GREAT AND PRECIOUS PROMISES, OR, Some Sermons concerning the Promises, and the
right application thereof: Whereunto are added some other concerning the
usefulness of Faith in advancing Sanctification. As also, three more concerning
the Faith of Assurance.

By Mr. ANDREW GRAY, late Minister of the Gospel in Glasgow.

All being revised since his death by some friends. The last Impression
carefully corrected and amended.

2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness
in the fear of God.

Edinburgh, Printed by George Swintoun and James Glen, Anno Dom. 1669.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
ALthough (upon some considerations) these following Sermons have been kept
back till now, and have waited the vacancy of the Press from other things: yet
was it at first intended (the connection of the purposes so requiring) that they
should have come forth as soon as some other of this precious Author, which we
did formerly publish: And therefore in the Preface which we then prefixed, we
did relate to both, and gave the Reader such advertisements as we conceived
necessary, concerning the one as well as the other: So that we have nothing to
do at present, but to put this little Piece into thy hands, commending it to
thy serious thoughts, and the Lords blessing upon them. Neither shall we use
many words to this purpose; Only, we find some help is offered unto thee, in
three most weighty and concerning points of Christian Religion. 1. How by the
lively exercise of faith; thou may apply the great and precious Promises. 2.
How by faith thou may advance the work of Sanctification. And 3. How thy faith
may grow up unto Assurance. Of all which we may truly say, that nothing can
more seasonably take up the thoughts nor bring more advantage to the souls of
the Lords people in these times.

O how necessary is it in such troublesome days, to learn, how through Faith
and Patience, we may inherit the Promises: and now when our strong corruption
(has in a manner necessitate the wise Physician to mix unto us so bitter a
cup, and give so strong a potion, in what a fainting and swouning condition
must we be, if by the two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God
to lie, we reoeive not also the strong consolation.

Again, when profanity and ungodliness has so abounded in these Nations, that
from the top of the head to the sole of the foot, there is no soundness, but
wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores: And when the corruptions of the Time
like the sons of Zerviah, are grown too strong, even for the David's who are
amongst us; What should we study with more earnestness, then to purify our
hearts by faith, and by having these promises, to cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the
Lord? 3. When the Lord has removed us so far from peace, that the souls of
many have even forget prosperity, and the multiplied changes and revolutions in
our days, has so clearly demonstrate the instability of all sublunary glory,
and so convincingly taught us, that this (...) not our ^est; Undoubtedly, it is
time to look for a city that has foundations, and to give all diligence to
make our calling and election sure. The subject then is useful.

As to the manner of handling it: It is true, much accuracy and neatness, is
not to be expected in any work of this nature, being only the hasty gleanings
of a Church Writer; And as to liveliness and power, though it he as easy to
draw a picture with the heat and motion of a living man, as to Write or Print,
these lively motions of the spirit which do often accompany the Lords
Messengers in Preaching, and in an eminent measure were also let out upon this
blessed Author, yet we suppose thou will find, the matter most seriously and
feelingly spoken unto, as from a heart which believed, and therefore spoke:
Yea, both conceptions and expressions savouring much of an exercised Spirit,
not only much taken up in communion with God within it self, but even thirsting
also, and panting for the salvation of others; nay (in some measure) traveling
in birth, till Christ might be formed in them. Oh, that more of this holy zeal
and fervency, might accompany this great measure of light and knowledge in the
mysteries of the Gospel that the Lord has graciously bestowed both on Pastors
and People in this generation, that once again we might see, (as in the days
of John Baptist) the Kingdom of Heaven suffering violence, and the violent
take it by force. And that the blessed Spirit by the same gracious operations,
may so warm and enlarge thy soul in the use of this and all other means for thy
eternal Salvation, is, and shall be the sincere desires of

Thy servants for Christ's sake, Robert Traill. John Stirling.


Great and precious Promises.
SERMON I.
2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.


MAy we not truly say, that if ever the Christians who live in those days
shall be advanced to stand within the holy place, and shall inherit everlasting
life, all these are now before his Throne may lay aside their harps and give us
leave to sing? Will it not be a mystery, suppose ye, unto heavenly Enoch that
spent so much of his time in communion and fellowship with God, when he shall
behold such Christians within that everlasting rest, that have spent so little
of their time in corresponding with God? Will it not be a mystery unto
believeing Abraham, when he shall behold such misbelievers, such disputers of
the promises of God, advanced to reign with Christ? Will it not be a mystery
unto wrestling Jacob, when he shall behold these Christians once crowned with
immortal glory, that did so little know what it was as Princes to wrestle with
God, till they did prevail: Will it not be a wonder to patient Job, when he
shall behold such impatient Christians as we have been, entering into that
blessed place of repose? Will it not be a mystery unto holy David, when he
shall behold such unmortified Christians entering within that City, into which
no unclean thing does enter? Will it not be a mystery unto tender Josiah, to
behold such Christians as we are, that have our hearts dying as a stone within
us, entering into Heaven? Will it not be a mystery unto upright Nathaniel, to
behold such hypocritical Christians as the most part of us are, entering
within the holy place, and to see those that have been clothed with hypocrisy
and guile, now clothed with the robes of immortal Glory? And will it not be a
mystery unto self denied Paul, when he shall behold so proud and selfish
Christians enter into Heaven? Give me leave to say this, go where we will, we
shall be matchless and singular; for if we shall go into eternity of pain, we
shall be the greatest debtors unto the infinite justice of God, in regard of
mercies we have received: and if we shall enter into eternity of joy, we shall
be the greatest debtors unto the spotless grace of Christ, in regard of mercy
we have abused. There shall be none in heaven like to us, and if we shall go to
hell, there shall be few there that may be compared unto us. And let me but
add thus further before I come to the words, go where we will, we shall be out
of doubt with our condition: Within a short time a real Christian shall be
exalted above the reach of his misbelieving, a hypocrite shall be depressed
below the reach of his faith, and one that is grossly in nature, he shall be
abased beyond the reach of his presumption: A Christian ere long shall
m^sbelieve no more; a hypocrite ere long shall believe no more; and one that is
grossly in nature shall ere long presume no more: there is no misbelief in
heaven, and there is no faith nor presumption of well being in hell. But to
come to that which we intend to speak to, we told you when first we began our
discourse upon that precious and exalting grace of Faith under a twofold notion
and consideration. first, As it is justifying: And, secondly, as it is
sanctifying. For the first, we resolved to speak to it in a twofold
consideration. First, As it closes with Christ simply as the object upon which
it rests, and of this we have spoken from that place, 1 Ioh. 1.3.23.
Secondly, As it closes with Christ, as held forth in the Promises. And now
being to speak of it in this consideration, we have made choice of this place,
in which those things concerning the promises, shortly.

1. Ye have that fountain and spring from whence the promises do flow, holden
forth in the first words of the verse, Whereby, or (as the words may be more
fitly rendered) By whom relating unto Jesus Christ who is the original and
spring of all the Promises.

2. The properties of the Promises, and these are, 1. The freedom of the
promises held forth in that word, Given, whereby are given, which speaks
this, that the promises are free gifts flowing only from good pleasure, 2.
Their unchangeablenesse, and that is holden forth also in the word, Given, the
gifts and calling of God, being without repentance. 3. That they are exceeding
great, and the Promises are called great, either in respect of that price that
was laid down to purchase the Promises, or they are called great in respect of
the great things that are contained in them. 4. That they are precious; Now the
Promises are called precious; either in respect of their original, that they
come from precious Christ; or else in respect of this, that they are the object
(I mean the object, quo, or by which) of precious Faith, as it is called in the
first verse of this Chapter; or else they are precious, because they are things
that a Christian ought to put a high account upon; for the word that is
rendered precious may likewise be rendered honorable, whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and honorable promises.

3. We have holden forth in the words the great advantage of the Promises, By
them we are made partakers of the divine nature: Now this is not to be
understood of any essential conversion of our substance into the substance of
God, but of a Christians having the divine virtues of Jesus Christ impressed
upon his soul, and expressed in his life and conversation.

And there is this lastly, concerning the promises in the words, even the time
when the promises are eminen^ly accomplished; It is, when we have escaped; or
as the word is, When we have fled from the corruptions that are in the world
through lust: That is the time when a Christian meets with the accomplishment
of the Promises.

Now before we can speak to any of these, we must speak a little unto some
things as necessary to be known, in order to the better understanding of all.
1. We shall not dwell long in pointing out unto you what is a promise: We
conceive it is a glorious discovery of the good will of God toward sinners,
and withal, a purpose and intendment, and (if we may say) an engagement to
bestow some spiritual or temporal good upon them, or to withhold some spiritual
or temporal evil from them: And certain it is, that in this description of the
promise, there is a divine harmony betwixt Mercy and Truth, betwixt
Righteousness and Peace, they kiss one another: Neither shall we stand long
to point out the distinction of the promises: 1. There are some promises that
are conditional, and there are some promises that are absolute, absolute
promises are these that have no condition annexed unto the performance of them;
such a promise is that, that God will destroy the world no more by water, that
is an absolute promise; such a promise was that of God sending his Son into the
World, that was an absolute promise; and such is that promise of conversion, in
giving the heart of flesh, it is an absolute promise: As for the conditional
promises, they are these that do require some condition to be performed by the
Christian, before the accomplishment of the promise, such as that promise of
Salvation, it requires believing as going before it, He that believes shall
be saved; And pardon, it is promised unto a Christian upon Repentance: and yet
we confess, that there is not a conditional promise that is in all the
Covenant of Grace, but it may be reduced unto an absolute promise, in regard
that the thing promised (in the conditional promise) is one absolute free gift,
and the condition of the promise is another. 2. There are some promises that
are temporal, and some that are spiritual; temporal promises are these, that
promise some temporal thing unto a Christian, and spiritual promises are these,
that promise the bestowing of something that is of everlasting concernment. 3.
There are some promises that are not accomplished in this life, such as this,
That we shall see him (...) he is, and shall be made like unto him: But for
the promises of Faith and of ^ustification, these are accomplished in this
life. 4. There are some promises that are extraordinary, and there are some
promises that are common: extraordinary promises are these, that are given to
some particular Believer as a singular privilege: such was that promise that
was given to Abraham, that in his seed should all families of the earth be
blessed, and that promise that was given to Rebekah, That the elder should
serve the younger: As for common promises, they are these, that every believer
in Christ has a right to make use of.

Neither shall we stand long to point out that it is the duty of a Christian to
be much in the exercise of Faith, upon the promises; it is clear from Psalm.
62.8* Trust in him at all times ye people: and it is clear from the practice of
that precious cloud of witnesses, recorded of in Heb. 11. that spent their
days in embracing of the Promises. But, 7. We would have you consider, that it
is more easy for a Christian to believe spiritual Promises, then to believe
temporal promises; it is easier to trust Christ for eternal Salvation, then to
trust him for our daily food when we are redacted unto straits; and the grounds
upon which we assert this, may be these; 1. Because it is hard for a Christian
to believe that Christ's death reaches for the purchasing of temporal
promises, which more easily he takes up in spiritual promises; for a Christian
can hardly believe that such a thing was in Christ's intention, as to die for
his daily food, which yet is most certain, if we consider it as a special
mercy. 2. In a Christians believing of spiritual promises, there is often some
sense and reason that helps him to the exercise of Faith, at least, they
press not the contrary; but to believe a temporal promise, when a Christian is
redacted unto a strait, and that he can see no outgate present, sense and
reason stands upon the top of his Faith, and presses him to despair: As for
instance, when a Christian is living upon the top of a mountain, and knows
not where to sup at night, to believe that there is a promise upon which he may
rest, that he shall not want his food; but if that the Lord had service for him
he will provide: Here, he has not only reason to dispute against, but the
strong pinching sense of hunger, both crying out, How can bread be given in the
wilderness? 3. The tentations that assault a Christian to misbelieve upon
temporal promises, they are more subtle and more con-natural to a Christian,
then his temptations that assault him in resting upon spiritual promises: When
a Christian is in straits in the world, the temptations that hinder his
exercise of Faith, they are more consonant to flesh and blood; we are ready to
yield to misbelief then, because we think it is rational, and speaks the
truth. 4. A Christian is often so affrighted by his daily failings, or some
particular more gross outbreakings in his life, that howbeit he may (through
grace) be helped to believe that the Lord shall make out these promises which
concern his eternal salvation, and so do him good in the latter end: yet may he
be sadly perplexed and distrustful in making use of any particular temporary
promise, for drawing forth any comfort or encouragement therefrom, as to his
present exigent: because he knows, that although the Lord does forgive his
peoples iniquities, yet may he take vengeance on their inventions, Psalm. 99.8.
and therefore may punish his present failing with the like calamities as he
has done others. 5. There is also much of a natural and carnal self love to a
present life, remaining in the best, that we are many times worse to satisfy
in our securities for the things of this life, then of that which is to come,
and can more easily trust the Lord for our souls, then for our bodies; so that
though his naked word will sometimes satisfy us for the one, yet it will not
for the other: And the last ground of it may be a Christians unacquaintednesse
with that lot of exercising Faith upon temporal promises, there being many who
think not that there is use for Faith, except for Salvation and the things
above, which makes his Faith upon these more difficult then upon promises that
are spiritual: And this may appear most clearly, in that we find men more
easily bear their spiritual wants (even a Christian that is most exercised)
then they bear their temporal want; and more corruption and impatience does
arise from temporal want, then from spiritual want.

2. Consider, That all a Christians duties are turned over into promises: there
is not a duty that is required of a Christian, but it is converted into a
Promise. Is not Faith a duty, 1 Ioh. 3.23. This is his Commandment that ye
should believe? And is not that turned over in a promise, Ier. 3 19. Thou shall
call me thy Father? The word imports not only an act of necessity, but of
violence, thou shall do it: And in the thirteenth of Zechary, at the close,
Thou shall call me thy Father, and so in Ezekiel. 11.19. Is not mortification a
Christians duty, Colos. 3.5. Mortify therefore your members; and it is turned
over in a promise* Ier. 32.28. and Ezekiel. 36.25, 29. where he promises, that he
will purge away all their uncleanness: and it is clear from Micah 7.19. I
will subdue (said he) all thine iniquities, it is not said, thou must subdue
them, but, I will do it, Is not also the knowledge of God a commanded duty? and
yet it is turned over in a promise in the Covenant of Grace; They shall know me
from the highest to the lowest, neither shall there be need any more that one
should say, know the Lord, for they shall be all taught of me. Is not the
commandment of fear your duty, as is clear from Eccles. 12.13. and yet that is
likewise turned over in a promise; I will put my fear in their inward parts,
they they shall not depart away from me: So tenderness is a Christians duty,
and yet that is turned over in a promise, I will take away their heart of
stone, and give them a heart of flesh. And that I may say no more of this, look
but to these four places, and there ye will see almost all duties turned over
in promises: there is Ier. 31. Ier* 32. Ezekiel 11. and Ezekiel. 36. ye will see all
the duties of the Covenant converted into Promises. But may not some say, what
advantage is there of this? much certainly, every way: That the duties are
turned over into promises; it may give a Christian hope, that he shall once
perform these duties: Will ye not once be tender? Yes certainly, because your
tenderness lies within a promise; Will ye not once be much in the exercise of
fear? No doubt ye will, and the ground of it is this, because your fear lies
within a promise, and so of the rest. And 2. There is this advantage of it,
that all the duties required of a Christian are turned over in promises because
by this means, a Christian may go to God when he cannot perform such a duty,
and desire him to fulfill his word, and accomplish his promise; and so may make
use not only of the Omnipotency of God, but of the faithfulness of God also.

There is this third Consideration that we would propose, that there are some
things of a Christian within a promise, that he does not believe to be within
it, especially these three: First, the challenges of a Christian are within a
promise, when ye are convinced, that is the accomplishment of a promise, this
is clear from Isai. 30 21. where convictions and challenges are turned over in
a promise; When thou art turning unto the right hand or to the left, thine ears
shall hear a voice behind thee, crying, this is the way, walk in it: And it may
be clear, that our convictions are the accomplishment of promises, because it
is a work of the Comforter, as well to convince, John 16.9. as it is for him to
make one rejoice: and if a Christian could believe that his challenges were the
accomplishment of a promise, he might embrace his challenges, he might see the
faithfulness of God in his challenges, and he might see much love in his
challenges. 2. A Christians cross is within a promise, so that when a
Christian meets with such affliction, he may sit down and cry out, this is the
accomplishment of a promise, and this is clear from Psalm. 89 31, 32. wherein in
the midst of the promises of ^he Covenant of Grace, that promise of visiting
their iniquities with rod^, is put in the bosom of them: and from Psalm.
119.77. In faithfulness have thou afflicted me; Why does David say in
faithfulness? It was this, because his cross was the accomplishment of a
promise: and it may be clear also from that word, Heb. 12.7. Forget not the
exhortation, (speaking of the cross) the word is, Forget not the consolation
that speaks unto you, As if the holy Ghost did say, crosses do yield much
consolation, as in verse. 11. They yield the peaceable fruits of righteousn^sse:
And if this were believed, that our crosses were the accomplishment of the
promises, it would help a Christian unto much humble submission, and there
would not be murmuring under them, if once we did believe that they were the
accomplishment of a promise: Yea, there is this advantage further, that if we
did believe that our crosses were the accomplishment of a promise, we would be
much in advanceing holiness under our cross. There is nothing that
obstructeth the sweet fruits of righteousness under a cross so much as
impatiency: and I would say this to commend the cross, a Christian never
moves so swiftly to heaven, as when he is under a sanctified cross; a cross
when it is sanctified, will prove a Christians motion to Heaven, more then ten
enjoyments, for our enjoyments ordinarily do retard our way as much as further
it. And there is this, Thirdly, that is within the promises, even your daily
food, and the hairs of your head, the hairs of a Christians head are numbered,
and within the Covenant. So that ye may see what a high respect Christ has put
upon Christians, that is clear from that word, Psalm 111.5* 8. He has given
meat unto them that fear Him, He will ever be mindful of His Covenant.

Our fourth consideration shall be, to point out a little these grounds upon
which Christ does delay his accomplishment of the promises; It is certain that
a Christian is oftentimes put to this, Does his promise fail for evermore? and
cries out, Why art thou become unto me as a liar, and as waters that fail; and
the grounds of this delay are these: 1. Christ knows that a Christian can
often better improve the delay of the accomplishment of the promise, then he
can improve the accomplishment it self: we might find this in our experience
(it being for the most part) easier for a Christian to bear his crosses, then
to bear his enjoyments. I think David never had so sweet a time as then, when
he was pursued as a Partridge by his son Absolon; then grace did breath forth
most sweetly in his actions: but let David be under prosperity, and then we see
he falls in the sin of Adultery. And therefore never repine when ye are under
a cross; for certainly, if we had spiritual understanding, we would not judge
it so great a hazard to be under a cross, as under prosperity, since we have
greater strength to bear the one, then to endure the other. 2. The
slothfulness of a Christian ^o whom the promises are made, this makes the
promises to be delayed in their performance, as was clear in the people of
Israel; they are forty years in a wilderness, before that promise of entering
into Canaan is accomplished; It was a promise that could have been accomplished
in a few days, and yet because of their sin, it was not accomplished for
forty years, as ye may see from that word in Numb. 14.33, 34. 3. The
accomplishment of the promises is delayed, that Faith may be more put in
exercise; this is clear from that remarkable word, Psalm. 105.19. Until the
time that his word came; that is, un^ill the word of the Lord was accomplished;
The word of the Lord tried him, that is, it was the matter of his exercise, an
exercise espe^ially unto Faith; for indeed it is much for a Christian to
believe upon a word, when it is delayed in its accomplishment. The fourth
ground of delay is, that the exercise of prayer may be more; and it is certain,
that the best improvement of delays is, to be much in prayer; the promises
they do occasion prayer, as is clear from Exodus 4. last, They believed, and
bowed down their heads and worshipped, and from 2 Samuel 7.27. where the great
promises being made to David, he cries out, Therefore have I found in my heart
to pray this prayer unto God, and it is clear from Psalm. 119.49. Perform the
word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope. It is a bad
improvement of delays when we turn impatient; and it is a bad improvement of
delays, when we quite our confidence. Know that promises are accomplished
after delays, and they have a luster upon them that may compence all the
delay. 5. There is this other ground of the delays of accomplishment of the
promises, even that the thing that is promised may be more sweet to a Christian
when it comes: this is clear from that word of Solomon, Prove. 13 12. Hope
deferred makes the heart sick, but when the desire does come, it is as a tree
of life; O but a mercy that comes to a Christian through a promise, it is
sweet; yea, a drink of cold water taken up as the accomplishment of a promise,
is more sweet then a feast of fat things full of marrow, and wine on the lees
well refined; to take up your bread and your dink as the accomplishment of your
promises, it would make them refreshfull to you. 6. The Lord delays his
promises, that a Christian may be more in the exercise of dependency, and may
be always kept about the throne. A Christian goes to God from a threefold
principle, he goes to God from a principle of Faith, from a principle of
necessity, and from a principle of love: but would you know that which puts
the Christian oftenest to God? it is a principle of necessity: and believe it,
that if necessity did not drive a Christian unto the foot of the Throne, we
would seldom go from a principle of love, or from a principle of faith. And
there is this last ground of the delay of the accomplishment of the promises,
that the glory of the wisdom of God may appear, and the glory of his power in
the accomplishment of the promise. When the promise is long beneath ground,
then the wisdom and power of God does more appear in the accomplishment of
that promise. And from this I would only say to Christians that are under that
exercise, complaining of the want of the performance of the promises, these few
things: 1. Believe that the promise shall once be accomplished, that though the
vision tarry, yet at last it shall speak. 2. Believe, that every hours delay of
the accomplishment of the promise has a sweet design of love: there is not one
moment of delay, but it is for the advantage of a Christian, as is clear from
that word, Romans 8.28. And, 3. that promise that comes after long delays, it
has these three sweet and soul-refreshing attendants. 1. It is performed most
seasonbly, a Christian if he will observe, he will see infinite wisdom shining
in timeing the accompaniment of the promise to such a particular day: a
Christian will be constrained to cry out, if the promise had been fulfilled
before there had been no such Art of wisdom appearing in the performance of
it. 2. That the promise when it is accomplished, will engage a Christian more
in the exercise of love, than four promises accomplished at a ^hort and smaller
time: there is nothing that will so inflame the soul with love, as to have a
promise accomplished after delays. And, 3. the promises accomplished after
de^ayes, have much sense waiting upon the per^ormance thereof: I think hardly a
Chri^tian ever met with the accomplishment of ^ promise after long delay, but
his soul was made as a watered garden, and as springs of water whose waters
fail not; this promise ^aileth and comes to a Christian perfumed with love.

Now we shall shut up our discourse at this ^ime, and shall only speak to these
six defects of a Christians faith in believing the promi^es. 1. That our faith
is impatient, we cannot stay upon the promise if it be delayed: Hence ye will
see, that in Scripture often patience is annexed to faith; which ^peaketh this,
That it is impossible for a Christian to believe as he ought, that wants the
exercise of patience. See Heb. 6.12. Be ye followers of them, who through faith
and patience inherit the promise: And that word ^n the Revelation, This is the
faith and pa^ience of the Saints. 2. Our faith in closing with the Promises, it
is most unconstant: A Christian when first a promise is born in upon his
spirit, he will then believe the promise and join with it; but after six or
seven days go about, he will change his Faith: this is remarkably clear from
Exodus 4.31. compared with Exodus 6.9. When first the promise comes to the
people of Israel, that they shall go out of Egypt, it is said of them in the
fourth Chapter at the close, They believed the Promise, and worshipped: But
look to them in Exodus 6.9. and there ye will see them not believing, because of
bitterness and anxiety of heart: And I will tell you the grounds why our Faith
is unconstant. 1. Sometimes the reading of a promise to a Christian will be as
his savory meat; sometimes when a Christian will read one time in the Covenant,
it will be perfumed with love, and his soul will be transported with joy after
it, and at another time when he shall read that promise again it will be
tastelesse as the white of an egg, and as his sorrowful meat 2. That we are
not much in studying the exercise of the things that are promised, which
certainly would cu^ short many of our debates. There is this third defect of
our Faith, That we are not diligent, a diligent faith we call this, that after
a Christian has believed, he would be much in the exercise of prayer, for the
accomplishment of the promise, he would be much in the exercise of meditation,
to make that promise sweet and lively to him. And a fourth defect is this, We
build our faith more upon Dispensations then upon the Word: when dispensations
say that which ^he promise says* then we will believe: but when dispensation
speaks the contrary language unto the promise, then we will re^ect our
confidence and hope. I will tell you two great mysteries of believing, it is
hard for a Christian to believe when the Commentary seems to destroy the
Text, that is, when the Commentary seems to declare, that the promise shall
never be accomplished. In (...) it is this, It is hard to believe when
dispensations will say, the Word of the Lord will faill, and when promises bids
you believe. 2. It is hard for a Chri^tian to take impossibilities in the one
hand, and the word of promise in the other, and ^ay, O precious Christ
reconcile these two together, that impossibilities do not destroy the promise,
but that the promise may be accomplished notwithstanding of this. ^. We have
this defect of faith amongst us, That we build our faith more upon sense, ^hen
upon the word of promise; when a Christian is in a good frame, he will believe,
but when Christ hides his face, he will then give over his hope. And lastly,
there is this, That our faith upon the promises is general, we believe the
truth of the promises, but we study not to make a particular application of
them. I shall not stand long to make any use of what we have spoken* Only I
would have the Christians of this age, and those that are here, to go home with
this conviction, the damnable neglect of believing of the promises. A Christian
neglects these three duties of Religion most, he neglects the duty of self
examining, the duty of believing the promises, and that noble soul exalting
duty of meditation: these three duties ^ Christian does so constantly neglect,
that almost he is above the reach of conviction, that he does neglect them.

But I would say a word unto these tha^ are destitute of the Faith of the
promises, and are strangers unto these blessed things that are recorded within
the Covenant: And i^ is only this; doubtless ye must believe your senses, if
ye will not believe his Word. It is a question indeed, Which of all the senses
shall be most satisfied in heaven, whether that of seeing, when we shall behold
the King in his beauty; and see him as he is, o^ that of hearing, when we shall
hear these melodious Halelujahs of that innumerable company, which are about
the Throne, without any jarring amongst them all* o^ that of smelling, when we
shall find the sweet perfume of his garments, which are perfumed with all the
powders of the merchant; or, that of touching, when we find Mary's inhibiti^on
taken off, Touch me not, and be admitted to embrace him who is now ascended to
his Father; Or, that of tasting, when we shall drink of these rivers of
Consolation, that shall never run dry. This, I say, is indeed a question; But
give me leave to tell you (...) athiests and enemies of God: It is also a
question, Which of all the five senses of a Reprobate shall be tormented in
Hell, and what would ye answer to it now? Whether ^hink ye the sense of sight,
when ye shall be^old that darkness of wrath, the devil and ^is angels, and
your fellow prisoners in that ^ungeon? Or whether shall your sense of ^earing
be most tormented in hell, when ye shall hear those screighings and howlings
that shall eternally ascend up before God, ^y the souls that are in prison? O
but the ^reatest enemy would have compassion upon ^is enemy, to hear their
cries: Or, whether ^ill ye say the sense of tasting shall be most ^ormented,
when ye shall drink of these ri^ers of brimstone? Or, will the sense of
^^uching, when ye shall be eternally scorch^d (...) with these flames of
eternal indignation* (...) the sense of smelling, when ye shall eter^^lly be,
as it were, suffocated with the ^^oke of that sulphurious furnace that shall
^ever be quenched? O think you if Cain should come from hell and preach that
do^^rine, that we should not persecute the ^^ints, would we listen unto him? If
Ab^^^on should come from hell, and should ^^each against the evil of ambition,
would ye, (...) unto him? And if Achitophel should (...) from the dead and
preach that doctrine ^^to you, Let not the wise man glory in his ^^sdome, would
we stop our ears? Or if (...) would come from hell and preach to (...) the evil
of hypocrisy, in betraying the (...) of man with a kiss, would we believe
(...)? Or if Dives that is recorded in the ^ospel should come from hell, and
choice (...) Text to preach upon, Iam. 5.1. Go to ye rich men and howl, and
weep for your miseries that shall come upon you. And if Dem^^ would come and
second him with that word love not the world, nor the things that are in the
world: I fear ye would cry out we will embrace that doctrine at another time.
We desire not to insist much upon these, but O to believe, that there is an
eter^nity of pain, and that there is an eternity (...) joy. I will give you a
description of the athiest, and let him think upon it, it is easie^ to convince
hundreds of you, that ye wa^^ the fear of God, then that ye want the fait^ and
love of God. Oh, an imaginary faith^ and a conceit of love, will ye ever quit^
these it w^ Idols. I confess, once ye sha^ have a faith that no man shall ever
rob yo^ of, and that is, the faith of that truth, th^^ when once ye enter into
eternity of pai^ there is no redemption out of that plac^ Awake, awake, for
behold the Judge comet^ and he shall render vengeance unto the^^ that know him
not. To his blessed (...) precious Name we desire to gi^^ praise.

SERMON II.
2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.


THough Justice and Judgment be the habitation of His Throne, yet mercy and
truth do go before it ^s two divine Ushers to convey ^s home unto God. There
are these two things that we would ^ave Christians principally to study. 1.
That ye would be much in the study of these wrongs and injuries that ye have
done to Christ: And, 2. that ye would be much ^n the study of these infinite
acts of precious ^ondescendency that Christ has manifested ^owards you, that
the one may provoke you unto sorrow and humility, and the other may provoke you
unto a sweet astonishment and admiration. And I would ask you this, ^f Christ
should present that challenge unto you. which Absolon presented unto Hushai, Is
this thy kindness unto thy friend? O beloved, what could you answer, when you
were thus reproved? I think if Christ had not forgetfulness for that blessed
end, to ^orget the wrongs and injuries of his own; I know not unto what use
Christ should have forgetfulness, for he knows not what i^ is to forget our
good works, but he has (...) blessed art of forgetting our wrongs; though we
may say upon the contrary, that we have a cursed art of forgetting them our
selves* There are these three things that Christian^ does forget; they forget
much Christ, tha^ is the great author of the promises, so tha^ he may charge
them with this, Why have (...) forgotten me? 2. They forget their mercies, and
these divine receipts of love that Christ has given unto them. 3. They forget
even their iniquities, yea sometimes the^ forget them before Christ does forget
them and pass an act of pardon upon them. (...) shall not stand long to plead
with you for your undervaluings of that blessed and nobl^ Plant of renown; I
think if there were no more to evidence that low esteem that we have of Christ,
but only this, that we ar^ so much in sleighting the promises, it were more
than sufficient: but besides, is there not this to testify how much you under^
value that holy and just one; that ye study more to have an outward conformity
unto him, than to have an inward. We may cal^ the Christians of this time
Nephthali; they are as a hind let loose, and they give goodly words, but we do
not give Christ godly practices: And is there not this also th^^ testifies our
undervaluings of Christ, tha^ we slight so much, secret and retired
correspondance and communion with him? (...) suppose there are some that are
here, whos^ consciences bears them record, they do not exercise themselves
unto godliness, and I shall only say that word, that Gideon spoke in another
case, If God be with us, how then is all this come upon us? such a spirit of
formality, such a spirit of laziness, such a spirit of hardness, and such a
spirit of undervaluing of Christ? I suppose, that if there were a Chronicle
written of all the lives of the Saints that have been since Adams days, and
the Christians of this time should read over that Chronicle, when they should
begin and read the life of Adam, they might put this to the close of it, my
life is not like his, and when they should read the life of Abel, they might
put this to the close of it* my life is not like his; and when they should read
the life of Enoch, they might put this to the close of it, my life is not like
his: O! to which of the Saints can we go: and if ye should call, is there any
that would answer you, your life is like mine.

But to come to the words, we told you at the last occasion tha^ we spoke upon
them, that there were these things concerning the promises holden forth in
them. 1. The rise of the promises is holden forth in these words, Whereby, or
as we cleared the words may be thus rendered, by whom, which relates unto
Jesus Christ.

The second thing concerning the promises holden forth in the verse is, the
property of the promise, and they are these four. 1. That the promises are
free, holden forth in that word, Whereby are given unto us; all the promises of
the everlasting Covenant are gifts, and not debt. There is that second property
of the promises, that they are unchangeable, holden forth in that word, Given,
the gifts and calling of God being without repentance. And the third property
of the promises was, That they were exceeding great* And the fourth, That they
were exceeding precious.

The third thing concerning the promises, holden forth in the words, is the
advantage^ that flows to a Christian by the promise^ that by them they might
be made partakers o^ the divine nature.

And the last thing concerning them was that time when the promises were
especially accomplished, it was then when we had escaped the pollutions of the
world through lust.

Now, as for the first thing, to wit, the fountain, original and rise of the
promise^ which is Jesus Christ, By whom; In speakin^ unto this, we shall speak
a little unto these two. 1. In what respects Christ may b^ said to be the
fountain and original of the promises; and we conceive he may be sai^ to be so.
First, Because he purchased the promises unto us by his own precio^ blood.
There is not a promise in all the everlasting Covenant, but it is the price
(...) the blood of the Son of God; this is clear (...) Ephesians* 2.12, 13. where
speaking of the Ge^^tiles, that they were strangers unto the Co^venant of
promise: he sets down in the 13. verse, the way by which they were brought
near unto the Covenant, and had ^ight unto it, it was through the blood of his
^rosse: and it is clear in Ephesians. 3.9. that the promises of the Gospel were
given unto us in him, that is, through the purchase of him, and his merits: and
1 Pet. 1.19. where we are said to be bought by his blood: for the promise of
Redemption, was the price of ^loud. Secondly, Christ may be said to be ^he
fountain of the Promises, in this respect, that he is the Person unto whom the
promises of the Covenant are first made, and through him are made over unto us;
this is clear in Gal. 3 16. the promises were given unto Abraham, not unto many
seeds, but as unto one, that is Christ; and it is clear from 2 Timothy 1.9. where
the promises of Grace and Salvation are said to be given unto us in ^im before
the world was made: It is true, that the promises are not given to Christ,
considered only as the Son of God, (for so he had no other relation to us then
the Father of the holy Ghost) but yet they are, first, made to him as the
Mediator and head ^f his Church, and as that blessed Days man, and King of
Saints, and the Great Lord ^eeper of all the Rights of the young heirs of
Glory; And we all receive of his fullness, and grace for grace. Thirdly, There
is this ^espect, in which Christ may be said to be ^he fountain of the
promises, that he it is ^y whom we have a right unto all the promises; this is
clear, ^ Cor. 3.12, 13. where ^hese two are conjoined, ye are Christ's, and
^hen all things are your^: If once a soul close with Christ in the Covenant of
Promise, there is not one promise in Scripture but he may write this
superscription abov^ it, This is mine, this is mine. Fourthly Christ may be
said to be the fountain of the promises, in regard that he is the Person tha^
applies the promises, and makes us t^ rest upon them, and to believe them,
thi^ David did acknowledge, Psalm. 119.49. Re^member thy word unto thy servant,
upon which thou have caused me to hope: as if David said I had never believed a
promise, except tho^^ hadest caused me, and it is clear, Ephesians. 2.8* where
faith is called the gift of God, eve^ faith to believe the promises, it is the
roy^^ donation and gift of Christ. Fifthly, H^ may be said to be the fountain
of the pro^mises, in that he qualifieth us for the accom^plishment of them.
Christ gives us strengt^ to obey the condition that is annexed to the promise,
and Christ he infuseth habitua^ grace in us, by which we may be helped (...)
exercise faith upon the promises; so th^^ grant all the Scripture were
promises, y^ if Christ did not help us, we would never be^lieve a promise, and
there would never a pro^mise be accomplished unto us. Sixthly* The last respect
in which Christ may be sai^ to be the fountain of the promises, is, Th^^ all
the promises of the everlasting Covenan^ they have their accomplishment through
hi^ according to that word, 2 Cor. 1.20. All (...) promises of God are in him
yea, and in him Ame^ so that ye are to bless Christ, not only for the giving
of the promises, but for the accom^plishment of them also.

That which secondly we shall speak to from this, that Christ is the fountain
of the promises, shall be to press upon Christians these three excellent and
soul concerning duties. The first, That they would not have a light account of
the promises, since they are rivolets and streams that flow from that blessed
Ocean: O but if a Christian did believe that the promise that he has for his
daily bread, it was bought with the blood of the second Person of the blessed
Trinity, would he not have an high account of that promise? And let me tell
you, it is impossible for the promises to be in high account with you, till
once ye reduce them unto their ^ise, and to their fountain: but once know that
all the promises are sweet streams of love that have run through the heart of
precious Christ, and from thence they have ^lowed unto you, and then when this
is be^ieved, how shall ye sit down and comfort your ^elves in the promises, and
rejoice exceeding^y in them.

The second duty that we press upon you from this, is, That since Christ is
the foun^ain and original of the Promises, be much (...) the application of the
Promises: And ^ere I shall speak a little upon these three things. 1. A little
unto the evidences and ^arks of those that have a right to apply ^he promises;
and shall only name unto you ^hese few: The first is, to be a person under
^onvictions of sensible need and necessity of ^uch a promise; have ye
convictions of such (...) necessity; Then from that ye may infer, I have a
right to the promises, and are not these glad tiding^? I know there are some
that are under such convictions of their sin, tha^ they think it boldness to
apply the promises* But I would say this unto you, that if y^^ were under
sensible convictions of your lostnesse, ye would give a world for an hair o^ a
promise whereby to hang: believe it, the exercise of misbelief is never at its
height, till we would be content to dig through the earth to get a promise, and
till we were at that, that our souls would pursue after them from the one end
of the world to the other: And for the grounds of this assertion, that sensible
necessity gives a right to the promises, if ye will look to these great
promises of the everlasting Covenant, are they not given to that Christian that
is under a need, Isai. 55.1, 2. and Matthew. 11.28 where the great promise of the
Gospel (...) given out, and the invitation of Jesus Christ, is unto these that
are weary and heav^ laden. Christ would account it an excellen^ courtesy, that
ye would not dispute, bu^ believe, and that ye would look upon you^ necessities
as his call to believe the promise* 2. A person that has a high account of the
Promises, he has a right to apply the pro^mises: Let once your soul, close
with Christ by Faith and Love, and then you may wit^ boldness close with the
Promises. I con^fesse, if we were more in believing the pro^mises, we would
have a higher and mo^^^full esteem of the Promiser: Would yo^ ^now the reason
that Christ is not acounte^ matchless, it is because of this, our necessities
of the promises is not always within our sight, and our exercising of Faith
upon the promises is not our daily work. 3. This looks like a right to the
promise; that which is born in upon a Christians spirit when he is near God in
prayer, and is under most sensible exercise under his own inf^rmities, he has
readily a right to apply that promise: As for instance, when a Christian is
debating himself out of Christ, which is but an unpleasant exercise; to meet
with a promise born in upon their spirit, that gives them some ground of hope,
that they may apply and rest upon Christ: or when a Christian is fainting under
affliction, and is like to give over; to meet with a word of promise born in
upon his spirit, that does uphold him in the day of his trial, he may probably
conclude he has a right to believe that promise. 4 There is that evidence,
persons that have an high account of the promises, they have a right to apply
the promises, it is an excellent and most concerning work for a Christian to
believe the excellency of the promises, when he cannot have the actual
application of the Promises. For when once a Christian comes to this, that the
great things of the everlasting Covenant are matchless in his eyes; then that
is the val^^ of Achor, and a door of hope, that ere long Christ will apply
them. 5. When a Christian has great delight in the promises, when they are
sweet to his taste, and are the refreshing and rejoicing of his heart, that is
an undeniable sign that h^ has a right to make use of such promises* Were your
souls never refreshed by readin^ of the boundless Covenant of love, an^ the
sweet promises that are in it? I would have Christians marking these promises
tha^ have upholden them in their straits, I would have them marking the
promises that have been lively to their souls, and say, Th^^ once was my goodly
meet, and made me to rejoice in the house of my affliction; and (...) would
have a Christian marking the time o^ the accomplishment of the Promises, i^
which he will see infinite wisdom shining i^ ordering the accomplishment of
the pro^mises to such a time. And I would have (...) Christian marking the
frame of his own spirit, when the promises are accomplished (as ye will find
often in Scripture) and by all this, ye should find such a reviving an^
profitable delight in the promises, that should give a very full evidence of
your righ^ unto them. 6. Lastly, when a Christian understraits can receive
consolation from no other thing, but all prove Physicians of no value and
miserable comforters: when (...) Christian is convinced, there is no joy to be
had under such a cross but in the faith o^ the promises, that is an evidence
that th^^ person has a right to the promises. I would only say this, O beloved
in the Lord* is not this your guilt, your undervaluing o^ the promises, and
your little exercise o^ faith? I would pose you with this, when last studied ye
to apply any promise of the Covenant of Grace? When last did ye exercise says
upon any of them? Shall I tell you what is the practice of the most part of us,
we study perhaps to apply one promise, but for the rest of the promises we lay
them aside, and do totally neglect them: we study to apply the promises of
salvation, and of having redemption through Christ, but for the promises of
Sanctification, for the promises to help us to perform duties, for the promises
to support us under the cross, for the promises to comfort us in our way to
heaven, for promises in reference to all ordinary things, we are not much in
application of these. O but if a Christian were believing the promises, he
might sit down even while he is here, and sing one of the songs of Zion, though
yet but in a strange land.

The second thing that I shall speak to upon the application of the promise,
shall be to propose unto you some rules that ye would make use of in the
application of them, and shall name unto you these.

First, Study these four things, one is the ^aithfulnesse and truth of the
promises, that ^uch a thing is the saying of him that is the faithful witness,
and Amen: This was the practice of Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. the way how ^e was
brought to make application of the promise, was, 1. by laying down that
conclusion, this is a faithful saying; and Rev. ^2. from the beginning to the
6. verse, when ^here are great promises made, and much ^poken to the
commendation of heaven, this is subjoyned in the 6. verse, These are the
faithful and true sayings of God: As if John had said, all that I have spoken
concerning heaven, will be to no purpose, except ye believe the truth of the
promises; and this was the practice of David, 2 Samuel 7.28. Thy words are truth,
O Lord, he subjoyned th^^ unto the actual application of the promises. 2. Study
the sweetn^sse and excellency of the promises, this was the practice of Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and then he subjoyneth, and worthy of
all acceptance: And this was the practice of David, Psalm. 119.72. I have
esteemed the laws of thy mouth better then thousands of gold and silver. O such
an opinion, to esteem the promises better then thousands of gold! It is
heterodox amongst the most part of you, that prefer the world before the
promises of the Covenant: and it was his practice, verse. 103. and verse. 162. I
rejoice at thy word as one that finds great spoil: he had an higher account
of the Promises, then to divide the spoil after war. 3. Let the Christian study
the necessity that he has of the promise, that there is no way of winning
above that neces^sity but the closing with the promise, an^ laying hold upon
it. 4. Lastly, A Christi^an would study the suitableness that is in the
promise to answer their necessities, that i^ they be under need, there is a
preciou^ way of remedy manifested unto them by these.

The second rule that we would prescrib^ in the application of the promises,
is, Tha^ ye do not expect sensible comforts immediately after ye have believed
the promise, a Christian may apply the promises, and yet want the joy and
sweetness that is in them: This is clear, Psalm. 119.25. My soul cleaves unto
the dust. There he is under much anxiety and much sorrow; and yet he is a
believer of the promises in the mean time, as the words following does clear,
Quicken me according to thy word, he lays claim to the promise, and this is
clear in the 81. verse. of that Psalm, My soul does faint within me; There is
much exercise of sorrow, and yet he is a believer in the promise, But I hope in
thy word: A Christian after he has believed ^he promise, he would put a blank
in Christ's hand concerning the sweetness of the promises to be made out in its
own time. What is sense? Is it the precious indulgence of Christ that he gives
to his own. I would press this upon you, prophecy nothing before your
believing of the pomise; but, having believed, ye may surely prophecy that the
promise shall be accomplished in its own time, and the word that he has spoken
shall certainly come to pass: but as for sense, as for quickening, as for
comforting, as for receiving, ye must put a blank in the hand of Christ to
dispense these things to you as he sees fit.

The third rule in the application of the promises, is, That ye do not build
your faith upon this, that the promises shall be accomplished, because
probability and reason seem to say the thing: I would say this to a Christian,
that ye may oftentimes suspect the promise is not near to be accomplished when
reason says, Behold the word of the Lo^^ comes, and that oftimes the Lord is
neare^ when we begin to pass a conclusion, the Word is not at hand, and the
time of the accomplishment of the promise is not near* Certainly many times
before Christ accomplish the promises, he will learn us to be liv^ing above
sense and reason, and he will have reason to submit to faith, and he will have
probabilities to contradict the accomplishment of the promise; and when
probabilities are furthest away, that is His time (...) work: this is clear in
these two signal deliverances of the people of Israel from Egy^^ and Babylon,
Exodus 3.4, 5. and Ezech. 37.^^ the beginning. And therefore as a Christian
would not quite his grip of the promises, because dispensations seem to
contradict the accomplishment of the promise, and sometime cries out, Why art
thou become unto (...) as a liar, and as waters that fail? So on the other
hand, ye are to build your faith upon the promises, and not upon dispensation^
even when favorable; seeing that we kno^ the way that Christ takes many times
(...) accomplish the promises, is by contrar^ means to our apprehension; His
paths (...) in the whirlewind, and his footsteps are (...) known. And may we
not cry out, Who ca^ take up the ways of God, whose wa^es ar^ more subtle than
the way of an eagle in the ai^ or the way of a serpent upon the rock, or the
wa^ of a ship upon the sea, etc.

The fourth rule that we would prescribe unto you in the application of the
promises, is, That ye would close absolutely with the promises, I mean, without
limiting the only One. There is a limited closing with the promise, which is
the frequent exercise of our hearts; we will close with the promise, but with
this restraint laid upon Christ, That whenever we begin to believe the
promises, all things might go as we desire: and this is the great occasion that
we do so frequently reject our confidence, and do refuse our hope when God does
not answer our peremptory expectations.

Fifthly, We give you this rule, that ye would eye Christ much in the
application of the promises. There is a threefold sight of Christ that a
Christian should have when he applies the promises, a Christian should have a
sight of the boundless and condescending love of Christ, that so he may be
constrained to hope, and may be constrained to love. 2. A Christian should eye
the faithfulness and unchangeableness of Christ, that what his blessed lips
have spoken, he will also do, and what he has said, he will likewise bring to
pass. And, 3. in the application of promises, he must eye the omnipotency of
Christ, that what he has said, he ^s able to bring to pass. And O when shall
we have occasion to sing that song, What has God wrought for us, which was the
song that Balaam sung who yet was but a profane wretch.

6. There is this rule that we would prescribe unto you in the application of
the promises, that a Christian after he has applied them, he would be much in
the exercise of Prayer for the accomplishment of these promises; this was the
practice o^ David, 2 Samuel 7.27. When God in passing many precious promises;
David does subjoyn that word, Therefore have I found i^ my heart to pray this
prayer: And we see i^ Ezekiel. 36.37. All alongs that Chapter, Go^ is passing most
excellent promises; and yet in verse. 37. this is subjoyned, For all these
things, I will be enquired of the house of Israel: And in Ier. 29.10, and 12.
where the time is coming, when God would accomplis^ his good word (as he
speaks) that is subjoyned in verse. 12. Then shall ye call upon me* and seek
after me: And Daniel 9.2, 3* when Daniel knew that the promise (...) near the
time of its accomplishment, the^ he set himself by prayer and supplication
(...) seek the face of God. I would say these three words unto a Christian; The
smallest mercy that a Christian meets with, if he can call it Samuel* that
is, The son of prayer, and (...) ye can call it Isaac, that is, The child of
promise, he may then, and does ordinarily receive much consolation in that
mercy. O but a mercy flowing to a Christian through a promise, if it were but a
drink of col^ water, and a piece of brown bread, it will be more excellent
cheer, then all the dainties of the Kings of the earth. O but to eat and drink,
taking these things as the accomplishment of the promises, this would make us
eat our bread with singleness of heart, and much cheerfulness. And there is
this, ^econdly, I would say unto you, When a promise is accomplished, and a
Christian is ^ot much in the exercise of Prayer in the ^ccomplishment of it,
one to a hundred if ^ee loose not the sanctified use of the accom^lishment of
that promise. Ah, know ye ^ot that a promise when it is accomplished, may be
a curse to a Christian. That word ^s most terrible, Mal. 2.2. I will curse your
^lessings. And the last word that I would ^ay to this, is, That a Christian who
believes ^he promises, notwithstanding that dispen^ations seem to contradict
it, that promise shall be made most refreshfull unto his spirit, when it is
accomplished. O but a Chri^tian that never had much jealousy, nor much
staggering about the accomplishment ^f the promise, when it comes, it will be
most refreshfull unto him: And believe it, ^here is not one hours entertainment
of jea^ousie about the accomplishment of the promise, but it will impare the
sweetness of ^he promise when it is accomplished, ex^ept so far, that the
transcendant and free love of Christ is seen in the accomplishment ^f them,
notwithstanding of our misbe^ief.

The last rule that I shall offer a Christian ^n his application of the
promises, when ye meet with objections that ye cannot answer, but they do
silence you; I will tell you what ye should do with them, misken these
obstructions and lay them by. This was the practice of believing Abraham, Romans
4.9. He considered not his own body being weak, and the deadness of Sarahs
womb. The weakness of his own body, and the deadness of Sarahs womb were so
strong objections in the way of the accomplishment of the promises, that he
could not answer them; and the way he takes to refute them was, He did not
consider them; as it were, he forgot those objections and went about his duty.

The third thing that we shall speak to, in relation to the application of the
promises, shall be somewhat for helping a Christian that is standing at too
great a distance, to get the promises applied.

First, A Christian would be much in the study of these experiences of the
faithfulness of God, and what others have met with. When ye begin to apply a
promise, ye may be helped in the Faith of applying promises* by beholding these
great records of the faithfulness of God that are extant. This was the way the
Angel took with Mary, Luke 1.36. where helping her to believe that promise,
that of her should be born the Messiah; this is the way that he strengthened
her, Thy cousin Elizabeth is now with child, and has gone six months, even
she that was called barren. And, I shall only name these two places in
Scripture which may help you exceedingly, and strengthen you to believe the
promises upon this acount. There is that lord in Exodus 12.41. and 51. It is a
most re^arkable saying, At the end of the four hundred and thirty-years, on
that same very day, (there ^as not one day missed after the time that ^as set
was accomplished) In that same very ^ay they came out, and this is marked in
ver. 51. ^gain: And there is that word 1 Kings 8.56. ^here Solomon, when he is
singing most ^weetly to God, he takes an observation of ^is, Lo (says he)
there has not failed one lord that God has spoken to you by his servant Moses.

Secondly, Ye would be much in the con^^deration of your own experiences, that
^ou have in the accomplishment of promises ^^rmerly. This was David's way that
he ^^ok to strengthen himself to believe the ^romise, He that has delivered me
from the ^ge of the Lion, and the paw of the Bear, he ^ill deliver me from this
uncircumcised Phi^^stine, 1 Samuel 17.35. and 37.46. And this ^as the practice of
the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy ^*17, 18. God has delivered me from that (...) lion:
And from thence he subjoyneth, and the Lord will deliver me from every evil
^ork: And this was his practice. 2 Cor. 1.^^. where these three are swetly knit
to^ther, God has delivered me, he does deli^^^ me, and he shall deliver me.
There is (...) one experience of this kind, but it ^eacheth that (...) your^
O, believe the ^^omise, and do not ^all in question his faith^^^nesse.

Thirdly, There is that help; that ye^ study much the excellency of the
promise^ that is the most noble and excellent way (...) move you to apply the
promises, accordin^ to that word, Psalm. 119.111. I have man thy testimonies my
heritage for ever; and the ground of it is that, Because they are the
r^^joycing of my heart. The sweetness of the promises would engage our heart
to apply them.

And there is that fourth help, a Christi^^ would study the omnipotency of God,
th^^ so he may be helped to believe and appl^ the promise: This is clear in
Zech. 12.1* where God going to pass many excelle^^ promises, he ushers in
that discourse wi^^ high and magestick description of his power in that he
streatcheth forth the heavens, (...) lays the foundation of the earth, and
forme^ the spirit of man within him. And this (...) the practice of Abraham,
Romans 4.21. the (...) how he came to believe the promise, He (...) him able that
had made it, that he (...) perform it.

Fifthly, For your help in applying (...) the promises, Study much the
unchang^^ablenesse of Christ, and his faithfulness, kno^ that he is the same,
yesterday, and to (...) and for ever. This was the way that (...) came to the
faith of the promises, Heb. 11.^* She believed, (...) the (...) of it (...)
that she judged him faithful that had pr^^mised. There (...) of misbeli^^
that a Christian falls into, but it sai^^ that God is not faithful, and that
he is not true.

Now the last duty that we would press from this point, that Christ is the
fountain of the promises, is, that we may have an high esteem of the Promiser;
even of Jesus Christ, in whom they are yea, and Amen. And I shall close all at
this time with this, ^re there not many here, that have no re^pect unto him who
is that faithful witness, and the Amen; who has promised us himself, and all
things: and if ye will not take with the challenge, let your hearts but an^wer
these two or three things: 1. Has ^ot the loss of things in the world
affected ^our heart more, then ever absence from christ did? Has it not? And
can such a ^oul say, I have an high account of the Pro^iser? Is it possible,
that these that will ^ourn more under the absence of their Idols ^an for the
want of him, that they can have (...) high account of Jesus Christ? I am
per^^aded of this, there are some Merchants, (...) the loss of their goods at
the Sea, has ^^^verted them from their nights rest, and (...) absence from
Christ never did divert (...) from their sleep one hour. O when (...) love to
find out Jesus Christ, and to enjoy (...) fellowship, make you rise up in the
silent ^^atches of the night, and to pursue after (...). 2. Have not your souls
delighted ^ore on the enjoyment of the things of a ^orld, than ever they did in
the enjoyment (...) Christ. Is not this true, that the increase (...) wine and
oil, and of silver and gold has affected your hearts more with joy than ever
Christ did? And have you a high esteem of the Promiser? 3. Are you taking
delight to entertain fellowship and communion with the Promiser; Is this true?
When went you to your prayers, but ye wearied ere ye went away? And have ye
a high account of the Promiser? Is not that the language of your hearts; O when
shall the Sabbath be over? and when shall the new mo^^ be gone, that I may
pursue after my Idols? (...) would pose you with this, if there were n^ eye to
take notice of you, would you (...) slight secret prayer, would you not sligh^
Family Prayer? We love not to serve Je^sus Christ. I know there are atheists
her^ that would love to go to heaven without Faith, Love, Prayer and
Repentance, the^ would love to go to heaven by a way th^^ never one went before
them. And now (...) shall say but this one word to you that (...) the heirs of
the promise, and have the bless^^ expectation of heaven, what ever the (...)
do, esteem ye highly of him: O rememb^^ and comfort your selves in the
thoughts (...) the blessed day which Christ (after he (...) past the sentence
of condemnation upon (...) wicked) shall go in upon the head of (...) Troops of
the first born, he shall walk (...) before us through the Ports of the New
J^^rusalem, having Crowns of Immortal Glo^^ upon his head, and then shall
follow aft^^ Him His Angels, and then shall follow aft^^ Him the blessed
company of the first (...) every one having the Harps of God in the ^and, and
they shall be singing as they enter (...) through the Ports of the City,
Hallelujah unto him that was dead, and is alive, and now ^iveth for evermore. O
to believe that day when first we shall all enter in through the ^^reets of the
New Jerusalem, when we shall ^ee clothed in white robes, having Crowns upon
our head! O such a day, if it were ^elieved, might it make us often shake our
^lasse, and streach out our necks, (as the word (...), Romans 8.19) till once we
saw that blessed ^ay were approaching to us! There is no ^earying in heaven,
the promises are now ^ccomplished unto them, and they are inhe^^ting the
promises; When shall that word (...) accomplished, or when shall we have
oc^asion to say it? Mark 1.37. Behold all men (...) after thee; the word that
these Disciples ^^ake to Christ: O study to love him, study (...) believe on
him, for be persuaded he is upon his way. And I shall say no more but ^his,
that as all the promises that are within (...) bounds of this everlasting
Covenant, they (...) yea, and Amen, in an embraced Christ, (...) laid hold on
by faith; so I say, all the ^^rses that are in Deuteronomy. 26.27, 28. and all the
^^rses that are within the volumn of the Book (...) this Covenant, they shall
be yea and Amen (...) a despised Christ, and not laid hold upon (...) faith.

SERMON III.
2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unt^ us exceeding great and precious Promises,
that by these you might b^ partakers of the divine nature, hav^ing escaped the
corruption that is i^ the world through lust.


SOmetimes the soul of a Christian do^^ move in the paths of God, and in the
ways toward Zion as the chariots (...) Aminadab, when they are under the so^^
enliving and quickening influences of heaven and sometimes the soul of a
Christian do^^ move in those blessed paths as Pharaohs ch^^riots, they drive
most heavily, when there^^ a cloud between the precious face of Chr^^^ and
them: and we conceive that sound (...) spiritual exercise of Faith upon the
Pr^^mises, would make a Christians motion more swift toward heaven. We grant
Chr^^^ has three different ways of guiding (...) and daughters to Glory:
there are some th^^ Christ carries to heaven in a chariot pav^^ with love,
that all alongs their life they (...) living within sight of that promised La^^
and are taken up with the refreshing fo^^ tastes of the heavenly joys; such a
one (...) Henoch, who spent his days in walking wi^^ God: there are some that
Christ guides (...) heaven in a chariot that is drawn with speck^ed horses;
they have mixed dispensations of sorrow and joy attending them in their walk,
they have a winter and a summer, they have a night and a day, and such a one
was Job. 3. There are some that Christ carries to Heaven in a fiery chariot,
that all alongs their life they are under distracting terrors of the most
High, and are living perpetually to their own apprehensions upon the borders of
hell, and such a one was Heman, whom Christ thus did guide to heaven: however,
if we shall go there, we need not much dispute the way how we came, for he
does all things well. And upon the other part, Satan has three different ways
of guiding souls unto everlasting torment; there are some that Satan carries
to hell in a chariot of delusions, making them believe that they are still
going to heaven; and such are the hypocrites in Sion: and I shall say; I think
that chariot was never so ^illed as it is in those days. O fear that ^nxious
disappointment that many of you (it is like) will meet with? An hypocrite he
has strong hopes, he has strong idols, and he has strong delusions, these
are his three attendants. And there are some that Satan carries to hell in a
chariot of profa^ity and ignorance of God, whose judgment goes before hand,
and they are known that ^hey are going there. And there are some that Satan
carries to hell in a chariot of civility, whose Religion stands in this,
con^erning the letter of the Law to be blameless. And certainly, believing of
the promises* and studying to exercise faith upon them, (...) that which might
prevent many of these damnable soul destroying and murdering delusions that are
within some of our beast^. There are three things in Scripture that are called
precious: Christ he is called precious 1 Pet. 2.7. Faith is called precious, 2
Pe^* 1.1. To you that are partakers of the li^^ precious faith with us, and the
promises they are called precious, in the words that (...) have read, and Faith
(as it were) hat^ two blessed eyes, by one of those it beholds Christ, and by
another of these it beholds the promises, and fixes it self upon them. O
Christians and expectants of He^ven, would you know what is the rise of (...)
the sad things that have befallen you in the^^ days? It is this in short, ye
believe not the promises. O Christians, what is the reason that ye carry not
your crosses with patience it is, because ye believe not the promises b^ which
your soul must be upholden in the day of your affliction. O Christian, wh^^ is
the rise of your little mortification? (...) it not because ye believe not the
promises for by them ye should be made partakers (...) the divine nature. O
Christian, what is the ground that ye pray so little, and that yo^ pray with so
little success? It is, because ye believe not the promises. A Christian when
he goes to pray, he should take the^^ two things along; 1. The sensible
co^^victions of his necessities: And, 2. The precious promises that is given to
answe^ that necessity, the one would provoke fervency, and the other Faith. Are
there not some here that knows not what it is to pray upon a promise, and
that makes you pray to so little purpose. O Christian, what is the reason of
your so much sorrow, and of your little spiritual comfort? It is, that ye
believe not the promises: It is no wonder that your names be called Marah,
because ye exercise not faith upon the precious promises of God. I think
without wronging you or any that are here; I doubt much if ever Christians had
such hearts as the most part of us have; O what a heart is that, that can
neither pray nor praise? both are alike mysteries unto them: What a heart is
that, O Christian, that can neither believe promises, believe threatenings, nor
obey commands? What a heart is that, that can neither sorrow for sin, nor
rejoice in God? and what a heart is that, that can neither love Christ when he
is present, nor can they ^ong for Christ when he is absent? and what ^ heart is
that, O Christian, that can neither love heaven, nor can fear hell? and is
there nor such hearts with us, even with us that ^re here this day?

At the last occasion that we spoke upon these words, we spoke a little to the
first thing in them, which was the rise and original of the promises, holden
forth in that word, Whereby, or by whom. The second thing in the words, was the
properties of ^he promises; and we told you that there were these four holden
forth in the words. The first property of the promises is, that they are free,
which is imported in that word, are given; all the promises of the everlasting
Covenant being the precious and free gifts of God. Hence you will see that often
times the tenor of the Covenant of Grace runs upon that strain, I will give
you, as i^ clear, Ier. 32.39. I will give you one heart, and Ezekiel. 36.26. I
will give you a new heart, and Ezekiel. 11.19. I will give you; It is the strain
of the language of the Covenant of Grace, to give.

Now in speaking upon this first property of the promises, to wit, their
freedom, I shall speak a little unto these two, the first thing shall be to
point out unto you the way how a Christian may win to the distinct uptaking of
the freedom of the promises* and then I shall from thence press some duties.

And in short, as to the first, we conceive that a Christian may win unto the
distinct uptaking of the freedom of the promises, by these Considerations. 1.
Let a Christian cast his eye upon the sweet rise, and spring, or fountain of
the promises, and there ye will see their freedom shining most clear: for what
is the fountain of the promises? Is it not the boundless and everlasting love
of Christ: this is clear, Deuteronomy. 7* 7. where God giving a reason of all the
great things that he had performed for them, he sets down the rise of it,
Because I loved you, says he: and again the ground of this is, Because I have
loved you, there being no reason of love, but love: and it is clear, 2. Sam.
7.2. where David having received many precious promises, he sets down the
rise of all these in that verse, For the words sake, says he, and according to
thine own heart, have thou done all these things to make them known to thy
servant. And it is clear, Ezekiel. 17.8. where God calls the time of entering
into Covenant with them, a time of love; that love it was eminently shining in
that day when God did condescend to Covenant with them: And hence ye see in
Scripture, that the promises they are called by the name of mercy, Micah 7.20.
To perform the mercy to Abraham, which is the Promises, and they are so called,
because mercy and boundless love is the sole fountain and spring of all these
promises. Secondly, Consider the persons who have right to make use of the
promises? Must not the promises be free when the proclamation is upon these
terms, Rev. 22.17. Whosover will, let him come, there is nothing to give you a
right to the promises, but only a willingness to embrace them, if ye will,
ye may take them. And, thirdly, ye may read the freedom of the promises in
this, that any condition which is annexed to the promise: Christ gives to the
Believer strength to perform that condition: It is known that Faith is the
condition of the promises, and it is certain Christ gives a Believer that
condition as well as he gives him the promise, Philip 1 29. To you it is
given to believe, and Ephesians. 2.8* It is the gift of God: It is impossible for a
Christian to perform the condition, except Christ who is surety for him did
perform it. Fourthly, Ye may read the freedom of the promises, (...) ye
consider the time when the promises are accomplished, it is often at such a
time, when the Christian has been, and is under no very spiritual frame.
Hence ye will see in Ezekiel. 16.60, 61. that when the promises are accomplished,
then God requires confusion and blushing of face, because of their former
ways: and Ezekiel. 36.31. when the promises are accomplished, then that is the
time when the Lord calls them to remember their own evil ways, and their
doings that were not good; yea, he will have them and all the world to know,
it is not for their sakes that he does this; therefore he commands them to
be ashamed and confounded for their own ways, or the posture they were in
when he accomplished his promise: And if there were no other thing to speak the
freedom of the promises, but the trysting of the accomplishment of them with
such a frame, it were more then suff^cient: But besides this, see David's
practice, 2 Samuel 7.8. he reads the freedom of the promises from his own
imperfections, What am I (says he) and what is my fathers house, that thou
should have brought me hitherto? And even in the same Text, there is an
Emphasis in that word, to us, Whereby are given to us, as if the Apostle did
say, to prove that the promises are gifts: I can bring no other argument so
strong as this, They are given to us. Fifthly, Ye may read the freedom of the
Promises, if ye will consider and take up the infinite fullness and
all sufficiency of the Promiser, that there is nothing without himself that can
persuade him to give such promises. Hence ye will see, Genesis 17.1. when he is
making the Covenant with Abraham, he puts it still in the Frontispiece of
the Covenant, I am God all-sufficient, as it were, to put off all thoughts of
merit that Abraham might have, and that Abraham might be persuaded of this,
that there was not any imaginable perfection in himself, that could be the
ground and rise of such promises. And there is that, lastly, from which ye may
read the freedom of the promises, if ye consider the greatness of these
promises: if they were of a lower nature; then were it less to be wondered,
if merit should come in to plead for it self: But when a Christian shall
compare himself, and the greatness of the promises together, he cannot but
then sing that blessed song, These are the gifts and donations of God, and what
am I, and what is my fathers house that thou have brought me hitherto.

Now the second thing that we purposed to speak to, is, to press some duties
upon you from this, that the promises are free, and we shall lay before you
these three. The first, That since the promises of God, are free, then as you
would not destroy your own souls, be much in making use and application of the
Promises: Are not the promises your life? Did not all the Saints that went to
heaven before us go to heaven, living upon the promises? There was not a step
of Abraham's life, but he walked with a promise in it; there was not an
affliction that Abraham met with, but he took comfort to himself from the
promises; and I shall remove these two mistakes that are incident to Christians
in the application of the promises, even from this ground, that they are free.

The first is this, There are some Christians that will not apply the promises,
because they are under the convictions of their own infirmities, and of their
own baseness: so that when we press you to believe the promises, ye reject
this counsel, because ye consult with your own infirmities. This was the
practice of David, Psalm. 22.4. Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted and
were delivered: but he durst not trust in the 6. verse, But I am a worm, and
not a man* I am a reproach among the people. And it is that same divinity that
is in these days, when we press you to believe the promises, because of the
great cloud of witnesses that have gone before you, that believed the promises.
O say ye, if I were like David, and Abraham, I would believe the promises; but
truly David said that same, that lived before you, if I were like my fathers,
I would believe the promises, but I am not like my fathers. And therefore I
would say to you these two words. 1. Are ye inferior o^ short unto David in
holiness, or necessities? We do not question but all of you will answer, we
are not inferior to David in necessities, but in holiness; Then say we, if
ye be not inferior to David in necessity, then make use of the promises: for
as we cleared the last day, necessity gives ^ right in making use of the
promises. 2. I would say, I am certainly persuaded, that sensible necessity
would cut short many of our formal debates, in closing with the promises,
necessities (as ye use to speak) has no Law, and necessity has no manners.
Let me say that to you who will not close with the promises, that if ye were
under sensible necessity* if Christ should forbid you to close with such a
promise, ye would close with it though he forbid you, as the woman of Canaan
did, there is nothing but sensible necessity will overcome it: necessity never
disputes its right, for it goes over the belly of such a dispute, it presently
makes use of that that its need calls for.

Secondly, There is that other mistake amongst Christians in believing the
promises, that they want the qualifications annexed to the promises, and
therefore they dare not believe the Promise, especially that promise of closing
with Christ, they think they are not under such a deep measure of humiliation,
of sorrow for sin, nor under such lively apprehensions of the excellency of
Christ. And I shall say but these six things unto these that will not close
with Christ, because they want qualifications, or at least, have not these
qualifications after such a way. First, Let me tell thee (O Christian that
thus disputes,) go between the first steps of a Christians way to heaven and
the last, and see if ye can behold a grave upon which this is written, Behold
here lies a man or a woman that came to Christ to embrace him, and he would
not receive them; Did ye ever behold such a grave as this? And why then do ye
so much dispute? Will ye take a trial of Christ whether he will refuse you if
ye come, and if he shall refuse you, sure I am, he will do that which he
never did to any before you. The second thing I would say to such, that the
want of such degrees of such things, ought not to be a ground of your not
closing with Christ; for if ye had these qualifications that ye require, ye
would maintain that same dispute that ye do now; for when we desire you to
close with Christ, ye answer, that your sorrow is not come to such a height as
it ought, nor is your humiliation come to such a height, as ye pitch for your
self to come to. O Christian, if ye come to ten times more, and yet ten times
more, ye would have that same dispute then which ye have now: and the ground
of it is this, the more that a Christian have real sorrow, he will oftentimes
be the more in the apprehension that he has not sorrow. Thirdly, If ye want
the qualifications that are required in these that should close with Christ in
the Covenant of promise, then come to Christ to get these qualifications. I
would only ask at you, think ye to spin sorrow for sin out of your own hearts;
Think ye to spin humiliation for sin out of these wretched breasts of yours,
ye must come to Christ for sorrow, as well as ye come to Christ for life.
Fourthly, All the qualifications* that ^re annexed unto that promise of closing
with Christ, and coming to him, they point ^ut rather the qualification of them
that will come, then the qualification of these that ought to come: Ye read
such a command as that, Come unto me all ye that are wearied and heavy laden.
O say ye, I am not weary, and I am not under the burden of sin, therefore I
cannot come. I will tell you what is the meaning of that command; Christ
inviteth these who have the greatest unwillingnesse, to come and get
willingness: But withal, it shows this, none will come to get rest from
Christ, but these that are first weary; and that this is the Lords method of
working, first, to make weary, and then to ease; but no such matter in his
Word, That first, we must have a weariness of our own making, or else he
will not receive us: now but when ye come, ye will be weary, and he will
receive you. Fifthly, let me say to you who thus disputes, make your want of
qualifications the very ground of your closing with Christ. I shall but in
three places let you see this strange arguing of Faith in closing with the
promises: There is that, Psalm. 40.11, 12. Let thy truth continually preserve
me, that is, let thy promises be accomplished and made lively unto me, which
are my preservation: and would ye know the ground and reason that he anexeth
unto this; For says he, Innumerable evils encompassed me about, they have
taken such hold of me, that I am not able to look up. He makes his very want
of qualifications, the grounds of his closing with the promise, and seeking the
accomplishment of it. And there is that second expression which is most
wonderful, Psalm. 25 11. David prays for the accomplishment of that promise,
Pardon my sin upon that same very account, Because it is great. And I shall
give you a third place in which the arguing of Faith is most mysterious, Exodus
33. compared with Exodus 34.9. In the first place, God denies the
accomplishment of that promise, of going up amongst that people: And the ground
he gives of it, is, Because, says he, ye are a stiff necked people. And
chap. 34. verse 9. when Moses is praying for the accomplishment of that
promise, That God would go amongst them; he takes that same very argument out
of the mouth of God; Go up amongst us; For, says he, we are a stiff-necked
people: God said he would not go up because they were a stiff necked people,
and Moses desires him to go up because of this* And there is this, lastly,
that we would say to you, that so much dispute; If ye would have these
qualifications that ye want, ye would study to close with Christ by Faith;
Would ye have sorrow for sin? then believe; Would ye have high thoughts of
Christ? then believe: Would ye have humiliation? then believe; for believing is
a mother grace unto all these.

The second duty that we would press upon you from this consideration that the
promises are free, is, That when the promises ^re given to you, and are
accomplished, ye would study to be denied to any merit in your selves, which ye
may suppose to be the ^ise of the giving or accomplishment of the promises.
There is nothing that a Christian ^eceiveth, but it is a fruit of infinite love,
there ^s not a conviction that trysteth a Christian, ^ut it is the fruit of
infinite love; there is ^ot one real sigh for sin, but it is the fruit of
^nfinit love; there is not one blink of the precious countenance of Christ, but
it is a ^ruit of infinite love; there is not the least ^egree of hatred against
sin, but it is the fruit of infinite love; there is not the least promise that
is accomplished unto you, but it is ^he fruit of infinite love: so that upon all
our ^eceipts from God, there is reason to sing that ^ong, Not unto us, not unto
us, but unto thee ^oth belong the glory: And therefore, I would press this
upon you, O Christians, ^educe all your mercies unto the fountain, and there
sit down and pen songs of everlast^ng praise to him. Will ye but take a view ^f
this, there is not one bit of bread that ye ^at, that is within a promise, but
it is a mercy that has come running to you through the ^owels and tender heart
of Christ: his heart (...) the fountain of all our mercies, and they ^weetly
stream out of that precious foun^ain; so that if ye had no other thing to
com^end your mercy from, but that it is a gift ^f the heart of Christ, ye may
take it in your ^rms upon this account, and solace your ^elves with it.

The last duty that we would press upon you from this consideration, that the
promises are free, is this; Ye would be studying to close with Jesus Christ
that is promised and freely holden out to you in the Gospel; O sinner of eighty
years old, O sinner of sixty years old, O atheists of forty years old, and O
sinner of twenty years ol^ and downward! I do here invite you, (...) the
Ambassador of Jesus Christ, to embrace Christ freely offered in the promise;
yea, (...) do invite you by all the virtues of that noble Plant of renown; by
that everlasting love that dwelt in his precious heart, by all the sufferings
and wounds that he received, by his eternal glory, and by all the blessings and
joys of heaven, and by that love that ye owe unto your precious and immortal
souls* that ye would come and embrace him freely offered to you in the Gospel.
And for the further pressing of this, and for clearing of the way of your
closing with him, I shall first propose some Gospel mysteries, and sweetly
agreeing contradictions, (if so we may speak) held forth in Scripture. 1. Come
and buy Christ, and yet buy him without money; that is, come and receive
Christ, and ye shall have as unquestionable a right to him as if ye had bought
him, that is to buy without money; ye have nothing to commend you to Christ but
necessities, and necessities bideth you go, and Christ bids you come, why
then will ye sit this call. 2. What a Gospel mystery is that, Ye ar^ to buy
Christ, and Christ is above price, there is nothing that we can give to buy
that pear^ of greatest price, and yet we must buy him: then the meaning is,
come, and buy Christ by faith, and by forsaking of your idols, this is all the
price that he does require for himself; and so he requires nothing of you but
what he himself does give, or what is both your duty and advantage to forsake,
and which is no gain for him to receive: Christ is not enriched by your hearts,
and by giving of your consent to him. 3. This is a Gospel mystery, that we are
to buy without money and without price, and yet to buy with a price, according
to that word, Prove. 17.17. there is a price put in the hands of fools, to buy
wisdom, and what is the meaning of tha^, to buy with price, and buy without
price? It is in short this, though Christ be offered to you in the Gospel
freely, ye must not sit down, but be active in closing with him; What is the
price that Christ requires of you? even this, that ye would forsake your soul
destroying idols, and that ye would forsake your former evil ways, and take
hold of the present opportunity for embracing him. And O! cursed shall the
heart be that will not embrace Christ; O but to have him one hour in our arms,
it were well worth ten thousand E^ernities of the enjoyment of all things that
are here below; ye would never open your arms again to another lover, if once
ye had him between your breasts. O but a sight of him that now is the eternal
ravishment of all that are above, would transport your hearts with joy, with
delight, and admiration, above all expression. Fourthly, There is this Gospel
mystery by which we would press you to embrace Christ; A Christian must buy
Christ, and yet he must have him freely. Is there not an inconsistence, do you
suppose between buying and having freely* But I would say this to clear it,
Christ is bot^ the seller, he is the wares, and he is the buyer; Christ he
presents himself unt^ your hearts, and he desires to sell himself and he
persuades and freely enableth yo^ to buy him: I will tell you what Christ
does, he stands without our hearts, and within our hearts, he stands
without an^ knocks by the Word, and he stands within and opens by his
Spirit; Christ he bot^ commands, and he obeys, both within doors, and
without doors, and all this (...) does freely.

The second thing I shall say to persuade your hearts to take Christ freely
promised and offered unto you, shall be this; Will yo^ consider that there is
willingness in the hear^ of Christ to take you. I shall give unto you these six
things that speaks ou^ Christ his willingness to receive you. First, Does he
not command you to come and receive him? and if ye could multiply objection^
throughout eternity, why ye should no^ close with Christ, ye may cut them all
asunder with this knife, This is his Commandment: And does he not command you,
Mat* 11 28. Come unto me all ye that labor: And Isai. 55 1* Ho, every one that
thirsts* com^ to the water. Secondly, He does regra^^ and deeply resent it
that ye will not come. ^ think Christ never weeped so bitterly, as that day
when he weeped over Jerusalem, that they would not embrace him, Luke 19.^^. If
thou, even thou, at least, in this thy day, ^ad known these things that belong
unto thy ^eace: And John 5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye may have life. O
what think ye can be the rise of this, that Christ should ^orrow because ye
will not give up your hearts to him; does he increase his gain when ye give
him your hearts? No cer^ainly, but he cannot endure that madness ^n you, that
ye should forsake your only gain. Thirdly, Would you do Christ a joy^ull turn,
and make his heart glad? Embrace him; This is clear, Luke 15.5. that when he
finde^h the sheep that is going astray, He returns rejoicing. Fourthly, I say
no more unto you, would you make all the Persons of the blessed Trinity to
rejoice, would ye make all the Angels of Heaven to ^ing, would ye make all
the Saints that ^re round about the Throne to ex^lt for joy; ^hen give your
hearts up to Christ, and close with him in the Covenant of promise; according
to that word, Song 6. last verse. Re^urn, return O Shulamite, return, return,
that we may look upon thee. Four times that command is repeated, return* and
the great argument with which he ba^keth it, is. That ^ll the Persons of the
Trinity may rejoice, That we may look upon thee. Fourthly, Con^ider but how he
has concescended to give himself at a very low rate: What will ye give for
Christ? O sinners, what will ye give for him? Would ye give the world for
Christ? I will tell you what ye will ge^ Christ for, ye will get him for a
very look, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, O all ye ends of the earth: And think
ye not that is a matchless mercy, that the thirty three years sufferings of
Christ, all the pains and torture^ of his heart, his being under the
unsupportable wrath of an offended God, the fruit o^ all that should be yours
for a look. Will ye deny that to Christ, Oh, do ye ever think to find a more
down-coming market? Ye^, fifthly, does not this speak an admirable willingness
to have you, he is to give you that look. It is impossible for these cursed
eyes of ours, ever to give precious Christ a look, and therefore he has
Promised to give that to us, that we may give to him, Zech. 12 10. They shall
look to me, that very look ye are to get from Christ, and ye see it is within
the compass of a promise. Lastly, That speaks Christ's willingness to
receive and take you, that he does not take the first refusal. O Christians
that are now in Christ, if Christ had taken an hundred refusals from you ye
should never have been in heaven, but he waits for an answer, and does not
take us at our first word: acording to that word, Song. 5.2. I am wet, says
he, with the drops of the morning, and my locks with the dew of the night: He
was long knocking at her heart, and stayed a long time there patiently*
suffering all the injuries he could meet with. And I would only pose you, think
ye that ^f one of the richest of you were suiting a ^ery poor woman, and she
refused you so ^any times, would your proud hearts sub^it to take her? And yet
how oftentimes ^ath the precious heart of Christ submitted ^o many effronts,
and refusals that we have ^iven him: I think if it were possible, Chri^^ians
would wink when first they behold christ upon the day of their espousals: For
(...) suppose their will be a great dispute between ^^me and love, desire and
confusion; shame ^ill make you to close your eyes, because ye ^ave oftentimes
undervalued that Prince, and ^et love will not let you close them; desire ^ill
put you to look, though reflecting upon our former ways, will make you blush
and (...) ashamed.

Thirdly, To persuade you to receive christ in the offer of his free promises*
I ^^all but say these three words and close.

Look to these excellent gifts that Christ ^^ingeth with him, he brings
Justification ^ith him, and is not that an excellent gift? (...) brings
Sanctification with him, and is (...) that an excellent gift? He brings joy
(...) the holy Ghost with him, and is not that (...) excellent gift? He
brings the love of ^od with him, and is not that an excellent (...)? He
brings patience under sufferings ^ith him, and is not that an excellent gift?
(...) why should I name what he brings? (...) brings himself and all
things, and what should ye have more? O but for one saving ^^ink of his face,
it would make your hearts (...) down your enimity that you have maintained so
long. 2. O Christian, that ye man close with Christ, do but remember the
hap^pinesse that ye will have in embracing him I told you not long since, and
now I put yo^ in mind again: There is a sixfold crown which shall be put upon
your head; Would yo^ have long life, then come to Christ, and y^^ shall have a
crown of eternal life: Would (...) have glory? then come to Christ and ye sha^^
have a crown of glory: Would ye have know^ledge of the mysteries of God? then
come (...) Christ, and he shall crown you with know^ledge: Would you have an
eternal felicity and an uninterrupted happiness, then com^ to Christ, and ye
shall have an immort^^^ crown: Would you have holiness and s^^^ctifiation,
then come to Christ, and ye (...) have a crown of righteousness; yea, he
sha^^ put a royal crown upon your head, a crow^ of pure Gold; and then that
word shall be accomplished to the full, Zech. 9.16. The^ shall they be as the
stones of a crown lifted (...) and as an ensign upon the land. O what a (...)
think ye will it be, when Christ shall (...) your crowns upon his hand, and
shall (...) them upon those heads never to be remov^ again, here we are often
put to sigh (...) that lamentation, The crown is fallen from (...) heads, woe
unto us for we have sinned, b^ there shall be no more sin to make our crow^ to
totter. 2. I must tell you, There is ^ fourfold suit of apparel that ye shall
be clothed with ere long: ye are now cloath^ with heaviness, but then ye
shall be cloath^ed with the garments of praise; And did (...) ^ver know such a
robe as that? Is it not a more excellent robe then the robes of Kings and
Emperors in the earth, to be clothed with praises? Many of them are and
shall ^e for ever clothed with infamy and (...). Ye shall be clothed with
change of ray^ent, and shall be brought unto the King in ^ayment of needle
work. O poor L^sse and ^oor Lade that sits upon the dunghill, that knows
not what it is to have change of ^pparel, ye shall have it in that day, when
christ shall solemnize the Marriage with ^ou, ye shall misken your self. O
Christian, (...) ye knew your self never so well, ye will ^ee forced to cry
out, O* is this I? Is this I (...) am now made perfect through his comeli^sse.
3. Ye shall be clothed with the gar^ents of immortal glory, ye that have
your ^^undation in the dust, and dwell in the houses (...) clay, ye shall then
be clothed with these ^^cellent robes of immortality, and clothed (...) with
your house from heaven. And lastly, (...) shall be clothed with the garment
of (...) spotless righteousness of Christ. O such a ^^jestick walk as ye will
have, when ye shall (...) a scepter in one hand, and a palm in (...) other,
these robes put upon your back, (...) these crowns upon your heads, and then
(...) be walking through these streets that (...) paved with Gold. 3. I shall
give you (...) word to think upon, That there are (...) things that shall be
your exercise in (...). 1. Ye shall be constantly taken up in ^^ndering: If it
be not presumption for us ^hink a little; What is the exercise of Christ and
the Saints that are above, we conceive it is this, Christ is wondering at their
beauty, and they are wondering at his beauty, Christ is looking upon them, and
the^ upon him; and is it not true, that if Christ ^e now ravished with one of
our eyes, Son^ 4. ver. 9. much more shall he be ravishe^ when both our eyes
shall be given to hi^ and shall eternally behold him, without go^ing a whoring
after other lovers. 2. (...) shall be continually in the exercise of prais^ joy
and light shall be flowing in, and admir^^tion and praise shall be flowing out
eternally ye shall then sweetly warble upon the^ Harps of God, and shall cry,
Hallelujah (...) him that sits upon the Throne, there (...) be no discord
there; there is a sweet (...) beautiful harmony amongst all these spirit^ all
and heavenly Musicians. O but to (...) them, it were a heaven, though we had
(...) that blessed lot as to sing with them. 3. (...) shall be continually
taken up in the (...) of love: Faith is your predominant (...) while ye are
here, but Love shall be (...) predominant grace when ye are there. (...) is it
not a mystery to take up these (...) emanations of love and delight, that
(...) pass between Christ and you? ye shall be folding Christ, and Christ
shall be infold you. 4. Ye shall be continually beholding (...) I think it is
hardly possible for the Wife to ^^^member her Husband in heaven, though loved
him as her own heart, they will (...) taken up in beholding him that sits on
Throne, they will think it too low an (...) to be taken up with looking upon
another in these relations: all will be ravished beholding him, and one another
in him, and for him. O the blessed exercise of these that are now entered within
tha^ City, and within these Gates, whose name is praise. 5. Ye shall be
continually taken up in beholding, ye shall be alwaye^ knowing, and yet never
able to comprehend the endless mysteries and perfections of Jesus Christ. O
such a study! Is it not pleasant always to be studying Christ? and will not
these things persuade you.

And now but a word more to these that will not have this free offer: If ye
will not ^mbrace Christ and take him, let me tell you, (...) would not be in
the stead of that person ^or ten thousand worlds, if ye will not im^race
Christ and take him for your portion, ^he stones of the wall of this house will
bear witness against you, and they shall have a ^ongue to speak against you,
that ye have ^een invited to take him, and would not: (...) long that day is
approaching, and draw^^g near, when the Athiests and refusers of christ they
shall change their faith, they shall ^hange their love, they shall change their
fear, (...) they shall change their joy; and they ^^all change their mind, ye
shall change your (...) ye that are refusers of Christ; for I (...) there are
many that thinks they have (...) with Christ, who never did close with (...);
that faith shall flee away, and ye shall ^^lieve the contrary: ye shall change
your (...), or at least, your opinion of your love: (...) think ye love
Christ, but ye do not embrace him; I will tell you what will be you^ exercise,
and I can tell you nothing so te^rible Christ shall eternally hate you, and ye
shall eternally hate Christ, there shall be a (...) hatred betwixt you two for
evermore. (...) that dreadful word, Zech. 11.8. it shall the^ be accomplished
to the uttermost, My (...) loathed them, and their soul also abhorred mee^* And
ye shall change your fear, for now thoug^ ye fear not God, nor reverence man,
yet the^^ the horror of God shall make you shake (...) a leaf, and ye shall
change your light and you^ judgment. Ye do now undervalue Christ and thinks
him of nothing worth; when Christ is presented unto you, there is no beauty
(...) ye should desire him: But, O think on th^^ day when Christ shall sit
down in the cloud^ and ye shall see his beautiful face, every (...) of which
shall be able to captivate your hear^ if they were then capable to be ravished
(...) the sight. O what will be your thoughts (...) him? And if the blessings
of a crucified (...) our come not upon you, then the eternal, (...)
unsupportable vengeance of Christ shall (...) upon your heads that would not
condesce^^ to take him: ye shall be cursed in your (...) ye shall be cursed in
your death* and ye (...) be cursed after death; What say ye to (...) Are ye
content to take him! ye might (...) the day that ever ye were born, if ye
(...) once come to close with Christ. Now (...) him that has the keys of the
house of D^vid, that can open your hearts to give (...) entry, we desire to
give praise.

SERMON IV.
2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.


THere are three most glorious and excellent gifts that God has bestowed upon
man, there is that comprehensive gift of heaven, Jesus Christ, who is so
called, John 4.10. and sure such a gift as that, ought in some sense to blind
our eyes, and make us look upon all things that are be^ow him, as nothing. The
second royal Gift that the Lord has given, is the precious promises of the
everlasting Covenant, which are given to us through him: A Christian that is
united unto him by the blood of Faith* (...) may write this above the head of
every promise of the everlasting Covenant, this is ^ine, and this is mine. His
third precious gift, is the gift of Faith, which is that grace that makes use
of the former two: and we conceive, that our little making use of ^hese three
excellent gifts, is the great occasion and cause why these four most sad and
lamentable evils have befallen us. ^. The evil of a silent conscience, that
though we be profound to commit iniquity, and do love a reward under every
green tree, yet our conscience does not speak nor reprove us; and if at any
time they do speak; yet there are some that are so possessed with a dumb and
dea^ spirit, they can neither hear what God does speak, nor can they hear their
cons^ience. 2. The evil of a (...) nod, we know not the voice of our rod, and
who is he that has appointed it; God does not now open our ears to discipline,
nor seal up our instruction. 3. There is that evil of silent mercies, the
mercies that we receive of God, we understand not the language of them: ar^ not
our mercies Barbarians unto us, speaking to us in an unknown tongue? and yet we
may say, there is not a rod nor a mercy a Christian meets with, but it has a
voice, if we did understand it. And lastly, there is that evil which has
befallen us, and alas, this is the capestone of all, a silent God, who does not
hearken unto the voice of our cries, but turns about the face of his Throne,
covering himself with a cloud in his anger, so that our prayers cannot pass
through. Alas, may not each Christian of this time cry out* Call me no more
Naomi, but call me Mara, because the Lord has dealt bitterly with me. In
short, I think there are these two things that may b^ our lamentation upon the
high places of Israel. First, That we live without sight of God; And secondly,
that we live without sight of our selves, and all this, because we live
without a sight of these precious Gifts* Christ and his Promises.

But now to the words; We to^d you* tha^ in them there were these four things
holden ^orth concerning the promises. 1. The original and fountain of the
promises, in that word, Whereby, or by whom: 2. The properties of the promises
which we told you, were these four. The first was, that the promises were free*
holden forth in that word, they are Given; all the promises of the everlasting
Covenant being the noble gifts of God. The second (of which we are to speak at
this time) is this, that the promises of the Covenant they are unchangeable,
which is imported also in that word* they are given, the gifts of God being
indeed without repentance; And as to this: 1. We shall prove the truth of the
point: and for this end, consider that place, Numb. 23.19. which was a part of
Balaams song, Has he not spoken it, and will he not also d^ it? Has he
said it, and shall it not also come to pass? and Psalm. 89.34. I will not break
my Covenant, nor alter the word that has gone out of my mouth: and the point
is clear also, from the name that the promises gets in Scripture, are they
no called the sure mercies of David, Isa. 55.3. and are they not sometimes in
Scripture called Truth, as we may see from Micah 7.20. Thirdly, The nature of
the Covenant proves it; in that it is called an everlasting Covenant, and
sometimes a Covenant of Salt, because that Covenant is above the reach of
alteration or putrefaction: And fourthly, It may be likewise shown from the
constant experience that the Saints have had of the unchangeablenesse of the
promises. This Joshua takes notice of, Chap. 23.24. where when he was a dying,
There has not failed (says he) one thing of all these good things that God
has spoken; and he is so confident of this, that he is forced to repeat that
word over again in that verse: and he takes notice of it, Josh. 21.45. where
he has tha^ same expression again, There has not failed (says he) one thing
of all the good things that God has spoken: and this Solomon he took notice
of, 1 King. 8.56. There has not failed one thing that God has spoken unto us
by Moses; and indeed, there is near six thousand years experience that
preaches this truth, the promises are unchangeable, so that we may now say,
The word of the Lord i^ tried as silver is purified in a furnace of earth hot
seven times: If there had been any falsehood in the precious promises of the
everlasting Covenant, six thousand years trial should have brought it to
light; but does not every one of the cloud of witnesse^ that have gone before
us, leave this testimony upon record, Faithful is he that has promised, who
will also do it* his promise (...) with the night and with the day, it cannot
be altered, the ordinances of heaven continue to this day, much less can this
Covenant of love be broken or altered, only we would have you taking this
Caution by the way, that there are some conditional promises that God passes
unto his people* which in the depths of his spotless wisdom he does not
accomplish unto these who never fulfill the condition; such was that promise
that he gave to the Israelites in the land of Egypt of their possessing the
land of Ca^aan, who yet died in the wilderness: And ^ence is that strange
word, Numb. 13.34. see shall know my breach of promise, says the Lord, which
is a word spoken after the man^er of men, not importing any change of pur^ose
in God, but only showing that because ^hey did not believe, and so fulfill the
condi^ion of the promise, therefore it was not to ^e fulfilled personally to
them*

The second thing that we shall speak to upon this, that the promises are
unchange^ble, shall be to propose these six golden ^illars and excellent
foundation^, upon which the unchangeablenesse of the promises (...) built. And
the first of them is the omni^otency of God, that there is nothing that he ^ath
promised, but he is able to effectuate and to bring to pass, Therefore, 2 Cor.
6.8. when God had been passing many ex^ellent promises, he strengthens their
faith with this, Thus says the Lord God Almighty: and no doubt, Where the word
of this King (...), there is power, and who can say unto him, that do thou: O
misbeliever of the pre^ious promises of the Covenant; be ashamed ^o cast up
your eyes to heaven above, or to ^he earth beneath; we think the Stars, the
^un, the Moon, and all the works of God, they ^ay speak out that to you, do not
misbelieve God, but trust in him, That is wonderful in ^ounsell and excellent
in working. The se^ond is, the wisdom and infinite counsel of God, he has not
only complea^ ability to accomplish the promise that he has given, but he
has the depths and treasures o^ knowledge, by which he has contrived the way
of the accomplishment of such a promise: Hence is that word, 2 Samuel 23.5* that
the Covenant is well ordered, which speaks out the wisdom of God: and the^
that word is subjoyned, the Covenant is sure^ yea, the Covenant of Grace is
such a things that there is so much of the art of heaven^ so much of infinite
wisdom shining in it, tha^ it is called the counsel of God, Heb. 6.17. Tha^ ye
might know the immutability of his counsel. The third golden pillar, is, the
infinite love (...) God, that though there be nothing in us tha^ can put him to
^^complish the promises, ye^ he will take an argument from his own love, to
make out such a promise to us; there i^ sometimes (if not always) nothing in
us, but that which may speak forth delays o^ the accomplishment of the
promises; but when God can bring no argument from us, he can bring an argument
from his own love, (...) Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. where giving a reason of the
accomplishment of many promises, and o^ his love to them, I loved you, says
he, because I loved you; there being no reason that ca^ be given for love, but
love. The fourth is, The unchangeablenesse of the Promiser, that he is the
same, yesterday, and to day, and for ever, and without all alteration and
shadow of change: Hence ye may see, Exodus 3.14. when God is repeating many
preciou^ promises unto Moses, He (as it were) ^trengtheneth Moses faith with
this, I am, ^aith he, that I am, which we conceive to point sorth the
unchangeablenesse of God, that what he has said, he will certainly ac^omplish
in its own time, and though the ^ision do tarry, yet at last it shall speak.
The (...) i^, The faithfulness of God, and that he (...) one that cannot lie,
but certainly will ^ake out what he has spoken. Love, it ^aketh the promises,
the faithfulness and ^ower of God accomplisheth the promises, and the infinite
wisdom of God chooses the ^ost fit time f^r the performing of them. ^ence it
is said, Psalm. 119 89, 90. Thy word (...) Lord, is for ever settled in heaven,
and the ^round of it is in the following verse; For ^^y faithfulness is unto
all generations: Hence ^ou may see, that oftentimes when God is ^aking promises
to his own, he puts to ^^at word, I that speak in righteousness, Isa. 5,
19. and Isa. 63.1. O! must not the ^^omises be unchangeable that are made by
(...) Father who is the God of Truth? Must (...) the promises be unchangeable
that are ^^ceived and merited by the Son, that is truth it self, and the
faithful Witness, and ^men? Must not the promises be unchange^^le that are
applied by the holy Ghost, that (...) the Spirit of Truth? And must not the
^^omises be unchangeable that are made ^^own unto us by the Gospel, that is
the lord of Truth? Was there ever any who (...) leave that upon record of God,
that he ^as unfaithful in the accomplishment of his ^^omises. O what a clear
sight of the faithfulness of God shall a Christian get, when he shall be
standing upon the outmost li^^ between Time and Eternity, then he will (...)
God faithful in accomplishing all his pr^^mises unto him from first to last.
The (...) golden pillar, is, The justice of God, (...) justice, it now puts
him to accompli^^ his promises, mercy and righteousness ha^ now kissed each
other: Hence is that wor^ 1 John 1.9. He is just and faithful to forgiv^ So
that now the accomplishment of t^^ promises, it is not only an act of love, but
(...) is an act of justice also: We confess indee^ love and mercy makes the
promises, (...) justice and truth also puts God to the ac^complishment of
them: Hence is that word Micah 7.20. To perform the truth to Iaco^ and the
mercy to Abraham: Why is it mercy to Abraham, and it is truth to Jacob? It i^
in short this, because mercy made the promises to Abraham, but truth did
accomplis^ the promises to Jacob?

The third thing that we shall speak to from ^his, That the promises are
unchangeable shall be, to press these six duties upon yo^ from this point.

O Christians and Expectants of Heaven, who have Christ in you, the hope of
Glory, rejoice and be exceeding glad that the promises are unchangeable. 1.
This is a duty that is pressed from that ground, Heb. 6.18. That by two
immutable things we might have strong consolation: There is exceeding much joy
that may come to a Christian from this, that the promises shall be accomplished
i^ their own time. We conceive that the word unchangeable, it is engraven upon
the head of many a Christians mercies. Is not unchangeable written above the
head of our promises? Is not unchangeable written upon the head of our
blessedness? Is not unchangeable written above the head of our enjoyment of
God? That day is coming when we shall have unchangeable love, unchangeable
enjoyment of God, and all things unchangeable: And we conceive, that if these
two were believed, the truth of the promises, and the unchangeablenesse of the
promises, a Christian might walk through this valey of tears with joy, and
comfort himself in hope.

The second duty we would press, is this, that ye would sursease and give over
your disputings and carnal reasonings about the accomplishment of the promises,
since the promises of God are unchangeable, ought not we with this to silence
misbelief, and all that blind humane reason can say: This is pressed, Heb.
6.16. An oath for confirmation, it is an end of all strife. Gods confirming of
his Covenant by an oath, it ought to cut short the disputings of misbelief; And
here give me leave to point out a little these grounds upon which it is that
Christians does so much dispute the accomplishment of promises: and to let you
see how all these grounds may be answered from these six pillars that were
given of their unchangeablenesse.

The first is, When dispensations seems to contradict the truth of the
Promises, the promise it speaks one thing, and dispensations seem to speak
another: and this is the occasion that oftentimes Christians cry out, Does his
promise fail for evermore. This is clear from the practice of David, 1. Sam.
27.1. when dispensations were upon the top of the accompl^shment, and truth of
the promises, then misbelief it arises as a Champion mighty to war, and cries
out, I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul: And we conceive, that
dispensations contradicting the truth of the promises, was the occasion of his
speaking that word, Psalm. 116.11. I said in my haste, all men are liars. And I
would only say to you that dispute the truth of the promises upon this account,
that dispensations contradicts them: Do but consider this: God in his way is
not like unto you: Would ye know the time when the promises are nearest their
accomplishment, it is then when we can least see that they are to be
accomplished, the promises are never nearer their performance, then when we
think that they are furthest off from it: And therefore let the faith of the
omnipotency of God, uphold your spirit under such a debate, then let
dispensations speak what they will, ye may answer all with this, There is
nothing too hard for him, there is nothing too hard for the Lord. I grant this
may try the strength of the strongest faith, yea, we find it has made the
best to stagger when they had no probabilities to tell them that the promise
shall be accomplished: this was the ground of Sarahs misbelief, Genesis 18.12.
that when she heard she should bear a son in her old age, she laughed within
her self, and did, as it were, mock at such a promise: and this was the ground
of Moses his misbelief, Numb. 11.21, 22. he did not see a probability that
such a multitude should be ^ed with flesh, and therefore he did call in
question the truth of that promise: this was the ground of the misbelief of
that Lord that is made mention, 2 King. 7.2. and this was the ground of
Zecharies misbelief, Luke 1.20. But I would only say to you that do so much
consult with probability in the exercise of your faith, these two things. 1.
There is nothing too hard for God, this was the very argument that God took to
convince Sarah in the 14. verse. of that 18 Chapter, Is there any thing too hard
for God? And, 2. Faith is never in its native and spiritual exercise, till
once probabilities contradict the truth of the promise, then faith it is put
upon the stage, and then faith does act; but as long as faith and probabilities
think one thing, then the day of the trial of the strength of faith is not yet
come.

The second ground upon which Christians dispute the accomplishment of the
promises, ^s their much disputing of their interest in God? Sometimes a
Christian will believe ^ promise, and before the accomplishment of ^he promise
come, their hope will be darkened, their interest in Christ will be obscured,
and then they do quite their faith in adhering to the truth of that promise.
These two are joined together, want of the faith of our interest, and want of
faith of the accomplishment of the promise, as it is clear from that word, Psalm
77.8. Is his mercy clean gone. There is disputing of his interest, and
presently this is subjoyned, Does his promise fail for evermore. Except a
Christian can read his name in the ancient records of heaven, and can seal this
conclusion, I am my beloveds, and my beloved he is mine, it will be a hard, and
a difficult task for him, if not impossible to believe the promises.

The fourth ground of a Christians disputing the truth of the promises, is,
their mistaking the way how the promises are to be accomplished, There are some
that suppose that when ever they close with a promise by faith, there is no
more but to enter to the possession of such a promise; but do not mistake it,
between your believing the promise and the accomplishment of it, there may be
sad and dark days interveening, according to that word in Mark 10.30. where
Christ passing great promises to his Disciples, He, as it were does add, do
not mistake me that ye shall have these promises without trouble and
affliction, Ye shall receive (says he) an hundred fold in this life with
persecutions. A Christian when he believes the promises, he must resolve to
have a winter before the spring time come, wherein the promise shall bud and
flourish.

The fifth ground of a Christians disputing the truth of the promises, is, when
the promises are long in their accomplishing. A Christian when first he
meets with a promise, he will cry forth, O I believe, but when ^ime is taken
for the accomplishment of it, ^hen his faith begins to faint, and his hope
begins to languish and give over; yea, sometimes Christians they fall in
this ^a^lt, when they believe a promise, they fix ^ day for the accomplishment
of it, which ^f God do not keep, but go over; then they ^mmediately cry forth,
What is my strength that I should wait, and what is my confidence that I should
prolong my days. This is clear in the practice of Abraham, where the promise
of having a numerous seed being given ^o him, Genesis 2.12. the long time before
that promise was accomplished in part to him, was the occasion of his
misbelief, that he vented, Genesis 15.3. O Lord, what will thou give me, since I
go childelesse: But ye must know, that before the vision shall speak, there is
an appointed time that ye must wait, according to, 1 Pet 5.9, 10. After ye
have suffered a while, then the promises shall be accomplished, and ye shall
be made perfect.

The sixth ground upon which Christians call in question the accomplishment of
the promises, is, The consideration of the greatness of the thing that is
promised, when they compare it with their own worth and deserving, then they
begin to dispute, O shall such a thing be, shall unworthy I, shall sinful I,
shall self-destroying I, shall I that am less then the least of his mercies,
receive the accomplishment of such a mercy* This we may suppose was one ground
o^ Abraham's misbelief, Genesis 17.18. when h^ cried forth at that same time, when
the Lord was giving him the excellent promise of (...) Isaac, O that Ishmael
might live: He though^ an Isaac such an excellent mercy, that he^ could not
without presumption, expect the accomplishment of that promise. And Zach. 8* 6.
this was the ground of their misbelief which God does sweetly obviate, If i^ be
wonderful in the eyes of the remnant of the people in these days, should is
also be wonderful in mine.

The last ground upon which Christian^ dispute the accomplishment of the
promises is, When in the time between their believing and the accomplishment of
the promise they fall into some gross iniquity, (...) makes them exceedingly
debate, whethe^ the promise shall be accomplished unto them for since they have
transgressed the Covenant of God, and have broken their purposes and
resolutions, they cannot suppos^ God will abide faithful to them, and (...)
accomplish his promises unto them, (...) the only way how to answer this
dispute, is to look to the faithfulness of God, and (...) that word, 2 Timothy
2.13. Though we believ^ not, yet God does abide faithful, he cannot (...)
himself.

And now to shut up this second duty tha^ we press from the unchangeablenesse
of the promises: I shall only say these two word^ unto you, 1. Assure your
selves of thi^ ^^at these accomplishments of promises that (...) not through
the lively exercise of (...), does loose much of their sweetness, ^uch of
their luster, and much of their ad^^ntage: Sometimes a promise will be
ac^^mplished unto a Christian, when he has (...) been much in the constant
lively exer^^se of Faith in believing such a promise; (...) then the
disadvantage that attends ^^ch a one, are not easily experessed: How ^ften
may he cry out, The Lord was in this ^ace, and I was not aware: How little of
(...) does he see in it, how short is he in ^raises and rendering to the Lord
according (...) the good he has received? How negli^ent in improving or
keeping the mercy, and how loath to lay it out for God, when ^ee says, The
Lord has need of it: and many ^^ing^ more of this kind which may press (...)
to be steadfast in believing. And, 2. O ^ispute less, and believe more, what
pro^^te shall ye have of your disputings; and (...) ye would produce all your
strong argu^ents why ye should not believe the pro^ises, ye may drown them in
this immense ^epth, God is unchangeable. Let me say ^ut this further, There
are three most re^arkable changes in a Christian, in his ma^ing use of the
promises: First, Sometimes ^ee will believe the promises and make ^pplication
of them, and ere many hours ^o about, he will misbelieve that promise which
presently he believed. Will not some^^me a Christian in the morning cry out, I
^m my beloveds, and my beloved he is mine, and ere twelve hours come, they will
chang^ their note and cry out, My hope and (...) strength is perished from the
Lord: Some^times a Christian in the morning will cry out My mountain stands
strong, I shall never b^ moved, and ere many hours go about, he wi^^ change his
note, and cry out, Thou have (...) thy face from me, and I was troubled.
Secondly Sometimes a promise will be to a Christian sweeter then the honey and
the honey comb: Some^times a Christian would die and live upon (...) promise:
Sometimes the believing of a pro^mise will be to a Christian as the valey
(...) Achor for a door of hope, that will make hi^ to sing, and yet ere many
days go about, h^ may come to that same very promise, and i^ will prove
tastelesse to him as the white of (...) egg; so that he may cry out, O that it
(...) with me, as in months past, and in the ancie^^ times: And O where is the
sweetness tha^ found in such a promise? O it is gone, it (...) gone, and I am
left desolate. Thirdly, Some^times when a Christian will be believing su^^ a
promise, and resting upon it, he will (through the Spirit of the Lord) see much
light an^ clearness in that promise, he will take (...) the deep things of
God that shines therei^ and at another time he may come to the same promise,
and it may be dark to him, (...) that his light has evanished: and sometime
the joy of a Christian in the promise will be gone when his light that he had
in it, (...) remain with him. A Christian may come (...) the promise, and find
his ancient light, ye^ not his ancient joy, nor his ancient delight. Therefore
if ye would have the promises ^lwayes sweet unto you, pray over them, ^ray
that God might breath upon such a pro^ise, and make it lively to you.

The third thing that we would press upon you from the unchangeablenesse of
the ^romises, is that which by proportion ye ^ay gather even from this, that
the threat^ings of God are unchangeable; these two ^re conjoined, yea, Joshua
seems to infer ^he unchangeablenesse of the threatenings from the
unchangeablenesse of the promises, Chap. 23.14* compared with verse* 15. and
^hese two are conjoined, Zech. 8.14, 15. That as I thought to punish you, and
it has ^ome to pass, so I have thought to build you up, and it shall come to
pass. And I would from this desire you to stand in awe, lest you come under
the lash of the unchangeable threat^ings of God; for know, that as God is
unchangeable in the promises, and there is not one word in all the everlasting
Covenant that shall not be accomplished; so likewise know, there is not a
curse in all the Book of the Covenant, but it shall be accomplished in its
time: And know this likewise, that the day is coming when that sad word that is
in Hos. 7.12. shall be accomplished, I will chastise them as their
Congregation has heard. And O ye that live in this place, if all the
threatenings that your Congregations has heard, shall be accomplished in their
time, ye may take up the last words of Baalams song, alas, Who shall live when
God shall do these things: And therefore, since the threa^^nings of God are
unchangeable, as also the promises, life and death is set before you and either
ye shall be the Object of ^he ^^^changeable threa^nings of God, or ye mu^^
be the Object of the unchangeable promise^ of God: And therefore, I would from
the charge you, that as you would not be help^full to the destruction of your
own immo^^tal souls, you would not undervalue the threatenings that ye hear in
your Congreg^tions, since there is a declaration past, th^^ the threatenings in
your Congregations sha^^ be accomplished.

Now there is that fourth duty that we^ would press upon you from this, that
the promises are unchangeable, have an unchange^able love to the Promiser; let
this comme^^ the Promiser, let this constrain your hearts t^ delight in the
Promiser. O what a blessed dispensation of love is this, that an unchangeabl^
God should make unchangeable promises u^^to changeable Creatures. If the
promises (...) the Covenant of Grace were as changeable i^ their nature as we
are changable, there should not one of us go to Heaven; but know, it i^ the
blessed design of love, and it has been ^ blessed practice of the infinite
wisdom of God that when he has to do with changeable creatures, he will give
them unchangeable promises. And I would once invite you again that you would
come near and embrace thi^ unchangeable Promiser: I shall speak these five
words that may persuade you. First Christ is easily to be gotten if ye will
take ^im, ye will get Christ if ye will but hear; ^ea, for one listening of
your ear to his ^oice ye shall get him: according to that word, Isa. 55.3.
Hear, And what of that, and your soul shall live; Is not this to get Christ at
an easy rate: and as we spoke before, ye will get Christ for a look, and is
^ot that an easy rate, Isa. 45.22. Look unto (...) all ye ends of the earth
and be saved: Have ye a desire to take Christ, ye shall get him for that
desire; according to that word, Isa. 55.1. Ho every one that thristeth, let him
^ome and he that wills let him come: Will ye ^ut consent to take him, ye shall
have him, and what can you have at a lower rate then ^his: Shall never your
cursed hands take the (...) and put to your name to the blessed con^ract of
Marriage? Shall never these cursed hearts of ours cry forth, Even so I take
him, and do promise to live to him, and to die to him. O strange, will ye not
do it, upon what terms would the world have Christ, is ^t possible to have him
without a consent to take him? Oh if ye would but open to him, he would
condescend to come in unto you, and to sup with you, and ye with him; do ye but
stir to open, Christ has the Keys in his own hand, and he would help you to
open. O what if Christ the precious Gift of Heaven, the eternal admiration of
Angels, that branch of Righteousness shall be despised, being offered upon so
easy terms; then cursed eternally shall be that person that thus undervalueth
Christ, it had been better for him that he had never been born: Cursed shall ye
be in your birth, and in yo^^ life, and in your death, all the curses of the
Persons of the Trinity will light upon yo^ yea, believe it: O wife that has a
believin^ husband, in the day that the great sentenc^ of eternal
excommunication from the pre^sence of the Lord, shall be past against the
undervaluers of Christ, a believing husban^ will say amen to that sentence,
even to hi^ wife that did thus undervalue that Nobl^ Plant of renown: and the
wife upon the other part will say with hearty consent, ame^^ to that sentence
against the unbelieving husband, and the father to the son, and the so^ to the
father.

Now there is this fifth duty that we^ would press upon you from this, That
the promises are unchangeable, that ye would be persuaded to make the promises
your portion and your inheritance; What can ye wan^ that will choice the
promises for your portion? I know, our cursed eyes does not love to make
invisible promises, and that invisibl^ crown, and an invisible God our portion,
w^ look to walk by sight, not by faith. But (...) if you knew once what it were
but to clai^ a relation to Christ! Did ye once know wha^ it were to have but
Christ a moment between your breasts, ye would cry forth, O! wh^ would not love
him who is the King of Saints (...) who would not be content to quite all
things that they might get Christ that noble pearl o^ price.

And there is this last duty that we would press upon you from this, That the
promises are unchangeable; read a lecture from his, O Christian, even your
misbelief; God ^ath confirmed his everlasting Covenant ^ith an oath, with the
Blood of his Son, by (...) two great broad Seals of heaven, the Sa^^ament of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper; and what does all these confirmations speak ^ut
our dreadful misbelief, and that we now not what it is to be resting on a
naked lord of promise. I shall say no more, but ^esire that ye would consider
and take no^^ce of these three. First, Ye have been ^^lemnly and often invited
by the Ambassa^ors of Christ to close with him, and to ^^ke him for your
Husband and your Lord, (...) will you consider presently, that all (...) Angels
in heaven, and all that are about (...) Throne, and the three most glorious
^ost blessed Persons of the Trinity, that they (...) witnesses, and shall be
to your dissent. and are there not many here whose hearts ^ould never be
brought up to give a hearty ^onsent to close with Christ that is the great
^^omiser, and who has laid all the bonds ^^at heaven or earth could contrive
to gain ^^ners hearts unto himself: O precious christ, what could he do to
persuade us to ^^ve him which he has not done; and yet (...) may be your
name, which is in Ephesians. 2. Children of disobedience. Or as the lord is,
Children of Imperswasion, we can^^t be persuaded. Secondly, I fear if christ
Himself would come from heaven (...) invite you, and say, here am I, embrace
(...), there are some here who would close not only their eyes, but their ears,
they would close their eyes lest the beauty o^ Christ should allure them, they
would close their cursed ears lest they should be gained and captivate by the
sweet enchaunt^ing voice of that blessed Charmer, when h^ should charm so
wisely. And, lastly, wi^^ thou tell me, O Christian and expectant o^ heaven,
what a day shall it be when all the unchangeable promises of God shall be
a^^complished? What a day shall it be when that promise shall be accomplished,
Ye sh^^ see him as he is? What a day shall it b^^ when that promise shall be
accomplished* Ye shall be made like unto him? What a da^ shall it be when
that promise shall be accom^plished, ye shall know as ye are known? (...) are
ye not longing for the day of the full ac^complishment of the precious promises
o^ God, when ye shall sit down and comfor^ your selves in the eternal and
unspeakabl^ fruition of them? O let us long and wa^^ till the day shall be
when that voice shall (...) heard in heaven, That the mysteries of God (...)
finished, till the day when that voice sha^^ be heard in heaven, Behold, the
Bridegroo^ comes, go ye out to meet him. Oh how (...) willing are we to
leave a world. And ho^ gladly would we take up our rest on the side of Jordan.
I think if this were the night that that blessed voice were to be heard in
heaven, Behold, the Bridegroo^ comes, go ye out to meet him; some, if no^
many of the Christians (that are so indeed^ in this time would cry forth, Oh
spare little that we may recover strength, before we go hence and shall be
no more. Are ye not longing to bring the King over Jordan, and to bring him
home to your self, and to have your heart brought home to him? O blessed,
blessed are these that are above; Is not the voice of these that shout for
victory heard amongst them? Is not the voice of these that sing for joy heard
among them? Job does not now any more complain, Why do ^hou make me to
possess the iniquities of my ^outh, and sets a print upon my heels? David
does now no more complain, Why does ^hy promise fail for evermore, but rather
does ^weetly sing, How is thy promise fulfilled for ^vermore? Heman does now no
more complain, While I suffer thy terrors I am di^^racted, but rather cries
ou^, While I feel ^hy comforts I am ravished. The voice of ^ourning is now
sweetly gone away, and ^he voice of Hallelujah and of eternal prais^ng of him
that sits upon the Throne is ^ow heard in the place of it: O such a day that
shall never admit of a following night. ^ow to him that is upon his way, that
will ^ome, and shall come, and shall not tarry, ^e desire to give praise.

SERMON V.
2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.


THere are three cardinal and excellent Graces that are exercised and taken up
with the precious promises, there is the excellent grace of Faith, th^^
believes the truth and the goodness of the promise; there is the precious
grace o^ Hope, that with patience waits for the accomplishment of the
promise, and do^^ stay until the vision speak: and that nobl^ grace of Lov^,
that loves the thing that (...) promised; and takes exceeding much de^light
in the Promiser. If we may be allowe^ to speak so, we think these strange
revolu^^^ons and times we live in, are another Eccl^^siastes, which does fully
preach forth the vanity and emptiness of all things that ar^ below God: And
we do indeed conceiv^^ that it is the great design of God in the dar^^ning of
our pleasant things, and in makin^ every gourd to wither, under the shadow
(...) which we use to repose our self, and in f^^mishing all the gods of the
earth, to bring h^^ own to delight themselves in this visib^^ Treasure, the
promises of the everlasting Covenant, and in him who is the substance of them;
and that since all things else (...) declared to be vanity, we might choice
these, as our own portion for ever.

At the last occasion that we spoke upon these words, we were speaking unto
the properties of the promises; and we told you that there were ^our of them
holden forth. 1. The freedom of the promises. 2. The unchangeablenesse of the
promises, of which two we have spoken unto you; and now there remains other
two to be spoken to, to wit, that the promises are exceeding great, and that
they are exceeding precious, a sweet and excellent, though a rare conjunction,
greatness and goodness here kissing one another, preciousn^sse and highness
linked together by the bond of Union: And we shall speak unto these two
properties together, and shall clear a little this thing, in what respects the
promises of the Covenant may be called exceeding great and precious: And we
conceive in short, they may be cal^ed so in these eight respects. First, They
^re exceeding great, in respect of the great price that was laid down to
purchase them, ^here not being a promise of the everlasting Covenant above the
head of which this may not be engraven in great letters, Here is the price and
purchase of blood: And no doubt ^his ought highly to commend the promises, that
they are bought at so infinite a rate. Must they not be great and precious
things that so wise a Merchant did lay down so infinite a treasure for the
purchasing of them 2. They may be called exceeding great an^ precious, in
respect of those great and pre^cious things that are promised in them. (...)
not godliness a great thing, and this is with^in the bosom of a promise; Is
not heaven an eternal enjoyment of God a great an^ precious thing? and yet this
lies within the bosom of a promise? Is not the know^ing of God as he is, our
perfect conformit^ with God, our victory over Idols, great an^ excellent
things; and yet all these are trea^sured up in the promises. 3. They maybe
called exceeding great and precious, in re^spect of the great advantage that
redound to a Christian through the enjoyment o^ them: the promises of the
everlasting Co^venant (if so we may speak) are the Pensi^ that draws the
draughts and lineaments o^ the Image of Christ upon the soul, it is the
promises of the everlasting Covenant b^ which we are changed from glory to
glory, (...) it were by the Spirit of the Lord, and as Pete^ does here speak,
the promises are such things whereby we are made partakers of the divine
nature. 4. They may be called exceedi^^ precious, in respect of that near
relation th^^ they have unto Jesus Christ; What are (...) the promises of the
Covenant of Grace Are they not streams and rivolets that flo^ from Jesus
Christ; Christ is the fountai^ out of which all these promises do spring and
can this fountain that is sweet in it se^ send forth any bitter waters? must
they (...) be precious things that have such a nob^^ ^escent? as to be streams
of love flowing ^ut from the Father to the Son, and from ^im unto us, as the
pouring out of the ^yntment upon the beard of Aaron which ran ^own the head
unto the skirts of his gar^ents. 5. They may be called exceeding ^recious
promises, in respect they, or rather Christ in them are the object of precious
^ith: What is the meat upon which faith ^oth feed? is it not upon the promises
of ^he Covenant, and Christ the kernel of them: What are these things that
faith takes so ^uch delight in, and is suported by? Is ^t not the promises of
the Covenant: ^. They may be called exceeding precious, (...) that they are the
things that guides and ^^adeth us to precious Christ. There is not (...)
promise within the Book of the Covenant, ^ut, as it were, it cries forth with
a loud ^oice, O come to Christ; The promises are ^ndeed the Star that leads
us unto the ^ouse where Christ dothly, and there is no ^^ccesse unto Jesus
Christ but by a promise, Christ is to be found there, for he dwells within the
bounds of the everlasting Covenant, and there he will tryst with his people,
and be found of them. And, 7. They may ^e called exceeding precious, in respect
that ^he Saints have found such sweetness, and ^uch unspeakable delight in
these promises. Did not David find a great sweetness in the ^romises when he
cried forth. The words of ^hy mouth are better unto me, then thousands of ^old
and silver? Did he not find much sweet^esse in the promises, when he was
constrained to cry out, Thy Law is sweeter unto me, then the honey and the
honey comb? David in a manner was put to a nonplus, to find out any suitable
similitude and significant resemblance, to point out the sweetness of the
promises; though we may see the Christians of this time in a spiritual fever,
they have lost their spiritual taste, so that they may say, if we may allude
unto that word, 2 Samuel 19.25. I am this day fourscore years old, and cannot
discern between good and evil, can thy servant taste what I eat or what I
drink. They know not what it is to be overcome with the sweetness that is to
be found in these excellent streams of divine consolation. Lastly, The
promises may be called exceeding precious, in that the Sai^t^ have a high and
matchless account of them* Hence that word here rendered Precious, may
likewise be rendered Honorable, which speaks forth that there is nothing
th^^ has so much of the esteem of a Christian as the promises. Would ye put
wisdom, o^ riches, or honor, or what ye will in the balance with the
promises, they would cry forth, what should I profit to gain all these if I
lose the promises. We shall say no more of this, but that the promises are
indee^ that Apple, the eating of which would mak^ us in some respect, (and in
humility be i^ spoken) as God knowing good and evil: The promises are these
things that does elevat^ the soul unto a divine conformity with God^ And oh
that this might be the fruit of them the promises are as cords let down to
soul^ sinking in the myrie clay, and in the horrible ^it, do but lay hold upon
them, and ye shall undoubtedly be drawn up, and he shall set your feet upon the
rock, and order all your goings.

Now we come to speak of the third thing ^n the words: which is the advantage
and ^nspeakable gain that flows to a Christian through the promises, holden
forth in these words, That by them ye might be made par^akers of the divine
nature; which words ^oth not hold forth tha^ there is any sub^tantial change of
our natures unto the es^ence of God; but only it holds ^orth this, that the
soul that is taken up in believing of ^he promises, they arise unto a liken^sse
and ^onformity to Him in Holiness, Wisdom and Righteousness. And as to
these ad^antages that come to a Christian through ^he promises: 1. We must lay
this for a ^round, that the fruit of all comes to him through believing the
promises, and in ^aking application of them.

And the first is, That they do exceedingly ^elp and promove that excellent and
neces^ary work of mortification: This is clear from the words of the Text; As
likewise ^^om 2 Cor. 7.1. Having these promises, ^early beloved, let us cleanse
our selves from (...) filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting ^olinesse
in the fear of the Lord. And the ^^fluence that the promises have upon
San^^ification, may be shown unto you in these ^hree. First, They lay upon a
Christian (...) ^ivine bond and obligation to study holiness, that since
Christ has signified and testify* His respects unto us, in so ample and larg^
a way as to give us such precious promise^ we ought to endeavor to study
holiness which is that great reward of love that h^ seeks from us for all
things that he hat^ bestowed, and we receive, and this is the meaning of that,
2 Corinthians. 7.1. Secondly* The strength and furniture of a Christian for
fulfilling and accomplishing of the work o^ Sanctification, lies within the
promises* Are not the promises of God unto a Christ^^an, as Samsons lo^ks, in
which their great strength dothly; and if once they cut them^selves off from
the promises through misbe^lief, their strength does decay, and (...) become as
other men. Where must the Christian go to for strength? Is it not to the
promise: Is it not the Name of the Lord* yea, this is the strength of a
Christian unt^ which he must resort continually. And thirdly, the promises of
God they hold fort^ that unspeakable reward that attends th^^ Christian that
shall study holiness. Ther^ are several promises of the everlasting Cov^^nant
that cries forth to the Christian, t^ him that overcomes will this promise b^
accomplished, to him that overcomes sha^^ this truth be fulfilled, and this
does exceed^ingly provoke a Christian to wrestle with (...) his discouragements
he meets with in the way, he burieth all his anxieties within the circle of
his immortal Crown, which h^ hops for, and sees in the promise, and hi^
hope makes him dispense with his want^ his expectation makes him overcome his
fears, and his looked for joy makes him to dispense with his sorrows.

The second advantage, is, That the faith of the promises do help a Christian
to a spiritual and heavenly performance of the duty of prayer, and withal,
makes him delight in the performance of it: This is clear from ^ Sam. 7.27.
where David believing the promises, it is subjoyned, He found in his heart to
pray that prayer unto God; and if any will look unto the words of that prayer,
they will see them running in a heavenly and spiritual strain, speaking him one
much acquainted with God, and under most high and majestic apprehensions of
his Glory, as is clear also, Psalm. 119.147. I prevented the ^awning of the
morning and cried; and as if David had said, would you know what made me thus
fervent and diligent in prayer, ^t was that, I hoped in his word; and hence ^t
is, that he has so many prayers in that Psalm, all were occasioned through the
^ith of the promises: As for instance, when ^e cried forth, Quicken me
according to thy lord, be merciful unto me according to thy lord. And we
conceive, the faith of the ^romises helps a Christian in his prayer to ^hese
four Divine ingredients of that duty. ^. It makes him pray with faith: when
^nce he builds his prayer upon the pro^ises, then he venteth his prayer with
much ^onfidence of hope, according to that word, ^sal. 65.3* where ye may see a
man be^ieving, and praying when he is believing, and expressing his confidence
mo^^ strangely in th^se words. As for our trans^gressions thou shall purge them
away; It i^ not said, thou will purge them away, or we desire that thou should
purge them away, bu^ thou shall, which speaks forth both the confidence of
Faith, and the boldness o^ Faith: A Christian that believes the promises, he
can take the promise in his hand and present it unto God, and say fulfill this
promise since thou will not de^y thy Name but art faithful. 2. It makes a
Christian pray with much humility, for when he does understand that there is
nothing that he has but it is the fruit, and accomplishment of ^ promise, he
does not boast as those tha^ have received, but walks humbly under his
enjoyments: this is clear, Genesis 32 10* where we may see Jacob speaking to Go^
with much humility, and in the ninth verse he is speaking to God with much
Faith And 3. It makes a Christian pray wi^^ much love: Would you know the
great ground that we are so remiss in the exercis^ of love in prayer, it is,
because we build no^ our prayers upon the promise. And 4. I^ helps a
Christian to pray with much fer^vency; when was it that David cried to God? Was
it not when he was believing the promise that past to him of old, we would not
plead with God with such remissness i^ we did believe the promises that are
within the Covenant.

The third advantage is, That the faith o^ the promises does sometimes uphold a
Christian under his spiritual disertions and tentations. Is it not certain,
that sometimes he has been ready to draw that conclusion, I am cast out of his
sight, and shall no more behold him in the land of the living? when a promise
has been born in upon his spirit, has supported him and made him to change
his song, and to invert his conclusion. This is clear from Psalm. 94.18. when I
said, my foot slippeth, there is the conclusion of misbelief and despair, yet
thy mercy, O Lord, did hold me up, there is the gate at which faith does bring
in consolation, not from bygone experiences only; but certainly from that
which he found in some precious promises that was born in upon his spirit: Many
excellent cords of love has Christ let down unto a soul, when they have been
going down into the depths, and the weeds have been wrapped about their heads: It
is clear likewise from Psalm. 119.81. My soul faints for thy salvation: as if
David had said, I am in hazard to give over my hope, and to break my
confidence: And would ye know what was it that supported me under such an
estate, I hoped in thy word: Has not this oftentimes been the song of a
Christian in their darkest night, In the multitude of my thoughts within me,
thy comforts do delight my soul: Faith will see a morning approaching in the
time of the greatest trouble; and no doubt that promise that upholdeth a
Christian in their doubting and most misbelieving condition, the lively
impressions of that promise will remain a long time with him; and when first it
is born in upon their spirits, they will see no small love shining forth in
carving out such a promise to suit with such a providence as they are (it may
be) meeting with for the time.

The fourth advantage in believing the promise, i^, that thereby we have an
excellent help to patience and divine submission under our saddest outward
afflictions: this is clear from Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted unless I had
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living; and from
Psalm. 119.49, 50. where David telling his exercise in the 49. I hope, says he,
in thy word, Immediately he subjoyneth, This is my comfort in mine affliction,
as if he had said, if I had not had the promises to be my comforters, I had sit
alone and kept silence, and should have remained without comfort in the day of
my adversity, and verse. 92. Unless thy law had been my delight, I should have
perished in my afflictions; and we conceive in short, the influence which faith
upon the promises has upon the patient bearing of the cross, may be shown
unto you in these two particulars; First, Faith it is an excellent Prophet,
that always prophesies unto us good things. Would ye enquire at Faith at your
midnight of affliction, what is its opinion of God and of your own estate;
Faith would sweetly resolve you thus, Wait on God for I shall yet praise him
for the health of his countenance. Faith knows not what it is to have a wrong
construction of God; and therefore it is the noble interpreter of a Christians
cross: If sense, reason, and misbelief interpret your cross, they will make
you cry out unto God, Why art thou become unto as an enemy, or as a liar, and
waters that sail? but if faith that noble Interpreter do interpret your
crosses, it will make you cry out, I know the thoughts of his heart, that they
are thoughts of peace and not of evil, to give me an expected end. Faith
lets a Christian see a blessed ou^gate and issue of all the sad
dispensations that he meets with. Faith, that is its divinity, I sow in
tears, but I shall reap in joy, weeping may be at evening, says Faith, but joy
shall come in the morning. Secondly, It affords unto a Christian such soul
refreshing consolation in the midst of their afflictions, that in a manner they
forget their sorrows, as waters that pass away; this David does divinely
assert in Psalm. 119.50. This is my comfort in mine affliction: The faith of the
promises are indeed that tree which if they be cast into our waters of Marah,
they will make them immediately become sweet.

The fifth advantage is, that the faith of the promises does help a Christian
to a greater distance with the world, and to live as a pilgrim, as is clear
from Heb. 11.13. where these two are sweetly linked together, their embracing
of the promises by Faith, and confessing that they were strangers and pilgrims
here on earth. And we shall show the influence that faith has upon this, in
these three. 1. It makes a Christian see the end of all perfection here, and
that there is nothing within this Glob of the World that is not vanity and
vexation of spirit, Faith is that prospect through which a Christian has most
clear discoveries of the vanity of all things, and this does exceedingly help
him to live as a pilgrim. 2. It lets a Christian see the endless
perfections of heaven, and brings it within sight of that immense and
everlasting hope, and this makes him to live as a pilgrim, and to declare
plainly that he seeks a Country. And, 3. It does exeedingly help him forward
in that blessed work of weaning of affections from all things that are here;
Would you know where a Believers heart is? It is in Heaven; would you know
where his thoughts are? They are in Heaven; Would ye know where his
conversation is? It is in Heaven; Would ye know where his hope is? It is in
Heaven, his treasure is in heaven, and therefore his heart and his conversation
is there, And Christ in him is the hope of glory: and indeed, more faith of the
promises would constrain us all to subscribe that Confession of Faith that is
in Heb 11.13.

The sixth advantage that attends the believing of the promises, is. That it
is the mother of much spiritual joy and divine consolation, and makes a
Christian to be much in the exercise of praise: this is clear from Psalm. 71.14.
But I will hope continu^ally, and then immediately is subjoyned, And will yet
praise him more and more; As likewise from Romans 15.13. and from 1 Pet* 1.8. If
a man would have his way to heaven made pleasant, and while they are sitting by
the rivers of Babel, would be admitted to sing one of the songs of Zion, then
ought they ^o believe the promises, and to choose them as their heritage for
ever: and then he may sing in hope, and praise in expectation, though he have
but little in hand for the present: indeed when he looks to his possession,
there will not be so much matter of rejoicing, but when he looks upon his
hopes and his expectations, he may be constrained to cry ^orth, Awake up O my
glory, I my self will awake early.

The seventh advantage is, That the faith of the promises is a notable mean to
attain unto spiritual life: This is clear from Isa. 38.16. By these things,
says Hezekiah, do men live, (speaking of the promises) and in all these things
is the life of my spirit. As likewise from Psalm. 119.50. Thy word, says David,
has quickened me. O what spiritual and divine life does attend that Christian
that is much in the exercise of Faith upon the promises: And what is the great
occasion that our hearts are oftentimes dying within us like a stone, and we
are like unto those that are free among the dead? Is it ^ot because we do not
make use of the promises.

Eighthly, there is that advantage, that ^aith of the promises, it makes a
Christian have an esteem of the thing that is promised: What is the reason that
we write ^his above the head of the great things of ^he everlasting Covenant,
this is a Zoar, a little one? Is it not because we do not believe; great things
sometimes to us have no beauty, and there is no comeliness that appears in
them why they should be desired* but if we had so much faith as a grain of
mustard seed, we would cry forth. How excellent are these things that are
purchased to the Saints, and how eternally are they mad^ up that have a right
but to one line of the everlasting Covenant, That is well ordered i^ all things
and sure.

And ninthly, The faith of the promise^ is the door at which the accomplishment
o^ the promises does enter in: according to tha^ word, Luke 1.45. Blessed are
they that believe for there shall be a performance of these things that are
spoken of the Lord unto them. If w^ were more in waiting for the accomplishmen^
of his promises, the vision should speak and should not tarry: And no doubt, a
mercy coming to us as the fruit and performance o^ a promise, will make it an
exceedingly to freshfull thing; When a Christian gets leave to sing that
song which is in Isa. 25.9. Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him and he
will come and save us: And when (...) mercy is the fruit and accomplishment of
the promise, there is a beautiful luster an^ dy^ upon that mercy, which no art
could (...) on, but only the finger of the love of God The smallest mercy then
becomes a matchless mystery of love, and the most matchles^^ mysteries of
love without the exercise o^ Faith, they become as things that are contemptible
in our eyes, and we do not value ^or praise them. Faith makes our thoughts ^o
ascend, and misbelief makes our thoughts ^o descend, in relation to the mercies
of heaven.

Lastly, Besides all these advantages, We ^ave these two mentioned in the Text:
^. That by them we are partakers of the Di^ine Nature, and are brought up unto
tha^ ^lessed conformity with God, which we had ^ost in the fall. 2. That by
them we escape ^he corruptions in the world through lust: I ^ntend not
particularly to open up the nature of these things at this time, because I am
only ^o speak of the exercise of Faith in the promises. But O what excellent
mercies are these ^o get on the beauty of the Image of God, and ^o get off
these ugly defilements which were ^he image of Satan upon our souls. O how
should this commend the promises unto us, that by faith in them, we do all
behold with ^pen face as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, and are changed
into the same from glory to glory as it were by the Spirit of the Lord.

Now that which, secondly, we shall speak ^o, shall be the advantages that
results to a Christian from a spiritual observation of the Lords accomplishing
his promises; for here ye see in the Text, the Apostle makes ^n observation of
these excellent things that ^re the fruit of these precious promises when they
are accomplished. And the first ^dvantage is, That it stampeth the soul of a
B^liever with most divine impressions of love: This is clear, Isa. 38 15. where
Hezekiah cries out, What shall I say, he has spoken it, and himself has done
it, being as it were, astonished and overcome with the apprehensions of the
condescendency of God He is put to a non plus, and to what shall (...) say,
Psalm. 41.8, 9. As we have heard (sait^ David) so have we seen in the City of
the Lord of hosts, That is according to his promise, we have had suitable
performance and he subjoyneth, verse 9. that which wa^ both their exercise and
their advantage, We^ have thought of thy loving kindness, O God, i^ the midst
of thy Temple; as it were, the ob^servation of the performance of the promise
made their thoughts wholly to be taken up with the love of God: and no doubt,
ther^ is more love in performing one promise, the^ eternity were sufficient to
make a commen^tary upon. It is one wonder of condescendency, that God should
obliege and bind himself to us by promises: and another depth of wonderful
love, that he should perfor^ these bonds, and answer his words with performance.

The second advantage is, That the observing of accomplishment of promises does
bring in to the soul new discoveries of God this is clear, Exodus 6.3. where God
th^^ speaks to Moses: I was known (says he) unto Abraham, and unto Isaac,
and unto Jacob by the name of the Almighty, but by the nam^ of Jehovah was I
not known unto them, tha^ is, by the Name of giving an accomplishment unto my
promises, that Name was no^ discovered unto them, but should be mad^ known
unto their posterity, in the day whe^^ ^is promises should pass unto
performances* and hence it is also, that when the Lord is ^peaking of the
accomplishment of great pro^ises, he does so often in the Scripture sub^^yn
that word, Ye shall know that I am Ieho^ah, or the Lord, Isa. 49.23, 52. and
60.16. and indeed we do daily find it so; for, is not ^very accomplshment of a
promise, a new ^iscovery of the wisdom of God, that shines (...) the suitable
tyming of the accomplishment ^f a promise: Is not every accomplishment ^f a
promise a new discovery of the faithful^esse of God, that he will not alter
that which has gone out of his mouth? And is ^ot every performance of the
promise a new ^iscovery of the love of God, that he desir^th to magnify his
mercies above all his work, and a new discovery of the power and ^mnipotency of
God, that can bring forth the ^erformance of his promise, notwithstand^ng of
all things that are in the way, yea, ^ake things that are not to be, and
brings to ^ought things that are.

The third advantage is, That it helps (...) ^hristian to have high
apprehensions, and ^ajestick uptakings of God: This is clear, ^ Tim. 1* 15
compared with verse. 17. where Paul closing with that promise, That Christ ^ame
in the world to save sinners, and behold^ng in the accomplishment of it, in
himself, ^is heart (as it were) i^ elevated within ^im, and he cries forth.
Now unto the King ^ternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, ^e honor
and glory for ever and ever, Amen. There is an Emphasis in that word, Now,
(...) if Paul had said, I could never praise and ex^toll him till now, and I am
so much bound (...) Christ that I will not delay this exercise on^ moment, now
I will bless him, and it is clea^ from Mic. 7.18. where the accomplishmen^ of
the promises that are there, made the Church cry out, Who is like unto thee, he
be^came matchless unto them through the performance of the promises. And so we
conceiv^ that these who are much in spiritual observation of the performance of
the promises, they will see precious draughts of the Majesty o^ God engraven
upon them; so that they will be constrained to cry out* that he above (...)
mighty, that his Name is Jehovah, and in hi^ is everlasting strength, upon
which we ough^ to rely in our greatest straits.

The fourth advantage is, The observing of the accomplishment of the promises,
will help a Christian when he is redacted unto new straits, to be much in the
exercise of faith upon God; his former experience will produce hope in his
soul; for there is not (...) discovery of the faithfulness of God, but hat^ a
voice, and cries out, O believe him who i^ able to give a clear being unto his
word: Thi^ is clear from Psalm. 56. at the close. Thou has^ delivered my soul
from death, says David, an^ then he subjoyneth, Will thou not deliver m^ feet
from falling: that is* I am certainly per^swaded, thou will likewise perform
that wor^ unto me. And from Psalm. 37.2, 3. he gives that tittle unto God,
verse. 2. that he performs all things for him, and then he does subjoyn. He
shall send from heaven and save me: and (by the way) the soul that can give
God ^^at tittle and style. That he performs all things for them, that soul
must of necessity be (...) a choice and excellent state: And the point (...)
likewise clear from 2 Cor. 1.10. where Paul says, God has delivered me, and
he does ^eliver me; and from hence he draws that ^onclusion of Faith, And he
will yet deliver (...). We confess sometimes our former ex^eriences of the
faithfulness of God, they do ^ot support our faith when we are redacted unto
new difficulties, which is either occasio^ed through the greatness of the
strait that ^e are now put to, (in our apprehensions) ^bove that which we were
put to before; so that though God did deliver us when we were ^unning with
footmen, yet we have no faith to ^elieve that he shall deliver us when we are
about to contend with horses: or else it is, through the unfaithfulness of our
walk, in ^ot answering the precious dispensations of Christ in accomplishment
of his promises, for ^his makes us that we cannot with boldness ^ake use of
his Word when we are brought unto a new strait, a guilty conscience is the
^^ther of misbelief.

The fifth advantage is, That the accom^lishment of the promises does occasion
^uch spiritual joy and rejoicing unto his own. We told you, the giving of the
promises occa^^oneth joy, and when the promises travelleth (...) birth and
brings forth, that occasioneth ^uch more spiritual joy: this is clear from
Psalm. 28.7. The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart trusted in him, and
I was hel^^ed: And he draws this excellent conclusion from it, Therefore my
heart greatly rejoycet^ and with my soul will I praise him, And we^ conceive,
that sometimes, that God tryste^^ the accomplishment of the promises wi^^ some
precious manifestation of himself to the soul, which makes them to rejoice
with jo^ unspeakable, and full of glory; but however this is the matter of a
spiritual song, Th^^ mercy and truth have met together, and righte^ousnesse and
peace are kissing one another: Is i^ not a pleasant matter of a song to behol^
love making promises, and to behold faithful^nesse accomplishing them?

And the last advantage is, That the observation of the accomplishment of
promise^ does strengthen a Christians faith in his inte^rest in God; so that
now many disputings ar^ silenced, and many questions now are out o^ the way,
this is clear Psalm. 31.21, 22. Davi^ confesses his quarrelling before, but
when once the Lord had showed his mavelous lovi^^ kindness in a strong city,
then all his quarrel^ was against himself, because he had quarrelled and did
say in his haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes.

And now we shall only speak a little un^to some duties that we would press
upon you, from that which we have spoken* And the first duty is, That
Christians would be much in waiting for the accomplishmen^ of the promises,
and standing upon their watch tower until the vision shall speak* And we
shall only give you these to enforce ^t. 1. It is commanded that you should so
do: this is clear from Psalm. 27. at the close, where David presses that duty
very much, Wait on the Lord, says he, and if that be not enough, he will
repeat that command in that same verse: Wait I say on the Lord: and no doubt
the doubling of it ^peaketh not only advantage that is in it, but ^ur
difficulty to obey it, and the great necessity that we have to go about it:
and that same word is repeated by David, Psalm. ^1.24. Be of good courage,
which is that ^ame, to wait upon the Lord. 2. These that wait patiently for the
accomplishment of ^he promises, God will strengthen them to ^ait: this is clear
from Psalm. 27. at the close, Wait on the Lord, and when we are Hagar ^ike,
casting away the child of hope, he ^ill open our eyes, and give us
refreshment, ^y which we may be supported under our ^isquietment, and he
shall strengthen thine ^eart: And there is this. 3 There shall ^e a speedy
accomplishment of the promises: (...) is not long before all the mercies that
ever (...) Lord has promised, and thou have be^^yed, shall be told down to
you, as it were, (...) one sum, principal and interest: as is clear (...) Hab.
2.3. where he positively assert^^h, That the vision will come, and will not
^^rry. There is indeed a pleasant seeming* ^^ntradiction in that verse, he had
said be^^re, that the vision would tarry, and yet here (...) ^aith, Tho vision
will not tarry, but will (...) come: in which ye may see the divini^^ both of
sense and faith, and that noble contradiction that is between their assertions,
Sense asserting that the promise does tarry too long, and Faith crying out, it
will surely come, it will not tarry; which i^ set down, 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is
not slack concerning his promise. 4. Promises that come unto us through the
most strong and lively exercise of Faith, and that are expected and longed for
by us before they come, they are most relishing and sweet, and these mercies
come unto us with a binding tie of love: this is somewhat pointed at in Isa.
25.9. where the Church cries forth, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for
him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation* their waiting and
expecting of the promise to be accomplished in its time is there the fountain
of their song and of their spiritual joy: I think sometimes a Christian is like
that misbelieving Lord, 2 King. 7.2. that though they meet with the
accomplishment of a promise, yet they do not taste of the sweetness that is in
it, because they did not believe the Word of the Lord.

The second duty that we would press^ from what we have spoken, is, That
Christians would close with the promises for their everlasting inheritance,
since the promise^ of the Covenant are exceeding great, and ex^ceeding
precious, and the advantage that lyet^ in them is unspeakable. O! should no^
these things proclaim aloud unto us, Clos^ with the promises ^s your portion
for ever. (...) think, one that has a right to the promises and has entered
himself heir unto the (...) ^nheritance; he may sometimes rejoice in that
threefold mystery of the Gospel, that ^o a natural man can hardly appear other
^hen a contradiction. 1* He may sometimes, ^ have nothing, and yet I possess
all things; ^or when he looks unto his being in the word, he is as poor
Lazarus, having no ^lace whereon to lay his head; but when ^ee casts his eye
unto his spiritual inheri^^nce, then he beholds his treasures, and (...)
constrained to cry out, I possess all things. (...)* Sometimes he may cry
forth, I am ^ich, and yet I am exeeeding poor; he may be ^^ch in hopes, and yet
poor in his possessions. ^here is much of a Christians treasure that (...) in
hope; hope is that thing that will ^ake the Christian sweetly quite all other
in ^^mparison of that: that is the motto of the ^hristian, spero meliora which
he holds (...) in his flag, even in the great^st storm, (...) at length he
finds it true, that hope ^aketh not ashamed. 3. Sometime the Chri^^an will
cry forth* I am always sorrowing, (...) yet always rejoicing: when he
casts (...) eye upon himself, he will sit down and (...) his couch with
tears, but when with (...) other eye he reflecteth upon Jesus Christ* ^ee will
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full (...) glory; a Christian can both weep
and re^^^ce at one time, and again he can rejoice (...) weep: No doubt, the
reflecting upon (...) immense hope, and that everlasting (...), will make a
Christian rejoice under (...) his disquietmen^s and anxieties in the (...), he
can look to the back of time, and behold a glorious inheritance. A Christian
has the eye of an eagle that can behold an^ discern things afar of.

The third duty that we would press upon you, is, To long for the day when all
the promises of the Covenant of Grace shall receiv^ their complete
accomplishment, and when (...) shall be entered into the everlasting fruitio^
of all these things wherein your blessedness^ lies. There is a threefold come
that Christ speaks to the soul that is united unto him all which they sweetly
obey. There is tha^ first come, which is in Matthew. 11.28. Com^ unto me all ye
that are weary and heavy laden And there is that second come, Isa. 26. Com^ my
people, enter into the chambers, which is t^ entertain that excellent
correspondency wit^ him in troublesome times: And there is th^^ third
matchless come, when Christ shall sa^ to his own in the day of their standing
before the tribunal, Come, O blessed of my Father* Shall we say it, that if we
had faith ^s a (...) of mustard seed, we would cry forth, Why (...) his chariot
so long in coming; and did we (...) or made a high account of the matchless
pr^^mises of the boundless Covenant, we wou^^ cry forth, O that our time would
flee away (...) the ships of desire. I shall say no more but th^^ Christ is
gone up with a shout unto heaven, an^ shall come again with the sound of a
trumpe^ sing praises to God, sing praises, sing praises un^^ our God, sing
praises.

The last thing that we would press upon you is, That ye would mark the time
of (...) accomplishment of the promises. And as (...) ^his, I shall say but
these: 1. That ordina^ily the time of the accomplishment of the promises, is
the time when sense, reason, and probability does most contradict them: this ^s
clear, Ezekiel. 37. in the fulfilling of the promises that were past to Judah in
their capti^ity, was it not when they were as a valley of dead bones, and their
hopes were in a manner cut off for their part, from the 11. verse of that
chapter, compared with the 12. And 2. That the time of the accomplishment of
^he promises, ordinarily i^ a praying time: ^his is also clear from Dan. 9.2,
3. and from Ier. 29.12. compared with the 11. verse. and ^he 10. thus says the
Lord, the time when he will visit them, and perform his good word ^o them, in
causing them to return, it shall be a time when they shall call upon me, and
shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto them. And, 3. the time of
the accomplishment of his promises, it is a time when our thoughts of the
promises are high and ^arge, when once we begin to value our mercies, this is a
sign that our mercy is near, and ^t is bringing forth: However, it is our duty
^o wait on Him who can give a being unto his Word, and sweetly perform his
promises. We ought not to limit infinite wisdom, nor to ^ay unto him that is
infinite in strength, How ^an such a thing be? but answer all objections of
misbelief with this, God has spoken it, and he will also do it, and drown all
our ob^ections of misbelief in that glorious and my^terious Name of His, I am
that I am. To Him be praise.

SERMON VI.
Acts 26* 18. To open their eyes, an^ to turn them from darkness to light and
from the power of Satan unt^ God, that they may receive for^givenesse of sins,
and inheritanc^ among them which are sanctified b^ faith that is in me.


WHen first we did begin our di^^course upon the precious (...) excellent grace
of Faith; W^ told you that we intended t^ speak of it under a twofold notion
and co^^sideration. First, As it lays hold upon Christ for Justication; and
of this we have spoken to you at some length, as ye have heard. Secondly, As it
closes with Christ for Sanctification; and of this we are (...) speak at this
time; and have chosen these words to speak of it, which are a part (...) that
excellent Oration and Discourse th^^ Paul had before Agrippa in his own
defense* In which Oration and Discourse of his, (...) may behold these four
things eminently shin^ing: 1. That Godliness and good manner are not
inconsistent, not contrary one to ano^ther: Therefore ye will see in the second
an^ third verses of this Chapter, Paul acting the part of a Courtly Orator: and
believe (...) there is more good manners to be learned by being seven days in
the School of Christ, then by being seven years in all the Courts of France.
This, secondly, that innocent Policy that he made use of in the deliverance of
this Oration, which likewise does appear in the second and third verse of this
Chapter, where he endeavors to insinuate and ingratiate himself in the favors
of the person before whom he had stood; I confess, piety is the best policy
that is taken up in intertaining piety, howbeit true policy may move in one
(...) and sphere with piety, and the one is not contrary to the other in some
case. 3. This shines in that discourse, even the spiritual boldness Paul had
in giving an excellent confession of his faith, and the declaring him to be
God, even Jesus Christ in whom he did believe; Christ witnessed a glorious
confession before Pontius Pilat for him, and he would witness a glorious
confession before Agrippa for Christ, that since Christ had not denied him in
that notable day, he would not now deny precious Christ in this day: and this
is from the beginning and all alongs. Lastly, This shines in the words that
Paul does set forth, the matchless freedom and unspeakable riches of Christ,
not only toward himself in that he did cast the lot of everlasting love toward
him; but likewise toward the Gentiles to whom he was sent as a Preacher, and
that he did gloriously condescend to visit the dark places of the earth, and to
have the morning Star, and the Day spring from on high ^rising on the
habitations of cruelty. And in this verse which we have read, you may behold
these five glorious ends of the preaching of this everlasting Gospel, for
attaining of which, Ministers are made instruments under God. The first is, to
open the eyes of the blind, which in short is even this to give those that are
ignorant of God, the spiritual knowledge of the deep mysteries o^ the Father,
and of the Son: So that from this, ye may see that the Gospel has a kind of
omnipotency in producing effects abov^ the power of nature. The second, we may
see in these words, to remove them from darkness to light: Which imports
these two* 1. The removing of persons from an estate of excellent joy. 2. The
removing of persons from an estate of iniquity, unto an estate of holiness,
darkness in Scripture pointing out sin, and light in Scripture pointing ou^
holiness. 3. The bringing us from under the power of Satan unto God, the
making (...) blessed exchange of captivity and bondage that these who were
under the captivity o^ Satan, may be under the captivity of Love that those who
were under the bondage o^ sin, may be under the sweet obedience (...)
Christ, whose yoke is easy, and whose burden is light, Matthew. 11.30. 4. That
person may receive the remission of sins, and the for^givenesse of their
iniquity; This is the great voice of the Gospel, come to a crucifie^ Christ,
come to a pardoning Christ, com^ to a glorified Christ, Christ has the pardon
of iniquity in his one hand, and riches (...) himself in the other, and these
are the great motives by which he studieth to persuade us to come. And the last
is in the close of the verse, that persons may receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me, that
is, that they may have a share of that glorious mansion, of that excellent
Kingdom that Christ has purchased, and has gone before to prepare. And
withal, in this verse as the words are set down, ye may see the excellent and
orderly method that the Gospel keeps in conquering souls, and you may see
these excellent alurements, these persuasive arguments that Christ holds
forth to conquer you, as it were, Christ comes not unto us clothed with the
robes of Majesty, but clothed with the robes of Love and advantage, knowing
that in this posture he shall most ^gain upon our hearts.

Now in speaking unto that last end of the preaching the Gospel, we shall only
according to our present purpose, take notice of this one thing from it, (not
intending to prosecute it as it is an end of the Gospel) but as a property of
Faith: and it is that, Faith in Jesus Christ has a noble and excellent
influence upon the growth of Sanctification, and the attaining of holiness,
they are sanctified, says he, through faith in me. We shall not stand long to
clear this unto you, it is evident from Act. 15.9. where the Apostle tells us
of purifying their hearts by faith: And likewise, 1 Timothy 1.5. where a pure
heart and faith unfeigned, they are joined and linked together: As likewise, 1
Ioh. 3.3. Every man that has this hope in him, (...) purifieth himself. All
the Graces of the Gospel they are linked together by a golden an^ unseparable
chain, so that he that obtainet^ one, he shall obtain all; yea, more, all the
graces of the Gospel, they have a mutual in^fluence upon one another growth,
so tha^ we may compare them unto Hypocrates twin of whom it was reported, that
they (...) laugh and weep together, and they did grow together: even so when
one grace does re^joyce, the rest does rejoce with it, an^ when one grace does
mourn, the rest dot^ also mourn with it, and when one grace dot^ grow the rest
of the graces of the spirit they do likewise grow apace.

There are only three particulars that w^ shall insist a little upon: First, We
shall show you how faith has influence upon the attaining of Sanctification,
and this we mak^ clear unto you in these respects.

1. In that it discovers to the soul th^^ matchless excellency, that
transcendent beauty, and that surpassing comeliness that is i^ Christ, which
sight does exceedingly persuade the soul to draw that conclusion, Wh^^ have I
to do any more with idols? A gloriou^ sight of Christ, and acquaintance with
hi^ makes us lose our acquaintance with ou^ idols, and when once we are united
unt^ Christ by faith, we break that union we ha^^ with them. And indeed, the
want of the knowledge of that excellent comeliness th^^ is in Christ, and of
love to him, is the great occasion that the poorest dieties and idols (...) the
world takes up your hearts: did ye but once see him who is that glorious Son
of righteousness, ye would be forced to put in your Amen unto that excellent
confession of Faith, Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity and
vexation of spirit.

2. In that it is the grace that discovers unto a Christian the spotless
holiness of Christ, Faith does not only discover the beauty of Christ, but
likewise his holiness, and this does make the soul fall in love with that
excellent thing Sanctification. It is recorded amongst the first steps to sin
and misery, that we desired to be as Gods, knowing good and evil; but certainly
it is among the first steps to life and happiness, when the soul desires to
be holy as he is holy: And I suppose, this is the great ground that ye are
not much endeavoring a blessed conformity to God, and to be partakers of the
blessed Image of Christ, ye know not the beauty of holiness.

3. Faith lays hold upon Jesus Christ, and draws strength and virtue from
him for the conquering of lusts, and in raising (...) up into a blessed
conformity unto himself: when the Christian is weak; Faith is that noble
correspondent between that emptiness that is in us, and the fullness that is in
Christ; ^aith is that noble correspondent between that weakness that is in us,
and that everla^^ing strength that is in him: Therefore ^here are two noble and
excellent counsels ^f Faith: First, It counsels us not to lean (...) our own
strength: And, secondly, to ^ave our recourse unto him whose Name is Jehovah
that everlasting strength; And no doubt, if we were more taken up in employing
Christ by faith, that prophecy should be accomplished, I will make the feeble
ones as David, and David as the Angel of God: and when a Christian is most
diffident in himself, then God should prove himself to be Almighty, and
All-sufficient.

And, 4. Faiths influence may be cleared in this, that it lays hold upon the
promises, and does believe them: and believing of the promises brings forth
that noble birth, conformity to God, according to tha^ word upon which we were
speaking, 2 Pet* 1: 4. by believing the promises, (that is the advantage of it)
We are by them made partakers of the divine nature.

5. Faith also believes the threatning^ that are past in Scripture against
sin, and the believing them has an undoubted and strong influence upon the
attaining and growth o^ Sanctification: Faith strengthens a Christian against
the committing of iniquity with these two words: that word, Romans 6.20 O soul
(says faith) commit not iniquity, for the wages of sin is death: and that
word, Rev* 21. last, There shall in no way enter into the City, any thing that
is unclean, or that commits iniquity. And be persuaded of it that the faith
of the threatenings and of the promises that are in Scripture, would be as (...)
threefold cord not easily broken, to restai^ you from the acting of iniquity:
And shall tell you briefly the ground why these curse^ hearts of ours does
commit iniquity wit^ so little fear, and with so much delight, it is even this,
because we believe not the threatenings of God, which shall be accomplished in
their own season: for is it possible that if ye believed that word, Rev 21.
last. That nothing shall enter into the New Jerusalem that defiles or works
abominations, or that makes a lie; that ye durst not for a world adventure
upon the committing of iniquity as ye do. And I shall only say to such that do
undervalue the threatenings of God, the day is coming when they shall be
constrained to cry out, He has spoken it, and he has done it, and faithful is
he, there is not one jot nor title in the word of the Lord that shall fall to
the ground: And believe it, God will be faithful in the accomplishment of his
threatenings, as he is faithful in the accomplishment of his promises.

6. Faith discovers unto a Christian the noble excellencies, and those
spiritual dignities that are in that everlasting estate that is provided for
the Saints in light; Faith (as it were) carries up the soul to the top of
Pisgah, off which it is admitted to behold the promised land, and truly the
seeing of these noble things that are provided for the Saints, cannot but make
them study holiness, since they know that there is an impossibility for one to
attain to that estate with ou^ holiness, because he had said it, Without
holiness no man shall see God. O then if once ye saw heaven, ye would be
constrained to walk in that path of Sanctification, since it is the glorious
way by which ye must walk in through the gates of that blessed City. Bu^ ye
know* not the excellency that is there, i^ is a fancy and notion unto you: and
that i^ the ground that ye do not study to conform your selves unto that
blessed image of God. And I would only ask you this one question* Is it
possible that such a delusion as this can overtake you, as to think, that ye
who never studied holiness on earth, shall yet enter into heavens gates. I
know there are some that say in their hearts, I shall have peace though I walk
in the imaginations of my own heart: and many more, that suppose that they
might fight and overcome, that they may quite the estate of nature, and be
complete in the estate of grace all in one day. But why will ye deceive your
selves, Can a nation be born in one day; Or is there but one step between hell
and heaven? O remember, though nothing be impossible with God, yet there was
but one thief saved upon the cross.

7. Faith has influence upon the attaining of holiness in this respect, That
it believes the exceeding great advantages that are promised unto the person
that studieth holiness: Faith believes that word, Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the
poor in spirit, for they shall see God: Faith it lays hold upon the truth of
the excellent sayings, and makes the Christian endeavor to attain unto a
likeness and conformity with him, that so he may be admitted to behold his
face for all eternity, and to be made like unto him.

8. Faith discovers unto Christians the sinfulness of sin, that is never
done till once they be in the lively exercise of the grace of Faith. And I will
give you these three grounds why faith compleaty discovers the sinfulness of
sin. 1. Faith lets us see the person against whom we commit this sin, and
that does exceedingly aggrege sin; for when the Christian is admitted to behold
God; and to see that matchless excellency that is in him; then (says he) what
a beast was I to offend such a glorious Majesty as He? What a fool was I to
kick against the pricks; or to enter in the lists with such an infinite God? 2.
Faith lets a Christian see these excellent obligations of love that Christ
has imposed upon us; Faith lets us see the ancient and everlasting love of
Christ; Faith is that grace that lets us see his sufferings; Faith lets
us see all that he has done for us, and this makes the Christian to cry out,
Do I thus requite the Lord, O foolish one and unwise: And no doubt, if a
Christian were more taken up in the study of this duty, he would be less in
contracting debt, and were you but seriously taken up in the study of these two
great Registers. 1. The Register in which all the infinite acts of love are
recorded. And, 2. That Register in which all your acts of offending precious
Christ are written, ye would be astonished and ashamed to see so much forgiven
you; and durst not sin any more; there ye would see infinite mercy desiring to
rejoice over Judgment, and there ye would see the spotless riches of that
transcendent grace that is in Christ. 3. Faith lets a Christian see the
disadvantages of sin, and what woeful effects does follow upon it, and this does
exceedingly hold forth the sinfulness of sin.

The second thing that we shall speak to concerning Faiths influence in the
attaining Sanctification, shall be to enquire a little unto these things that
hinder even Believers from attaining this blessed effect of their Faith; for
some Christians there are that in some respects are taken up in the exercise of
Faith, making use of Christ for Sanctification, and yet their making use of
Christ by Faith, does not weaken the strength of their idols (at least) to
their apprehensions, neither yet raise them up to a conformity with God; so
that they are constrained sometimes to cry out, I shall once fall by the hand of
one of mine iniquities, and when they fight and does not overcome, they are at
last constrained to say, There is no hope.

The first ground of such a dispensation is, That a Christian is not constant
in his acting^ of Faith, he will be strong in faith to day, and when the morrow
comes, he will faint in that exercise, and this does exceedingly interrupt the
noble victory of Faith: For when faith has gotten its advantages, they lose
them through security and negligence: that is a command that should be
continually obeyed, Trust in the Lord at all times: and no doubt, if a
Christian were more taken up in the constant actings of Faith, he should
sometimes sing that song, I trusted in God, and I was helped.

Secondly, The most part of Christians, they are not strong and vigorous in
actings of their Faith, their Faith is exceedingly weak, and so they cannot
bring forth these noble fruits and effects of Faith. If we were trusting in God
with all our hearts, then that promse, Psalm. 37.5. should be accomplished to
us, Trust in the Lord, and he shall bring it to pass. Thridly, There is a
strong heart conjunction and soul union between us and our idols: we are
joined to our idols, and therefore we cannot be easily divorced; yea, when we
are in the heat of the war against them, there is a procuratour within that
cries, O spare this little one, or this profitable or pleasant one, and this
is ordinarily our practice, to spare the choicest of our lusts; so that our
Agags may cry forth, The bitterness of death is past. But I confess, if that
union were once dissolved, we should then be heard with greatest earnestness
to cry forth, O blessed be the Lord that teaches my hands to fight. Fourthly,
Sometimes a Christian lays too much weight upon the actings of Faith, and
does not employ Faith, but as an instrument to which Christ must bestow
strength to conquer. Sometimes we think that faith has the virtue of
overcoming in its own hand, but remember, Faith is but an empty thing without
Christ: as ye may see, Acts 15.9. where the purifying their hearts by faith is
ascribed to the holy Ghost, so that the activity of faith is from him, and not
in it self. Fifthly, A Christian does not hate sin with a perfect hatred, even
in the time of his warfare with his lusts, and with these strong idols that are
within him, but there is a secret heart inclination to that very idol which he
does oppose: So that oftenimes there is that twofold contradiction in a
Christian; Sometimes his light will cry, mortify such an idol, and yet his
heart will cry, O spare such an idol; yea more, sometimes his hear^ will cry,
mortify such an idol, and yet hi^ heart will cry, O spare such an idol: That
is to say, there will be one part of our affection crying one thing, and
another part o^ it will cry another thing. O! but there is a remarkable command
for the perfect hatred of sin, Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is evil. The word is
in the Original, have evil, as ye would do hell, that is: have perfect hatred
to sin, O to hate iniquity as much as hell a and join that word, Ephesians. 5.11.
Reprove the unfruitful works of darkness; or as the word may be rendered,
Make out by unanswerable arguments to your tentations, that you cannot embrace
the unfruitful works of darkness, convince your tentations that ye cannot do
it: As we suppose, it was a noble arguing of Joseph when he was tempted, How
shall I do this? he put the tentation (as it were) to it: O tentation give me
ou^ ground why I should commit such an iniquity. And certainly, if we were
thus reasoning with our tentations, they should flee before us: But the truth
is, we imbace the desire of our tentation upon implicit faith. It is a sad
regrate; and yet I may utter it, O if men would but deal with God as they do by
Satan, we never dispute the promise of Satan, and never examine these
allurements he setteh forth, and yet we constantly dispute with God upon every
thing. Sixthly, A Christian promoveth not in the growth of Sanctification,
though in some measure exercising faith, because he has not such a heart to
holiness. If we did discover more that excellent beauty, that is, in being
clothed with that glorious robe of the righteousness of Christ, and in having
the sweet draughts of the Image of Christ engraven upon our hearts, we would
have more victory over our lusts: There is a command for a perfect love to that
which is good, and holiness in that same place, Romans 12.9. and cleave (says
he) to that which is good; or, as the word may be rendered, Be married and
glewed to that which is good, let there be an unspeakable and undissolvable
knot of union between you and that which is good: And certainly, if once we
believed that report which is given of holiness, we would endeavor more to be
clothed with it: but that is the great ground why we advance not in holiness,
we know not the advantage nor diguity, to be made like God. O will ye think on
it, What a thing is it for you who are the dust of his feet, to be made conform
to him? Seventhly, A Christian is not much in the exercise of other duties that
should go along with faith, suspect that faith for presumption, that can act,
and be maintained without Prayer, certainly prayer it keeps in the life of
Faith: Prayer, it is that grace that must act mutually with faith, in
accomplishing that blessed work of Sanctification, and if we prayed more, and
believed more, then we should have more to speak concerning the victory over
our lusts. When was it, O Christian and expectant of heaven, that ye was
constrained to put up an Eben^zer, and cry forth, Hitherto has the Lord helped
me? When was it, O Christian and expectant of heaven, that ye was put to cry
forth, God has arisen, and mine enemies are scattered before my face? I will
tell you what is your practice, ye make such a covenant with your idols, as
Nahash did with the men of Iabesh Gilead, 1 Samuel 11.2, 3. your lusts desire to
make you pluck out your right eyes, and there is nothing your lusts will
command you, but almost ye will obey; but would you send out prayers as a
messenger to tell the King of such a tyranny, ye should know better what it
is to be victorious. There is such a Covenant between the graces of the
Spirit, especially between faith and Prayer (if so we may allude) as was made
between Ioab and Abishai, 2 Samuel 10.11. one grace, as it were, says to
another, If I be weak, Come over and help me, and if ye be weak, I will come
and help you. When once grace is like to fall in battle, then another grace
comes and helps it; when faith is like to die, then prayer and experience
comes in and sweetly helps faith; when love is beginning to die, and wax
cold in the fight, then faith comes in and puts life in love; and when
patience is like to fall and be overcome, then faith comes in and speaks that
word to patience, Wait on God, for I shall yet praise him for the health of his
countenance. Oftentimes our patience and our sense they join together, for when
sense speaks good things, patience is in life, but when once sense preaches
hard things, it is like to die, and Faith must then maintain and uphold it.

The third thing that we shall speak as to faiths influence upon
Sanctification, shall be to draw these four conclusions from the point.

The first is, That ye may know from this, the rise and original of your little
success over corruption: There are many that are troubled with this question;
O! what is the ground that I get not victory over my lusts, and they propose
that question to Christ that once the Disciples proposed to him, Why was it
that I could not cast out such a devil? And I can give no other answer nor
Christ gave to them, it is, because ye have not faith; For if ye had faith as
a grain of mustard seed, ye might say unto your idols, depart from us, and
they should obey you, and there should not be a mountain in the way between you
and heaven, but if ye had faith, it should be rolled away and become a plain.
And the ground why many are groaning under the captivity of their idols, is,
That they are not much in the exercise of faith; sometimes ye enter in the
lists with your lusts in your own strength, then ye are carried captives, and
if ye do enter in the lists having some faith, yet ye maintain not the war, il
faith get but one stroke.

I will tell you six things which if faith overcome, it keeps the fields, and
makes the Christian sing a song of triumph, even before a complete victory.

First, Faith helps a Christian to overcome that idol of impatience and
discontent, some never met with a discouragement, but they cry out, This evil
is of the Lord, why should I wait any longer, they are soon put to the end of
their patience: Now faith can overcome such an idol, and I will tell you three
excellent things that faith performs to the soul under impatience, or when it
i^ in hazard of it. 1. Faith tells the Christian there is an end, and their
expectation shall not be cut off; Faith tells that there is a morning as well
as night, and this keeps the soul from being overcome with disco^ragement,
when they are brought to the midnight of trouble; Faith can tell what hour of
the night it is, and how near the approaching of the morning, when day shall
break and all their clouds flee away. 2. Faith helps the Christian to see
there is much in Christ to make up any loss or disadvantage that they have; if
ye loss your son, or your choicest contentment in the world, Faith will say
such a word as Elkana said to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8. Is not Christ better to thee
then ten sons? The choicest contentments ye can lose, (that is faiths divinity)
Christ is worth an hundred of them: and so this makes the ^oul be ashamed of
their impatiency, and to ^ive over their fretting at the excellent and ^ise
dispensations of God. 3. Faith lets Christian see, that there is not a
dispensati^n that he meets with, but it has these ^wo excellent ends, it
has our advantage as ^ne end, and the glory of the Lord as another (...): and
there is not a dispensation that a Christian meets with, but these are the
glo^ious ends proposed in it. And therefore I would only give you this advice,
evermore ^hen ye meet with a dark dispensation, let ^ith interpret it, for it
is only the best inter^reter of dark dispensations; for if ye meet with sense,
this is its interpretation, he is not ^hastening me in love, but punishing me
with ^he wound of an enemy, but faith will pro^hesy good things to you in the
darkest night.

The second next great idol that faith will ^ring low, is that idol of
covetousness and ^esire to the things of the world. I think that word, Eccles.
3.11. was never so much ^ccomplished as it is in those days, and amongst you,
He has set the world in your ^^arts, that is the idol that dwells and
^^dgeth within you: yea, the world it has ^our first thoughts in the morning,
and your (...) thoughts at night; yea more, it has ^our thoughts when ye are
at Prayer, and ^hen ye are at Preaching; yea, it has such dominion over you,
that it gives you, as were, a new Bible, and in all the ten Com^ands s^rapeth
out the Name of God, and ^^tteth down the world. And whereas ^od says, Thou
shall have no other Gods but me, the world says, Thou shall have no other Gods
but me, etc. But faith will bring thi^ idol low, and soon let you see the
vanity and emptiness of it; yea, faith would let you see a more noble object,
and withal, discove^ unto you how short your time is, and how few hours ye
have to spend in following afte^ lies: And I am persuaded of this, that if y^^
could win to shake hands with cold death every day, and say, thou at last shall
be my prince, and shall be the king to whom I shall be a subject, and if ye
believed that the day of Eternity were approaching, it would be ^ mean to
mortify these pursuits after the world: And I shall say, he is a blessed
Christian that can maintain always such thought^ of the world, as he shall
have when he i^ standing upon the outmost line between Time and Eternity. I
shall say it, and believe it* O worldling, and O thou that have the Moo^ upon
thy head, and in thy heart, the day shall once come, that thou may preach a^
much of the vanity of the world, as thos^ that undervalued it never so much.

The third great idol that faith will brin^ low, is that idol of self love and
self-indul^gence, that which is the great mother of al^ other Idols. I think,
if there were no more to be said against that Idol of self love an^ self
indulgence, that which is in 2 Timothy 3.2. were sufficient, that amongst all the
great idols of the latter times, this is put in the first place, They shall be
lovers of themselves we cannot take pains for Christ, we cannon go about the
exercise of any duty, because that idol of self-indulgence forbids us. I
will tell you its counsel and great advice it gives you, O person, pity thy
self, that same counsel Peter gave his Master, it bids you pity your self:
But if we could rightly interpret that language, it would be this, destroy
your self, for self indulgence, and self-love is that which will ruin you. O
what blessed seize of God; what blessed fruitions of Jesus Christ, what
advancement in mortification, what conformity to God has that idol of self
indulgence obstructed, and not only utterly ruined, even in the best? I think,
if once ye could set your foot upon that idol, the rest should fall apace;
that is the general of all the forces of your lusts, and it is as Saul, the
head higher then the rest of all your idols within you.

The fourth idol that faith will subdue, is self-righteousnesse, this is a
great thing we maintain, we will never renounce our own righteousness and
submit to the righteousness of Christ: and the great ground of it is* That there
is this principle within us all, (...) love to go to heaven through a Covenant
of Works, and we never desire to be much obliged to any other, we cannot
submit our selves to the righteousness of Christ.

The fifth great idol that faith can subdue, (...) that of pleasure, the world,
and the con^entments of it: Pleasure is the great idol that many worship and
adore, there are ^ome that love the gain of the world, and ^her ^are others
that love the pleasures of ^he world; but faith has a noble influence upon the
bringing low of such an idol; for faith discovers to a so^l more excellent
pleasures, more sweet delights nor is to he found under the Sun; Faith makes
a Christian lose his state unto all things that are here below; Faith is that
grace that makes us grow blind, and not much to behold these passing vanities,
those transient dilights of a present evil world.

Our second conclusion is this, That as Faith helps Sanctification, so
Sanctification helps Faith. I will tell you three great advantages Faith has
by the growth and exercise of Sanctification. 1. It is a noble evidence of
faith, and makes a Christian to be persuaded that he is s^tled upon the
Rock, and that his interest in God is made sure. Sanctification is that which
will help a Christian daily to read his interest in God: This is clear from
Iam. 2.18. I will show thee my faith by my works, where this is clearly holden
forth, That a Christian much in the work of Sanctification, he can upon all
times give an extract of his Faith, and, as it were, discover it and show it to
the world. 2. Sanctification makes faith perfect, according to that remarkable
word, Iam. 2.22. And by works was faith made perfect. There is a noble
perfection that redoundeth to faith through the exercise of the work of
Sanctification; for not only is it thereby made manifest, and receives such a
shining luster and splendour, as that sometimes the eyes of carnal men are even
dazzled to behold a Believer, but it also receives strength and power: Faith is
not of the nature of these things that spend themselves in bringing forth, but
on the contrary ^f faith bring forth a hundred children (I mean works of
holiness) in one day, it grows stronger: and this is further clear, 2 Pet.
1.8. For if these things be in you, and abound, ye shall neither be barren nor
unfruitful. And from that other word, Iam. 2. where it is said, That faith
without works is dead, being alone: ^f faith be alone, it wants its spiritual
life and ^igour; but if ye were much in the exercise of the work of
Sanctification, ye would, ^o doubt, attain to a noble and lively acting of that
grace of Faith. And, lastly, if a Chri^tian be much in this work of
Sanctification, ^here will be a comfortable exercise of faith, ^ometimes Faith
is exercised with much ^^xiety, and sometimes with much doubting, (...) faith
and a pure conscience joined together, they make an excellent feast, and ^aketh
a Christian rejoice with joy unspeak^ble and full of glory.

Thirdly, We may draw this conclusion, ^f faith have influence upon the work
of ^anctification, and helps the producing of noble conformity to God, then I
say, there ^re many that their faith is a delusion, and their hope shall be
cut off as a spiders web. There are some that have faith, that have not
^anctification, nor knows not what it is. and shall not that faith
unquestionably perish as a ^^eam, and evanish as the vision of the night* and
therefore if ye would testify the reality ^f your faith, then study more the
work of ^a^ctification. I shall but from Ioh. 8.14* 15. give you these eight
properties of a hypocrites faith and hope, which may make you try and examine
your self. 1. Their hope and their faith is but an act of folly, yea, there is
not such an act of foolishness under heaven, as a hypocrites hope; because it
is but a castle in the air, and as writing to himself a charter on the sand:
so that word ye have rendered, whose hope shall be cut off; is in the
Original, whose folly shall be cut off; showing this, that they build without a
foundation, and so their faith must be most unsure and uncertain, 2. The thing
they hope for shall at last loath them: O hypocrites, ye hope for enjoyment of
Christ, but be persuaded of it, Christ shall eternally loath you, and ye shall
eternally ^^ath Christ: that is clear in that same wor^, Whose hope shall be
cut off, or as the word may be read, Whose hope shall loath them, the thing he
hoped ^or shall loath him, and Christ shall say, Depart, I know you not. 3. And
though ye have now much delight and pleasure in the actings of your
presumptuous hope, yet at the last, ye shall loath that hope: The word will
carry that, not only the thing ye hoped for shall loath you, but ye likewise
shall loath your hope. The day is coming, that ye shall cry forth, cursed be
the day that ever I believed that I should get heaven. 3. It shall at last be
the matter of his vexation* from that word, whose hope shall be cut off; or as
the word may be rendered, whose hope shall vex him. O when the hypocrites shall
meet with that anxious, that dreadull disappointment one day, they shall then
put their hand on their head, being ashamed because of their confidence. 4. He
studieth by all means to keep his hope, though it be but false, therefore have
ye that word in the 15 verse, he holds it fast, or is the word is, he
keeps it with hand and arm, with all his strength he keeps his hope: so
that if Christ would come from heaven and say, man, thou art a hypocrite, and
thy hope shall be cut off, they would say, I will keep my hope Sir, and
maintain it, and that is an evidence your hope is not built upon the
foundation; I love never a faith that in this side of time is unchangeable, and
never knows what it is to have ups nor downs. 5. It is built always upon a
wrong foundation, which is imported in (...) word, He shall lean upon his
house, which we suppose may interpret thus, he shall lean upon his, worldly
^njoyments, or upon these spiritual like enjoyments he met with. The hope of a
hypocrite is never built upon Christ, and so unquestionably that hope shall be
cut off and evanish. 6. Let hypocrites hold fast their hope with both their
arms, I will say these three words to them: First, (...) all the Ministers
should preach to you, and desire you to quite your hope, and ye will not, yet
does your hope and you shall be separate: as it is in that word. Your hope
shall depart from you, and ye shall quite it. Secondly, Your hope will bring
you to death, and no further: according to that word, John 18.14. Whose hope
shall bring them to the King of terrors: Will it bring m^ no further say you,
O no, The King of ter^rors shall separate you and your hope. Thirdly The day is
coming when the foundation o^ it shall be discovered, and there shall no^ be a
delusion but it shall be unfolded. The day is approaching when Christ shall as^
how you got your faith, and how you main^tained it. 7. The hypocrites hope is ^
poor building, it is as a spiders web; which I conceive (without being critic)
is this* The hope of hypocrites they spin it out o^ their own bowels, they have
it not from Christ, but as ye see a spider spin out o^ its own bowels, so do
they out of them^selves, it is no better stuff then their ow^ ^otten
righteousness, Christ never beg^^ those unto a lively hope. Let me beseech
you therefore, that by all means ye would study to make sure your interest in
God, an^ to build your faith on him, whose name i^ that munition of rocks; For
believe it, I may say it with much persuasion, I know ther^ are many that shall
once meet (if God pre^vent it not) with a dreadful disappoint^ment: And
therefore as ye would not incu^ that eternal hazard that is attending thos^
that presumptuously take hold of a hope before Christ take hold of them, study
to search your hope what it is: I desire not to raze any foundation of their
hope that i^ laid by the hand of Christ, but would desir^ and charge you to
raze the foundation o^ that hope which ye have laid from the be^ginning by
your own hands, and he knew i^ not. I would press these three things upon
you. First, O ye that are strangers to Christ, and that know not what it is to
embrace the offers of the everlasting Gospel, obey that excellent counsel, 2 Chronicles. 3.8. Give Christ your hand; for that word which ye have rendered, Yield
your self to the Lord, it is in the Original, Give your hand to God; which is
in short, Marry him, and be content to contract your self to him; for believe
it, the day is coming, that either that contract between you and Christ, shall
be eternally confirmed, or that contract between the devil and you, shall be
eternally ratified. And, I suppose, there is so much spoken to the commendation
of that noble Plant of renown, that ye may take Christ (if so we may speak)
blindly, ye may close your eyes and take him, for he shall never disappoint
your hope; for let you think of him to Eternity, he shall always be above
your thoughts. Secondly, I would earnestly desire you once to search and try,
what was the first rise of your faith in Jesus Christ: I am persuaded of it,
there are many that take up their faith at their foot, they never traveled in
pain, and yet faith is brought forth. Is not this a mystery? shall it be said,
before they traveled, they brought forth? I do not question but there may be
less and greater pangs of the new birth, but this is most certain, there is
always some either lesser troubles or greater, till that child be brought
forth: and yet I may condemn these that stay too long in the place of the
breaking forth of children, Christ will never refuse you when ye do really
come, because y^ have not been so many years and days in prison to the Law:
Thirdly, Let me desire you to go and ask, is there a grave between you and
heaven, in all that way through which the Saints have traveled, upon which
this is written, here lies a man that sincerely sought life from Christ, and
he denied him. I think without encroaching too much upon the searching forth of
the exercise of the Saints in heaven, I think we may suppose, there may be in
heaven some Queries and Interrogations: Christ shall ask* O beloved, Did ye
want any thing here below when ye was sent forth to travel in the world? and
ye shall be constrained to an^swer, No: Christ shall ask that question a^ you.
Did I not all things well? and y^ shall be constrained to answer, Yes: Christ
shall propose that question, Are ye not well rewarded for all your pains? and
you shall be constrained to answer, Yes: O but to take him, He is the blessed
and most excellent One in heaven and in earth, it is the best bargain ever ye
made: O ye Merchants that have made many excellent bargains to your own
apprehension, will ye come and make one excellent bargain yet, that will make
you eternally up? And what is that? Come and buy Christ and take him for
nothing, this is not your ordinary bargaining: there is few comes to you, and
bids you buy excellent things without money; but come in the Gospel, and ye
shall get Christ without money: O niggards that are loath to spend your money
in the world, will ye come to Christ and believe on him, take him freely: O
say ye, if I could get three things of Christ, I would come. 1. I would have
much gold and silver; I say, come to Christ, and ye shall get much gold and
silver: Is that true? it is abundantly true: See Job 22.25, 26. where pressing
that exhortation, Acquaint thy self with God* and using many arguments, he
says. Thou shall lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of
the brooks. Is not that gold enough? yea, ye shall have silver likewise, Thou
shall have plenty of silver. In the 26. verse, ye shall not only have gold and
silver, but shall have plenty of it, and shall have the most excellent and
refined gold. But O say ye, will that promise be literally accomplished to me
if I come to Christ. I would only say these three things to thee: 1. Come to
Christ, and if gold and silver be for thy advantage, thou shall have it
literally accomplished. 2. I say, ye shall have as much contentment in Jesus
Christ, as if ye had this house full of gold. 3. I will say this to thee,
Christ shall be thy gold and thy silver: according to that word in the 26.
verse, which is most remarkable; yea, the Almighty shall be thy defense; or as
it is in the Original, shall be thy gold, speaking of the promise of gold
before. Secondly, Ye say, I would have this that what I purpose might be
accomplished: I say, come to Christ and ye shall have that likewise, Job.
22.28. Thou shall decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee; which
I conceive, does not only take in these spiritual decrees; but likewise these
that relate to temporal enjoyments. But there is a third thing I would have
(say ye) and I would come to Christ, and it is, that I might have all the
desires of my heart: I say, O man* and O woman, come to Christ, and thou shall
have what thou desire: This is clear from Psalm. 37.4. Delight thy self in
God, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart: What can ye have man but
it is there? Would ye have any thing of Christ? He puts a blank in your
hand, and says that word which he said to Solomon, Ask; What would ye have,
and I shall give you, Christ, as it were, puts his name to the foot of a
clean sheet of paper, and he desires you to ask what ye would have, And is
not this an excellent bargan? O niggard, what would ye have which ye will not
get in Christ? And be persuaded, that ye that refuse and will not take him,
the eternal curse of all that is in heaven will return upon thy head, the
eternal curse of all the expectants of heaven and heirs of life will return
upon the head of that person that will not take Christ. And cursed, cursed
shall that person be who will not take Christ, and one day all the Congregation
in heaven and earth shall say, Amen.

SERMON VII.
2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith? prove your own
selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates?


ASsurance is a precious gift which many that live in these days do
undervalue, and trod under foot; do not the Christians of these times go
halting between two opinions, being neither positive that they are received
into the adoption of children, not positive that they are yet in a state of
alienation, and enemies in their minds by wicked works; yea, and (that which is
worse) there are many among us that walk with much contentment under their
uncertainty. I think it is a fault to be condemned in many, they pursue more to
satisfy their sense for the present, nor to have a solid well grounded
assurance for time to come: I could wish that all the debates and questions of
these days, that take up so much of our time, and so much of our spirits from
better things, were happily drowned in these four excellent questions, which
without controversy are of greatest concernment for all to have resolved. 1.
Where shall I rest all ^ight when the long shaddows of the everlasting evening
shall be streatched out upon me and whither or not has Christ gone before to
take up a place for me in his Fathers house 2. It is a soul-concerning
question, Master what shall I do to inherit eternal life? to be asking at him
that can sweetly resolve you* And 3. not to rest there, but to be crying forth
in the morning, What shall I do to be^ saved, and to be crying out in the
evening* Lord what will thou have me to do. 4. It i^ sweet to be asking
seriously, Saw ye him whom my soul loves: There is much of our time spent in
asking news from Court* and from abroad, concerning the revolutions of States
and Kingdoms: But I suppose, it were better to ask, What news from heaven
concerning thy self, and what news from within, and news of thy Bridegrooms
comeing? for these are great Courts, I mean the Court of heaven, and the Court
of conscience, the affairs of which, a Christian should endeavor much to know.
5. It is a soul-concerning question, that a Christian should be much in
proposing to himself, What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits.
It is certain, we must say, that our faith and assurance, and all our other
mercies are from him, and yet alas, we are negligent in praises, we may with
Tamar rent our garments of diverse colors, even the garments of the Kings
daughters, because of spiritual whoredom against God, and our ingratitude to
him.

Now having spoken unto you at so great a length of that precious and
fundamental grace of Faith, we have thought fit to shut up all in speaking a
little upon these wo^ds we now have read, concerning the evidence and assurance
of Faith. The Apostle in this Chapter is vindicating his Ministry and
Apostleship, from the contempt that was cast upon it, he proves he was a
Minister of the New Testament, called and sent of God, by the blessing and
success he had among them, in that he had not plowed nor threshed in vain;
and they being so much in censuring his way, and seeking an account of his
Ministry: In these words, he does (as it were) draw them off by a holy
diversion unto another business, as if he had said to them, O Corinthians, I
will divert you from the exercise of judging me, and will lead you into an
exercise that is more divine and profitable; be much in judging and examining
your selves: and indeed, it is a truth worth our observation, that if we were
more in judging of our selves, we would be less in judging others: but alas,
there are some of us, we are so much abroad, that we cannot be much at home.

In the words, there is these six things considerable. First, That there is
such a thing attainable by a Christian while he is here, as a distinct
persuasion and assurance that he is in the Faith, and has an interest in
Christ: by being in the faith; here is not to be understood, a being in the
doctrine of Faith only, but it is to be understood of principally, being indeed
and really united to Christ by Faith. Secondly, That the seeking after
assurance, is a necessary commanded duty, for ye see here the words very
imperative, Examine your selves, prove your selves. Thirdly, That there are
many mistakes and delusions among people, concerning that noble and excellent
thing, Assurance, there being many that keep fast a hope which Christ shall
once discountenance and sweep away, like a spiders web, and this is imported in
these words, Examine your selves, or as the word may be rendered, Take an
acurate and an experimental search of your selves, try your selves, or prove
your selves: it is a word that is borrowed from the Goldsmiths fineing and
trying Gold. And so his putting of the Corinthians to so acurate a search of
themselves, says this clearly to us, there are many mistakes concerning this
thing, many do pass a decree in their own favors before Christ has passed
his approbation of them. Fourthly, Take notice of this from the word, that
there is much and exceeding much advantage, by trying and searching whether we
be in the faith or no; this is imported in his doubling the exhortation.
Fifthly, That one most excellent and spiritual way of attaining assurance,
whether we be in the faith or no, is self examination, and putting our self to
the trial, as if he had said, would ye have a distinct persuasion that ye are
in Christ, then be much in the exercise of self-examination. For the rest of
the words of the verse, we intend not to handle.

As to the first, That there is such a thing attainable: I shall only propose
these reasons unto you to make it evident. 1. It is known in Scripture, that
the Saints of old have in ordinary way attained to distinct persuasion of their
interest in Christ, Song. 2. verse. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his, and
Romans 8.38. I am persuaded (says the Apostle) that neither death nor life, etc.
shall be able to separate me from the love of God in Christ. And 2 Cor. 5.
ver. 1. For we know, if this our earthly tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
house with God not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 2. It is the great
scope of many Scriptures, to show how Christians may attain to assurance, 1
Ioh. 1.13. These things I write unto you, that ye may know that ye have
eternal life. The great end and design of John, writing in these Epistles, is,
to make a soul acquaint with Christ, and to make them to accept of him, and to
give them a distinct assurance that Christ has accepted them. 3. There are
many commands in Scripture for Christians to be serious in searching after
assurance, 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore brethren, give all diligence to make your
calling and election sure. It is the blessed end of Gods oath in the
everlasting Covenant, that a Christian might get assurance. What was the ground
and great end that God confirmed his Covenant with an oath, was it not, Heb.
6.18. That by two immutable things, wherein it was impossible for God to lie,
ye might have strong consolation. 5. If assurance of our interest in Ch^^st
were not attainable, then these precious graces of joy and love could not be
well exercised: if a Christian were evermore in the dark concerning his
interest in Christ, he could not give obedience to that exhortation, Rejoice
evermore, again, I say, rejoice, 6. The Scripture has set down these means by
which a Christian may win to assurance: as is clear, 1 Ioh. 3.18, 19. 2 Pet.
4.5. compared with verse 10. where the Apostle Peter pressing the Doctrine of
making our calling and election sure, he fetteth down these excellent means by
which they may win to in, and doubtless the marks and evidences that are
registrate in the Scripture of a gracious state, do assure us, that assurance
is attainable. 7. What are the ends of the Sacraments, but that our assurance
may be confirmed, and that our faith may be strengthened, the two Sacraments
are the two great Seals of heaven that are put to the Charter of the Covenant.

Now as to the applitation, and the more full improvement of this first point,
I shall only offer these considerations. 1. I would have it taken notice of,
that though grace and assurance be two lovers, yet there is no such band of
union between them, that the one cannot consist without the other: A Christian
may have the real grace of God, and yet walk in darkness and have no light: a
Christian may be going to heaven, and yet that word oftentimes in his mouth, I
am cut off from thy sight; yea, are there not even some who have had assurance,
and sometime a day have been admitted to draw that conclusion, I am my
beloveds, and his desire is toward me, who are now under darkness concerning
their interest, and in much bitterness of spirit, do sometimes cry out, My
hope and my strength is perished from the Lord. But therefore let me say this
one word, both to weak ones who never had assurance, and deserted ones who have
lost it; when ye miss assurance, beware of drawing such negative conclusions
concerning your graces, but when ye fit in darkness and see no light, Trust in
the Name of the Lord, and stay your selves upon your God; that is when ye
cannot reach the faith of assurance, be much in maintaining of adherence,
remember Jobs divinity, Though thou should kill me, yet will I trust in thee,
and consider that sweet word, He will keep them in perfect peace, whose hearts
are stayed on him.

My second consideration is, That since assurance is attainable, ye would study
to find out and remove these things that does hinder you from attaining unto
it. And that we may help you in this, we conceive, that the obstructions of a
Christians assurance, are especially in these two. 1. Our mistaking of the
Lords dealing toward us. And, 2. Our untender and unsuitable dealing toward
him.

Of the first sort we shall lay before you these five. The first is, want of
favorable terms of prayer; this often makes a Christian to debate his
interest* and call in question his evidences, Lam. 3 8. compared with verse 18.
I cry and shout, but he shuts out my prayers: And this is the conclusion of
that dispensation, verse 18. My hope and my strength is perished from the Lord;
and this i^ especially occasioned when the Christian i^ most serious and
fervent in prayer, and the^ he meets not with a return, this makes them
exceedingly debate their interest. And I confess, it is a sad dispensation to
meet with a silent Christ in prayer; but yet that needs not make a Believer
question all, and debate the reality of his interest in God, since the dearest
of all the children of the Kingdom have been so dealt with, even a David, Psalm.
22. Cried night and day without silence, and is not heard, but cries out, Why
art thou so far from helping* and from the words of my roaring; yea, that
passage may relate to him who was the root and off spring of David; for even he
was so dealt with, and had not presently a sensible return, when he had prayed
thrice, that the cup might pass from him.

Secondly, The want of sensible enlargement and liberty in prayer, that he
never got to his knees, but his heart begins to die like a stone within him,
then he cries forth that word, 2 Cor. 3.17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty, and sure if I had the Spirit of the Lord, I would have
liberty in the exercise of prayer, and that this is a rise of the disputing of
our interest, is clear from Psalm. 77.4. compared with ver. 7.9. says David, I
am sore troubled that I cannot speak, I have no liberty in prayer, I never go
to God in prayer, but (as it were) my tongue sticks to the roof of my mouth:
he from hence draws that conclusion, Has God forgotten to be gracious, and
has he in wrath shut up his tender mercies for ever: I confess, this also is
a sad dispensation to meet with an absent and veiled Christ in prayer: so that
we can never go to seek God in secret, but we may write this upon our prayers,
He is gone, he is gone, especially when we have lost that liberty that formerly
we have had: and therefore is David's perplexity much heightened, ver. 5, 6. from
his remembering his song in the night, and his calling to mind the years of
ancient times; yet we may remember how soon David wrote his retractions, as to
that sad conclusion, I said, this is my infirmity, ver. 10. and so should we do
when upon every straiting in prayer, we begin to question all the Lords
kindness toward us.

A third obstruction of assurance, is a Christians wrestling with his
corruptions painfully and seriously, and yet not meeting with any sensible
victory over them, but upon the contrary, their corruptions seem to be
stronger, and they themselves seem to be weaker, and then it is, they
strengthen their misbelief, but that word, 1 John 3 3. Every man that has this
hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure: And indeed, this is a knot
that is not easily loosed, but when he sees his idols and corruptions
prevailing over him, he will cry out, I am gone, and there is no help in
Israel concerning this thing, and yet this also is a word in haste, Paul has
registrate himself a standing witness, even after he was a chosen vessel,
Romans 7. How strangely a child of God may be born down with a body of death
even under most serious wrestlings against it: And there^fore if thou seriously
maintain that combat though thou do not sensibly prevail, thou ha^ no reason
upon that ground to weaken the assurance.

Fourthly, When a Christian is put to more then ordinary outward affliction,
when Go^ does dispense sadly unto them in outwar^ things, they then begin to
call in question their interest, and dispute their assurance, this i^ clear, by
comparing Lament 3. verse. 18. wit^ the preceding words, where speaking of the
sad dispensations they meet with, he draws that conclusion in verse 18. My
hope and my strength is perished from the Lord, and Ion. 2.2. where he draws
that conclusion from such a promise. I am now cast out of thy sight, the devil
he takes Eliphaz divinity and presents it to a Christian; Call now if there be
any to answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou go: As if he had said,
did thou ever know a Christian afflicted so as thou art afflicted, and so he
would have Job to quite his integrity; But yet we know all these blessed ones
for all their afflictions, were dear unto the Lord, and had their interest
secure in him, yea, as many as he loves, he does rebuke and chasten, and it is
bastards and not sons on whom he will not bestow a rod, and therefore we ought
not to quarrel our interest because of afflictions.

And lastly, The rise of a Christians discouragement, and that which hinders
their assurance, is* when their former experience of the manifestations of God
does not relish to them, and when the promises upon which they have built
become tastlesse unto them as the white of an egg, and when they meet not with
God in Ordinances, but these become lifelesse, when these three rise together
upon them, their case becomes very per^lexed oftentimes: and this also seemed
to ^ave been David's case, Psalm. 77. When he remembered his song in the night*
and the days of ^ld, and yet had no sweetness in them, then he breaks forth
into these bitter complaints which are there expressed: but yet as we said
before, this was his infirmity, and there is no reason for a Christian to
question his interest upon such an account; because the Ordinances are not at
all times alike lively even to the best, and the Lord is not always present,
but though sometimes the candle of the Lord does shine upon his head, yet at
other times he is necessitate to cry out, O that it were with me as in months
past.

The second sort of obstructions of a Christians assurance, I mean such as flow
from our untender dealing toward God are,

First, A guilty conscience; that is a remarkable word, 1 Timothy 3 9. Holding the
mystery of faith in a pure conscience; It tells us, that this excellent grace
of Faith cannot bide but in a cleanly lodging, even in a pure conscience, and
when a Christian sets about to believe he will know how a guilty conscience
will flee in his face, and cry out, O adventure not to believe, dare thou
believe; the guiltiness of a Christians conscience makes him often to cry out,
Touch not the mountain lest thou be thrust through: And I tell you three
disadvantages of a guilty conscience. 1. It obstructeth a Christians boldness
in making applications to Christ; his heart says close, and his necessity
says close; but his guilty conscience cries out, O stand aback and do not
close. 2. A guilty conscience oftentimes it hinders the discoveries of Christ
to the soul, and does so affright and terrify, yea, it will so sting and bite
us, that when he reveals himself, we cannot take notice, when he would lay on
a plaster, our souls will tear it off, and refuse to be comforted. 3. It does
exceedingly obstruct our going about duty. O but our soul moves slowly in the
paths of God when we are under the power of a guilty conscience.

The second obstruction is, That we are not much in the exercise of
tenderness. O but if a Christian were tender, and if in every step of his life
he desired to set Christ before his eyes, he would easily win to much
assurance, according to that word, Isa. 64 5. Thou meetest him that rejoycest
and works righteousness, and these that remember thee in thy ways: Would
ye know the assured Christian, it is the tender Christian; the Christian that
does not crucify convictions, the Christian that brea^eth not resolutions, the
Christian that does not sit calls and opportunities to prayer, the Christian
that says not of any sin it is a little one; or the Christian that searches
always, watches always, examineth always, and is always casting out sin,
that is the assured Christian.

The third obstruction is, The want of the ^^ercise of the grace of fear, we
are not much ^^der this disposition, to fear the Lord and (...) goodness; this
is clear from that word, ^sal. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with ^^em that
fear him, and he will show to them (...) Covenant. I think there are these two
^reat evidences that much of the power of ^odlinesse is gone from some of our
hearts: ^ee fear God no more, nor if we were his ^ompanion. And we fear our
selves no more ^or if we had not a deceitful heart within (...), we neither
fear God nor our selves, and ^ut speaks that much of the life of Religi^^ is
lost amongst us.

The fifth thing that does much astruct our ^ssurance, is, much worldly
mindedness, and (...) eager pursuit after the things of a present (...): That
is remarkable, 2 Cor. 4. ver. last, ^ompared with 2 Cor. 5.1. We look not unto
^he things that are seen, that is, we are not much taken up with the things of
a present world, which the men of the world seek and delight themselves in: and
it is subjoy^ed, For we know, if this our earthly house ^f this tabernacle
were dissolved, we have a ^ouse not made with hands; so we see assurance and
mortification to the world, are much (...) together. Would ye know where to
^^nd our hearts, the most part of us are con^ersing with idols of the world;
Would ^ee know where to find our hearts, they are among the vanities of the
world O how true ^s that word, Psalm. 39. Man walks in a vain show: What is man
in all his actings, but ^s one walking in a long gallery that is set about with
pictures, gazing on these things and saluting them all, as if they were livin^
Kings and Queens, and great persons tha^ could do him good; and so our pursuing
a^^ter the world, is nothing else but a dead shad^dow pursuing after dead
shaddows, a man tha^ is but a short living shadow pursuing afte^ vanity and
nothing, and thus he fools awa^ his time, forgetting to make sure the one thin^
necessary.

Fifthly, Want of distinct apprehension of these three, the infinite love of
Christ, the infinite power of Christ, and the infinite wise^dome of Christ;
there is not an objection O Christians that ye have from the multitud^ of your
sins, but it may be drowned in infi^nit love; there is not an objection that
y^^ have concerning the strength of your idols but it may be drowned in that
immense ocea^ of the infinite power of Christ; there is no^ an objection ye have
from your wants, or about your evil nature, but ye may drown it in the infinite
wisdom and goodness of Christ, and there can be nothing against your
assurance, but may be sweetly answered also from these rightly applied, taken
up and rested on by the soul. The last thing which hinders our assurance, is,
the smalnesse of the measure of grace that we have attained; for when grace is
small, it is hard to be discerned, and therefore, if we would have assurance,
learn not to ly still and dispute, but to rise up and to increase our stock,
and then you shall know ye are rich, Grow in Grace and the knowledge of God,
and by this ye shall know if (...) follow to know the Lord.

The third consideration is, that assurance ^s not bestowed at all times, but
there are some special times and seasons when God giteth a Christian a broad
sight of his interest, and I shall but name these.

The first is, when he is first converted, and Christ and he joins hands
together, even then ^ometimes the best robe is put on upon the prodigal son,
and the farted calf is killed, and (...) is put upon his hand, and shoes upon
his feet, Act. 9.17. Paul meets with (...) immediately after his conversion,
1 Ioh. ^.12, ^4. I write unto you little children, because ye have known the
Father; and before that, in the 12. verse. I write unto you little ^hildren,
because your sins are forgiven you; so that when a Christian is brought into
Christ, (...) will (as it were) lead them to the Registers of heaven, and say,
friend come and see, (...) is your name written from eternity. But do not
mistake me* I do not say, this is always so, but these whom Christ converteth
through the thunderings of the Law, these most frequently meet with intimation
of the ^ardon of their sins and peace of God, even ^t their first acquaintance?
I know there are ^ome Christians, that if ye ask at them when ^hey were
begotten to a lively hope, they would say that word that the blind man once
^id, One thing I know, I was once blind, and ^ow I see, but for the time and
the day, I know ^ot when it was.

The second (...) is, when they are wresting with God like Princes in Prayer,
and ^atching unto that exercise, Dan. 9.23* compared with the preceding verse,
he being much and serious in prayer, does meet with that word from heaven, O
man greatly beloved, or as the word is, O man of desires, and Acts 10.2, 3, 4.
when Cornelius is much in exercise of watching and prayer, he set (...) a
vision, and gets intimation of his peac^ with God; and Jacob when he^ was
wrestling with Christ, Genesis 32. he has that testi^mony given him, Thou have as
a prince wrest^led with God, and prevailed.

The third time is, when a Christian is p^^^sing through the gates of death,
and is upon the borders of Eternity: I desire not to b^ mistaken in this
neither; I know some Chri^stians are led to heaven through a dark (...) so as
they never see a blink of the countenance of Christ, until the day come th^^
they get him in their arm^ eternally within his Fathers house; Some Christians
when they go through the gates of death, they man be disputing of this
question, Where am I go^ing, but this is certain, that sometimes, ye^
oftentimes Christ will dispense a broad sight of a Christians interest unto him
at the day o^ death, 2 Samuel 25.5. When was it that Davi^ sang that song, which
has strengthened thou^sands in the very jaws of death, God hat^ made with me an
everlasting Covenant, was i^ not when death was shaking hands with him and 2 Timothy 4.8. When was it that Paul san^ that song, I have fought the good fight of
faith I have finished my course, henceforth is laid (...) for me a crown of
righteousness, was it (...) even then when he was ready, to depart and (...)
be offered up? And when was it when old Simeon did sing that blessed song, Luke
2.29* Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for my eyes have seen thy
salvation, was it not within a step of death, as it were, he went to heaven
with Christ in his arms, or rather in his heart he carried Christ with him,
and found Christ before him, and so death to Simeon was a change of his place,
and not a change of his company.

The fourth time is, when he is to be put to some hard and difficult duty:
Before Abraham be put to forsake his native land, and become a stranger and a
wanderer, he meets with sweet intimation of his interest, Genesis 12.2. I will
make of thee a great nation, and verse. 7. The Lord appeared unto Abraham, and
before Jeremiah be sent a Preacher to a rebellious people, he will have that
word spoken unto him, I know thee before thou wast brought forth.

The fifth time is, when a Christian has done some singular act of obedience,
when Abraham had obeyed the Lord, and was content to offer up his Isaac, he
meets with a sight of his interest and Covenant renewed to him with an oath,
Genesis 22.16. By my self I have sworn, because thou have done this thing, and
have not witholden thy son, even thy only son, blessing, I will bless thee,
and multiplying, I will multiply thee as the stars of heaven.

The sixth time is, when a Christian is to meet with hard trials, difficulties
and afflictions in the world, then they usually meet with assurance, and so
Genesis 28.14, 15, 16. before Jacob go to serve Laban, he meets with intimation
of his peace with God.

The seventh time is, when a Christian is under sad persecution and affliction,
then will the Lord give a word from heaven to comfort him and assure him of his
fatherly love and mercy: When was it that Christ left that noble Legacy to his
Disciples, Ioh. 14. ver. 27. My peace I leave with you, my peace I give you,
was it not when he himself was to leave them to troublesome and sorrowful
days, in a persecuting world.

The eighth time is at some solemn Ordinances and approaches to God, the days
of a Communion to a tender Christian have been sweet days, when Christ has
come to the soul, and said, Behold me, behold me. I think the eleven Apostles
met with much assurance of their interest in Christ at the Communion they were
at with him: O what sweet intimations were these, This is my body which is
broken for you, and this cup is the New Testament in my blood shed for you, and
a little after, you are they which have continued with me in my tentation, and
I appoint unto you a kingdom.

We come now to the second point which we proposed from the words, viz. That a^
assurance is a thing which may be attained so to seek after it, is a necessary
duty: (...) me not be mistaken, as if I said, the havin^ of assurance were
simply necessary to Salva^tion; no, that were a Doctrine as comfor^^lesse upon
the other hand, as the Popis^ doctrine of the impossibility of assurance (...)
upon the other: But the thing I say, is, that the Christians seeking after
assurance, and his real (endeavoring to attain unto it, is a necessary command
of God which he has bound upon the consciences of his children amongst other
Gospel duties; And certainly, we need go no further for the clearing of this
then the Text it self; what means these peremptory injunctions, Examine your
selves whether ye be in the faith or not: Prove your own selves; Know ye not,
etc. but if you will, you may add that word, 2 Pet. 1. verse. 5. and 10.
compared, what can be more expressly commanded, and more strongly pressed, then
that Christians should bend their utmost endeavors for attaining unto this
blessed condition of assurance: Give diligence, yea, give all diligence, yea,
the rather give all diligence to make your calling and election sure.

From this, we shall only lay before you these Considerations. 1. If the
seeking after assurance be a necessary duty, then these three things are most
lamentable. First, That there are so many in this Generation who are pure in
their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their iniquity; they flatter
themselves with a rotten assurance, that has no other foundation but their own
imagination: they never knew since the first day they were Baptized and did
begin to profess Christ, what it was to mortify one lust, nor seriously to
wrestle against one temptation, and yet they want not a strong persuasion of
their interest in Christ: But ah, will ye stand in awe, lest ye meet with such
a dreadful disppointment, as (when ye think y^ are in the very gate of heaven)
even then to fall backwards to the very bottom of hell, and when ye expect a
kindly welcome from the Lord of Glory, as one who thinks you have been in
Covenant with him this many years, ye meet with that dreadful summons* Depart
from me ye cursed, I know you not.

2. How sad may we be upon this account; that howbeit assurance be an
attainable thing* and a great many dare not say they have attained it; yet so
little diligence is used in pursuing after it: Is it not very lamentable* that
many of you to whom I am speaking, since first ye gave up your names to Christ
(...) a visible way, and were reputed amongst the generation of the seekers of
his face, scare^ ever set a day or an hour a part to examine whether ever
indeed you were in Christ or not* Alas, is heaven of so little moment, is the
having or wanting all the enjoyments which are there of so small concernment to
you, that y^ will not be at the pains as once to enquire af^ter your interest
in the matter: What if any of you were but possessors of a thousand pound, and
your interest or right unto it un^certain and questionable, would not your
slee^ depart from you, and your rest be unquiet til^ you had made it more
secure? What thin^ you shall the men of this generation answe^ in the day of
the Lord for neglecting that on thing necessary, when they have been so vex^ing
themselves about many things, and have been so serious in so many consultations
t^ make sure a worm eaten portion in a perishing world, that the whole wit of
Men and Angels cannot secure for one moment: It is certain, the root of all
this slothfulness is Atheism: It is not possible that we believe (...) really
there is a heaven as we believe there i^ an earth, or that the world to come is
as real as that which is present, or else it must be a strange power in these
lusts that keep us captive, that we are never suffered to think upon Eternity,
nor to ask where we must ^^dge when this cottage we carry about shall ^all
about our ears. O will ye think upon it how serious and pressing that command
is, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give all diligence to make your ^alling and election sure,
when the Lord says, ^ive all diligence, will ye give no diligence, and when he
says, make your calling and election sure, will ye live upon uncertainty, I
said to the foolish, deal not so foolishly.

3. It is most lamentable, that since assurance is attainable, yet men live so
content^dly under the want thereof: how strange is it that many are so seldom
on their knees complaining of their uncertainty, if Christ were precious unto
you, would it be so, I am sure there are some of us here that have hade the
name of Christians I know not how long, that never had one sad thought about
the want of assurance: when we look upon the desolations, vastations and
plunderings in the world, how many of us can cry out, They have taken away my
gods, and what have I more; but when we speak of heaven we care not who deprive
us of our portion there. I will not limite the Lord, nor determine what he may
do, but believe it, it is one to a thousand, if many Christians of this age
have a pleasant night and comfortable closing of their eyes, they are such
undervalue (...) of assurance: I may fear, that lamentation shall be heard upon
the death beds of many (...) O poor wretched wandering Soul, where art thou
going: and it is no wonder it come to this* when we are so long in beginning to
ask the question. And now I close with this one thing, that I think beyond all
question the souls that live contentedly under the want of assurance, are the
careless daughters that dwells at ease; Christ and they are at a remarkable
distance; it must be a cold winter and a dark night (at best) as to their
present fellowship with God,

A second consideration from this point is* that if the seeking after assurance
be so necessary a duty, then let me beseech you to ponder with your selves what
means are fit for you to use that ye may attain it, and if ye enquire what
these means are, I shall only lay before you some few.

1. That ye would be much in the exercise of Faith, I mean the direct acts of
Faith, whereby the sinner from his sense and feeling of his wants, lays hold
on Jesus Christ* closing with him, and leaning upon him for a full supply out
of his fullness: for indeed there are two great faults amongst the Lord
people, some do seek assurance of Faith, before ever they seek to have Faith.
2. Some are much more taken up in debating their evidences, whether they be
real or not, then they are in strengthening their evidences, so that most of
their time is spent in questioning: O! is this a real evidence of assurance;
whereas more actual believing in Christ and gripping to the promises, and l^sse
disputing, were the shorter and surer way, that word is most clear, Ephesians. 1.13.
After ye believed, ye were sealed with the Spirit of promise, that is, ye got
assurance, but not before ye believed: and ye know it is said, Matthew. 9 2. And
when Jesus saw their Faith, he said, Son, be of good comfort, thy sins are
forgiven thee* so then it is clear, that to be much in believing, is the
nearest way to assurance.

2. Ye would be much in believing the general truths and promises of the
Gospel, and frequently meditatnig of them; all assurance is by a practical
sylogisme; the first proposition whereof, must needs be a Scripture truth: and
certainly, the firm assent to that truth, and the souls delightful meditation
on it, is often blessed of the Lord as a special mean whereby the conscience is
helped to make the assumption, and also to bring forth the conclusion: For
instance, we see with what strength of affection Paul acts his faith on that
word, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance,
Christ Jesus came to save sinners; and presently we see what follows on it,
of whom I am the chief, then is his assurance; for doubtless he means, that
he was the chief of saved sinners; yea, certainly, a sinner thus exercising
himself, will often find so much sweetness in the general truths, that he
cannot but put to his own name.

3. Be diligent in the exercise of all spiritual graces and Christian duties,
that this i^ among the best means of attaining to assurance, is manifest from 2
Pet. 1. Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure: for indeed
it is very observable, that the diligence there mentioned, is not a diligence
in disputing and questioning about our election, but a diligence in the
practice of duties and graces* as is clear from ver. 5. Give all diligence
(says the Apostle) Whereto? in adding to your faith virtue, to your virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, etc. and then verse. 8. If ye do these
things, ye shall neither be barren no^ unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ; he does not say in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ simply,
but of our Lord Jesus: importing that, that the result of diligence in these
graces, shall be the knowledge of Christ as ours, and of our interes^ in him:
and then he adds (upon the other hand) he that laketh these things, is blind
and cannot see afar off, this is, he cannot see far i^ any spiritual matter,
and so not in the matte^ of his interest. O therefore, think not tha^ ye will
get assurance by lying down with the ^^uggard upon your bed, or by your formal^
prayer, or your anxious debates, but if eve^ ye come to assurance, ye must be
striving a^ in an agony, for so the word imports, which is used to express
our diligence in Christian duties.

4. As ye would be diligent, so if ever y^ would come to assurance, ye would be
tender and circumspect in your walking, that is a clear word, Psalm. 50. last
verse, To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation
of God, and Isa. 32. The effect of righteousness is peace and assurance for
ever: Ah the untender walk that many of us have: it is no wonder to see us walk
in darkness, such stinking gross vapors that arises off our conversation,
cannot but engender clouds that hinder us from seeing God, and certainly such
pearls as Assurance is not given to dogs and swine, lest they tread upon them.

SERMON VIII.
^ Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith? prove your own
selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates?


THere are two great balances into which men do weight themselves; there are
some that weight themselves in the balance of deceit, who ^^ink that in all
their labors there is no ini^uity to be found, yet God who is the weigher
(...) the spirit, when he shall weigh them will ^^grave this upon their
forehead, Thou art ^eighed in the balance, and are found light: but there are
many who approve themselves, whom Christ shall never approve* There are many
that call God Father, whom he will not call Children, and many that call Christ
Husband, whom he will not call Spouse. 2. There are some who weigh themselves
in the balance of the Sanctuary, who upon solid and most spiritual grounds do
draw this conclusion, I am my beloveds and his desire is toward me, who can
with boldness and confidence look Christ in the face, and say, thou art mine,
and with much spiritual confidence, take him in their arms, and cry out, he
shall be eternally mine: and sure there is not a more pleasant life than to be
taking him every day in our arms, and to be crying out, Am I not made up in
him, am I not made up in him,

Before I come to the words, there are three great and most soul-concerning
errour^ amongst the Christians of these days, that we desire ye may consider.
1. There are many that are more desirous to know what they are, then what they
should do; there are some are more taken up to know whether they be justified
and sanctified, then to be indeed justified and sanctified; and they are more
desirous to know if they be in Christ, then indeed to be in him: and therefore
we find many who do spend a great deal more time disputing that question,
Whether am I in Christ or not, then they do i^ using of these means by which
real union and communion with him may be attained: But oh, will ye once study
more to be in him, and that shall be the shortest way to attain to the
knowledge of your being in him. The second great error is, that some are more
desirous to know what they should do, then they are desirous to do what they
know; Are there not many of us that have this question, Wherewith shall I come
before the Lord, and yet we do not know his Commandment is with us; and that
we should do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with our God. A third error
is, that we are more in talking of Christ, than in believing in him, or closing
with him: Some of us think to win to heaven by discourses, if we can talk of
Christ, we think all is without debate or controversy; but alas, there are
many who were sweet talkers of Christ, that are cursing him this day in Hell.
And I would only say this by the way, if there be any of you that have win to
any soul persuasion of your interest in Christ, I entreat you if you can put
the conclusion upon record, that in such a day of such a Month, and such a Year
of God, you did then win to cry out, I am my beloveds and he is mine: It
seems to have been David's practice, Psalm. 16.2. O my soul thou have said unto
the Lord, thou art my Lord; and it was Ierimiahs practice, Lam. 3.24. The Lord
is my portion, says my soul, I say, ye should even mark that conclusion as
they did, that when tentations come, and begin to assault you, ye may look to
your record that ye have set down, and be ashamed to misbelieve. It is true,
that for a little while our assurance at best will be but ebbing and flowing,
but I hope ere long, we shall be above the reach of misbelief, and above the
reach of fears, I hope ere long, we shall dispute no more, we shall be jealous
no more, and we shall question our interest no more, when all our disputings
and questionings shall be sweetly drowned in that infinite ocean of eternal
delight and fruition of God. O expectants of heaven, expectants of heaven, are
ye not looking after this day, are ye not looking after it: I know not what we
do here, if we be not walking forward every day: he is upon his way; O to see
him, we will even stand and wonder at him: I hope the day is coming when we
shall never lose our grips of Christ any more, he is coming, he is coming; and
I think if* Christ would give a Pass, we would long to go hence: O what
streets are these that are there, is there any here who is groaning for heaven,
be of good comfort, I hope ere long he shall come, he shall come and wash all
tears from our eyes.

Now at the last occasion, when we spoke upon these words, we told you that
there was five or six things which we intended to consider in them. The first
was, that such a thing as a distinct and well grounded persuasion of our
interest in Christ was attainable; and of this we have already spoken. The
second thing is, That concerning this noble and excellent thing assurance,
there are many mistakes among the people of God, and to make this evident, is
is clear first in this Text, from that serious and acurate search in this
matter, which the Apostle puts these people unto, as we cleared unto you
from the force of the words, and his doubling of these exhortations, Try your
own selves, prove your own selves. 2. From the many commands which the Lord
has left upon record that we should not be mistaken concerning our assurance,
1 Cor. 3.18. Let no man deceive himself, Gal. 6.3. If a man think himself to be
something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself, and therefore does the
Apostle add, Let every one prove his own work, and verse 7. Be not deceived.
3. The point is clear from this, that we find in Scripture many who have been
mistaken most dreadfully in the matter of their assurance, Hos. 8. Israel
cries out, my God we know thee, and yet Israel was in a great mistake, for in
the words following, verse 3. Israel had cut off the thing that was good, and
Prove. 30. verse 12. we find there, A generation that are pure in their own
eyes, and yet are not washed from their iniquities. 4. It is clear from this,
that it is a great design of Satan the great deceiver, that we might be
mistaken about that noble and weighty point of our Assurance of being in
Christ: Is there not a power given unto him from Christ to deceive the Nations;
I may say, that in no point does he more prevail to deceive us then in this: If
profanity kill its thousands, delusion kills ten thousands, and this delusion
its twenty thousands. Lastly, Does not this prove how much a Christian may be
mistaken in the matter of his Assurance, even that came which is given to our
hearts, Ier. 17. verse. 9. It is deceitful above all things and desperately
wicked, and who can know it; no doubt this may show us (though there were no
more) how ready our hearts are to deceive us, making us to entertain a delusion
in stead of truth, and embrace a shadow in stead of substance.

The next thing that we have to speak to you upon this point, is to show you
where these mistakes do lie, and what are these false grounds by which so many
do deceive their own souls in this matter; and here there are two sorts of
persons whom we must inform. 1. There be some who upon most unwarrantable
grounds do conclude that their interest in Christ is sure, when indeed it is
not. 2. There be some (upon the other hand) who from sad mistakes of
themselves, and the Lords dealing toward them, deny that they have an
interest, when indeed they have. The first sort are the worst, and in the most
dangerous condition, and they build upon these six false foundations, which we
beseech them to consider.

The first is* their supposed sensible enjoyments, some Christians in these
times especially do meet with some flashes of light and joy which they have not
been (it may be) acquainted with before, or at least, not i^ such a measure,
or in such a sensible manner, and upon this they presently cry forth, My
beloved is mine, and I am his. I shall not dispute with such about the reality
of these enjoyments, or how they came to know that these are such as proceed
from a saving work of the Spirit of Grace, but waving that debate, give me
leave to say this much of all enjo^ments and sensible manifestions (as in the
point in hand) they may be sometime a good supporter to underprop a Christians
assurance when i^ (...), but never a good foundation whereon he may lay the
first stone of that building: and therefore, ^ee is the wiser-Christian who
first tries the reality of his interest in Christ by other blessed fruits of
righteousness and holiness before he ^^ust the reality of sensible
enjoyments, how sweet or comfortable soever they may seem to be. 2. Some build
their assurance upon the number and bulk of their duties, without considering
the frame of their spirit, and the principle from which they flow, they use
prayer, and reading, and conference, they wait upon Ordinances, and are always
there where the means is thought to be* most powerful* and upon this they
take up themselves in their own arms, blessing themselves as that poor man,
Luke 18. I fast twice a week, I pay tithes of all that I possess: But alas,
they do not consider that they* do but build their house upon the sand, which
the first blast of a temptation will overturn, because not only all our duties
when weighed in the balance, may be found light, but when put to the trial may
be found empty, dead, and lifelesse things, wherein the LORDS soul can have no
pleasure. 3* Some are mistaken in the matter of their assurance, by judging
themselves by the law, not knowing or not regarding the spiritual meaning
thereof: Paul was a gallant man (in his own apprehension) when he was without
the Law, that i^* when he knew not the spiritual meaning of the Law, he thought
himself the most eminent (...) in all his N^tion, and as he shows us, Phil*
^. he could compare with any of them, but when the Lord opened his eyes, we
see, he put himself last in the roll of Saints, and first in the roll of
sinners, Romans 7. He was alive without the Law, that is, thought himself living
and reigning above his sins; but when the commandment came, that is, when it
came to his knowledge, and he saw the spirituality of it, sin revived, and he
died, then he saw how that he had triumphed before the victory, he then saw
all his sins alive, and, as it were, risen from the dead, and himself a dead
man, lost and undone in the estate he was in. O how many are there amongst us
in Paul's first condition, alive without the Law: O how many destroy themselves
with this, they think there is not a sin forbidden in all the Law of God but
only Ten, but alas, thou fool thou errest in this, not knowing the Scriptures;
should thou not judge thy self by that spiritual extent of the meaning of the
Law, and that divine commentary which the Apostle James has set forth upon it,
wherein he shows thee, That if thou be guilty of the breach of one point,
thou art guilty of all; and by that infallible exposition which Christ himself
the blessed Law giver has set down, Mat. 6. whereby he discovers adultery
in the heart and in the eye. O atheist, thou must take up the Ten Commands, and
subscribe guilty to them all: And let me tell you this, if ye will subscribe
the Law to Christ, He will subscribe the Gospel to you; if thou will sincerely
say, I am guilty, He will as sincerely say, I have pardoned; Son or daughter,
be of good courage, thy sins are forgiven thee.

Fourthly, Some build their assurance upon the apprehension of their hatred of
some particular sin, that albeit it was sometimes as their right hand, or their
eye, yet now they can pluck it out, or cut it off: But O! will thou but
consider, some sin may be made weak, and the soul (though not upon a right
principle) brought to hate it, and to cry unto it, get you hence, and yet the
interest of Satan may be strong in the heart.

The fifth mistake is of many who judge themselves, because they go a greater
length then the former, and are kept free from all gross outbreaking sin; how
many are there who go sleeping down to hell with this? I am no drunkard, no
adulterer, no murderer, no thief nor whore; this long have I lived in the town,
and they were never born that can say, I wronged them: and so they adventure
their soul upon this, they never committed any gross sin. But I beseech you
be not deceived, remember how that wretched man did speed, Luke 18.11. I am no
extortioner, nor adulterer, nor even as this publican, etc. poor creature that
he was, Christ gives not a testimonial to every one who take it for
themselves; and I must tell some of you, that there may be desperate atheists
without God, and without Christ in the world, and yet be free of gross
outbreaking sins: I do not think, but many of these who crucified the Lord of
Glory, were kept from other gross sins, What know thou O man that there
is more favor showed to thee, in that thou art kept from some gross sins,
when yet thou have a desperately wicked heart, then is showed to the devil,
when some links of his chai^ are taken in, and restraining power, keeping him
i^ from his outmost bounds. God will sometimes restrain a hypocrite, or a
heathen, as it was said of Abimelech, and God restrained him* there may be a
cord put upon thy jaws, when thou art far from having the power of conquering
grace. It may be also that all that abstaining from outward outbreakings,
proceeds but from outward disadvantages, and not from any fear of God, or
respect to him, yea, not so much as from the fear of any eternal punishment:
Are the^e not many amongst us. I believe it, there are many, that take away
shame, and Church ce^su^e, or civil punishment, and other inconveniences of
that sort, and set a thousand hells before them, they would not be kept back
from one sin, but would take their hazard of them all: Yea, is it not want of
tentation, and nothing else that hinders many from gross out-breakings? If
Satan would come but with a kindled match, there wants no more to set tongue
and hands and all on fire of hell, O wretched soul, do but ask thy self how
often thou have tempted Satan, when he would not tempt thee, and how often thou
have followed a tentation when it fled from thee; yea, when the Lord has
hedged up thy ways that thou could not overtake thy lovers, how many a long
look have thou sent after them, and what lustings of thy spirit within; and do
ye think that heart sins are nothing, although thou had no out-breakings what
were the matter of that; if thou had not a tongue thou would break the third
command, and curse God in thy heart, if thou had not an eye, thou could commit
adultery in thy heart; if thou had not a hand, thou might commit murder in thy
heart. O therefore build not thy assurance upon this, that thou have made clean
the outside of the platter, when yet all filthiness it within.

The sixth false foundation upon which I am sure too many build their assurance*
is their gifts and pa^^s, and especially upon these two, the gift of prayer,
and the gift of knowledge; but believe it, it is not much to be a Christian in
tongue, but it is much to be a Christian in heart; know ye not that this will
cast out many, We have prophesied in thy Name, and in thy name cast out devils.
No doubt, these had been excellent flourishers, and if the tongue would have
done it, they had been highly advanced; but yet ye see these men meet with a
depart from me (...) know you not. Ah, think upon it, he is not the best
Christian that is the best Orator, Religion that is pure and undefiled,
consists more in the affection, the^ in the tongue, and more in practice,
then in profession: I beseech you, when you cast up your evidences of
assurance, consider how well ye have done, and not how well ye have spoken.

The seventh false ground whereby many do misjudge themselves, is, their
supposed peace of conscience: O says one, my conscience does not charge me
with any thing, I thank God I have a quiet mind, and nothing trouble me; but
a^, poor wretch, will thou tell me, may not the strong man be within, and
therefore all is at peace; a dumb conscience, and a s^ared conscience, is a
dreadful plague. Know thou not that many say, I shall have peace, though I
walk in the imagination of my own heart, and because they say so, the Lord
shall not spare them, but all the curses in his Book shall ly upon them.

The eighth false ground, is, the approbation of other Christians, so that if
they have the approbation of some such exercised Christians, or if they have
the approbation of such a Minister, that is the way to silence all their
disputings. O cursed be the person that puts his trust in men who are
liars; O man or woman, let me assure you this, if ye had a testimonial to
present to Christ, subscribed with all the hands of every Christian that ever
ye we^e acquainted ^^th, this will be enough for Christ to reject you, and it
both, I know you not, and therefore depart from me. There is an emphasis in
that word, I know you not, as if he had said, it is not much though all others
know you, If I know you not.

The ninth false ground, is, their diligent observing all the Ordinances, their
going to Preachings, and their going to Communions, and running to and fro,
pretending this (...), that knowledge may be increased; but know it, there are
many that have sitten down at a Table with Christ here, that shall never sit
down at the higher Table with him hereafter: Are there not many that shall say
unto Christ in the great Day, Have we not ^aten and drunken in thy presen^e,
unto whom Christ shall say, Depart from me, I know you not.

The tenth false foundation, which is the strong delusion of Atheists* of which
no doubt there are many here to day: is the building of their eternal
happiness upon this, I (...) with a cross, I never knew what it was to have a
sad day; but to thee I shall only say, it may be thou never had a joyful day,
neither in all ^hy sinful pleasures under the Sun; but let me tell thee, it is
^ad Divinity to conclude, therefore I am in the way to Heaven: It may be it
were better reasoning* (and though I will not say it, yet it comes nearer
truth) I had never a cross, therefore I am going on in the way to Hell: O will thou but consider, what if He be heaping coals upon thy head, and fatting thee
to the day of slaughter? What if this word be your portion? Eat, drink, and be
merry while you are here, for to morrow thou must ^ternally die. What are all
your pleasures? and what are all your honors: and what are all your
possessions? What are they all? Are there not a bone cast unto a (...)? the
Lord valueth them not, What if they be the fa^ting of you to the day of
slaughter?

Now as to these who deny they have any interest in Christ, when indeed they
have, they commonly deceive themselves, and (...) their own spirits upon some
of these (...) the like mistakes. 1. Some judge of their estate by their
present frame and conditions, so that if they be in an evil frame, they begin
and (...) the foundations; and to such I would only say, That every change of
condition does not speak a change of estate; (...) child of God may be in much
darkness, and under much deadness* and ye^ a child of God still* Psalm. ^^.
It was (...) evil (...) be as a beast before God, and (...) then ^e keeps
grips* and holds him by the right hand* Job was often in a very ill (...),
and yet holds fast his integrity* and why then should thou upon that account
cast away thine.

2. Christians judge their estate by dispensations, they think every change of
dispensations, speaks a change of estate, and if Christ do not smile always,
we know not what it is to keep up the faith of our interest; and indeed this is
a great fault among Christians, that when they cannot read love in the
beautiful face of Christ, they think it is not in his heart. What though he
change his dispensation, does that speak forth a change of thy estate. Christ
cannot change his voice to us, but we think he changes his heart, Christ he
cannot speak to us in the whirlwind; but we cry out, Why art thou become unto
me as an enemy? Oh, shall precious Christ be thus mistaken.

The third ground of mistake about our interest in Christ, is, that we judge of
our estate by what we are in our selves, and not by what we are in Christ.
When a Christian begins to judge and search himself, he can find nothing in
himself; but what is the matter of doubting, and therefore thinks it high
presumption to think himself a Believer: But O fool, can thou not look to
Christ, and cry out, though in my self I be nothing, yet in him I am all: O if
Christians knew to judge of themselves be what they are in Christ, and not be
what they are in themselves, that with one eye they might look to themselves,
and cry out, I am undone, and with another look to Christ, and cry out, There
is hope in Israel concerning me, that with one eye they might look to
themselves, and blush, and with another eye they might look unto Christ, and
hope, that with one eye they might look to themselves, and weep, and with
another eye they might look to Christ and rejoice. O Christian will thou judge
always of thy self, be what thou art in Christ, and not be what thou art in thy
self; yea, I would say this to thee by the way, when thou mee^est with
tentations that put thee to dispute thy interest, do but send them to Christ to
get an answer, and say, O precious Christ, answer this tentation, for this is
Christ's way with the soul, the Law must bring us back to Christ, and Christ
must ^en^ us back to the Law, and deliver us over to it, not to the condemning
power of it as before, but the directing and guiding power of it as a rule of
holiness; so that a Christians whole life must be a sweet and constant
traveling between Christ and the Law: when thou have broke the Law, fly unto
Christ to take away thy guilt, and when thou have closed with Christ, come
running out again in his strength to perform the Law.

The fourth mistake is, that Christians judge of their estate by the measure of
their graces, more nor by the sincerity of them; some Christians, if they find
not love in such a degree, and if they find not repentance in such a degree,
immediately they begin and raze the foundations, and do call their enjoyments
delusions, and their faith presumption, and their mortification hypocrisy; but
I must say this to thee, we should not only weigh our graces in the balance,
but try them also by the touchstone, for the smallest piece of gold is gold,
and the least degree of faith, is alike precious faith, with that the Apostles
themselves had.

The fifth ground of mistakes among Christians is this, That they compare
themselves more unto the Saints, then they judge of themselves by the Word. O
says one, if I were like David, I would believe, but I am not like David, nor
Job, nor Hezekiah: and therefore there is none of the Saints to which I should
go, and if I should call, there is none to answer, and why then should I
believe: I would only say to thee whose objection that is, it is even David's
objection, Psalm. 22.5, 6. Our fathers trusted in thee; O they were excellent
men; But what a man am I? A worm, and not a man, and yet, he was put from that
objection: and I would say this, Are ye below him: In what? I hope ye are not
below David in necessity: Now though ye be below him in grace, if ye be not
below him in necessity, ye have so much the more right to believe; for as we
said before, necessity gives you a right, and the more necessity, the greater
right to believe.

The sixth ground is, That Christians judge of their estate by Christ's part of
the Covenant, and not by their own, rather examining themselves by what Christ
has promised to do for them, then by what is left to them to do, which thing
if it were headed, would put a close to many of our mistakes and disputings.

Having now laid out some mistakes upon either hand, the next we would do, i^
to propose some considerations to press you to guard against these mistakes,
especially the first.

And the first consideration is, That mistakes about one interest in Christ,
and assurance, is a most universal and popular evil; it is not one of a ^^y,
nor two of a family, but many are mistaken in their interest in Christ: that
word, Prove. 30.12. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and
yet is not cleansed from their iniquity, it is not one or two that are under
this mistake, but it is a generation: And I suppose, there are many of us, we
are of this tribe and generation, Matthew. 7.22. He says, many in that day
shall say unto me, Lord, Lord, and have we not prophesied, and yet he shall
say unto them, I know you not: Since it is so universal a mistake, I entreat
you be much in the search of your selves, search your own selves: Certainly I
think, if there were but within this Church one that were under this mistake,
it should put us all to this, Master is it I, Master is it I; but how much mo^^
since there is a generation of mistakers, should it not be our exercise every
day to cry out, is it I.

The second consideration is, That as it is a most universal, so also it is a
most irrecoverable mistake; if ye mistake about this your being in Christ,
there is no making up of that mistake; if once ye pass the borders of Time
with this lie in your right hand, I am in Christ, there is no hope of recovery,
eternity will cut off access to make up that mistake: I entreat you go not
down to your grave with this, I am in Christ, when yet Christ may say, I know
you not: I believe it, if ye could have a testimonial subscribed by the hands
of all the most eminent and tender Christians that ye have known, that ye are
indeed a Saint, and if all the Ministers that ever you spoke to should praise
you in the gate, and declare you to be a son and daughter of Abraham; yet when
you shall bring up your testimonial to Hevean, and the Father shall read it,
and shall ask you where is my Sons Name, if that be not there, it will
certainly be rejected, and cast over the bar.

Thirdly, It is a soul destroying delusion, this mistake about ones interest in
Christ, is the very ruin of their immortal soul, according to that word, Isa.
44.20. A deceived heart has led them aside, and what is the fruits of it, so
that he cannot deliver his soul, and by consequence it may be said, that they
destroy their soul; I believe it, there are many that go to hell in a chariot
of delusion; we know some Christ guides to Heaven by the gates of hell, and
lets them not see life till they be in sight of hell; but it is true also;
there are others whom the devil guides to hell, by the very borders of Heaven,
he makes them believe they are dwelling in the gate of Heaven all their days,
and yet at last they are thrust down to these habitations that are prepared for
the devil and his angels.

Fourthly, If once a person be mistaken about their interest in Christ, they
will have these three notable disadvantages attending upon them. 1. As long as
he is under this mistake, he is without all reach of profiting by the
Ordinances, for when he hears preaching, he will apply promises, when he
should apply threatenings, and upon the other hand, apply threatenings when he^
should apply promises, and so that which should be his medicine, becomes
poison to him. 2. As long as he is under this mistake, it makes him that he
cannot pity nor have compassion upon himself, that though he be the most
suitable object of compassion, yet he knows not what it is to weep over his own
ruin. 3. Readily all his graces are but delusions, all his good motions are
but flashes, and all his mortification counterfeit, and all his tenderness is
but the mother of stupidity, and therefore guard against mistakes about your
interest in Christ I entreat you.

Fifthly, Consider, that mistakes about ones interest, is a most abiding and
constant mistake, believe it, if once we mistake in this, it is one to a
hundred if ever we come right again: this is clear, Ier. 8.5. They hold fast
deceit, they keep it with both their hands: And, Isa. 44.20. Their is a lie in
their right hand, that is, they hold the lie and they keep it with all their
power; I say, if once one be mistaken concerning their interest in Christ, it
is hard to put them from it, yea, delusion it is such an abiding thing, that we
find Christ speaks of it, as if it would wait upon one before the judgment
seat of Christ, and as if some would never quite their hope of heaven, till
Christ pronounce that word, Depart from me, I know you not, delusion may carry
us over the borders of Time, and lead us in to Eternity.

Sixthly, There is much counterfeit Religion that is in those days, their is a
painted faith, there is a painted love, there is a painted mortification, and
there is a painted tenderness; some they love shaddows and pictures, and yet
they do not love the very shadow of Christ, and are there not many who think
they are embracing Christ, and yet are embracing a delusion and a fancy.

That which thirdly we would speak to from this poi^, is, to give you some
evidences by which ye may know if the assurance ye have of your being in
Christ, be right or no: Believe it, there are many that draw that conclusion, I
am in Christ, which the devil and their own deceitful heart has drawn, and
Christ never gave consent to it: And I shall propose these seven or eighth
evidences of real assurance, by which ye may discern.

First, A real assurance is a purifying and sanctifying assurance: this is
clear, 1 Ioh. 3.3. Every man that has this hope in him, that is, persuaded of
this that he shall come to heaven, He will purify himself, as he is pure: And
2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh, and of the spirit. O! When a
Christian gets Christ in his arms, he cannot but cry forth, What have I to
do any more with idols: When he has once gotten Christ in his arms, he will
answer every tentation that he meets with this, I am not mine own, I am
bought with a price, I cannot now dispose of my self: and if your assurance of
going to heaven be not a purifying assurance; be persuaded of it, it is but the
devils pillow sowed under your arm holes: is it possible a person can be
assured of heaven, and not study holiness, can such a delusion at this
overtake you.

Secondly, A real assurance puts the Christian to a pressing and earnest
pursuit after communion and fellowship with God: is it possible for one to be
assured, and not to ^e saying, he is sick of love: this is clear Song 2.16, 17.
My beloved is mine, and I am his; and immediately* follows, Turn thee, O my
beloved, and be like a roe, or a young har^ upon the mountains of Bether: And
it is clear, Song 7.10, 11. I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me: and
what follows upon that, She comes and inviteth Christ, O come down with me
to the fields, let us lodge in the villages. O when gave ye Christ such an
invitation as this, O precious Christ, let us lodge in the villages, and go
down to the secret places of the field: and Psalm. 63.1. My God, there is his
assurance; and immediately follows upon that, Early will I seek thee, my soul
thirsts after thee as in a dry parched land where no water is. There is a
pressing desire after communion. But I would ask you, Are there not many here
who have the hope of heaven (to their apprehension) and yet the desire of
communion with Christ was never with them: I desire to say to thee, (be who
thou will) Be not deceived, God is not mocked, that which thou sowest, thou
shall also reap. I think there are some of us, we would let Christ live in
Heaven many days without giving him one visit, if He would let us alone: But O
if we were within sight of our interest in Christ, how often would this be our
complaint when he were absent, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not
where they have laid him; or my idol has carried me away from Him, and I know
not where to find Him.

Thirdly, Assurance of our being in Christ, will put us to the exercise of
praise; believe it, I think this is one of the most searching evidences of
assurance: There are some Christians they will be convinced for the neglect of
the duty of prayer, but for the neglect of the duty of praise, they never have
one conviction; and I tell you the reason of it, prayer is a selfish grace, (so
to speak) but praise it is a denying grace, prayer seeks, but praise gives,
Exodus 15.2. He is my God, I will prepare him an habitation, and he is my
fathers God, I will exalt him, Psalm. 118.28. He is my God, I will praise him,
he is my God, I will exalt him: What needs David these repetitions, might not
one serve? No says he, I would even spend my days in this, My God, my God,
there is much of heaven in that word, My God, and love commits many sweet
batoligies: Now I say to thee, was thou ever put to the heart exercise of
praise, by this assurance that thou have, this is an evidence indeed, but alas,
many of us cannot say it.

Fourthly, A person that lives within sight of his interest, Christ is
match^esse unto him, as is clear, Song. 2.3. I sat down under his shadow,
there is faith and assurance of it, and what accompanies that, As the apple
tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons: Christ has
not a match, says the Spouse, in his sweetness, his power, his beauty; and
his usefulness is above all.

Fifthly, Real assurance is a humbling thing, the assurance of a Christian
makes him to sit low in the dust: Was not Jacob low in his own eyes, when he
cried out, I am less then the least of all thy mercies; What? was not David
low in his own eyes, when he spoke that word, What am I, and what is my fathers
house, that thou have brought me hitherto; and was not Paul a low man in his
own eyes, Ephesians. 3.8.16. I am less then the least of all thy Saints, and when
he cried out, I am the chief of sinners: The assurance that is real, it will
make a Christian to sit down in the dust, and cry out, Woe is me, I Am a man of
polluted lips.

Sixthly, Real assurance will put him to take much pleasure and delight in the
going about of duties: that word, Psalm. 40.8. My God, says he, that is his
assurance, and presently he subjoyneth, I delight to do thy will, O Lord, this
he speaks of himself, as himself, and likewise as a type of Christ, Psalm.
119.115. Depart from me evil doers, for I will keep the commandments of my
God; I believe it, the love of Christ when it is much in exercise, it will
constrain us to our duty: and therefore this proud transporting assurance in
these days, that sets men above all duties and Ordinances, and makes them
count the Gospel as well as the Law, but beggarly rudiments* and cry out to
their neighbors, Stand aback, for I am holier then thou, must needs be a
delusion.

Lastly, There are these three properties of a real assurance, it is a begotten
assurance, it is a living assurance, and it is a constraining assurance. The
first two properties of it are set down in that, 1 Pet. 1.2. He has begotten
us to a lively hope; Who begat that assurance in thee? I suppose some have
assurance, and it was begotten without travel; but if Christ be not the father
of thy assurance, it will evanish and pass away. And, secondly, it must be a
living assurance, some hearts are dead as a stone, and yet they say they have
the hope of heaven. And thirdly, it must be a constraining assurance, it will
put the Christian to do what he commands, yea, if it were the most pleasant
Isaac that we have, if he commands us to sacrifice it, we would put a knife
to the throat of it, and be willing to offer it up.

Now after all these evidences, I desire to have a report from you concerning
your estate; What think ye of your selves, are ye in Christ, or no; I suppose,
if Christ should come here to day, and put us all to the door but these that
are in Christ, we would have a thin assembly: I confess, I wonder, that that
word does not make us to walk with sadness, Many are called, but few are
chosen: Now I ask this question at you all, as in the sight of God, and as ye
will one day answer unto him that will be your Judge; What think ye of your
selves? Is there none here that can give a present positive answer to this, Are
ye in Christ: I suppose this, if I were to go round them that are here, and
ask, are ye in Christ, are ye, and ye in Christ, O! I doubt much if there
should be many negative answers within the doors, we have so strong a faith
some of us, that since we were born, we never doubted of it; But I think
(without commending doubting) I may say, the faith that thou never doubted of,
is too like a delusion, and the faith that thou never took pains to keep, and
yet it kept it self, that is too like a delusion, the faith that never knew
what it was to put thee to real seeking of Christ, is too like a delusion. But
let me close with this, be your estate what it will, search and come away; I
think that is one of the most Gospel invitations that is in all the Scripture,
Lam. 3.34. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord: When
thou have searched, come away, for I tell thee this, there will be nothing that
will commend thee to Christ so much as necessity, and I hope there is none of
you, but ye have enough of this, and know it, if ye will not come to Christ,
he will compel you to come, but it shall not be for your advan^age to stay
away, till ye be compelled. O persons that are out of Christ, Come away; O
persons that are in Christ, Come away; we must preach that word, Come away,
unto you, as long as ye are here, till ye come and be fixed as a pillar in the
house of God, and go no more ou^, O study to be near him: O Christian did
thou ever think upon this, and say with thy self, O when shall I have immediate
embraces of blessed Christ: When shall there be nothing between my heart and
Him? till then* we never get Christ near enough, there is always something
between Him and us, till we be above the clouds: O these immediate soul
infoldings and imbracings of Christ: Are ye never sending a messenger to
heaven, desiring a pass to go away that ye may enjoy them, and are ye not
longing for the day, when the waters of Jordan shall divide themselves, and the
ransomed of the Lord shall pass through: Now let us sing praises to our King,
sing praises, for he has gone up with a shout, and shall come again, sing
praises to our King, sing praises.

SERMON IX.
2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith? prove your own
selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates?


I Think ere long, there are many that passes under the notion of Professors,
that the veriest atheist when he beholds their walk, may cry out, Are thou
also become like unto one of us: Are there not many here that are in a golden
dream, and in a fools paradise, that dream they eat, and behold, when they
awake, they shall be hungry; therefore I think it is incumbent upon us, to
search and examine our state, and condition; profanity has slain its
thousands, but delusion and presumption has slain their ten thousands. It was
an ancient complaint of Christ, Luke 12.57. And why even of your selves judge
ye not what is right; I am persuaded of this, there are many decreets of peace
past upon earth, that are never ratified in heaven, there are many that cry
out, The bitterness of death is past, whom yet God by the sword of his
Justicee, shall hew in pieces before our eyes. We told you at the last
occasion, that we spoke upon these word; there were six things we intended to
speak from them, of the first three we have spoken.

That which we intended to speak to at this time, is, that there is much soul
advantage and spiritual gain, that does redound to the Christian, by the
distinct persuasion of his interest in Christ; this we gathered from Paul's
doubling the command of searching and trying themselves, as if he had said, it
is a business that will be so much for your advantage, that it is incumbent
for you to search and try diligently: And for further clearing of the point, I
shall only give these three places, Rev 2.17. I will give unto them a white
stone, and in the stone a new name written, that no man knows, but he that
has received it: By the new name, and the white stone, is understood
assurance, and the intimation of it to the soul: This indeed is such a mercy,
that I defy any to make language of it, no man knows it, much less can he
express it, but he that is the professor of it, and that place, Isa. 62.2, 3.
I will give unto them a new name, which the mouth of the Lord will name: O what
a name must that be which the mouth of the Lord will name: I think, what he
gives, must be one of the noblest names that ever was given, all the styles
and titles under heaven cannot equal it. And, thirdly, we see David in the 18.
Psalm. found much sweetness and advantage in this, when nine times he has that
word, my: My strength, my rock, my fortress and my deliverer, my strength and
my buckler, the horn of my salvation, and my high tower, O David, what needs
all these Mys, David would answer us; O! he is so sweet in himself, but O! much
sweeter to me, when I put to that possessive note, My.

Now to speak more particularly to these advantages of assurance, The first is,
That a person that is assured of his interest in Christ, he is much in desiring
communion with Christ: Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, (there is his
assurance) where thou feedest, and where thou make thy flock to rest at noon,
there is desire of communion, and Song 7.10, 11. My beloved is mine, and his
desire is toward me, there is her assurance, and immediately follows, Come
my beloved, let us go forth into the fields, let us lodge in the villages,
there her desire of communion, Song 2.16, 17. My beloved is mine, and I am his,
and what follows upon that, He feeds among the lillies, until the day
break, and the shadows fly away, Turn my beloved, and be as a roe, or a wild
heart upon the mountains of Bether, that is in short, let me have sweet
correspondency and fellowship with thee, till the day of Eternity shall come: I
think the desires of an assured Christian, they are like the grave, the cry
continually, Give, give, and they never say, it is enough: What is the reason,
ye seek so little after fellowship with Christ, it is even this, ye are not
persuaded of your interest in him; believe it, if once ye had attained to this
blessed length, as to cry out, Christ is mine, it would be a hell upon earth for
you to live at such a distance with him as ye do for the most part: O but
assurance makes absence from Christ an unsupportable burden, Psalm. 22.1. My
God, my God, there is assurance, and immediately follows his complaint, Why
hidest thou thy self from me, Song 3.1, 2, 3. that word, Him whom my soul
loves, made her to weep so much under absence from Christ, and Ioh. 20.13.
when the Angels ask the question at Mary, Women why weepest thou? I think she
thought it a needless question, and she tells the cause of it, They have taken
away my Lord: I think her heart was at her mouth when she pronounced these two
words, My Lord, she spoke them with a great deal of emphasis and force, could
ye resent absence with Christ so little, if ye were assured he were yours. I
confess, it is no wonder when persons loss that which is not their own, that
they weep not much for the loss of it; but O! to loss that which is our own,
it makes it a cross and a burden to us.

Secondly, It makes the soul to have a high and matchless esteem of precious
Christ, Song 5.10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chief among ten thousand:
O says the Spouse, I never saw his like, and I shall never see his like again;
there is much in that My; interest makes her look upon Christ with another eye
nor she would have done, strangers look upon him but as a tree planted on the
sand, 1 Pet. 2.7. To you that believe Christ is precious, not to every one: And
Song 2.2. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, the reason is,
interest in the words going before, As the apple tree among the trees of the
wood, so is my beloved among the sons; yea, assurance will make every thing in
Christ exceeding pleasant to the soul: as is clear, Song 5.16. My beloved is
altogether lovely, or, he is all desires. I tell you what assurance will do,
it will make Christ's person pleasant and precious to the soul, it will make
Christ's Natures pleasant to the soul, it will make Christ's Offices pleasant to
the soul, it will make Christ's Promises pleasant to the soul, it will make
Threatenings pleasant to the soul, it will make the smell of Christ's Garments
pleasant to the soul, and it will make the kisses of His Mouth pleasant to the
soul: O says the assured Christian, there is nothing of Christ but it is most
pleasant, and is all desires; His Threatenings are pleasant, they are the wounds
of a friend, and His kisses are pleasant, they are better then wine, His Name
it is pleasant, it is as precious ointment powered, forth, His smellings are
most delightsome, whose countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars: O
to embrace a married Christ, how pleasant is it to the soul; What makeeth you
to have so low thoughts of Christ? even this, the want of assurance that He is
your H^sband.

Thirdly, Assurance will make the Christian patiently to submit to every cross
and sad dispensation he meets wi^h: this is clear, Heb. 10.34. They took with
joy the spoiling of their goods, and what made them do so, They hoped for a
better inheritance, and a more enduring substance: I tell you, assurance, it
will answer all crosses with this, Christ is mine; when they are afflicted,
assurance will lift up its face, and cry out, Christ is mine, and when they are
reproached, they will comfort themselves with this, Christ is mine, I can put
on the Lord Jesus.

Fourthly, Assurance will keep you from apostasy and defection from Christ, 2
Pet. 1.10. Make your calling and election sure, and if ye do this (says he) ye
shall never fall, Heb. 3.11.12. It is there set down as a fruit of the evil
heart of misbelief, it makes us depart from the living God, but on the
contrary, assurance knitteth the soul to Christ by a threefold cord, which is
not easily broken. Believe it, the assured Christian can cry out with much
confidence of faith, My mountain stands strong, I shall never be moved; the
assured Christian can cry out with much cheerfulness: In God will I praise his
word, in God have I put my trust, I will not be afraid what flesh can do unto
me; yea, he can sweetly sing in the very mouth of danger, The Lord is my light
and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of
whom shall I be afraid, Psalm. 27.1.

Fifthly, Assurance keeps all the graces of the spirit green and flourishing,
it is as a refreshing dew upon our branches, which makes every grace sweetly
to blossom in its season. 1. It stirs up the exercise of love: O how
vigorous are the actings of love, when a Christian can cry out, My beloved is
mine, and I am his, Song 1.13. My beloved, there is her assurance, He is a
bundle of myrrh, and shall lie all night between my breasts, that is, as long
as time shall last, I shall never have Christ out of my my heart, there is
love, 1 Ioh. 4.19. We loved him, because he loved us first; our hearts are
naturally cold, but love kindles love, the sense of his love to us, puts
our hearts into a heavenly flame toward him again. 2. Assurance keeps up the
exercise of prayer, it is the assured Christian that can p^ay best, and to best
advantage, and in these three things especially, is prayer helped by assurance.
First, It helps in the point of boldness: O but the assured Christian can go
boldly to the Throne of Grace, Crying Abba father, and my Lord and my God.
Secondly, It helpe^h our diligence in prayer, Psalm. 63 1. O my God, there is
assurance, early will I seek thee, there is his diligence as the fruit thereof.
Thirdly, It helps the fervency of prayer, as in that same place, my soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, there is his fervency as another
fruit of his assurance. 3. Assurance keeepeth in exercise and life, the grace
of mortification: ^s is clear by comparing, 2 Cor. 4. verse. last, with 2 Cor.
5.1. We look not after the things that are seen: O Paul, what aileth you, may
ye not take a look of the world, O says Paul, and would ye know the ground of
it, We know if this house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a house
not made with hands, eternally in the heavens: my house and my treasure is in
heaven, I must have my heart there, and my eyes also: Would ye know what would
stay your pursuit after the world, study to have the assurance of your interest
in Christ continually with you. And 4. It keeps in exercise the grace of
humility; there is nothing will keep a Christian so humble as assurance, Gal.
2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Ephesians. 3.8. there he is all
in exalting grace, and debasing himself: It is the misbeliever and discouraged
person that dwells nearest pride; Believe it, misbelief is big with child of
pride and apostasy, these are the two children which that fruitful mother will
bring forth. And, 5. It will help the grace of Repentance: Would ye know what
would make the Christian to repent, it is even this, to take Christ in our arms
and call him ours, Zech. 12.10. They shall look unto him, that is, their faith,
and and they shall mourn as one mourns for his only Son: I think it is known
by experience, the soul never weeps more tenderly under the conviction of sin,
then when he has Christ in his arms, and can see, He is mine: O how sweetly
does they then complain, there is not a sight of Christ as their own, when they
have offended, but it breaks all their heart in pieces, and it is as a sword
piercing into the bones, when they cry out, O what a fool was I to offend such
a precious One, in whom I had so much interest; Was it not sense of interest
that made Mary wash the feet of Christ with her tears. Lastly, It will keep in
exercise the grace of Joy, 1 Pet. 1.8. It is faith which makes one to rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory: Would ye know why your graces are
withered? would ye know why all the pleasant plants of God within your soul are
decayed? It is this, ye live without sight of your interest in Christ, believe
it, (if so I may speak) assurance will be a watering to your graces every
morning, and ^^fresh them every hour, it being as a ^hannel through which
divine influence is conveyed to the increase of grace, and especially of joy.

The sixth advantage that comes in to the Christian by assurance of his
interest in Christ, is, That it makes death exceeding pleasant and comfortable
to the soul; what makes death the king of terrors, and what makes it so unto
us? Is it not this, we go to heaven under a cloud: the assured Christian can
take death in his arms, and cry out, welcome, O friend: the assured Christian,
when he sees the chariots his father sends for him, does with old Jacob
rejoice, and Psalm 23. When I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear no evil: What brought you that length, David? I tell you why, says
he, for God is with me, ver. 4. I think I need not feas any thing, when I have
God in my company: It is the assured Christian that can cry out, Why should I
fear death, should I not laugh at destruction: I think indeed, the assured
Christian needs no^ fear death, because death to him is the death of all his
lusts, the funeral of all his sorrows: and is not the day of death his
coronation day, his marriage day, the day of his triumph, and of his entering
into rest, and why then should he fear it.

The seventh advantage is, That a Christian being in the state of assurance,
can put the highest account upon the smallest mercy that he meets with from
God: the assured Christian looks upon every mercy as a wonder; it is the
assured Christian that cries out, I am less then the least of all thy
mercies: there is not a mercy he meets with, were it but a drop of cold water,
but if he can read this on it, that it came from my Husband, and from my
Father, it will be better to him then the sweetest wine.

Lastly, Assurance does exceedingly help us to cheerfulness in obedience: O
that is a remarkable connection that Paul has, Act. 27.23. The Lord whose I am,
and whom I serve: That passage also, 2 Cor. 5.14. is very observable, The love
of Christ constrained us, etc. Why art thou so painful a Minister Paul? Why?
Know thou no man after the flesh, are not led by carnal interests, nor
affections, art so busy and diligent as all the world counts thee mad? Why?
(says he) love will not let me rest if I would be lazy or carnal, or fold my
hands to sleep: the love of Christ does always sound that in my ears, that I
was dead, and he has died for me, that henceforth I should not live unto my
self, but to Him who died for me: Now to him who is the first and the last, who
was dead, and is alive for evermore, We give praise.

FINIS.

