Great and Weighty CONSIDERATIONS Relating to the D, or Successor of the Crown,
Humbly offered to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, AND Both Houses of
Parliament.
By a True Patriot.
May it please Your Majesty,
HE is undoubtedly to be reputed the best Friend to his King and Country whom
neither the Fear of any Worldly Powers can deter or hinder to speak, nor the
love of any Temporal advantages can induce to dissemble the Truth; especially
in such serious and weighty matters, as mainly concern the welfare both of
Church and State. For, whosoever lays aside all the alluring Considerations of
Self-Interest, and chooses rather to expose himself to the displeasure of a
prevailing Faction, than see the Truth oppressed by any feigned pretenses,
though never so specious or plausible, he sufficiently demonstrates by the
sincerity of his intentions, how Faithful he is to God, and how Loyal to his
Prince.

This plain and undoubted verity, (most Gracious Sovereign) encourages me at
present to offer unto your most Excellent Majesty this my humble Address,
briefly comprising such Reasons, as persuade me so much to mislike many
particulars of our present proceedings, whereby most preposterously we
endeavor to establish the true Reformed Religion in this Kingdom, by
overthrowing the chiefest Principle and Maxim thereof; which is fulln
epitomized in this excellent Precept, Give every one his due.

I cannot indeed but highly extol the rare constancy of our Leading Men in the
true Protestant Religion, and their fervent zeal to maintain and establish the
same for ever; as also their extraordinary care and diligence to suppress
Popery, and all Fanatical Leven: But I find their Zeal does so far transport
many of them beyond the limits of Justice and Equity, that unless they steer
their course more conformably to the Divine Cynosura of all Humane Actions, the
Word and Will of God, I am afraid we shall have ere long as much reason to
blame them for the one, as praise them for the other.

To establish firmly the true Protestant Religion, is undoubtedly a great and
glorious action; but to establish it upon the Quicksands of Humane Policy, or
upon grounds repugnant to the Laws both of God and Nature, is a thing, whereof
neither I, nor (I hope) any faithful Christian will ever approve. Hypocrites
indeed, and some factious Spirits of the Phanatical Leven, who make a Cloak of
Religion to palliate their black Designs, by their seditious Pamphlets do daily
labor to persuade the World, that nothing can be so Sacred, which must not be
sacrificed to their pretended Religion. And upon this ground as the
Rump-Parliament has Sacrificed the best of Kings so some fiery Zealots now
endeavor to Sacrifice the best of Princes, your Majesty's only Brother. But
the best and most conscientious Protestants do utterly abhor and detest such
Antichristian attempts, as being wholly repugnant to the Ordnance of God, and
to the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. Neither did they ever approve of that
Anarchical Bill lately framed by some turbulent Zealots of the House of Commons
against his Royal Highness, wherein they peremptorily assume to themselves a
Sovereign and Despotical Power of Deposing Princes, and disposing of Kingdoms,
as their spirit moves them; and withal most impudently affirm, that this has
been the ancient custom of Parliaments: Whereas it is evident to all the World,
that the Imperial Crown of England has always been Hereditary, and never
depending on the Votes or Suffrages of the Subject.

Nay, it is undeniable that the succession of the Crown was always hitherto
held so Sacred and inviolable, that no Crime whatsoever, no attainder of
Treason could debar the next Heir of Blood from succeeding in the Government,
as Coke upon Littleton, Sect. 8. page 16. testifies in these words: If the
right Heir of the Crown be attainted of Treason, yet the Crown shall descend to
him, and eo instante (without any other reversal) the attainder is utterly
avoided, as it fell out in the Case of Henry the Seventh.

But these cunning Politicians now will have a new model of Government; that so
all the world may acknowledge our Omnipotent Parliament, ( i e. themselves,) to
have an Absolute and Independent power, not only over mean Subjects, but also
over the Royal Family; nay, over the King himself, and to have power to degrade
or depose them, as they please. For they are sure, that by whatsoever Law,
Power, or pretense, the Parliament can dis-inherit or depose the Heir, by the
same they may likewise depose the Possessor of the Crown; as the Rump
Parliament, de facto, has done.

To what purpose then should any true Protestant, or any man of sense, that
loves either King or Country, approve of such an extravagant Bill; which Gilded
over, like poisoned Pills, with the specious pretense of establishing the true
Protestant Religion, is like to destroy the very root and life of our
Government? Or, what (in Gods name) do we mean by this pretense of Religion? Do
we intend to out-reach the Divine Providence, or do we despair either of the
justness of our cause, or of the goodness of God? Do not we remember how the
Apostle tells us, that evil is not to be done, that good may come of it? Or do
not we know, that whatsoever God affects in goodness, he does effect by good
means, and does not want our wickedness to fulfill his holy will? Is there no
other way of establishing the true Protestant Religion, but by robbing those we
should honor and obey, and depriving them of that, which God and Nature has
bestowed upon them; I mean their Birthright? Far be it from the heart of a
Christian, especially a Protestant, to think so ill of the all-seeing
Providence of the Almighty. For, what is this, but exactly to follow the
footsteps of that monster of ingratitude, the wicked Jeroboam, who after God of
his infinite goodness had raised him from nothing, and established him Monarch
of the ten Tribes of Israel, yet was he so mistrustful of Gods power in
preserving his Kingdom for the future, that he thought nothing could secure it
but his own accursed Policy? 1 King. 12.26, 27. Was not the true Protestant
Religion settled in this Nation by the same mighty hand of God, that
established Jeroboam in the Kingdom of Israel? Shall we then like that wicked
King, so far despair of Gods Providence in preserving the work of his own
hands, as never to think it secure, unless it be established upon the
quicksands of our own wicked inventions? Should not we rather be terrified at
that dreadful woe pronounced by the Prophet Jeremy, Woe unto him that builds
his house by unrighteousness, or his Chambers by wrong, Jer. 22.13. O insensati
Galatae (as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.1.) O foolish and timorous Countrymen,
who has bewitched you, that you should be of so little Faith, as to believe
that a king of England, though the most zealous of Papists, can ever subvert
the true Protestant Religion, or the present Government of this Kingdom, while
we know him so far engaged by the fundamental Laws of the Land, that he can
hardl move or stir, but with a concentrick motion to both Houses of Parliament?
Especially, while we daily see, how in our very neighborhood, (to omit
Germany, Poland, and other places) the French Kings ever since the Reformation,
have been most zealous Papists, and withal the most absolute and arbitrary
Sovereigns of all Christian Monarchs; and yet all this while could not suppress
the Reformed Religion there, nor hinder the overruling Providence of the
Almighty, who has even in that Kingdom, notwithstanding all Popish opposers,
preserved to himself a Remnant, not of seven (as he speaks of the Kingdom of
Israel) but of seventy, or rather seven hundred thousand, that bowed not the
knee to Baal, that is, submitted not to the intolerable yoke of Romish
Traditions? And if Gods overruling Providence has so far prevailed in
protecting his people at the very dawning of the Reformation, and in causing
Papists themselves become Protestants, notwithstanding all the Cruel Laws then
in force against them, and all the opposition of a Popish; nay, of a most
Absolute and Arbitrary Sovereign, who might ad libitum, make severer Laws
against them and their Doctrine: Shall we of little faith, be so mistrustful of
his goodness, now in the very Meridian of the Gospel, as to believe that a King
of England, (a King so far obliged by the fundamental Laws of his Kingdom, and
by all ties imaginable, to be advised in all weighty matters by a free
Representative of the whole Nation, that without this Representative he can
neither repeal the Penal Statutes enacted against Papists, nor yet enact any,
though he would, against the Protestant Religion) shall we, I say, believe that
such a King, and in such Circumstances, though never so zealous a Papist, can
induce or persuade his Subjects, who once received the full light and liberty
of the Gospel, ever to submit to the Yoke of Popish Superstitions?

Do not we remember, how in Queen Mary's time, the Protestant Religion was in a
manner in its Infancy in this Kingdom, and yet how miraculously it was
preserved, notwithstanding all the endeavors of that active Queen, and all the
Penal Laws then in force against it: And now being in its prime, and so firmly
established and fenced by Law, shall we despair of Gods power to preserve it,
unless we help him out with our wickedness? Certainly we must either believe
the whole Nation is inclined to Popery, or the Protestant Religion is grounded
on very weak Foundations, otherwise we cannot thus think it impossible, either
to secure our Faith and Liberties so well established by Law, or keep off the
Tyranny of the Sea of Rome from stealing upon us, under a Popish Successor, who
can neither make any new Statutes in favor of Popery, nor yet alter the
present Government, without the consent of a Parliament.

It is an unwarrantable attempt, and a point without Example or President, to
disinherit or depose a Prince for not complying with his People in Religion:
Neither can our seditious Pamphleters most impertinent Examples any thing
justify such violent proceedings. They allege, that King Asa removed his
Mother Maachah from being Queen, because of her Idolatry, 2 Chronicles. 15. But they
might as well justify Cromwell's Tyrannical Usurpation, by alleging the
example of Jeroboam rebelling against Rehoboam, and Jehu against Joram; for
these Rebellions have no less, if not more, approbation of God's Oracles, (1
King. 11.31. and 2 King. 9.6.) than Asa's deposing his Mother. Such things
therefore are recorded in holy Scripture to be read, but never to be imitated,
(as we are not to kill our selves in imitation of Sampson, though after his
death he is highly commended and by the Apostle reckoned among the Faithful,
Heb. 11.32.) unless we have as plain a Revelation from God to do them, as King
Asa had to depose his Mother by the advice of Azariah the Prophet.

Likewise they allege, that the people of France rejected the King of Navarr,
because of his Religion: But surely, they are either altogether ignorant, or
wholly besotted and blinded, that make use of this example: For, (to omit that
a vast number of Papists, and those too of the best and greatest Families of
all France, then closly adhered to the King of Navarr, and thought themselves
indispensably obliged in Conscience by the Law of Nature and the Principles of
their Religion, so to do, notwithstanding the Kings being of a different
persuasion, and all the Popes roaring Bulls and thundering Excommunicatios to
the contrary, as the best Historians of them times do sufficiently testify) to
omit, I say, this consideration, which should make us emulous at least of these
Papists Loyalty: Do not all Protestants generally exclaim against those other
rebellious Papists, who then opposed that worthy Prince? With what face then
can we produce it as a president to justify our own proceedings against his
Royal Highness? Or shall we judge it Antichristian and unlawful in Papists to
depose a Prince, but lawful and Christian in Protestants? O blind zeal! let us
not thus foolishly deceive our selves, but rather seriously consider that
dreadful sentence of the Apostle; Think thou, O man, that judge them which
do such things, and do the same thy self, that thou shall escape the
judgment of God? Romans 2.3. How do we think to escape the severity of Gods anger
and his just judgment, if we condemn and detest the Romish usurpation over
Kings and Princes, and yet use the same ourselves, without the least remorse of
Conscience?

But the Pamphleters blindness is yet more remarkable, when they ridiculously
heap together, in the very front of their Sophistical and most unreasonable
reasons, how such and such Princes have been either disinherited, banished, or
put to death, whether by their own rebellious Subjects, or by other encroaching
Princes; as Edgar Atheling was banished by William the Conqueror, Arthur
Plantagenet put to death by King John, and the like: But the silly Sophisters
never endeavored, nor ever could justify these examples, or prove them either
lawful or laudable. To what purpose then are such unjustifyable presidents
produced by these factious Spirits, to warrant their own desperate attempts?
Surely, they might as well argue that Christ was crucified by the Jews, and
thence infer that Subjects might lawfully crucify or put to death their
Sovereign, when and how they pleased. But such Antichristian and Fanatical
Logic was never heard, much less approved of, until the Spirit of Belial
revealed it to Oliver and his Rumpers

For if we look back to the Primitive Church, whose practice should be a rule
to our proceedings, though they were zealous to admiration of the true Faith
and Worship of God, ( having the first fruits of the Spirit, as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 8.23.) and though their Sovereigns for many hundred years were
either downright Idolaters, or blasphemous Heretics, and withal most Cruel
Persecutors of Christ's Church, yet in all this time we cannot find one Prince
disinherited or deposed by his Christian Subjects, for being of a contrary
profession, no, nor yet for his Tyrannical Persecutions: For they well knew how
God commanded them, To submit themselves to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, (1 Pet. 2.13. and to obey higher powers, (though Heathens, as then
they were) beause there is no power but of God, (Romans 13.1.) By whom Kings do
reign and Princes decree justice, Prove. 8.15. True Christians were numerous in
the days of Constantius and Valens, the Arian Emperors, and yet they never
attempted to dis-inherit or depose these Princes, notwithstanding their
Blasphemous Heresies. Many Christians well knew how Julian the Apostate,
notwithstanding his external profession of Christianity, was a Heathen in his
heart, long before he came to the Empire; and yet they never endeavored to
deprive him of his Birthright, but left all to the providence of God, whom
they assuredly knew always potent, and willing to protect his own inheritance,
the Catholic Church.

And to come nearer home, when Queen Elizabeth of glorious memory, came to the
Crown of England, the Protestants of this Kingdom were but a handful in respect
of the Papists, and though the Queen was already declared Illegitimate even by
her own Father, and this confirmed by an Act of Parliament, yet the Papists
endeavored not to depose or debar her from her Right for being of a contrary
Religion, but publicly owned her as their true and lawful Sovereign. Shall we
then show our selves worse than the Papists, or more mistrustful of God's
mercy? Is it not evident, that our sins are the cause why your Majesty has no
lawful Issue? Should not we then rather remove the cause by our serious
repentance, than preposterously endeavor to mend the matter, by adding fuel to
the flame, heaping one sin upon another, in robbing others of that which God
and Nature has bestowed upon them? Surely it is a Motto better beseeming a
Christian, Ruat Coelum, and fiat Justitia, than, Faciamus mala ut eveniant
bona. And it is the best Religion that gives every one his due, not that which
cannot subsist without depriving others of their undoubted Right.

But what do we intend to do, or shall we shake off all Conscience, and neither
regard our Loyalty to our Prince, nor yet our Oaths to God? Do not we
remember, how in taking the Oath of Allegiance, we have called God to testify
our candor and sincerity in pronouncing the ensuing words, I do swear from my
heart, that -- I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power
against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatso-ever, which shall be made against
his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such
Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise -- With what conscience then can we
subscribe or consent to that unadvised Bill, framed by some Members of the
House of Commons against his Royal Highness, after swearing so positively to
bear Faith and true Allegiance, not only to your Majesty, but also to your
Heirs and Successors; nay, to defend them to the uttermost of our power against
all attempts whatsoever, and swearing this with a Non-obstante to any Sentence
or Declaration, whether from the Pope or otherwise. For surely, the word
[otherwise] excludes all other Sententences and Declarations, as well as the
Popes; and consequently no less excludes this ill-digested Bill of the House of
Commons, than the roaring Bulls of the Sea of Rome: For (as St. Bernard says)
Nihil excipitur, ubi distinguitur nihil.

Oh! but our great Politicians have sound out a new Comment upon these words;
for, in effect, they tell us, that by Heirs here, we are to understand those
that are created such, not by God, but by the Parliament: And that although by
Birth one might claim a right to succeed in the Government, yet when the
Parliament declares to the contrary, and annulls this Claim, he is no longer
Heir to the Crown, and consequently the People are discharged from their Oath
of Allegiance to him. A Commentum indeed, and a Diabolical Fiction, nay, the
worst of all Jesuitical Equivocations: In the same Oath we call God to witness,
that we swear in the plain and common sense of the words, without any
Equivocation, Mental Reservation, or secret Evasion whatsoever. And after
swearing in this manner, how dare we make use of this so palpable an
Equivocation, and secret Evasion, which, if practiced, should render all Oaths
vain and ineffectual, and this purposely to color our own perfidious and
perjurious dealings? We cannot deny, but that by Heir, in the plain and vulgar,
or common sense of the Word, we understand such as by Blood (for Adoption is
not usual amongst us) have greatest right to succeed next in the Inheritance,
or to possess the same. How then can we; without grossly equivocating, interpret
it of Heirs made by Act of Parliament, at least while the Natural Heir is
alive, when we know it is an undoubted Maxim of the Law, Solus Deus Haeredem
facere potest, non homo? Do not we see, that the worst of Jesuits could at this
rate take the Oath of Allegiance, and glossing it after this new mode,
understand by your Majesty's Heirs and Successors, those that should be
declared such, not by King and Parliament, but by the Pope and See of Rome?
Nay, could not he further allege, in our Grand Machivilians new Dialect, that
although a King of England had right till then to Rule and Govern the Kingdom,
yet when the Pope declares to the contrary, and annuls this Right, he is no
longer lawful King of England, and consequently the People are, eo ipso,
absolved from their Oath of Allegiance to him? What can our cunning Politicians
allege against this, or can they show where the disparity lies, since it is
undeniable, that the Words of the Oath can as well bear this Jesuitical
Comment, as their own newfound Glosses? How then dare they deny the one, and
use the other?

Moreover, this at least must be granted: Whosoever is by Blood next Heir to
the Crown, we are by our Oath obliged before God to bear him Faith and true
Allegiance, nay, to defend him against all attempts, until he is dis-inherited
by Act of Parliament. Whatsoever therefore we do against him before this Act be
fully established, is a violation of our Oath. And since it is manifest, that
this unnatural and abortive Embrio, unluckily hatch^d by some overactive
members of the House of Commons, is directly against him, who by Blood is at
present the next Heir to the Imperial Crown of England; it necessarily ensues,
that the very attempt of Voting and passing this unparallelled Bill, makes the
Actors and Abberters thereof perjurers before God and the World.

To this perhaps our grand Politicians will answer, that the Duke is not Heir,
but only Heir Apparent, to the Crown, because (as Coke observed) none is Heir
before the death of his Ancestor, but only Heir Apparent, upon Littleton, p. 8.
And hence in their new Machiavilian Logic will enforce, that to dis-inherit
his Royal Highness, is not against the Oath of Allegiance, which speaks only
of Heirs, not of Heirs Apparent.

A ridiculous shift, and a most silly evasion; first, because we profess to
take the Oath, not in any by-sense of the Law, but in the plain and common
sense of the words, as all men do usually understand them: Wherefore although
the Law, by Heirs, had understood such as succeed to their deceased Ancestors,
yet fince this is not the plain and common sense of the word, and men do not
generally understand it so, it can never excuse us from a perjurious violation
of our Oath. 2dly. Because, by Cokes leave, this his observation is most
fallacious and impertinent: For it is a manifest contradiction for one to be
Heir Apparent, and not be Heir, as it is, to be a Learned man, and to be no
man; it being an undoubted maxim, Prius est esse, quam esse ^alc. And the
fallacy consists herein, that the word Heir, in its full and proper notion
signifies either an Heir Apparent, who is such during the life of his Ancestor,
of a^ Heir by right actually inheriting, which always presupposes his
Ancestors death, or at least his resignation: But Coke most improperly
restrains it to the latter, contrary to the common and usual manner of
speaking, not only of most men in general, but of God himself in his holy
Scriptures, where Heirs Apparent are absolutely and most commonly called Heirs;
as appears Genesis 15.3. and 2 Samuel 14.7 Mat. 21.38. Mark. 12.7. Luk 20.14. and
Gal. 4.1.

Since therefore it appears by so many passages of holy Scripture, that the
word, Heir, in its plain and common sense signifies an Heir Apparent, and that
we profess before God and the World, to take the Oath of Allegiance in the
plain and common sense of the words, upon what grounds can we understand here
an Heir actually inheriting, more than an Heir Apparent? Nay, since the words
of the Oath do signify as well an Heir Apparent, as an Heir actually
inheriting, what a Sophistical Equivocation it is, to understand it of the one,
exclusively of the other? Surely, it is no better, than if a Jesuit had Sworn
before a Magistrate to be true and Loyal to the Government of this Kingdom, he
in the interim meaning the Government, not of the King or Parliament, but of
his own Jesuitical Assemblies.

Let us not therefore flatter our selves, or foolishly think that after so
solemn an Oath, either, or both Houses of Par^iament can authorize us before
God to deprive our Prince of his undoubted right. And truly, I admire, if
they, who so much insist upon the liberties of freeborn English Subjects, will
ever acknowledge the Parliament, or any person whatsoever, to have this
arbitrary and despotical power, whereby the Axe is laid to the very root of
their greatest privileges. For if it be lawful for a prevailing faction in
Parliament to deprive their Prince of his undoubted Birthright, how can mean
Subjects have any security either of property or liberty?

And besides, since it is an undoubted maxim in Moral Affairs, Illud tantum
possumus, quod de jure possumus; and (as St. Austine says) Quod non potest
just, non potest justus: Upon what grounds should the House of Commons, nay
the whole Parliament, Claim this absolute power, I cannot find. For its
evident, that both Houses can challenge no other authority, but what they
derive from their Sovereign, and the diffusive body of the Subjects, whom they
represent: And no less manifest it is, that no King of England hitherto did
(nor, in my Opinion, could) give his Parliament any power to depose or
dis-inherit himself, or his Heir Apparent. And if your Majesty intends to grant
them any such thing at present, (which, I hope, your Princely wisdom will never
do) I remember your Royal Father gave the long Parliament greater power than he
was aware of, which they soon after used, or rather abused, against himself,
his Crown and Dignity. And therefore I say, Foelix quem faciunt paterna
pericula cautum. As for the diffusive Body of the Subjects, it is clear, they
neither would nor could grant the Parliament this extravagant Jurisdiction:
First, they would not do it; for who can be so credulous as to believe, that
any man so desirous of his liberty as English Subjects ever have been, would
grant the Parliament this Despotical power, uncontroulably to dispose of his
own, much less of his Princes Life or Estate. Secondly, How could the Subjects
grant the Parliament any power to deprive their Prince of his Birthright,
against all the Laws of God and Nature, since of God alone, and not of the
Subjects, the Prince deriveth his whole Right and Authority? For there is no
power but of God, Romans 13.1. By wh^m Kings do Reign, and Princes decree
justice, Prove. 8.15. How then can the People deprive their Prince of that,
which they have no power to give? As for my own particular, I must confess, I
could never understand, that the Imperial Crown of England was disposable by
Act of Parliament; I always thought the Liberties of English Subjects to be
grounded on surer Principles, and that no power in this Kingdom could lawfully
deprive us of our Privileges, or enthrall us to any servitude; whereas it is
evident, that if an Act of Parliament can thus transfer the Crown upon whom
they please, we can have no security, and may, according to such Maxims, first
or last be brought under the Tyranny of the French King, or any other Foreign
Prince, if ever the corruption or mercinariness of a Parliament should induce
them to comply with a King, that should have a mind to sell the Succession of
the Crown to a Foreigner, upon the security of an Act of Parliament; which,
according to the Tenets of these Politicians, can give a just Title.

But if we consult God's Divine Oracles, the Holy Scriptures, which undoubtedly
should be the chief Rule of all Humane actions, we shall never find any Example
or President to warrant these unparalled proceedings against his Royal
Highness, but may find several passages clearly against it? There we find how
King Ahab, though absolute Monarch of Israel, and consequently needed no
Parliament, but had himself alone as much power and authority over the Ten
Tribes of Israel, as your Majesty and Parliament together can claim, de jure,
over the Natives of England, and though this Monarch passionately coveted his
Subject Naboth's Vineyard, and was of himself little inclined to Justice, yet
he knew, that by the Laws of God and Nature it was altogether unlawful for him
to deprive Naboth of his Vineyard; but if he could not deprive him of a small
Vineyard, surely he could not rob him of his Birthright and whole Estate: And
if such an absolute Monarch could not do this to a mean Subject, by what color
of Justice can the House of Commons, nay, the whole Parliament, do it to their
undoubted Prince?

Certainly, if God was so much incensed against Esau for selling his Birth
right to his Brother Jacob, as the Apostle tells us, Heb. 12.17. how much
(think we) shall his fury be kindled against our proceedings, where not an
ordinary man, as Esau, loses his Birthright, but a most illustrious Prince,
by Birth and Lineal Descent of so many Glorious Kings; and loses not a
Birthright to a small Inheritance, but to several Kingdoms; and that not made
away by himself, but contrary to his will and all justice is robbed thereof by
a prevailing Faction of his Inferiors?

But if neither the unlawfulness of this desperate attempt, nor the heinous
guilt of perjury thereupon necessarily ensuing, can move or deter us from it,
yet let both our private and public dangers, and the sad effects inevitably
consequential thereunto, withdraw us from such violent proceedings. If it be
God's pleasure, that his Royal Highness shall survive your Sacred Majesty,
without having any Lawful Issue, we need not doubt, but he will endeavor to
recover his Right by force, if by fair means he cannot. And in this case we may
consider, how these three Kingdoms are most strangely divided into a numberless
number both of Religions and Interests; and it is a true saying, Omne Regnum in
se divisum desolabitur. And the strength of Protestants abroad is not very
great, and their will to help us, if need require, I am afraid is less. But the
Papists are very strong, and we may be sure the Pope will prevail with most of
them to help a Catholic Prince, deprived of his Right for his Religion; and,
no doubt, will not be backward himself in the Expedition. The French King
likewise (who is now in a manner at peace with all the World, and yet must of
necessity be somewhere in action, to give vent to the fiery Spirits of his
busy Subjects) will undoubtedly be glad of the opportunity, and will hold it a
glorious pretense to assist (though, I am afraid, most for his own ends) a
Catholic Prince, excluded from his Kingdom for the Catholic Faith. And
without all peradventure, his Royal Highness shall find enough even in these
three Kingdoms, not only of Papists, and other Malcontents, but also of the
best and most conscientious Protestants, as in duty bound, ready to take his
part in so just a quarrel.

How then shall we defend our selves, neither united at home, nor assisted from
abroad? or shall we expect to be miraculously delivered by God, of whose
protection and providence we show our selves now so mistrustful? Truly, I am
afraid, we shall rather be miraculously punished (like Sodom or Gomorrah) for
our heinous sins and daily multiplied transgressions, than any ways delivered
from the just judgments of God, unless we refrain in time from our desperate
proceedings, and no more endeavor with such manifest injustice to hinder the
order of Gods Providence, or debar our Prince, because of a different
persuasion, from his undoubted Birthright. For nothing does so much exasperate
the divine patience and longanimity, as to establish injustice by public
authority, and to make that seem lawful, which the Law of God declares
abominable. By what means then can we expect to escape his vengeance, if the
great Representative of the whole Nation, which should reform and redress all
transgressions of Gods Law, do attempt, contrary to the express word of God and
all justice, to rob their Prince of his undoubted right, and to make the
Imperial Crown of England, which since the beginning of Monarchy in this
Island, was never got but by Conquest or Inheritance, now to go by Election,
and the greatest Vote in the House of Commons; thereby making the King himself
for all ensuing Ages to be Tenant at will to every prevailing Faction in
Parliament? I say, Tenant at will; for nothing is more certain, than that by
whatsoever power or pretense the Parliament can depose the presumptive Heir, by
the same they may depose the actual possessor of the Crown; as the Rump
Parliament well understood. For the fundamental Reason, why a presumptive Heir
to the Crown may be dis-inherited or deposed either by King, Parliament, or
both together, is, because whatsoever is suspected to tend to the Subversion of
the Government, or of the true Religion here established by Law, is necessarily
to be removed, to secure the good and welfare of the people, according to the
Ancient saying: Salus populi suprema lex esto. But that this reason has no less
force against the Actual Possessor, than against the Presumptive Heir, of the
Crown, is a thing in it self so evident, that I think no man in his wits,
especially acquainted with the late intestine troubles and present temper of
our blind Zealots, can call it into question. For, what, if the King himself be
at any time thus suspected to endeavor the Subversion of the Government, is
there no remedy to be expected? Undoubtly their is, say our great Politicians,
and a good one too: For, our Omnipotent Parliament, ( i. e. themselves only and
their Emissaries, whose Religion is the Bellows of Rebellion) the grand Jury
of the whole Nation, and the public Inquest of all Grievances, is authorized
by God (when the King fails) to use their absolute Power against all manner of
persons, of what degree, or condition soever they be, to secure the good and
welfare of the people, because (as before said) Salus populi suprema lex esto.
And thus our grand Principle, as it is the fundamental Reason of deposing a
presumptive Heir to the Crown, so it is the ground work of all Anarchy and
Rebellion: It is the spring and source of all our last intestine troubles,
which overflowed the three Kingdoms with a deluge of crimson streams; nay, it
was the chief foundation, whereon the bloody Rumpers chiefly insisted in
Sacrificing our Royal Martyr, as a Tyrant Subverting the Government and true
Protestant Religion. But if a Prince so mild, so just, and so Religious, be
thus Cruelly Butchered upon these grounds by a prevailing Faction of his
Subjects, it is inconceivable to me, how can any King of England judge himself
otherwise than Tenant at will to every prevailing Faction in Parliament, or at
least think himself secure, while such principles are maintained by his
Subjects; especially if they be established by Law, as in effect they would
have been, had that abortive Embrio of the House of Commons received life
(which I hope will never happen) through the influence of Your Majesty's Royal
Assent.

Truly, our greatest comfort in this desperate juncture of Affairs, after the
unlimitted mercy of our gracious Savior, is, the assured confidence we always
repose in Your Majesty's Princely Wisdom and Courage, and in the Grave and
Mature Deliberations of the House of Lords, and of Your most Honorable
Privy Council; whose tried Loyalty both to Your Sacred Majesty, and to Your
Royal Father, assures us, that neither the pretense of establishing the true
Protestat Religion, (which of it self is sufficiently upheld by the mighty hand
of God) nor any consideration of Temporal gain or Worldly interest, can induce
them to decline in the least from their Sworn Allegiance and Fidelity to the
Royal Blood of your Glorious Father, who so magnanimously deposed his life in
defense of his Subjects Lives and Liberties, against the Anarchial
encroachments of the Factious Members of the House of Commons in the Rump
Parliament; whose footsteps some (I am afraid) no less Factious Members of this
present House of Commons seem exactly to follow; pretending, as the former did,
to secure and establish the true Protestant Religion, according to that
Machiavilian maxim, Quoties vis fallere plebem, finge Deum: Whereas it is
apparent, they do no more regard the establishing thereof, than the Rump
Parliament did in Oliver's days.

Yet this I say not (no, nor any thing else I have hitherto misliked or
reprehended) of the whole House of Commons, much less of the whole Parliament:
God forbid, I should think so ill of that Grave and Reverend Senate. I know
there are many true and well-meaning Loyalists in that Honorable House, who
bear the Faith and Allegiance, as well as the name and power of the Commons of
England. And I am of Opinion, that as the Faithful and Orthodox Bishops at the
Council of Arimine, through their over zealous desire of procuring the peace
and unity of Christ's Church, were by the specious Arguments of the Arians
inclined unawares to make a decree against the true Faith and Doctrine of
Christ; which unadvised decree, themselves upon second thoughts and more mature
deliberations, seeing the unexpected advantages their Adversaries took by their
well intended condescension, immediately recalled, and publicly protested
against it: So these Loyal and well meaning Members of the House of Commons,
through their excessive zeal of establishing the true Protestant Religion, were
by the plausible pretenses of some overactive Spirits, induced unwittingly to
Vote against that Allegiance and Fidelity they Swore not only to your Majesty,
but also to your Heirs and Successors; which over zealous Votes, I am fully
persuaded, these same members, after due reflection perceiving the fatal
consequences inevitably consequential to such proceedings, would have recalled,
had they sat longer, or will at their next Sessions recall them, as being
wholly repugnant not only to their Sworn Allegiance and Fidelity, but also to
Gods revealed will.

But as to this, time will best discover the reality of all their intentions;
and therefore I leave it to your Majesty's further consideration, humbly
submitting what I have said hitherto to your most Excellent Majesty, and to
your most Honorable Privy Council; by whom, I hope, these my Reasons and
Arguments shall be interpreted with that candor and sincerity, wherewith I
here present them unto your most Excellent Majesty. And so begging of the
Almighty to direct your Sacred Majesty in what is most advantageous to the
Glory of God, and to the Spirritual and temporal welfare of your Loyal
Subjects, I conclude this last of June, with my everlasting Prayer, Vivat and
Regnet in aeternum and ultra Carolus Secundus, nemini Secundus.


