Great and Good News from IRELAND: BEING A Full and True Account of the
Besieging and Taking The Famous Town of DROGHEDAH By Storm, WITH Five Thousand
Protestant Soldiers, Under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel DOUGLAS. To which
is added, An Impartial Relation of the Great and Signal Victory obtained over
the Irish Rebels, near the City of Dublin; the late King James heading of his
Army in Person, and of the Taking the very Horse on which he rid. ALSO The
Number of Men Killed, and Prisoners Taken, during the whole Action. 5.
June.1690.
Licensed J. Fraser, and Entered according to Odrer. 1690.

WE are just now come to Highlake, having been for some time Crusing before
Dublin, whither our Commander, Captain John Inwings, was ordered out-last Week,
taking their Majesty's Ship the Dover, Captain Whitaker Commander, along for
our Assistance; we Arrived at Dublin on Friday last, about Eleven at Night,
where we came to an Anchor, and sent our Boats to and again over the Bay all
that Night, and the next Day, who had the success to take several small
Vessels, with a considerable number of Prisoners and Protestants. Our taking of
so many Barks and other Vessels did so inrage the Irish that they planted a
strong Battery of Cannon upon one side of the Bay, and played very smartly upon
us all Saturday Morning, with no effect. Our Commander then ordered to weigh
Anchor, and coming nearer to them, returned upon them so hot Broad-sides,
notwithstanding all the place was full of Men, and though they had a Breast-Work
thrown up, which was in a great measure a security from our Shot; yet it was
very pleasant to see with what pannick Fear and Confusion they run, every one a
different way, in the greatest Confusion imaginable, making trial of every
appearance of a hiding place. The Horses run as confusedly and disorderly as
the Men, and being madded with noise and disorder trod doown many of their
Valiant Riders; for, though there were a great number of Horsemen (for they
feared our coming a shore) yet, in a little time not a Man was to be seen on
Horseback, save the late King James, endeavoring to put Courage into that
spiritless Crew; but all He could do was, with great difficulty, to get their
Guns carried off, and was forced to quit his Horse; upon which our Commander
immediately ordered the Boats on Shore, and heading them in Persen, took a
small Vessel in sight of several Troops of Dragoons, that had came fresh from
Dublin; But so soon as our Commander ordered the two Boats Crew a Shore, it was
pleasant to show how such as were ou Horseback did Scamper, and such as were on
Foot did climb upon the Rocks like so many Goats.

In fine, It not being safe for so small a Number of our Boats Crew to advance
far, our Commander was contented to bring some of their Horses on Board our
Ship, by the little Vessel he had taken in their Eye, for a token of their
Cowardice, and the English Courage, among which was the late King James's
Horse, which he had quitted) to Highlake, and set them on Shore. In all the
Action (though they lost considerable as we could visibly see, and Prisoners
after taken confirmed) we lost not one Man. The Protestants and Prisoners tell
us, That just before this Action fell out, advice came to King James at Dublin,
That the Famous Town of Droghedagh was lost; Duke Schomberg having Detached a
strong Party of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, consisting of 5000 Men, under the
Command of Lieutenant General Douglas, who investing the Place, immediately
ordered their Miners, and raised a strong Battery of whole and Demi Cannon,
which, in a little time, made so great a breach in the Old Wall, that our Men,
after having filled up the Ditch, entered the Town Pell-mell, and put all that
did not immediately lay down their Arms to the Sword.

All the Prisoners profess themselves willing and glad to be taken from the
Misery, they feared would come upon them. By which you may judge what may be
expected if our King were once over.

London, Printed for T. Rogers in Fleet Street, 1690.


