THE GREAT CASE PUT HOME In some modest Queries, Humbly Proposed and Tendered to
Consideration, By a true Lover of the Protestant Religion And English Loyalty.

(...). Eccles. 11.2. Set thy heart aright, and constantly endure, and make not
haste in time of trouble.

6. Believe in the Lord, and he will help thee; order thy way aright, and trust
in him.

7. Ye that fear the Lord, wait for his mercy, and go not aside lest ye fall.

Printed Anno Dom. 1681.

TO THE READER.
READER,
I know, That what I am now going upon is a Subject be set with many and great
Prejudices; and such peradventure are the Heates and Animosities of some, that
calm Reason will hardly find admittance. However, upon this Crisis, (being not
sure, whether ever there may be an opportunity again) in the silence of others
more Able, I have adventured to express my honest thoughts (such, I am sure,
they are in my Intendment) whatever Censure they may undergo from Biassed
persons, who Govern themselves by Interest or Humor, by Fears and Jealousies,
in those Things, wherein the Concerns of the Government and Nation require the
weightiest Consideration, and the cleerest Eviction of Reason and Argument.

Upon this account, I have thought fit to set forth this small Tract by way of
Queries: it being a thing, would not so much become my Meanness, to be
Positive. Only the Two first Things, which I take for granted, I suppose no
honest Englishman or true Protestant will deny me. As to the things debated, I
have so set them down by Cross Questions, as they say Pro and Con, with that
Evenness and Impartiality, that neither side can justly complain of me: and yet
with that due Submission and Deference, that I leave the Decision of them,
where I ought, at the feet of my Superiors. They are such Questions too,
mostly of that comprehensiveness, that they will take-in the whole State, and
may be both Enlarged in Themselves, and Extended also to all the minutest
particularities of the Case. I could have brought many more; but These being
the Principal and most Material, the Resolution and Issue of these will
overruled all Others of the like kind.

I must not leave this without a sincere Protestation, that I have not put Pen
to Paper upon any sinister End or Design; but, with an upright Conscience
toward God and toward Men, I have, according to my weakness, discharged my
mind, in an humble sense rf that Duty and Regard, I owe to all my Governors,
(of whom the KING is supreme,) and out of a hearty desire of my Countries Weal.

Farewell.

THE GREAT CASE PUT HOME.
THe CASE of his R. H. being such as will be made an Eternal Obstruction to His
Majesty's Affairs, and such as never will by Declamation and Harangue, but by
cool Debate and sober Reason be determined; I do in all humility propose that
there are some things in the Case, that must be granted, others that may be
debated.

The Things to be Granted are these two,

I. That the D. of Y. has by proximity of Blood an undoubted Natural Right to
inherit and succeed, if the King (whom God long preserve) should die without
Issue; this being an Hereditary, not an Elective Kingdom.

A Quaery arising from hence is; Positive Laws, made or to be made, do or may,
regulate, limit and modify, or null and make void a Natural Right, such as
Succession in an Hereditary Kingdom is a Main one?

II. That true Christian Religion, at least the Protestant Religion, as it has
here been professed in England, does not pretend to preclude, debar or hinder the
Right of Government, or so much as allow Subjects upon the account of Religion
to intermeddle; but presses Obedience to all lawful Governors, whatever the
Persons be.

The Quaery from hence will be, Religion in any Nation, at least how far the
Protestant Religion in This, being so interwoven with the Government as it is,
may, in case of a Persecution to arise from a Successor, be concerned in
providing aforehand for its own security?

The Things, which may fall under Debate, are such as these.

I. Whether an Heir of the Crown may not, whilst a Subject, by some
Misdemeanor forfeit that Right, which Nature has placed in him, to the Laws of
the Country? and whether the D. of Y. has not so done, particularly by having
(as it is strongly presumed he has) reconciled himself to the Church of Rome?

To this I ask; Whether the Heir of the Crown his being a Papist (if really
such) at any Rate, do in Law cause a Forfeiture of his Right? and then, Whether
a Presumtive Crime (be it what it will) can by Law take away the Right of any
Subjects Estate? and Whether it be not hard measure for a Prince to be denied
the common right of every Subject, when impleaded as a Criminal? which is, that
Sentence do not pass upon him, much less be put in Execution against him, till
he be Cited and summoned to appear and answer for himself, or be otherwise
Convicted by due course of Law?

II. Whether the very Constitution of the English Laws, as they now stand, do
not in the Intent and Purport of them, exclude a Popish Successor, as One, who
it is presumed neither Will nor Can execute them? seeing they do not allow a
Papist to be so much as a Justice of Peace, a Churchwarden, or a Constable?

To this I make these Demands,

Whether there be not a vast difference betwixt an Inferior Magistrate, whose
Place is a mere Trust, and a Sovereign invested into his Office by Right of
Birth? Whether a Distrust of Him, being still but matter of Presumption, ought
to extinguish such a Right? and Whosher that very Distrust too may not be
satisfied by Limitations and Concessions agreed upon with the Person concerned
in the Succession? and Whether the Word, Honor and Oath of such a Person, ought
not among Christians to be locked upon as sufficient grounds of Belief and
Assurance? as it is usual in other Countries; where different Religions are
professed; it being a thing hardly practicable to; lay any other Ties upon a
Sovereign, or to find out any Expedient of another nature, that may be
consistent with Majesty.

III. Whether (without any consideration of Law) the bare Foresight of great
Inconveniences or public Mischiefs, which may possibly or probably, nay must
necessarily, and certainly will befall a People upon the succession of the Right
Heir into the Government, be not a warrantable reason for his Exclusion, to lay
Him aside as if he were not, and to set up Another in His stead?

Let another like Question be put;

If a Christian Prince coming rightfully to the Throne, and having for some
time quietly sat therein, should afterward Apostatize from his Religion, and
persecute the Professors of it: Whether such an one may by Scripture or Law be
expelled and turned out of his Possession? and, Whether the Case of Exclusion
and Expulsion be not much-what the same? and, Whether the Humor of some amongst
Us may not be too like that of the Israelites, when for fear of Oppression they
Revolted from the Successor to an Usurper?

IV. Whether the Examples of our Forefathers, who have upon slighter occasions
made several Breaches and Interruptions in the Succession, are not a good
Warrant for Us at this time, who ly under such dismal and dreadful
apprehensions, to do the like? and Whether this will not be a legal Exclusion,
which is fortified and confirmed by so many Precedents, since the Laws
themselves are overruled and determined by Custom and Practice?

To which may be rejoined;

Whether it were in the power of our Forefathers, or be now in Ours by any Law
(for Id possumus, quod Jure possumus) to alter that form or frame of
Government, to which we are Born and Sworn Subjects, and of which the
Succession is a main essential Point? and by consequence, Whether it was not in
them Illegal to lay aside at any time the rightful Successor? and Whether our
following their Example in doing things Unlawful, can justify the Illegality
of our actings? Further, though the Body of the Nation might be excused in
their submission to such as were only de facto Kings, and were not de jure so;
yet Whether Those, who abetted and assisted such Persons to get into the
Throne, and deserted and opposed the Lawful Heirs, were not highly Guilty; as
in the case of King Stephen and Maud the Empress? And lastly, However Practice
may regulate the Law in things Indifferent, and in matters of smaller Alloy;
yet Whether an unlawful Practice be not in it self a plain downright violation
of Law?

V. Whether, upon the whole, the Exclusion of the D. together with the Union of
the Protestants, be not the most effectual, if not the only Means of securing
our Religion, and keeping out Popery? and consequently in our Case, there being
(as We say) no other Expedient, Whether absolute invincible Necessity, which
knows no Law, does not enforce us by any means to preserve our selves?

To this may be returned;

If the King, beside his Brotherly Affection, could be satisfied in Law and
Conscience (seeing that an Hereditary Kingdom is Feodum non alienabile, as the
Civilians term it) to comply with, and to give his consent to the Excluding
Bill; yet, Whether the Exclusion of the D. will not probably draw as ill
Consequents after it, and involve the Nation in as great Hazards, as the
Admission of him would possibly do? and, Whether the Uniting of Protestants (if
it be only into Immunities, and not into methods of Worship) be not in effect
to establish and legalize Schism in all its divisions; and by providing a
secure shelter for Romish Priests and Emissaries among our Sects (where no Test
shall reach them) it will not prove a very likely Means, in time, of betraying
us to Popery? most of those Sects in these late licentious Times, having been
Influenced and Principled by that Party, who have made the greatest Advantages
to their own Hopes from our Divisions: which by such a Comprehension, will be
so far from being United to Us, or among Themselves, that they will be
Established apart and severally by Law, and pass in short time for the most
considerable part of the National Religion? And as to Necessity, the last
Refuge; Whether, let our Circumstances be what they will, there can be any
necessity laid upon any man to Sin, to do Evil? and though Self-preservation be
the great principle of Nature, whether it ought to be indeavored by unlawful
indirect means; since our Savior tells us, that He that will save his life, in
that manner, shall loose it? and Whether the Apostles Rule in all dubious and
hazardous Cases, be not best and safest for Christians to follow, Not to do
evil, that good may come thereof?

The Sum of All is this;

That this Case of Succession, though it seem directly to cast an evil Aspect
upon Religion and the Protestant Cause amongst us, yet really and ultimately it
resolves it self into a Civil Grieuance, as that which may touch Life, Liberty,
Property, etc. by bringing in Arbitrary Power along with it, which Superstition
is too apt to do. Wherefore in were to be Wished, That some of the most Learned
in both Faculties of Law and Divinity might be consulted with, and required to
give their Judgment. For if Henry the Eighth, who was not overcurious to
govern himself by other men's Opinion and Advice, did think fit to propose the
Divorce of the Queen, who had been his Brothers Wife, to several Universities,
etc. and not to determine the matter without such a Consultation: How much more
will it become the Wisdom of a Nation to use the like leasurely and tender Care
in so Weighty a matter as the disabling the Inheritance of the Crown may prove?

May a merciful God, whose immediate Interposal alone can heal our Distempers,
and rescue us from those Dangers, we are too forward to bring upon our selves,
direct and prosper the Public Counsels, and may he ever preserve our Gracious
Sovereign, whose Life will be our best Security: and may We, as becomes Loyal
and dutiful Subjects, endeavor to make his Life Comfortable (that it may be
Long) by supplying proportionable Aids to our Necessities at Home, and by
giving suitable Encouragements to our Alliances abroad: which as it will be for
His Majesty's Honor, so will it be no less for Our own present Security.

FINIS.

