AN ADMONITION FOR THE Fifth of NOVEMBER.
Let us search, and try our Ways, and turn again unto the Lord.
DID one know how to retrieve that open Simplicity, and downright Honesty,
which was once the Character and Glory of the English Nation, one would think
nothing too much to do or suffer, in order to it.

We have lost our Innocence, and with it our Honor, and what have we got in
Exchange? Conscience violated for the sake of the Church, and the Church still
in Danger! Millions expended to secure our Property; and Property still
precarious, at the Mercy of Men in Red, both those within, and those without
St. Stephen's Chapel! The Lives of Englishmen prodigally thrown away, to
Enslave us under the Name of Liberty! And all that is dear to us Temporal and
Eternal, sacrificed to Foreigners in the Service of our Enemies, to bind us
down for ever, with the Chains of our own making! What worse could have
befallen us, had the Gunpowder-Treason took Effect, than has followed from the
pretended Deliverance we tack to it? -- Our King and Royal Family had perished
by the Hands of Miscreants, not by our own: Our Laws had been violated by
professed Adversaries, not tamely given up by our selves into the Hands of
treacherous Friends! Our Nobility had perished gloriously with their Prince in
a common Ruin; not meanly lived upon the Surrender of their Privileges and
Honor, not degraded themselves by submitting to the Scum of Foreign Countries.

The English Commoners had died Freemen; not basely betrayed their Liberties
and their Country for a Share in the Booty. Providence was pleased to protect
us, and deliver us from the former Attempt by the Wisdom of its Vicegerent,
our Lawful King: But when we took the Matter into our own Hand, and impiously
blasphemed the Righteous God, by ascribing our Wickedness to his Providence, we
were left to the Fruits of our own Folly: We feel the sad Effects, and have
worse to fear, till we be no more a Nation, but become an exhausted Province to
a petty Dukedom, and the Scorn of the whole Earth.

A melancholy Subject! But if we have any sense of Religion left; if under a
Cry of Moderation, and Liberty of Conscience, the Hardships put upon the
Reverend Clergy, obliged to Swear or Starve, and the inconsistent Oaths, which
Men of no Conscience forced upon them that once had some; if these Measures
have not deprived us of the Sense of Good and Evil, Religion and Moral Honesty,
the Danger of our immortal Souls is a Consideration of much greater
Consequence, than any temporal Calamity, be it what it may; nor is there indeed
so sure a Way of averting, or removing temporal Evils, or at least making them
turn to our Advantage, as by a speedy and real Repentance. If we are sensible
of our Sins, and forsake them, who can tell but God will yet be gracious to us,
as a Nation? To be sure he will pardon every particular Person who thus repents.

But to wipe our Mouths, and say we have done no Wickedness, is very distant
from Repentance: To profess with our Lips what our Heart cannot but condemn; to
do it in the House of God, and in our very Addresses to him; to ascribe to the
God of Holiness and essential Justice, what is abhorrent to his Nature; and
solemnly to thank him for prosperous Wickedness, is a most outrageous
Profanation. I will not, I cannot aggravate it; may it never be remembered but
in a penitent Way; and therefore may it never be again repeated.

To which Purpose, let me entreat the Reverend Clergy [who are Examples to
their Flocks] seriously to read over the Service for the Fifth of November in
private, before they come to read it in the House of God; and in his Name, and
for his sake and their own, I beg them to consider, how opposite it is to his
essential Attributes; how inconsistent with the Principles and Professions os
many of them; and how fatal such profane and hypocritical Addresses must be to
the Souls of those who make them. -- -- One would be glad to know, what Season
we refer to by the Time that afflicted us. It cannot be the Reigns of King
Charles and King James the Second, in which Trade flourished; we enjoyed Peace
and Plenty; our Churches were better frequented than they have been since; our
Clergy in higher Reputation; Religion more reverenced and more at Heart; the
few that had some Cause to complain, were treated in a more humane and generous
Manner, than the many who have suffered since. OATS, whose Character every
body knows, was whipped severely, it is true; but not to Death. Seven Bishops
were confined for a while in the Tower, and were allowed a speedy and fair
Trial; but they were not Deprived, as five of those very Bishops were, by their
pretended Deliverer, and not so much as allowed a small Subsistence. The
Magdalen College Business was much outdone by the many Nonjurors left to starve
with their Wives and Children. There is nothing in King James's Reign parallel
to the GLENCOE MASSACRE; nor to the Desolation of the Church of Scotland; a
Prelude to that of England. For what is it then that we are to offer up our
unfeigned Thanks? What is it, what can it be, that fills our Hearts with Joy
and Gladness, when we remember the Revolution? Is it, that our Hereditary
Monarchy was changed into an Elective? That we drove away our native and lawful
Princes, endued with an inborn Hereditary Clemency, to set up a FOREIGN RACE,
who neither understand our Laws nor Constitution, nor so much as our Language?
Is it, that our once groundless and unreasonable Fears, are really brought upon
us by the unrighteous Methods we took to be rid of them? For Popery can never
obtain in this Island, but Atheism and Irreligion not only may, but do. Do we
rejoice, that our Plenty and Peace are exchanged for War and Misery? That the
Nation is involved in a Debt, which, in the Way we are, must inevitably sink
it? That Multitudes of Families are reduced to extreme Necessity, that the
Betrayers of their Country may enrich themselves with its Spoils? Do we who
were so afraid of suffering any thing for Conscience sake, (that we chose
Iniquity rather than Affliction) rejoice that instead of a few Martyrs for the
Truth (a Trial we may safely say we should never have been put to by King
James) so many Thousand Lives and Souls have perished in an unjust and
ambitious War? Do we presume to thank God for a Deliverance from those
Grievances we complained of in our Petition of Right, at a Time when we labor
under the same, or greater, in Consequence of that pretended Deliverance:
Grievances which are not lessened, but increased, by being bound upon us by
those who call themselves our Representatives; the Corruption of a Parliament
being the greatest of all Grievances, as depriving us of all peaceable Means of
Redress, changing and suspending our Laws, and even destroying our
Constitution, as their Managers are pleased to direct. Tyranny is hateful from
whatever Hand it proceeds; it is not the better, but the worse for being
Protestant; the Insult is greater, and the Indignation ought to be so, when we
see our selves oppressed by those who declare the loudest against Oppressions,
and deprived of our Rights and Liberties, by those who pretended to defend
them. Providence is always just and wise, even when the Success does not answer
our Expectation; but we are neither, if we judge by Events. Time has convinced
us of our Want of Wisdom, it were happy for us, had we as lively a Sense of our
Injustice. With what Face can we speak to an All-knowing God of our extreme
Dangers; since they who raised the Alarm, and made the loudest Noise with their
Fears, allow, now their Turn is served, that the Stories which gave us those
Apprehensions, were most of them Forgeries; and the real Dangers were brought
upon us by the treacherous Counsels of the Men, whom OUR PRETENDED DELIVERER
afterward employed and rewarded for betraying their too honest and credulous
Master?

Had we then a Foreigner for our L -- d and King? one who kept up, not a
chimerical, but a real separate Interest from ours; who had other Subjects and
Dominions more beloved, amongst whom our Treasure was exhausted? No; K. James
made his Subjects rich as well as himself, and lost his Crown because he would
not enter into Alliances to the Detriment of his own People. If we had a
Standing Army, it did not consist of FOREIGN MERCENARY TROOPS, but of natural
born Subjects. Foreign Soldiers were not maintained at home, whilst our
Countrymen were sent abroad to perish in our Neighbors Quarrels. A French
League, was then only pretended; we are bound in it now with a Vengeance, to
the utter Ruin of our Trade; and tamely contribute to the exorbitant Power both
of France and Germany! The design of our Enemies did indeed succeed; SUNDERLAND
and others had the Reward of betraying their Country as well as their Prince
and Benefactor: The Confederates also had theirs, in drawing us in to bear the
Expense and Burden of their Quarrels. Whatever Attempts were made, or
pretended to be made formerly by our Enemies, to bereave us of our Religion and
Laws, sure I am the Nation feels by sad Experience, that we are not at present
delivered from such sort of Attempts, which are but too likely to succeed in
the Hands of our PRETENDED FRIENDS.

But to wave Facts and come to Principles. The Doctrine of the Cross, or
Patient Submission to our Lawful Sovereign, when unlawfully oppressed, without
daring to resist (though it should be in our Power to do it succesfully,) lest we
incur Damnation; as it is a Christian Doctrine, in fpite of all the Sophistry
and Scurrility of profane Wits, the Gates of Hell can never prevail against it.
The Reformed Church of England is peculiarly distinguished from other MODERN,
CHURCHES, (as yet under Corruption, or more imperfectly reformed) by teaching
and inculcating this Doctrine, as ancient as Christianity it self. And though
some of her Members, like St. Peter, may have fallen through Weakness, and
violent Temptations, it is to be hoped they will, like him, recover themselves,
and rather part with their Transgressions than their Principles. For alas! who
can say, I am free from Sin? The Weakness of human Nature renders us Objects of
the divine Compassion and mutual Forbearance. But it is the Property of Devils,
and those whom they have hardened, to persist in their Iniquity, and add Sin to
Sin.

Now that Resistance was used at the REVOLUTION, cannot well be denied; it was
contended for by the famous Managers, and is gloried in by the greatest
Advocates of the Revolution. And whatever Schemes they may proceed upon,
whatever Arguments they may urge in their own Defense, who would not be thought
to relinquish their Passive Principles, by complying, or if they please,
submitting to what was tranfacted by other Hands; though the learned may think
themselves able, it is certain the common People, even the more intelligent Part
of the Congregation, know not how to reconcile that Doctrine with the Prayers
for the 5th of November. Can we think it unlawful to resist King James in
private among our Friends, and thank God that we had no Hand in dethroning him;
and yet in public bless God for the safe Arrival of the Man who did it, and
for making (as we say) all Opposition fall before him, till he by the
Assistance of rebellious Subjects had possessed himself of our lawful
Sovereign's Throne, and so became our King and Governor. Is not this as solemn
an Approbation of the Revolution, and all the Methods that were taken to
accomplish it, as can be made; and such as is utterly inconsistent with the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience? Let us lay our Hands upon our Hearts, and
seriously consider, what Service our Excuses and Evasions will do us at the
dreadful Tribunal of the righteous God. Can we excuse our selves from being
Partakers at least in other Men's Sins, and from giving Countenance and
Encouragement to a Wickedness, which we profess to abhor? But if Principles of
Religion will not persuade us to juster Measures; if the Honor of our Church
and Nation has no Effect upon us; let us at least regard our mere temporal
Interest, which drew us at first into the Snare; and consider, how the just
Judgment of God has pursued us in our own Way, and punished us by our very
iniquity. Do but allow Atheism, Arianism, etc. as bad as Popery, and we must
needs own it is too notorious to be denied, that the very Evils we were at a
Distance afraid of, are by our Methods of Prevention brought upon us. Our
Impatience would not bear any thing from our Lawful Prince, to whom we owed
Subjection; and we tamely bear every thing from an Us -- r, whom in Duty,
Honor, and Interest, we are obliged to oppose. The Necessity we formerly
pretended in Breach of the Laws, our Oaths and Duty, is now real and urgent,
and the Measures it puts us upon, though ever so extraordinary, are even Lawful
too, inasmuch as they are entered on, in our own Just and necessary Defense,
against Thieves and Robbers, against unlawful Usurpation. We have all the
Reason in the World to throw off our Stupidity and Cowardice, and Manfully to
exert our selves; to deliver our Church and Nation from impending Ruin, our
selves and our Posterity from those Evils, which are so much the more shameful
and intolerable, in that we brought them by our Transgressions, upon our own
Heads: Now is there any Way to escape, but by returning to our Duty to God and
the King.

FINIS.

