The REMARKABLE SAYINGS, APOTHEGMS AND MAXIMS OF THE Eastern Nations;
Abstracted and translated out of their Books, written in the Arabian, Persian
and Turkish Language: With REMARKS. By Monsieur Galland, who lived many Years
in those Countries.

Translated out of French.

London, Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane; and
William Lindsey, at the Angel in Chancery Lane. 1695.

THE PREFACE.
THIS Book is divided into two Parts; the first contains the remarkable and
witty Sayings of the Eastern Nations, and the second their Maxims. The Reader,
who is in any measure acquainted with the Works of the Ancients, will easily
observe, that the first Title is the Interpretation of that of Apothegms, which
Plutarch gave to his Collection of the Remarkable Sayings of the Ancient Kings,
and Captains, both Greeks and Romans: and Valerius Maximus intitles his Dicta
memoratu digna, which doubtless is almost the same.

The Design of Plutarch, as he says himself in his Dedication to the Emperor
Trajan, was to show what was the Genius of those Great Men he speaks of; and
mine is to set forth both the Genius and Character of the Eastern Nations: For
as the Apothegms discover the Solidity of Judgment and Vprightness of Heart,
and the witty Sayings and Repartees, the Vivacity and Subtilty of Wit, the
Reader may perhaps be convinced by the perusing of this Book, that the Eastern
Nations come nothing short of the Western in Wit and Judgment.

Under the Name of Eastern People, I include not only the Arabians and
Persians, but also the Turks and Tartars, and almost all the other Nations of
Asia, to the Borders of China, both Mahometans and Pagans. The Sayings of
Ginghiz-khan, and Oghtai-khan, which I have related, prove that the Turks and
Tartars, who are the same with the Scythians, have still to this day almost the
same Genius and Customs mentioned by Quintus Curtius, and other ancient
Writers. I attribute the Maxims, which make the second Part of this Work, to
all those Nations, because they are abstracted not only from the Books of the
Arabians, but also from those of the Persians and Turks, tho there may be some
difference amongst them, the Authors following the particular Genius of their
own Country.

I do not design to collect all the remarkable or witty Sayings of the Eastern
Nations, no more than Plutarch or Valerius Maximus did those of the Greek and
Roman; that Undertaking would be too great: but if this Collection be kindly
received, I shall publish a second Volume, having several other Original Pieces
to peruse.

The Arabian, Persian and Turkish Books which I have read, or the Observations
that I made my self while I traveled into those Countries, have furnished me
with the Remarks that I thought necessary for the understanding of this Work. I
have made use of them specially to denote the Times wherein the Caliphs,
Sultans, and other Princes whom I mention, lived; and to make it the more easy
and plain, have reduced the Years of the Hegira to the Years of the Nativity of
Jesus Christ.

I have abstracted this Work, partly from printed Books, and partly from
Manuscripts: the Books are the History of the Caliphs by Elmacinus, the History
of the Dynasties by Alvu-lfarage, both in Arabic; and the Gulistan, which is a
Work of Saadi in Persian.

The Manuscripts are the Baharistan of Giami in Persian, writ after the Model
of the Gulistan; the Instruction of a King of Mazanderan to his Son in Persian,
of which I give a pretty large Account in my Remarks; the Abridgment of the
Mohammedan History written in Persian, under the Title of select History,
translated into the Turkish Language; another Abridgment of the same Story,
written also in Persian by Ommia Jahia Cazbin; the History of Ginghiz-khan in
Persian, by Mirkhond, which makes part of his general History, containing six
Volumes in Folio; the History in Persian of Schahroch Son of Tamerlan, and of
his Successors, by Abdurrizzac Effendi; the universal History of Mehemmed Lari
in Persian, of which there is a Translation in the King's Library; the O^^oman
History since Sultan Osman to Sultan Selim the first inclusively, written by
Cogia Effendi, named otherwise Saad-eddin, Son of a Favorite of the said
Selim; the History of the Turkish Poets by Letifi, who lived in the Reign of
Sultan Soliman; and lastly a Collection of witty Sayings and Jests in Turkish,
amongst which I have chosen those that seemed to me really witty, and that were
not against Morals or good Manners.

The Maxims are extracted out of those that Orpenius and Golius have
promiscuously published with the Arabic Proverbs, out of two Manuscripts, one
that I brought with me from Constantinople, and the other, which is to be found
in the Library of the late Monsieur Thevenot. I have also made use of the
Indian Tables of Bidpai, written in Turkish and Persian, and of several other
Books of Morals, both Arabian, Turkish and Persian, in Prose and in Verse.

I could enlarge my self upon the Natural Parts of the Eastern Nations; but I
leave it to the Reader to judge himself, if they deserve the hard Name of
Barbarous, which some People have bestowed upon them; and if they have not as
much right to lay Claim to Wit and Judgment as any Nation of Europe.

ADVERTISEMENT.
MIscellanea: Or, a choice Collection of Wise and Ingenious Sayings, etc. of
Princes, Philosophers, Statesmen, Courtiers, and others; out of several Ancient
and Modern Authors: For the pleasurable Entertainment of the Nobility and
Gentry of both Sexes. By G. M. Printed for William Lindsey, at the Angel near
Lincoln's Inn in Chancery Lane.

The Remarkable Sayings, Apothegms and Maxims of the Eastern Nations; with
Observations upon them.
1. A Mohammedan consulted Aischeh, one of Mahomet's Wives, asking her Advice
about the Conduct of his Life: Aischeh answered; Acknowledge God, command your
Tongue, refrain your Anger, get Knowledge, stand firm in your Religion, abstain
from Evil, converse with good People, cover the Faults of your Neighbor,
assist the Poor with your Alms, and expect Eternity for your Reward.

Observation. According to the Mohammedan Histories, Mahomet had fourteen Wives,
amongst whom was this Aischeh, Daughter to Aboubekir, the first Successor of
Mahomet. She lived nine Years with him, and died a long time after under the
Reign of Caliph Maavia, she being then 65 Years old.

2. Hormouzan, whom the King of Persia had entrusted with the Government of
Schouschter, the Capital City of the Province of Khousistan, fought the Arabs
seventy times, when they conquered the Kingdom of Persia. But at last the Arabs
took him Prisoner, and brought him to Omar, the second Successor of Mahomet,
who ordered him to be put to death. Before his Execution, Hormouzan called for
Drink, but the Terror of Death had so much seized upon him, that he had not the
Strength to drink the Water that was brought him. Whereupon Omar bid him take
Heart, for he had nothing to fear till he had drank; but seeing he drunk not,
he commanded him to be beheaded. How, cried Hormouzan, you have given me my
Pardon, and don't you keep your word? Omar being surpised, and asking how he
understood it? You have said, answered the Prisoner, I had nothing to fear till
I had drank, and I have not drank yet. The Company confessed Hormouzan was in
the right, and Omar granted him his Life.

Observations. It has been observed before me, that Schouschter is the ancient
Suza, where the Kings of Persia used to winter, it being situated in a very
warm Climate, as well as the whole Province of Khousistan, which is still one
of the Provinces of the Kingdom of Persia, bordering to the West, on the
Persian Gulf.

(...) forgot the gracious Pardon of Omar, and was one of his Murderers.

3. Taher, the Founder of the Empire of the Taherians, in the Province of
Khorassan, had killed the Calife Emin, and by that Murder raised Mamoun, Emin's
Brother, to the same Dignity. But Mamoun who trusted not Taher, notwithstanding
he was so much beholden to him, sent him into Khorassan as his Governor, in
order to remove him from Court. Whilst he was in that Station, Mamoun declared
for Calife after him Ali Riza, the 8th amongst the 12 Imams Successors of Ali,
and sent him into Khorassan; where Taher performed the Ceremony of the
Coronation in the City of Merou, and taking the Oath to him, he said, My
Right Hand has raised Mamoun, and my Left pays the same Duty to you. Ali Riza
answered, The Left Hand that raises an Imam to the Throne, may be called the
Right.

Observations. This Action of Taher, and the Murder of Calife Emin, gave
occasion to the calling him Two-handed. He died in the Year of the Hegyra 210.
that is, 825 of our Lord; having taken the Title of King sometime before his
Death.

The Saying of Ali Riza is grounded upon this, that being Ali's Issue, and
consequently Mahomet's Offspring, by reason of Fatima Daughter to Mahomet,
whom Ali had married, he thought himself worthier of the Calif^ship than
Mamoun, and his Predecessors; whom he, and all the Abettors of Ali, looked upon
as Usurpers. His Authority as Calife, was acknowledged, and Money coined with
his Name: but his Power, that was then equal to that of Mamoun, lasted only
about two Years; for Mamoun repenting of his Gift, caused him to be poisoned at
Tous in K^orassan, where he died. After his Death, his Corpse was carried and
buried in a Place called Senabad, belonging to the same Town; where a Tomb was
erected for him. Since that time, the Mohammedan Superstition has drawn thither
such vast Numbers of People, that a Town has been built there, with the Name of
Mesched, signifying the Tomb of a Person that has been put to Death, or rather
of a Martyr, because the Mahometans look upon Ali Riza as such. For amongst
them, those that are put to Death by the Prince's Command, or killed in the
War, are called Martyrs, and believed to be such. The Devotion at the Tomb of
Ali Riza does still continue, and the Mohammedan Pilgrims do yet resort thither;
especially those of Khorassan, and the Neighboring Provinces.

Khorassan, of which mention will be yet made in this Book, is a great
Province, or rather a considerable Kingdom, on this Side the River Oxus;
comprehending the Provinces of Ariana, Bactriana, and the Paropamisades of the
Ancient: The Vzbees are at this time Masters of that Kingdom, together with
that of Mave^amahar; that is, of the Transoxiana or Sogdiana; of which
Samarcand, named by Q. Curtius Maracande, is the Capital.

4. Jacoub the Son of Leits, who having seized upon the City of Sistan, and the
Dominions depending upon it, had made himself Sovereign, entered the Province
of Khorassan to subdue it, and went to attack Mehemmed, the 5th Successor of
Taher, in the Town of Nisabor, which he had chosen for the Capital of his
Kingdom. Mehemmed hearing of his Approach, sent to assure him that he was ready
to submit if he brought Letters with the Seal of the Calife; but that he was
very much surprised he should come against him in an hostile Manner, without
Order. Jacoub, who acknowledged not the Authority of the Calife, drew his
Scimiter out of the Scabbard, saying, Here Is my Order; and so entered Nisabor:
where he made Mehemmed Prisoner, with 160 Persons more of his Family, and sent
them to the Town of Sistan under a strong Guard.

Observation. Leits, the Father of Jacoub, of whom we speak here, was called
Leits Saftar; that is, the Copper-Merchant; because of his Profession: and from
that Name Saffar, Jacoub, together with his Brother Amrou, and Mehemmed Son to
Taher, who ran after him, were surnamed Saffarans. Jacoub, from his Youth, had
such a strong Inclination to bear Arms, that his Father endeavored in vain to
bind him to his Trade, and was forced to leave him to himself. When he was
Master of his own Actions, he turned Highway-Man; but was still so honest, as
to leave something to those he robbed. Upon a time he broke into the Treasury
of Dirhem, Governor of Sistan for the Calife; and in the Dark, laying his Hand
upon something that glittered, he put what he laid hold of into his Mouth,
believing it was precious Stones: but finding it was Salt, he went out without
carrying any thing away. The next day the Governor hearing that his Treasury
had been broken up, and nothing diminished, made a Proclamation that the Robber
might safely discover himself, and that he should not only not be punished, but
that he would do all he could to oblige him. Upon this, Jacoub appeared, and
the Governor asking him, why he carried nothing away? Jacoub told him this
Story: and added, I thought I was become your Friend by eating of your Salt;
and that by the Laws of Friendship, I was not allowed to diminish any thing
belonging to you. Dirhem gave him some Employment; which he discharged with so
much Valor and Conduct, that at last by degrees, he made him General of his
Army. But after the Death of Dirhem, Jacoub laying hold of his Power, expelled
the Sons of Dirhem, seized upon Sistan; and after that conquered Khorassan,
Persia, and several other States; of which he made a vast and powerful Empire.
He died in the Year of the Hegyra 262. of our Lord 875.

5. Amrou Leits considerably enlarged the Kingdom left to him by his Brother
Jacoub; and to do it yet more, he resolved to destroy the Calife, and
proclaimed War against him. But the Calife opposed to him Ismail, the first
King of the Family of the Samanians; and Ismail taking him Prisoner, sent him
to the Calife. Amrou was a very magnificent and liberal Prince; so that no less
than 300 Camels were employed in carrying his Kitchen Utensils when he was in
the Field. The Day he was overcome and taken Prisoner by Ismail, he saw near
him his chief Cook, who had stuck to him; and he asked him whether he had any
thing to eat? The Cook, that had yet some Flesh left, put it presently on the
Fire in a Pot, and went to look for something to treat his Master in his
Misfortune the best way he could. In the mean while, a Dog came by chance, and
put his Head in the Pot to take away the Meat; but by reason of the Violence of
the Fire, he could not do it; but lifting up his Head, the Pot-hook fell on his
Neck, and being not able to disintangle himself, ran away with Pot and all.
Amrou could not forbear laughing: and as one of his chief Keepers wondered how
a King b^ing Prisoner, could laugh; he answered, This Morning 300 Camels were
scarce enough to carry what belonged to my Kitchen, and this Afternoon you see
a Dog running away with it all about his Neck.

Observe. The Calife mentioned here, was Mutadad; who kept Amrou Prisoner two
Years: But after the Death of the Calife, Amrou was slighted, and starved in
his Prison. Mutadad died in the Year of the Hegyra 289. of our Lord 901.

6. A Slave of Amrou Leits ran away, but being pursued was brought back; and
that King's Grand Vizier, who hated the Slave, solicited Amrou to put him to
Death, suggesting to him, it would be an Instance to deter others. Hereupon the
Slave casting himself on the Ground before the King, said; Whatever your
Majesty will be pleased to order as to my Destiny, it must be done; for a Slave
cannot find fault with the Judgment of his Lord and Master: but because I have
been brought up in your Palace, as a Mark of my Gratitude, I could wish you
might not answer for my Blood at the Day of Judgment: And therefore if you
desire I should be killed, let it be under a Pretense of Justice. Amrou asked
him what he meant by that Pretense? Suffer me, answered the Slave, to kill the
Vizier, and then you will be in the Right in taking away my Life to revenge his
Death. Amrou laughed at the Conceit, and asked the Vizier what he thought of
it? The Vizier answered, I desire your Majesty to forgive the Wretch; he might
draw some Misfortune upon me: I have deserved that Answer; not considering that
when we design to kill another, we expose our selves to be killed as much as
him whom we intend to murder.

7. In the first Ages of Mahometism, a Mohammedan said he was God. A Year ago,
said some body to him, such a One who pretended to be a Prophet, was put to
Death; are you not afraid of the like Treatment? O, answered he, they did well
to put him to Death, for I had not sent him.

Observe. As to that false Prophet put to Death, it is observable that the
Mahometans hold Mahomet for the last of Prophets; after whom God is not to send
any other: so that they are persuaded they may safely kill, as Disturbers of
the Public Society, all those that pretend to that Quality.

8. A Calender who observed not the Fast of Ramazan, and took besides the
Liberty of drinking Wine, was advised that, since he did not fast, he ought at
least to forbear drinking Wine. Whereupon he answered, I have forsaken the
Practice of a Precept, will you have me also to forsake the Practice of this
Tradition?

Observations. The Calenders amongst the Mahometans, are a sort of People who
forsake Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Relations, and all things; running
through the World, and living on the Alms that are given them: but for all
that, they are not better Observers of their Religion, as may be seen by this
Instance.

Calender is also the Chief of a Nation, Tribe, or People. For Instance; In the
History of Scharah and other Sons and Issue of Tamerlan, Heads of 20 or 30000
Turcomans, that had passed from Persia into Khorassan to settle themselves
there, are called Calenders. The Armenians of Ispahan, who inhabited the Ward
of Julfa, have also a Chief named Calender; who in that Quality represents the
Grievances of his Nation to the King of Persia, or his Ministers; and causes
the Will of the Court to be put in Execution by those of his Nation.

9. At a certain time, a pretended Prophet was presented to the Calife Haroun
Err^schid, whose Subject he was. The Calife not doubting but the supposed
Prophet had his Brains cracked, sent for his Physicians to advise for a proper
Remedy. The Physicians did all agree that bad Food was the Cause of his Lunacy,
and said, that a good Diet might conduce to his Cure. Hereupon the Calife
ordered they should take him into his Kitchen, and feed him well during 40
Days: After which time, the Calife caused him to be brought to him, and asked
him, Whether he was yet a Prophet, and whether the Angel Gabriel still came to
declare him God's Will? The false Prophet answered, Because I am in the Favor
of God, he has procured me such a good Kitchen, and commands me not to leave it.

Observations. Haroun Erreschid was the 5th Calife of the Family of the
Abbassides, and died in the Year of the Hegyra 193. of our Lord 808.

The Mahometans hold, that God sends the Angel Gabriel on all his Errands;
wherefore they believe he has dictated the Alcoran to Mahomet, and call all the
Dreams contained in that Book, the Word of God.

10. A good harmless Man of Sivri-Hissar complained to one of his Neighbors,
of a great Pain in his Eye; and asked him, whether he knew any Remedy for it?
The Neighbor answered, Last Year having a great Toothache, I caused the Tooth
to be drawn and I was cured; I advise you to use the same Remedy.

Observation. Sivri-Hissar is a small Town of Natolia; the Inhabitants of which
are reputed very simple.

11. In the same Town of Sivri-Hissar, a Man locked up every day his Ax in his
Chest: and his Wife asking the Reason of it, he answered, I am afraid lest the
Cat should eat it: You jest, replied she, Cats don't eat Axes. The Rogue, says
the Husband, has eaten a Liver that cost an Asper and a half; why should not
she eat this Ax that cost twenty?

Observation. An Asper is a small silver Coin of the value of two Farthings,
that goes current through the Ottoman Empire, and is called by the Turks Akgeh,
that is Halfpenny; and the Greeks have translated that word into their Tongue,
by that of (...), that signifies the same: whence our Franck Merchants, and
Travelers, have made the word Asper, which is more in use than that of
Halfpenny.

12. A Mohammedan Woman extreme ugly, asked her Husband, by whom of her
Relations he would allow her to be seen? He answered, by whomsoever you please,
provided I never see you.

Observation. That Woman being so ugly, it might be asked how the Husband came
to marry her? But it is easy to answer, that amongst the Mahometans as well as
amongst us, Wives are often taken, because Parents will have it so. Besides,
they are almost ever taken without being seen on the Face; and when they are
married, they may not discover their Face before any body but by their
Husband's Leave; it being reckoned a Sin in a Mohammedan Wife, to show her self
to any other Mohammedan besides her Husband. However, I have read in one of
their Books, that it is not a Sin in them to show themselves to others that are
not Mahometans. The Reason of which may be this, if I understand their Policy:
They believe that though their Wives show themselves to Christians, or to Jews,
yet they will not be easily corrupted; 1st. Because of the Hatred they bear to
both, in which they have been educated: And, 2dly. because of the severe
Punishment, as stoning and drowning, to which those that are convicted of that
Crime are condemned. Moreover, they conceive that a great Good may from thence
accrue to their Religion; because Christians or Jews being hindered from
attempting the Chastity of Mohammedan Women, by the Fear of Fire, may by those
means fall in love with them, and be brought to forsake their Religion to marry
their Mistresses. It Is certain that they intend such a thing, which has often
proved too successful with them.

13. A Cadi, in presence of the Sultan, asked a Mohammedan, who gave himself out
for a Prophet, to prove his Mission by a Miracle? The pretended Prophet said,
that his Mission was evident, by reason that he could raise Men from the dead.
The Cadi replying, that this must be seen, for it was not sufficient to say it.
If you believe me not, answered the Prophet, let me have a Scimiter that I may
cut off your Head, and I Will engage I Will raise you up again. The Sultan asked
the Cadi, what he had to say against it? He answered, there needs no Miracle; I
discharge him, and believe him to be a Prophet.

Observation. Upon that Principle, that Prophets must prove their Mission by a
Miracle, the Mahometans, who believe that Mahomet is the last of Prophets, and
that God has prescribed to himself a Law to send none after him* hold also for
certain, that he has divided the Moon into two parts with his Finger's End; and
upon that false Miracle, they are so blind as to esteem him a Prophet, and to
credit whatever is taught in the Alcoran.

14. In the Town of Samarcand, a Learned Man took place of a Mohammedan, who had
the Alcoran by heart. The latter being offended at the Boldness of the former,
asked the Company whether the Alcoran or another Book, ought to be preferred?
The Learned Man, who understood his Meaning, said, the Alcoran undoubtedly, but
not the Case of the Alcoran.

Observations. Amongst the Mahometans there is a sort of People who make it
their business to get the Alcoran by heart, but commonly they know nothing
else. They are called by the name of Hafiz, derived from a Verb, signifying to
keep in memory. But as they are commendable only for that, the other Learned
Mahometans have not so much Veneration for them as they pretend to; though
otherwise they reverence the Alcoran as much as possible.

As the Alcoran is of very great use amongst them, they ordinarily keep it in a
Bag of green Cloth, or in a Leather or pasted Box. They also make Leather or
pasted Cases for other Books, especially when the Binding is extraordinary, and
ought to be carefully preserved.

15. A Christian having turned Mussulman, six Months after, his Neighbors
observing that he was not very careful of saying the five Prayers, to which he
was obliged, as all the other Mahometans, they brought him before a Cadi, that
he might be punished: the Cadi asking him the Reason of his Behavior, My Lord,
says he, when I turned Mussulman, you expressly told me I was as clean and pure
as when I came out of my Mother's Womb. The Cadi having owned it, he added; If
it be so, since I have been but six Months a Mussulman, pray tell me whether
you oblige Children six Months old to say their Prayers?

Observation. This shows that amongst the Mahometans, Ecclesiastical Causes are
judged by the Cadies as well as the Civil.

16. Another Mohammedan, that did not say his Prayers, was likewise cited to the
Court. Now the Cadi asking him the Cause of his Neglect: My Lord, says he, I
have a Wife and Children to keep; I am poor, and can earn our Livelihood only
by a continual Labor. Well said the Cadi, you shall have two Aspers every day,
say your Prayers as the others. Sometime after, he was brought again to the
Cadi, and the Judge was told that the Accused went indeed to Prayers, but that
he did not wash himself before. The Cadi checked him extremely, and asked him,
why he did not wash himself? My Lord, says he, if you desire I should wash my
self before Prayers, pray let me have four Aspers instead of two; for I forbear
washing for want of time.

Observation. Though every one of the Mohammedan Prayers be very short, yet
including the time they spend in washing themselves, which they do very
carefully and leasurely, they cannot perform both within less than half an
hour. The five times prescribed for that Exercise are, The Break of Day, Noon,
two Hours and a half before Sunset, Sunset, and an Hour and half after
Sunset. So that in all the Mohammedan Countries, they are generally up very
early in any Season whatsoever; for no body is exempted from that Law: Princes,
Lords, Gentlemen, People, every one is obliged to it when he is of age.

17. A Calender being very hungry, held out his Arm to a Physician that he
might ^eel his Pulse, and know whether he was sick. The Physician finding the
Calender was troubled with no other Distemper but Hunger, led him to his House,
and caused a great Dish of Pilau to be brought him. When the Calender had
sufficiently eaten, he said to the Physician, Doctor, there are twenty other
Calenders in our Cloister troubled with the same Disease.

Observation. This Pilau is made of Rice, dressed with Butter, Fat or Gravey.
But they dress it so, that the Grain remains entire, and is not bruised as when
we boil it with Milk, or any other Liquor.

18. A Learned Man that seemed to be a little crack-brain'd, and walked always
with his Head lifted up, was commended in a Company, especially for his Skill
in Astronomy. Bassiri, who was present, said, I don't wonder at it, for he is
always looking upon the Stars.

Observation. Bassiri was a Turkish Poet born on the Borders of Persia, who
came to the Court of Constantinople under the Reign of Sultan Bajazid, Son and
Successor to Sultan Mehemmed the Second; where he made himself known by his
Poetry in Turkish and Persian. Letifi speaks of him in his Book concerning the
Turkish Poets; observing that he was pleasant in Conversation, and had always a
Jest at hand. Bassiri is an Arabian word, that signifies the Clear-sighted or
Understanding. We may perhaps have occasion elsewhere to speak of the Names of
the Eastern Poets.

19. A Covetous Calife received the Verses made in his Praise; but for a
Reward, gave no more than the Weight of the Book or Writing. A Poet that knew
his Way, caused a piece of Poetry he had made for him, to be engraven upon a
great Marble Stone; and when the Engraving was finished, he loaded a Camel with
it, and ordered it to be carried to the Calife's Gate, and to wait for him. In
the mean while, he went to attend the Calife, and to speak with him about his
Work, to know whether he would be pleased to have the Marble Stone brought him:
No, answered the Calife, I will not have it brought, but let us compound.

Observations. The Agreement was, that he should have 5000 Aspers, that is
about 125 Livres, or about 10 l. which the Calife caused to be given to the
Author. But as this Reward was by no means proportionable both to his Pains and
Expenses, it is probable it was rather Drachms, a small Silver Money of the
Calife's Coin: so that the Sum was a little more considerable.

This Piece of Poetry was one of those that are called by the Eastern Nations
Cacideh; the shortest of which is 50 Distichs, and the longest 100, more or
less. The two first Verses rhyme together, and the others but alternately, all
upon the same Rhyme: so that the longest are upon such Terminations as afford
more Rhimes than others. This sort of Poetry is chiefly consecrated to the
Praise of Princes and Great Men.

20. Schahrah, Son to Timour, that is Tamerlan, was a Prince naturally covetous
and sparing. A Potter came to him, and asked him, whether he held for true that
Mohammedan Doctrine, which teaches that all the Mussulmans are Brothers?
Schahrah answered, He held it for true. Whereupon the Potter replied, Since we
are all Brothers, is it not an Injustice you should have so great a Treasure,
and I should stand in need of a Farthing? Pray give me at least a Brother's
Portion. Schahrah ordered a Silver Threepence to be given him: but not being
satisfied with it, he said, How is that? Shall I have but so small a Share in
so great a Treasure? Schahrah sent him back, saying, Go your way, and hold your
Tongue; for your Portion would not be so considerable, should all our Brothers
know of it.

Observation. It is a Turkish Writer who here taxes Schahrah with Covetousness
and Niggardliness: However, he was a potent Monarch; as will be seen by his
History, which is translated out of the Persian into the French Tongue by Mr.
Galand. One thing only can make him suspected of the Vice he is charged with
here, viz. that the Learned stuck rather to the Princes his Sons, than to him:
but to excuse him, it may be said, that he gave up himself wholly to the
Government of his Dominions, that reached from Persia to China; so that he had
not so much Leisure as particularly to examine those that deserved to be
rewarded.

21. Before Meals a Covetous Mohammedan used to say twice, Bismi-llah; that is,
In the Name of God. His Wi^e upon a time asking him the Reason of it, he
answered, The first time I do it to drive away the Devil, and the second, the
Parasites.

Observation. The Mahometans use to say Bismi-llah not only before Meals, but
also when they begin to walk, to work, or to do any thing else.

22. In a Company before Sultan Mehemmed the 2d, Emperor of Constantinople,
some said that Mirza Khan had promised 1000 Pieces of Gold to any one that
should show so much as one Fault in the Works of the Poets of his Court.
Whereupon Sultan Mehemmed said, I should quickly exhaust my Treasure should I
follow that Example.

Observations. Sultan Mehemmed is he who took Constantinople; and though he had
so mean an Opinion of the Poets of his Court, yet there were already good
Turkish Poets in his time, as Letifi testifies.

The word Mirza in Persia, and India, signifies the Son or Relation of a
Sovereign, and is said by Abbreviation instead of Emir Zadeh; that is in
Persian, the Son of an Emir. I believe there is a Fault in the Name of the
Prince here mentioned, and that he was of Tamerlan's Family, and had yet
another Name besides those of Mirza and Khan. The word Khan amongst the
Tartars, signifies a great Monarch. Those Turkish Emperors that are originally
from Turkestan, that is part of the Great Tartary, take it with the Name of
Sultan: So that they say, and write, Sultan Mehemmed Khan, Sultan Achmed Khan,
Sultan Murad Khan, etc.

23. The House of an Imam was very far from the Mosque in which he officiated.
The Mahometans that resorted to it, told him once; Your House is too far, you
cannot come every Night to the Mosque to say Prayers an Hour and half after
Sunset, and therefore we'll exempt you from it: We shall do well enough
amongst our selves without your taking so much Trouble. God bless you,
Mussulmans, answered the Imam, you exempt me from the Night Prayer, I exempt
you from that of the Morning.

Observations. Imam is an Arabian word, signifying the same as the Latin
Antistes; that is, the President of the Sacred Ceremony. And in that Sense
amongst the Mahometans, ^t den^^es him that makes the public Prayer, not only
in the Mosque, but in any Place whatsoever; whilst those that stand behind
imitate his Kneelings, Prostrations, and other Gestures.

The Turks call in their Tongue that Night Prayer Jatzinamaz; that is, Prayer
going to Bed.

24. A Mohammedan that was frightfully ugly, met with a Looking-glass in his
way; which he took up, and saw himself in it: but perceiving himself so
misshapen, he slung it down in a Rage, saying, Had thou been good for
something, People would not have thrown thee away.

25. A Calife sitting at Table, a roasted Lamb being served up before him,
there came an Inhabitant of Arabia Deserta: The Calife desired him to come
near, and sit at his Table. The Arabian did so, and began to eat with an
extraordinary Greediness. The Calife being displeased at his Clownishness,
said, You are very cruel to cut that poor Lamb in pieces with as great a Rage
as if his Dam had butted you with her Horns? You are very compassionate,
answered the Arabian, and see me eat it with as much Sorrow as if its Mother
had been your Nurse.

Observation. These Arabians are not so mannerly as those that live in Cities;
but for all that, they have pretty good Sense and Judgment, and live together
with more Fairness and Honesty than the other Arabians.

26. Behloul was desired to tell over the Fools of the Town of Basra, where he
was born: You ask, answered he, an impossible thing; but for the Learned, they
may indeed be reckoned, for they are not very numerous.

Observations. Basra, according to our Geographers, is the Town Balsora, upon
the Persian Gulf.

Behloul was a Learned Man of the Court of the Calife Haroun Erreschid, who was
very witty. Behloul is an Arabic Word, signifying a Jester, especially one
that is of a pleasant Humor; whence comes the Arabian Proverb, He that is of a
pleasant Humor, dances without a Fiddler: where the word Behloul is used in
that Sense. This Behloul had probably another Name; and this seems but a
Nickname, by which however he is now best known.

27. Behloul coming to attend the Calife, the Grand Vizier said to him;
Behloul, I have good News for you, the Calife makes you Overseer of the Apes
and Swine of his Dominions: Then prepare your self, replied Behloul, to obey my
Commands, for you are one of my Subjects.

27. A Learned Man wrote to a Friend, whilst a troublesome busy Fellow, that
stood near, looked over his Shoulder to see what he was writing: The Learned
Man perceiving it, broke off the Matter of his Letter to write the following
words; If an impertinent busy Fellow, that stands near me, did not look over
what I write, I would have written you several other things, which must be kept
to our selves. The Fellow having read it, said, I swear I neither looked upon,
nor read what you wrote: The Learned Man answered, You Sot, why then do you
speak as you do?

29. A Weaver that had entrusted a Schoolmaster with something, came to demand
it again, whilst the Master was sitting at his Door, leaning upon a Cushion,
and giving their Lesson to his Scholars that sat about him. Sir, says he to
the Schoolmaster, I want the thing I have entrusted you with, I desire you to
restore it me. The Schoolmaster asked him to sit down, and to wait till the
Lesson was finished: But the Weaver being in haste, and the Lesson lasting
somewhat long, as he perceived the Schoolmaster shaking his Head, which was
customary with him when giving his Scholars their Lesson, he fancied that the
Lesson consisted in nothing else but shaking his Head and so said; Pray, Sir,
rise and go for me; I Will keep your Place, and shake my Head for you while you
fetch what is mine, because I cannot stay. Which made both Master and Scholars
fall a laughing.

Observations. It must be understood, that this Schoolmaster sat cross-leg'd,
or his Heels inward, upon a Carpet or Matt, after the Custom of the East.

It Is also customary amongst the Mahometans, through all the East, to shake or nod
the Head backwards and forwards when they read; as we see by this Instance,
that this Schoolmaster, and the Children that were under him did; though as to
the Master, perhaps he might have abstained from it, but it was his Custom. The
Jews shake also their Heads in the Synagogues, whilst they say their Prayers;
but side-ways, and not backwards and forwards, as the former: Both pretend,
that this Nodding or Agitation makes 'em more attentive in their Prayers.

30. In a very dark Night a blind Man walked through the Streets with a Light
in his Hands, and a Pitcher of Water upon his Back. A Night-walker met him, and
said, you Fool, what do you do with that Light? Are not Night and Day both
alike to you? It Is not for my self, answered the blind Man, laughing, that I
carry this Light; but for such heedless Fellows as you are, lest they should
justle against me, and break my Pitcher.

31. A Learned Man, extraordinary ugly, talking with a Friend in the Street, a
pretty Lady going by stopped, and looked steadfastly upon him for some time;
after which, she went her way. The Learned Man sent his Servant after her, to
know what she would have. She answered, Tell your Master I had committed a
grievous Sin with my Eyes, and I looked about for a Punishment proportionable
to my Offense; and I thought none was so great, as to be staring upon his ugly
Face.

32. The same Learned Man related the following Story: I never received a
greater Mortification than this; A Lady upon a time took me by the Hand in the
Street, and brought me to a Founder's Shop; to whom she said, Just so; you
understand me: After which, she left me. I was the more surprised at this
Accident, that I could not understand what she would be at, and desired the
Founder to explain it to me. He told me, That Lady came to have me cast the
Figure of the Devil; and I answered, I had no Pattern for it: She has met with
you, and brought you to my Shop that I might take you for my Pattern.

33. A Mohammedan, who had a very long Nose, and was 50 Years of age, courted a
Lady; and said he was not fickle and unconstant, as young People used to be;
especially that he was very patient, how troublesome soever a Wife might prove.
The Lady answered, It must needs be so; for had you not the Patience to bear
with a Wife, how should you have born with your Nose for 50 Years?

34. A Mohammedan very neat and fine, seeing another that went mean and
neglected, and did not care to be shaved, told him, If you don't take off your
Beard, your Face and Head will be alike.

Observation. Though the Mahometans, especially married Men, suffer their
Beards to grow; yet for all that, they take a great care to have it shaved down
about their Cheeks and round their Face, and cut their Beard with Scissors, so
that one Hair may not be longer than another, which quite alters the Air of the
Face.

35. One of Ali's Race quarrelling with another Mohammedan, asked him, Why are
you my Enemy, whilst Religion obliges you to say in your Prayers; O God bless
Mahomet, and his Posterity? The other answered, The Prayer says, those of his
Posterity that are good and pure, but you are not of that Number.

Observation. The Race of Ali is considered in Persia, both by reason of Ali
and Fatima his Wife, Daughter to Mahomet; because they are reckoned as
descended from Mahomet by Fatima. The Xeriffs are the same amongst the Turks,
as the Posterity of Ali amongst the Persians. But the Turks believe not, with
the Persians, that Ali's Race are the true Successors of Mahomet to the Dignity
of Calife, and derive not the Nobility of their Xeriffs from thence, but from
Fatima, of whom they are descended.

36. An Inhabitant of Arabia Deserta, sat at Table with the Calife, who spied
a Hair on the Morsel he was putting to his Mouth; Arabian, said the Calife,
hold, take off the Hair that is upon your Meat. The Arabian answered, There Is
no eating at a Table where the Master looks so narrowly upon his Guests, that
he perceives even a Hair upon the Morsels they are eating. And upon this he
rose, swearing never to eat more at a Calife's Table.

37. A very rich Mohammedan dying during a Tyrant's Reign, the Tyrant's Vizier
cited the Deceased's Son before him, and asked him an Account of what his
Father had left. The Son gave it very exactly, and added at the End; My Father
has made you and me Coheirs, and equal Sharers of all his Goods. The Vizier
laughed in himself at the Wit of the Son, and was satisfied with taking one
half of the Estate for his Master's Use.

38. A Turk being asked what he would choose rather, either to plunder to Day,
or to enter into Paradise to Morrow? He answered; I Will take, plunder, and rob
to Day whatever pleases me; and am ready to enter to Morrow into Hell, to keep
company with Pharaoh.

Observation. The Turk mentioned here, is not a Turk of Constantinople, nor of
the Empire of the Grand Signior; but one of those of Turkestan in Great
Tartary, who live upon Plunder, and from time to time make Excursions out of
their Country, into others on this Side the River Oxus; or list themselves
Soldiers under other Princes. Though the Turks of Constantinople draw their
Original from one of those Excursions, yet they will not own that Name; and
give it only to the Mohammedan Clowns of Natolia and Romelia: so that amongst
them, a Turk is as much as a clownish, rustical, uncivil and ill-bred Person.

39. A poor Man asking an Alms at the Door of a great House, the Porter told
him, Go your ways, there is no body at home. The poor Man replied, I ask for a
Bit of Bread, and not for the People of the House.

40. As the Son of a Mohammedan was a dying, the Father ordered the Washer to
come. His Servants told him, he is not yet dead, you must wait a little. The
Father answered, That Is no matter, he will be dead before they have half washed
him.

Observation. The Mahometans are very careful in washing the Bodies of the
Deceased, before they bury them; it being an indispensable Ceremony of their
Religion.

41. A Handicraft Man being asked, Who was the elder, his Brother or he? I am
the elder, answered he; but when my Brother shall be a Year older, he shall be
as old as I am.

42. A Mohammedan being at the point of Death, a Bigot that had a stinking
Breath breathed under his Nose his dull Admonitions, wishing him to pronounce
their Profession of Faith; and the more the dying Man turned his Head aside,
the more the other was offensive. At last, the dying Man, not knowing how to
free himself, told him, Pray give me leave to die purely, and no longer infect
me with your poisonous Breath, more intolerable to me than Death it self.

Observation. Every one knows, that this Confession of Faith consists in these
words, La ilah illa-llah, Mehemmed resoul-ullah; There is no other God but God,
Mahome^ is his Messenger. The Mahometans endeavor as much as possible, to have
them pronounced by the dying Persons; as believing those Words necessary to
enter into their Paradise.

43. A hunch-back'd Fellow being asked, What he would choose rather; either
that God should make him as straight as other Men, or all other Men as crooked
as himself? He answered, I would rather have them hunch-back'd, that I might
have the Pleasure to look upon them with as much Contempt as they have done
upon me.

44. Some Friends went to walk into the Country with very good Provisions, and
rested to eat them under a Shade in a very pleasant Place: A Dog coming near
them, one of the Company threw him a Stone as if it had been a Piece of Meat:
the Dog smelt to it, and went his way; and though afterward they called never
so often, yet he would not come. Whereupon one of the Company said, Do you know
what the Dog fancies with himself? these are covetous miserable Wretches,
thinks he; hang them, they eat nothing but Stone; a Dog would not live with 'em.

45. A Son was asked, Whether he wished the Death of his Father, that he might
have his Estate? he answered, No, but I could wish somebody would kill the old
Chuff, that with the Inheritance I might also get the Price of his Blood.

Observation. Amongst the Mahometans, the Blood of one that has been killed is
always paid for, either at the Cost of the Murderer, or of the Neighbors of
the Place where the Murder has been committed; or in some other manner.

46. A Persian Poet read very indifferent Verses of his own to a Man of Sense,
telling him, he had made them in the Necessary House: I don't question that*
answered the Gentleman, for they smell on it.

47. A Poet came to a Physician, and told him he had something at his Heart
which from time to time caused Faintings and Tremblings, and all the Hair of
his Body to stand an end. The Physician being of a pleasant Humor, and knowing
his Man, asked him, Whether he had not wrote Verses, which he had not yet
rehearsed? The Poet owned it. Out with them then, said the Physician: so the
Poet recited; and then the Doctor said, Now go home, those Verses lay at your
Heart, but at last the Obstruction is removed.

48. A Preacher that made very scurvy Verses, affected to quote them in his
Sermons; and sometimes said, I have made these at Prayers. At last one of his
Hearers, offended at his Pride and Vanity, interrupted him, and said, Verses
made at Prayers are as inconsiderable, as the Prayers during which they were
made.

49. A Persian Scribler read to the famous Poet Giami, a wretched Gazel of his
composure, and made him observe, how artfully he had avoided the Letter Elif
through the whole Poem. You would still do better, replied Giami, should you
take out of it all the Letters of the Alphabet.

Observations. A Gazel is a Piece of Poetry much in fashion amongst the
Persians and Turks: The two first Verses rhyme together, and the first Verse of
the following Distichs terminate on the Rhyme of the first Distich; but the
second Verse does not rhyme at all. This Piece consists at least of 5 Distichs,
and I have seen some of 11, 12 and 13. Commonly the Poet inserts his Name in
the last Distich or the last but one, when the Gazel is somewhat long. All the
Poets of any note amongst them, make a Series of Gazels rhimed by Alphabetical
Order; which when brought to a Body, is called Divan. The very same word
signifies likewise a Body of People that make up a Council, and withal the
Place where they assemble. Thus at the Port, they say, the Grand Vizier
presides at the Divan: the Grand Vizier, the other Viziers, the two
Cadileskers, the Reis Kitteb, and the Nischanga meet thrice a Week in the
Divan, where they have each his Place. Love is the ordinary Subject of Gazels:
However, Hasis, Giami, and other Persian Poets, treat of the most sublime
Matters of mystical Divinity, in their Gazels, under the Allegorical Terms of
Love and Voluptuousness.

Giami is one of the greatest Persian Poets. It appears by his Baharistan, that
he was most famous in the Reign of Mirza Sultan Hussein, the last of Tamerlan's
Race who possessed the Kingdoms of Khorassan and Persia: He died in the Year
898 of the Hegyra, of our Lord 1483. being 81 Years of Age, according to the
History of the Persian Poets, written by Sami, a Prince of the Family of the
present Sophies of Persia. He has composed a great Number of Works in Verse and
Prose; and there are amongst his Pieces of Poetry five Divans, that is, five
perfect Collections of Gazels by Alphabetical Order. He is commonly called
Mevlana Giami: Mevlana being an Arabian Word that signifies our Master, is a
Title given to the Learned either in Divinity, Law, or other Sciences; and is
as a Surname to those that have distinguished themselves from the rest, as our
Doctors take the Title of Magister Noster.

That Gazel in which there was no Elif, gives me occasion to observe, that such
an Affectation has been in fashion amongst the Greeks, who have made entire
Poems wherein a certain Letter of the Alphabet was not to be found.

50. Messihi and Schemi, two Turkish Poets and Friends, having been together on
a Day from Constantinople to Galata, to ogle the Women at Church; another Poet
said, that Messihi the Mussulman went with a Wax Candle to the Christians
Church.

Observation. The Jest, such as it is, partly consists in that Messihi
signifies in Arabic a Christian, and Schemi a Wax Candle. Messihi and Schemi
lived in the Reign of Sultan Soliman, as Letifi relates in his History of the
Turkish Poets.

51. The Physician Mehemmed, Son to Zekeria, being in company with some of his
Disciples, met with a mad Man that star'd a while upon him, and then grinn'd
and laughed in his Face. As Soon as Mehemmed was come home, he ordered some
Epithymum to be prepared, and took it. His Disciples asked him, Why he took
that Remedy, since he seemed not to stand in need of it? Because that
brainsick Fellow laughed at me, returned he; for, I doubt, he would scarce
have done so, had he not read in my Face some of that Melancholy which he has
but too much of, and the Sight of which pleased him; as Birds of a Feather
flock together.

Observations. That Mehemmed, Son of Zekeria, is that famous Arabian Physician
known by the Name of Razis; which is not his proper Name, but an appellative
Name of the Town Rei in the Kingdom of Persia, where he was born; according to
the Rules of the Arabic Grammar, as from Paris we make Parisian. Thus Razis
was not an Arabian, but a Persian; and if he be called an Arabian Physician,
it is because he has written in Arabic, and withal practiced and taught the
Physic of the Arabians. Those that are acquainted with Plants, know that
Epithymum is the Dodder which grows about Thyme by Filaments of Threeds, still
in use amongst Physicians to purge Melancholy.

This Observation of the Life of Razis is drawn from the Persian Instruction of
Emir Ousor el Maali Kikiaous King of Mazanderan, for his Son Ghilan Schah,
under the Title of Kabous-nameh. This King lived in the 5th Century of the
Hegyra, since he observes in his Book that he went in Pilgrimage to Mecca in
the Reign of Calife Caim-Billah, in the Year of the Hegyra 420. of our Lord
1029.

52. A Woman consulting Bouzourgemhir, Vizier to Khosrou King of Persia, upon
some Affair, to which the other could give her no Answer: she said to him, Shame
on you, must you be in so high a Station, and not able to give me an Answer?
the King's Favor and Salary are finely bestowed. Bouzourgemhir only answered;
I am not paid for what I know not, but for what I know.

Observation. Khosrou is that same King of Persia who is called Nouschirvan and
Anouschirvan, under whom Mahomet was born, and Bouzourgemhir was his first
Minister. The Eastern Writers speak of Nouschirvan as the Pattern of a perfect
Prince, and of Bouzourgemhir as an Example to all Ministers of State.

53. A Tailor of Samarcand, living near the Gate that led to the burying Place,
had by his Shop-board an earthen Pot hanging on a Nail; into which he threw a
little Stone when any Corpse passed by: and at the end of every Moon he told
over the Stones that were in his Pot, to know the Number of the Deceased. At
last the Tailor died himself; and sometime after, one that knew nothing of his
Death, seeing his Shop shut up, asked what was become of him? So one of the
Neighbors of the Deceased answered, The Taylor's gone to the Pot as well as
the rest.

Observation. Kikiaous relates that Story in his Instruction for the Prince his
Son; where he makes him remember, that we must all die both old and young.

54. A young Man given to Jesting, met with an old Man a hundred Years of Age;
who went almost double, and could hardly support himself with a Staff: Hark ye
me, Scheich, what did this same Bow of yours cost you, cried he, that I may buy
me such a one? The old Man answered, If God give you Life, and you have but
Patience, you shall have one like this for nothing.

Observation. Scheich signifies an old Man, but is also a Title of Honor and
Dignity: for it appears by the Histories of the East, that it is given to the
Sons of the Great; as we find in the History of Tamerlan, Mirza Omer Scheich,
one of his Sons.

55. Kikiaous King of Mazanderan, in his Instruction for his Son, relates the
following Story. Camil one of my Father's Chiaoux, being 70 Years of Age, had a
mind to buy a Horse: A Jockey brought one that seemed fine and strong, and the
Chiaoux bought him. Now sometime after, he looked into his Mouth, and found
'twas an old Horse: so he sold him off to another out of hand. I asked him, Why
he parted with the Horse, and why the other bought him? He answered; He who
bought it of me, is a young Man, unacquainted with the Inconveniences of old
Age, and so is excusable for having been deceived by the outside: but I should
not, had I kept the old Jade, while I so well know what a wretched thing it is
to be old.

56. A King of Persia, in a Passion, deposed his Grand Vizier, and put another
in his room: however, as he was satisfied with his former Services, he told him
he might choose in his Dominions what Pla^e he best liked, to enjoy there, with
his Family, what he had got by his Bounty. The Vizier answered; As for the
Wealth your Majesty has so liberally bestowed upon me, I have no need of it;
and I entreat you to take it again: but if your Majesty has yet some Affection
for me, I most earnestly beg for my abode some Desert Village, which I may
people and cultivate by my Care, and the Industry of my Domestics. The King
gave order to look about for some such Village as he desired; but after a most
exact Enquiry, the Commissioners reported, that they could not find so much as
one. The King told it to the deposed Vizier; who then said to him, I knew very
well, Sir, that there was not so much as one waste Place in all the Dominions
your Majesty had entrusted to my Care: so that what I have done was, that you
might be informed in what State I restore them to you, and that my Successors
may give as good an Account of them as I do my self.

Observation. Kikiaous obse^ves, that the King was so well satisfied with the
Ingenuity of his Vizier, that he desired him to forget what was p^st, and
restored him to his former Dignity. This King was one of the Kings of Persia
that reigned before the Birth of Maho^^t: Which joined to other Testimonies,
shows that there were Histories of those Kings that might be lost in the Time
of Kikiaous; but of which many things were still known by Tradition.

57. In the Reign of Sultan Mahmoud Sebecteghin, the Governor of the Town of
Nisa in Khorassan, ruined a very rich Merchant, and imprisoned him. The
Merchant making his Escape, went to Gaznin, the Seat of the Sultan; where he
cast himself at his Feet, asking Justice. Sultan Mahmoud ordered a Letter
should be given him, directed to the Governor; enjoining him to restore
whatever he had taken from the Merchant. The Governor read the Letter; but,
thinking the Merchant would never take the Trouble to go again to Court, did
nothing of what was enjoined him. But the Merchant was not so easily wearied,
and went back to Gaznin; and watching his Opportunity when the Sultan went out
of his Palace, asked Justice a second time, with Sighs and Tears, against the
disobedient Governor. The Sultan ordered he should have another Letter: But
the Merchant represented to him, that he had already carried a Letter from his
Majesty which the Governor had not obeyed, and that it was not likely he
should obey this. Sultan Mahmoud, who was intent upon other things, answered; I
cannot help it* I can do nothing but write to him: but if he obey not, put his
Head under thy Feet. The Merchant replied, I beg your Majesty's Pardon, he
himself will trample my Head under his Feet when he receives this second
Letter. The Sultan came to himself, and said; I am mistaken, it is my part, and
not thine, to punish him. At the same time, he dispatched Officers to the
Provost of the Town of Nisa, with Orders to restore to the Merchant whatever
belonged to him, and to hang the Governor. The Provost executed the Orders;
and when they brought the Governor to the Gallows, the Sultan's Letter was
carried before him, a Crier proclaiming that this was the just Punishment of
those that did not obey the Prince their Master's Orders.

Observations. Sultan Mahmoud Sebecteghin was Son to Sebecteghin, who was at
first a Slave at the Court of the Samanians, that promoted him to the chief
Offices in their Dominions, with such advantageous Circumstances, that at last
he succeeded them in the Sovereignty of the Province of Khorassan: After his
Death Sultan Mahmoud succeeded him, and enlarged his Dominions by great
Conquests in the East Indies. He reigned in the 4th Age of the Hegyra, that is
in our 10th Century, and chose Gaznin, a Town on the Borders of the
East Indies, for the Seat of his Empire, preferring it before Bok^ara, where
the Samanians used to reside, that he might be nearer his Conquests, and still
at hand to assist them.

Nisa is a considerable Town of Khorassan, famous for its excellent
Pasture-ground, and good Horses.

58. Sultan Masoud, Son to Sultan Mahmoud Sebecteghin, was a brave Warrier, but
understood not the Art of Governing like his Father. Whilst he indulged himself
in Pleasures, charmed with Consorts of Music amidst the Ladies of his Palace,
the Governors of his Provinces, and his Troops, lived with the utmost
Licentiousness, and committed great Violences. A Woman that had been misused,
came to make her Complaint; and he gave her a Letter to the Governor, of whom
she complained. But the Governor performing nothing of what was commanded him,
she went again to the Sultan, and crowding through a Throng of Petitioners,
repeated her Complaint. Sultan Masoud ordered her a second Letter: and as she
represented that the Governor had not obeyed the first, and the Sultan said he
could not help it, she replied with great Boldness; Give your Provinces to be
governed, to such as will obey your Letters; and spend not your time in
Diversions, whilst your Subjects, the Creatures of God, groan under the Tyranny
of your Governors.

59. The Physician H^^^th said; Though this Life be always too s^ort, yet to
live long, we must ^at in the Morning, wear light Clothes, and use Women
soberly. By the Lightness of Clothes, he understood that we ought to avoid
being loaded with Debts, or being ^as'd up within a Stone-Doublet.

Observation. This Physician was an Arabian of the Town Taief, who practiced
Physic first in Persia, and then in his own Country, in the Time of Mahomet.
However, it is not sure that he was a Mohammedan; but it is certain he was born a
Heathen.

60. The Calife Mansour had for his Physician George Son to Bachtjeschoua, whom
he loved, though he was a Christian, because he had cured him of a very
dangerous Disease. George, being already pretty old, fell sick: The Calife
would needs see him, and ordered he should be brought to him the most
convenient Way; which was done. The Calife asked him, How he did? And the
Physician having satisfied him in that, entreated him to grant him Leave to
return to his Country; urging his Desire to see his Family before his Death,
especially his only Son, and to be buried with his Ancestors after his Death.
The Calife said, Doctor, fear God, and turn Mussulman, I promise you Paradise.
The Physician answered, 'Twill be Paradise to me to be where my Fathers are.

Observati^ns. Abul-pharage, who relates this Story, a^ds; that the Calife
having laughed at the Physician's Answer, did what he could to detain him: but
at last granted him his Request, and sent him back with a Present of 10000
Pieces of Gold, each the Value of a French Gold-Crown. Which shows, that the
Gift was not inconsiderable. This Physician was originally of Giondi Sabor, a
Town of Pe^sia; whither he was conducted by an Eunuch, that had Orders to cause
his Corpse to be carried thither, if he chanced to die by the way, that he might
be interred according to his ^esire; but he got thither alive.

The Calife Mansour was called Abougiafar Mansour, and was the Tenth of the
Family of the Abbassides. He died not far from Mecca, whither he was gone in
Pilgrimage, in the Year of the Hegyra 15^, of our Lord 774.

61. John, Son to Mesue, Physician to the Calife Haroun Erreschid, was given to
Jesting: yet Gabriel another Physician, was too hard for him in the Presence of
Ibrahim the Calife's Brother: for Gabriel having said to him, You are my
Brother, the Son of my Father; Mesue said to the Calife's Brother; My Lord, I
beg of your Lordship to bear witness; for I intend to share his Father's Estate
with him. But Gabriel answered, Hold, Brother, this cannot be; remember that
Bastards are no Heirs.

Observations. Mesue was of Syria, and Haroun Erres^hid, who had called him to
his Court, caused him to translate into Arabic the Ancient Physicians, and
other Greek Works. And being very Learned, he set up a School at Bagdat, where
he taught all sorts of Sciences.

Gabriel was Grandson to George Son of Bachtjeschoua, mentioned in the
foregoing History, and Physician to the Court of Haroun Erreschid, near whom he
got in great Credit on occasion of a Lady of his Palace. This ^ady stretching
her self, her arm remained stiff, so that she could not use it. All the
Unctions and Fomentations the Physicians could think of, were applied in vain.
At last Gabriel was called; and being told, after what Manner the Rigidity had
seized her, assured the Calife he knew an infallible Means to cure her; only he
desired he would not take amiss what he was to do before him and the whole
Company, when the Lady should come. She came by the Calife's Order; and as soon
as she appeared, Gabriel ran to her, and stooping took hold of the lower end of
her Coat, as though he would have taken it up. The Lady surpised at it, her
Color changed, and she stretched down that Arm, which was stiff before, to the
very bottom of her Coat, lest the Physician should take it up. Presently he
cried out to the Calife, that she was cured. And indeed from that Moment, the
Lady moved her Arm as freely as if it had never been hurt. The Calife was so
pleased with it, that he ordered 500000 Drachms to the Physician. Those Drachms
were a Silver Coin of the Value of about a Shilling; so that the whole Sum
amounted to 350000 Livers; that is, 26923 Pounds one Shilling and six Pence.

62. The Calife Vathek Billa angled upon the River Tygris, and Mesue his
Physician was near him. The Calife sorry he could catch nothing, said to Mesue;
Thou unlucky Wretch be gone, thou marrest my good Fortune. Mesue, incensed at
this hard Usage, said to the Calife; Emperor of the Faithful, accuse me not
unjustly: I own my Father was no more than a common Citizen of Khouz, and my
Mother Recala had been a Slave; yet I have attained to the Happiness of being
the Favorite of many Califes, of Eating and Drinking with them, and being a
Sharer in their Pleasures: and by their Kindness I am grown rich, even beyond
my Expectation. Now such a Man cannot be called unlucky: But if you will be
pleased to give me leave, I will tell you who may truly be called unhappy. The
Calife declaring he might explain himself, he added; It Is a Lord descended from
four Califes, whom God has made Calife too; but who regardless of his Dignity,
Grandeur and Palace, sits in a poor Cottage of 20 Cubits compass, exposed to a
Blast of Wind that may drown him, and does the Work of the poorest and vilest
sort of Men.

Observati^ns. Abul-pharage observes, that the Calife was highly incensed at
the Boldness of Mesue; but that the Presence of Mutevekkel ala-llah his Brother
and Successor, hindered him from showing his Resentment.

The Calife Vathek Billah died in the Year of the Hegyra 232, of our Lord 846.

63. The Physician Bachtjeschoua went to attend the Calife Mutevekkel ala-llah,
and found him alone. He sat down by him, as he used to do; and his Gown being
somewhat unstitched at the lower end, the Calife discoursing with him,
insensibly ripped it up to the Girdle. Now the Matter of which they discoursed,
caused the Calife to put this Question to the Doctor; By what Token they knew
it to be high time to bind a Madman? Bachtjeschoua answered, We bind him when
he is so mad as to rip up his Physician's Gown to the very Girdle.

Observations. Abul-pharage relates, that the Calife laughed so heartily at the
Physician's Answer, that he fell back on the Carpet on which he sat; and at
the same time ordered him a very rich Gown, and a considerable Sum of Money.

This Bachtjeschoua was Son to that Gabriel, whom we have lately mentioned; but
notwithstanding this great Familiarity with the Calife, a Treat which he
presumed to give that Prince, was fatal to the Giver: for the Calife was so
highly offended at his Sumptousness and Wealth, that sometime after he banished
him from Court, and extorted great Sums of Money from him. It Is observed, that
the Sale only of the Wood, Wine, Coals, and other Provisions of his House,
amounted to very near 3000 Pounds Sterling.

64. Mehemmed, Son of Zekeria, or rather Razis, of whom we have already spoke,
being grown blind in his old Age; a Quack prof^er'd to couch him, and so
restore him his Sight. Razis asked him, how many Tunicles the Eye was made of?
The Empirick answered, he knew not; however, he was sure he could cure him.
Razis replied; He that knows not how many Tunicles the Eye is composed of,
shall never touch my Eyes. His Friends and Relations urged him to it, alleging
that he ventured nothing, though the Operation should not succeed; and that he
might recover his Sight if it were successful. But he still excused it, saying,
I have seen the World so long, that I desire not to see it any more.

65. The Calife Caher Billah* having entrusted Sinan, the Son of his Physician
Thabet, with the Examination of those that would profess Physic; a comely
grave old Man happened to come to him, and was received with all the Honor due
to his Age and Appearance. He had no sooner desired him to ^it down, but he
declared he would listen with pleasure to the good things he expected from him;
and asked him, of whom he had learned Physic? Upon that Question, the old Man
pulled out of his Sleeve a Paper full of Pieces of Gold, which he put on the
Carpet before Sinan, desiring him to accept of them. Then he added, I must
freely own I can neither read nor write; but I have a Family, and I must
maintain them: which obliges me to entreat you not to hinder me from that Way
of living I have hitherto followed. Sinan smiled, and said, You shall, provided
you visit no Patients whose Disease is unknown to you, and prescribe neither
Bleeding nor Purging, but in those Diseases which you are very well acquainted
with. The old Man answered, It was his Method, and that he never ordered any
thing besides Oxymel and Juleps. The next Day a brisk and handsome young Man,
well accoutred, came to him upon the same account. Sinan asked him, of whom he
had learned Physic? He answered, of his Father; who was the old Man, to whom
he had given Power the Day before to practice Physic. Sinan replied, He Is a
brave Man, do you use his Method? The young Man answered, Yes: so Sinan, having
charged him to observe it well, sent him back with Power to practice Physic,
as he had done his Father.

Observations. The Calife Caher Billah was called Abou Mansour before his
coming to the Throne, and succeeded Muctseder Billa, in the Year of the Hegyra
320, of our Lord 932. He reigned a Year and seven Months.

The first Physician of the Grand Signior has, as well as this Physician of the
Calife, the Power of examining those who take upon them to profess Physic at
Constantinople.

66. A Greek Quack of Antiochia had agreed for a Sum of Money to cure a Man of
a Tertian Ague: but instead of performing his Promise, the Remedies he gave him
changed the Tertian into a Semi-tertian; so that the Patient's Relations would
not suffer him to come any more. Well then, said he, pay me half the Sum
promised, since I have expelled half the Sickness. He was so ignorant as to
insist upon the Name, and seemed to believe that the Semi-tertian is less than
the Tertian Fever, though it is double the Tertian: And whatever could be said
to him, he still demanded half the Money.

67. An Egyptian Lady sent for a famous Astrologer, and desired him to tell her
what it was that troubled her Mind. The Astrologer erected a Scheme, and made a
tedious Descant upon each of the Celestial Houses in his Figure; which he set
off with the less Grace, as being vexed with perceiving the Lady was not to be
edified with his elaborate Nonsense: At last he held his Tongue, and the Lady
threw him a Dram, or as you should say, a Shilling. The No-Conjurer seeing
how little she gave him, added, that by his Figure he could perceive she was
none of the most generous or richest: She told him this was the first Truth he
had said. Then the Astrologer, looking still upon his Scheme, asked her,
Whether she had lost any thing? Yes, said she, the Money I gave you.

68. The Learned of India owned the great Wisdom, and other Talents of
Bouzourgemhir; but found fault with him for wearying with Expectation those
that consulted him. Bouzourgemhir hearing of their Reproach, said, It Is fitter
I should think upon what I have to say, than that I should repent of having
said something amiss.

69. A King had passed Sentence of Death upon a Criminal; who having but his
Tongue in his Power, bellowed out a thousand Curses against the King: The King
having asked what he said, one of his Viziers, who would not heighten his
Resentment against the condemned Malefactor, answered; The Criminal, Sir, says
that God loves those who moderate their Anger, and pardon those who have
offended them. Upon this, the King, moved with Compassion, pardoned the
Prisoner. Another Vizier, who hated him that had spoken to the King, said; Men
of our Quality and Character ought not to tell Lies to their Sovereigns: that
abandoned Wretch has reviled the King, and spoken unworthy things against his
Majesty. The King angry at that Discourse, said; The Lie of thy Brother Vizier
pleases me better than thy Truth.

Observation. The first Chapter of Gulistan, begins with this little Story; but
I must observe by the way, that Gentius, who has translated it into Latin, did
not well understand the Place: His Words are, Lingua quam callebat, convitiis
regem proscindere cepit. He ought to have translated, Lingua quam habebat, or
quae illi supererat; and to have understood it as I have done.

70. A King had no Love for one of his Sons, because he was little, and his
Looks not so taking as his Brothers. On a certain Day, this Prince perceiving
that his Father looked upon him with Contempt; Sir, says he, a wise and prudent
diminutive Man, is better than a dull and stupid overgrown Sot; whatever is
big and bulky, is not always the mostprecious: the Sheep is white and neat, and
the Elephant ugly and unclean.

Observation. Time showed that this Prince had more Heart than his Brothers;
for he signalized himself in the War, whilst his Brothers had not the Courage
to face the Enemy.

71. A King having embarked at one of his Ports, was no sooner on Board but
one of his Pages began to tremble for Fear, and howl most hideously: And
whatever could be said to quiet him, his Howlings and his Fears increased; so
that the King was disturbed with them. At last one of the Prince's Retinue
said, That if his Majesty would give him Leave, he would find means to make him
hold his Tongue. The King having consented, the other caused the Page to be
thrown overboard; but the Seamen being fore-warned of what they were to do,
plunged him only twice or thrice, and drew him up again by the Hair, just as he
laid hold on the Rudder of the Ship, believing they really designed to drown
him. When they had drawn him up, he slunk into a Corner, and was as still as he
was loud before. The King being well pleased with the Cure, asked the Man who
had wrought it, the Reason of it: The Page answered, He neither knew before
what it is to be plunged into the Sea, nor what it is to be freed from the Fear
of immediate Drowning; so that the Danger he had been in, makes him better
relish the Pleasure of having escaped.

72. Hormouz King of Persia, after he was raised to the Throne, caused his
Father's Viziers to be imprisoned: He was asked what Crimes they had committed
to deserve this hard Usage? I do not know that they are guilty of any, answered
the King. But notwithstanding the repeated Assurances I have given them of my
Goodness and Clemency, I perceive they are still possessed with Fear, and put
no Considence in my Words: This makes me fear lest they plot my Ruin; and in
this I have followed the Counsel of the Politicians, who say, We must fear him
that fears us.

Observation. Of four ancient Kings of Persia, named Hormouz, as will be
observed hereafter, this is the first or the second of that Name, because both
were good Princes. The third was a Tyrant, and the fourth reigned but one Year.

73. A King of the Arabians being decrepit with Age, and on his Deathbed, a
Courier came to tell him that his Troops had taken a certain Town, made the
Garrison Prisoners of War, and caused the People to submit to his Obedience.
Upon this, with a deep sigh, he cried, This News is nothing to me, it concerns
my Enemies.

Observation. He understood his Heirs, whom he looked upon as his Enemies.

74. Hagiage was a Governor of Arabia under the Reign of Calife Abd'ulmelec,
Son to Mervan of the Family of the Ommiades, but extremely hated by reason of
his Exactions and Cruelties. Once, meeting with a Derviche of Bagdat, he
recommended himself to his Prayers. Presently the Derviche lifting his Eyes to
Heaven, said, Great God, take his Soul. Hagiage was not satisfied with that
Prayer, but murmured at it. But the Derviche replied: It i^ good for you and
for all the Mussulmans.

Observation. Abul-pharage in his History calls this Governor Hagiage, Son to
Jousouf, and the Author of the Gulistan, Hagiage Jousouf. It must also be
observed, that Abd'ulmelec Son to Mervan was made Calife in the 60th Year of
the Hegyra, and therefore the Author of the Gulistan is mistaken when he says
that this Derviche was of Bagdat, since this Town was not built till the 145th
Year of the Hegyra, of our Lord 762.

75. A Prince succeeding the King his Father, became Master of a considerable
Treasure, of which he was very liberal to his Troops and other Subjects. One of
his Favorites imprudently playing the Privy-Counsellor, said to him, Your
Ancestors, Sir, have ^oarded up this Treasure with great Trouble and Care: You
ought not then to lavish it away with so much Profuseness as you do. You know
not what may happen to you hereafter, and you have prying Enemies that eye you:
Take care lest you should fall in want. The King, incensed at that Advice,
replied; God has given me a Kingdom to enjoy it, and to be liberal, and not
barely to be the Keeper of a Treasure.

76. Venison was roasted for Nouschirvan King of Persia, in the very place
where he had hunted it himself: But when he went to sit down to eat it, no Salt
was to be found; so a Page was sent to the next Village for some, and ordered
by Nouschirvan to pay for it, lest it should become an evil Cust^m, and the
Village should suffer. A Courtier said, that was not worth speaking of* neither
could he see what Harm could arise from it. But Nouschirvan replied: All the
Vexations in the World have proceeded from small Beginnings, and afterward
have so much increased, that they have attained that (...) height we see them
at.

77. It Is past Dispute, that the Lion is the noblest, and the Ass the vilest of
all Beasts; yet the Wise say, An Ass that carries his Burden, is better than a
Lion that devours Men.

78. A griping Woodmonger bought Wood of the poor Peasa^ts at a low ra^e, and
sold it very dear to the Ri^h. One Night a Fire broke out in his Ki^chin, and
spread till it reached his vast Stores of Wood, and consumed them altogether.
Sometime after, while he said, I don't know how the Fire begun in my House; one
of the Company told him, It broke out by the Smoke that went out of the Heart
of the Poor whom your Covetousness h^s undone.

79. A Wr^stling-Master of 360 Tricks of his Art, had taught 359 to one of his
Disciples, and kept but one for himself. The Scholar being young and active,
had made so good use of his Master's Lessons, that he made bold to challenge
him: The Master accepted the Challenge, and they both appeared before the
Sultan, and a great Crowd of People. The Master, who knew very well that his
Scholar was stronger than he, gave him no time to make an Advantage of it, but
presently lifted him up very artfully from the Ground with both Hands, and
threw him over his Head upon the Ground, which caused the Spectators to give a
joyful Shout. The Sultan rewarded the Master and blamed the Scholar, who yet
said he had not been overcome by Force, but merely by a Trick of the Art, that
had been concealed from him. The Master replied; I grant it, I had kept it for
such a day as this, according to the Maxim of the Wise: That how great soever
our Affections be for a Man, we must never give him such an Advantage over us,
as might cause him to prevail if he became our Enemy.

Observations. There are yet Wrestlers among the Eastern Nations, like those of
the Ancients: These have nothing on when they wrestle, except Leather Breeches
from the Knees to the Loins, and they besmear their Body with Oil for that
purpose.

80. A King passed by a Derviche, who did not so much as lift up his Head to
look upon him. The King being one of those who are offended at the least thing,
was incensed at this want of Respect, and said: This sort of dirty Fellows in
Rags are mere Brutes. The Vizier also said to the Derviche, Why do you not pay
to the King the Respect that is due to him? The Derviche answered; Let the King
expect Veneration from those that expect his Favor: but know that Kings are
established for the Preservation of their Subjects; but that the same
Obligation lies not upon Subjects to pay Respect to Kings. The King having
heard his bold Discourse, desired the Derviche to ask him something. I only ask
said the Derviche, that you may let me alone.

Observation. Diogenes made very near the same Complement to Alexander, which
is not strange; for most of these Derviches are, properly speaking, the
Sectators of that Chief of the Cynick Philosophers: they affect to show the
same Indifference for the things of this World.

81. Nouschirvan in his Council was debating a very weighty Affair: The Viziers
proposed every one his Opinion; Nouschirvan proposed also his. Bouzourgemhir
followed it, and being asked, Why he had preferred the King's Opinion to those
of the Viziers? he answered; The Success of the Affair in Hand is uncertain,
and therefore I thought it was better to follow the King's Advice, that we
might be free from his Anger if the thing proved unsuccessful.

82. A wandering Rascal who had assumed the Dress of one of Ali's Progeny, came
to a Metropolis with the Caravan of the Pilgrims of Mecca, and reported
everywhere that he came from that Pilgrimage. Having intruded into the Court,
he read to the King a piece of Poetry, of which he pretended to be the Author.
One of the chief Officers newly come from the Army, said to the King; I have
seen him at Ba^ra on the Festival Day of the Sacrifice, how can he say he has
performed the Pilgrimage of Mecca? Besides his Father is a Christian of the
Town of Malatia. What Relation is there between a Nephew of Ali and a
Christian? Besides, the Poetry he had recited as his own was discovered to be
the Poet Envert's. The King, who perceived he was a Cheat, ordered him some
Blows, and Banishment. At this Order my Gentleman threw himself at the King's
Feet, saying: I beseech your Majesty to give me l^ave to say but one word for
my self, and I Will submit to any Punishment whatever, if what I say be not true.
The King consented, and said, What have thou to say? Travelers, replied he,
may lie by Authority.

Observations. The Pilgrims of Mecca celebrate the Festival of the Sacrifice on
the Mountain Ararat, where they offer every one a Sheep: But since on that Day
the pretended Pilgrim was at Ba^ra on the Persian Gulf, which is very far from
that Mountain Ararat; it is an infallible Sign he was not a Pilgrim of Mecca.

Malatia is a Town of Nat^lia in the ancient Cappadocia.

Enveri is an Ancient Persian Poet.

83. Two Brothers were in Posts very different from each other: One was in the
Service of the Sultan* and the other earned his Livelihood by the Sweat of his
Brows; so that one lived at Ease, and the other had much ado to get Bread. The
Rich said to the Poor, Why don't you get into the Sultan's Service as I have
done; you would free your self from so many Plagues you must undergo? The Poor
replied; And you, why do you not work to free your self from such a
contemptible Slavery.

84. A Courier came to Nouschirvan, and told him, that God had freed him from
an Enemy. He asked, Are you not also to tell me that I shall always live, and
never die?

85. In the same Nouschirvan's Council, where he was present, an Affair was
debating, and every Vizier except Bouzourgemhir delivered his Opinion. The
others asking the Reason of his Silence, he answered, Viziers are like
Physicians, who give Remedies to the Sick only when they are in great danger:
You all say so many good things, that I were to blame should I add any thing of
my own.

86. The Calife Haroun Erreschid, having conquered Egypt, placed there one
Cosaib, the vilest of his Slaves, for a Governor. The Reason he gave for it
was, his Indignation against Pharaoh, who would have been taken for a God. Now
Cosaib was a Negro, as dull and rustic as may be imagined; as he showed
himself in several Occasions, especially in this. The Husbandmen in hopes of
some Diminution of the Taxes they lay under, presented him a Petition upon an
Inundation of the Nile; which had unhappily destroyed all the Cotton they had
sown. Cosaib answered; You ought to have sown Wool, it would not have been lost.

87. Alexander the Great was asked, How he had been able to subdue the East and
the West? a thing which other Monarchs of riper Years had not been able to
perform with greater Treasures, State and Forces. He answered; I did no Harm to
the Nations I conquered with God's Assistance, and never said any thing but
Good of the Kings with whom I had to do.

Observation. Alexander the Great is famous amongst the Mahometans under the
Name of Iskender; but they are divided as to the Nation whence he was
originally. Some write that he was Son to Darab King of Persia; and that having
ascended the Throne after Dara his elder Brother, the same with Darius, he
conquered the whole World. Others come nearer the Truth, saying he was the Son
of Phillip. Both agree as to the Extent of his Conquests; and ascribe him very
great Wisdom improved by Aristotle his Master. They say likewise, that in the
Course of his Victories, he sought for the Fountain of Life: but it was only
discovered by Hizir General of his Army; and in their Meaning this Hizir is the
same with Elijah, who is not dead, because he drank of this Water. They
likewise called him the Horned, because of his great Power in the East, and in
the West. I am almost persuaded that the Eastern Nations have given him that
Denomination on occasion of the Greek Medals of Lysimachus, especially those of
Silver; where he is represented with Horns: and that those Medals being fallen
into their Hands, they took them for Medals of Alexander, because they could
not read Greek; so that they could not distinguish one from the other: Besides,
that those Medals being larger than those of Alexander, those Nations seem the
more excusable for having inferred from their Largeness and Beauty, that they
were rather made for Alexander than for any other.

88. A Derviche being invited to the Sultan's Table, did eat much less than he
used to do at home, to make his Sobriety observable; and after the Meal, made
his Prayer longer than others, that he might raise a proportionable Opinion of
his Devotion. When he came home, he ordered some Meat to be got ready, saying
that he would eat. His Son who had some Wit, said to him, But, Father, have you
not eaten at the King's Table? Not much, answered the Derviche, lest either he
or his Courtiers should say, I am a great Eater. The Son replied, Then, Father,
I doubt you must say your Prayer over again; for I fancy it is little better
than the Meal.

Observation. On occasion of this Son of the Derviche, it is good to observe,
that though the Derviches lead an austere Life, which might persuade us they
have some relation to Monks and Friars* yet most or all of them are married,
except the Calenders. The Mahometans find no fault with it, having this Maxim
amongst them; That there is no monastie Life in the Mussulman Religion, La
rubbaniet filis^am; by which they mean, that the Vow of Chastity is not
admitted among them.

89. The Author of the Gulistan, writing concerning himself, has these words:
While I was very young, I used to watch and read the Alcoran: One Night, as I
was in that Exercise, and all our Family asleep except my Father, near whom I
was; See, Father, said I to him, none so much as lifts up his Head to pray to
God; but all are so fast asleep, that they seem to be dead. My Father stopped my
Month, saying, It were better you should sleep as they do, than to observe
their Faults as you do.

90. In an Assembly a Person of Quality was commended for his Prudence, and a
very honorable Character given of him. The Party concerned lifted up his Head,
and said; I am such as I know my self to be.

91. A King asked a Derviche, Whether he did sometimes remember him in his
Prayers? Yes, answered the Derviche, I remember you when I don't think on God.

92. A devout Man saw in a Dream a King in Paradise, and a Derviche in Hell;
and being surprised at it, would needs know why he had seen them both in Places
so different from those in which they are imagined to be after Death? It was
answered him, That the King was in Paradise for having loved the Derviches, and
the Derviche in Hell for his servile Dependence on Kings.

93. A certain Derviche who eat 10 Pound of Bread per diem, and spent the whole
Night in Prayers, was told by a Man of Sense, that it were better for him to
sleep, and eat but half so much Bread.

94. The Author of Gulistan says further, in speaking of himself; I was a Slave
at Tripoli amongst the Franks, and a certain Friend from Halep knowing me as he
passed by, redeemed me for ten Pieces of Gold, and carried me with him to
Halep; where he gave me his Daughter in Marriage, and an hundred Pieces with
her for her Portion. But being a wicked ill-tougu'd Scold, she reproached me
sometime after with my Poverty, and told me that her Father had redeemed me
from the Chains of the Franks (...). I answered, It is true he procured my
Liberty for ten Pieces* but he made me your Slave for a hundred.

95. A certain King being about an Affair of great Importance, made a Vow that
if he accomplished his Design, he would distribute a considerable Sum amongst
the Derviches. The Affair succeeding according to his Desire; the King that he
might be as good as his Word, put the Money in a Purse, and gave it to an
Officer to distribute: but the Officer knowing what sort of Men the Derviches
were, kept the Purse till Night; and restoring it to the King, told him he
could find never a Derviche. How Is that, answered the King, I know there are
above 400 in the Town. The Officer replied, Sir, the Derviches take no Money,
and those who do are no Derviches.

96. One having asked a certain Learned Man, what he thought of the
Distribution of Bread settled upon the Derviches? He was answered, that if the
Derviches did eat with a Design to make themselves stronger for the Service of
God, they might lawfully eat thereof; but if they become Derviches only that
they may eat, they eat their own Damnation.

97. A Derviche having left his Convent, and betaken himself to hear the
Lectures of a Professor in a certain College; I asked him, (says the Author of
Gulistan) seeing he had changed his Profession, What Difference he found
betwixt a Learned Man and a Derviche? He answered, That a Derviche did withdraw
himself from the Waves and Tempests of the World, but a Learned Man did also
withdraw others.

Observation. The Derviches amongst the Mahometans don't enter into such strict
Vows as the Religious amongst the Papists; but do freely quit their Habit, Rule
and Cloister, to embrace what other Profession they please. The Mahometans have
a great Number of Colleges founded by Sultans, and private Persons; where there
are Pensions settled upon Professors to teach those things which are necessary
for acquiring the Title of Learned, at which they arrive by degrees, as our
Doctors do in the Universities of Europe; and the Sciences which they learn,
are all of them concerning Religion and the Laws, which amongst them are
unseparable.

98. A Mohammedan who had given many Proofs of his extraordinary Strength, being
in such a Passion that he was stark mad, and foamed at the Mouth, a certain
Sage who knew him, seeing him in that Condition, inquired what was the Matter;
and understanding that some Body had spoke ill of him, answered, How, can that
Wretch carry a thousand Weight, and is he not able to bear one Word?

Observation. That it is more emphatical in the Persian; for the same Word that
signifies to carry or bear, signifies also to bear up under, or to support.

99. An old Man of Bagdat having married his Daughter to a Shoemaker, he
kissed her so hard, that he bit her Lip till it bled again: whereupon the old
Man told him, that his Daughter's Lips were not of Lather.

100. A Learned Man being at a loss how to dispose of his Daughter she was so
very ugly, though she h^d a vast Portion, did at last marry her to a blind Man.
That same Year an Empiric^, who restored the Blind to their Sight, arrived in
the Island of Serendib; and the Learned Man being asked why he did not make use
of him for his Son-in-Law, he answered, I am afraid, if he could see, that he
would put away my Daughter she is so very ugly; and therefore it is better that
he continue blind.

Observation. Serendib is the same with the Island of Ceylon, and that which
the Ancients called Taprobane.

101. A Derviche speaking to a King who had no great Esteem for those of his
Profession, says to him, We have neither the Might nor Power which you have in
this World, yet we live more contentedly than you; Death will at last make us
equal, and at the Day of Judgment we shall have the Advantage to be above you.

Observation. The Mahometans do expect a Day of universal Judgment as well as
we, for the Punishment of the Wicked, and the Reward of the Just.

102. In the City of Halep a poor African said to some rich Merchants, who were
assembled together; Gentlemen, if you who are rich, would do what in Equity you
are obliged to do; and if we poor Men could be therewith contented, there would
be no more Beggars in the World.

103. There were two Princes, Sons to a King of Egypt; the one of which applied
himself to the Study of Sciences, and the other to heap up Riches: The latter
became King, and upbraided his Brother as having but little of the World for
his share. But the Prince replied, Brother, I bless God that I have the
Inheritance of the Prophets, that is, Wisdom, for my Share; whereas yours is
only the Lot of Pharaoh and Haman, viz. the Kingdom of Egypt.

Observation. This Pharaoh, according to the Mohammedan Traditions, is he who
was drowned in the Red Sea; and Haman was his Chief Minister, who put his
wicked Designs in Execution. He was also, according to them, the first of the
Egyptian Kings named Pharaoh, and of a very low Extract. His History they give
thus; That his Father was one Massib a Cow-keeper, who dying, and leaving him
an Infant, his Mother bred him a Joiner; but not liking that Trade, he put
himself Prentice to a Coster-monger, but did not continue long at that
Employment neither. Then he fell a Merchandising; but was also disgusted with
that way of Living, because at a certain Pass they exacted a Toll of him equal
in value to his Merchandise; so that out of Spite, he turned Highway-man. At
last he found Means to post himself at one of the Gates of the Metropolis of
Egypt, todemand a Toll in the King's Name of every thing that came in or went
out, tho without any Warrant; but being discovered, by exacting the same Toll
on the Corpse of one of the King's Daughters who was going to be interred, he
redeemed himself from Death by the great Sums which he had amassed. Fortune
however did not abandon him, he found a Way still to be made Captain of the
Watch; and when advanced to that Charge, had an express Order from the King of
Egppt to put to Death all those whom he found abroad in the Night. The King
himself going abroad one Night to communicate some secret Affair to one of his
Ministers, without giving notice thereof to Pharaoh, was seized by the Watch;
who would not believe him to be the King, and brought him before Pharaoh, who
would not believe him neither, but forced him to a-light from his Horse, and
cut off his Head: And after the Action, having discovered that it was really
the King, finding himself strong enough he went and forced the Palace, and
declared himself King. He introduced Idol-worship, and would be owned as God
himself. In fine, he pursued the Israelites, and was drowned in the Red Sea.
All these Particulars are to be found in the History of the Prophets of Kesani.

104. A King of Persia sent a Physician to Mahomet, who staid some Years in
Arabia without any Practice; whereat being aggrieved, he presented himself to
Mahomet, and, complaining, told him, that those who had a Right to command him,
had sent him thither to profess Physic, but that no Body had made use of him;
so that he had never sound any Occasion to let them see what he could do.
Mahomet answered, It is the Custom of our Country not to eat but when we are
hungry, and to leave off with an Appetite. The Physician replied, That Is the
Way to preserve Health, and have no need of a Doctor; and taking his Leave,
returned to Persia.

105. Ardeschir Babekan King of Persia, asked of an Arabian Physician, how much
Nourishment was needful per diem? who answered, One hundred Drachms: the King
said, that was not enough to furnish Strength. The Physician replied, that is
enough to carry you; but if you take more, you must carry it.

Observation. Ardeschir Babekan was the first of that Race of the Kings of
Persia, who reigned until such time as they were expelled by the Mahometans.
His Father's Name was Sasan; whence it came to pass, that he and the following
Kings were called Sasanians, according to the Ancient History of the Persians,
or what remains of it in the Arabian Writings.

106. Two Sophies of the City of Vasete took Meat of a Butcher upon Credit, and
did not pay him; whereupon he dunn'd them every Day with ill Language, which
put 'em to mighty Shame; but they bore it patiently, because they had no Money.
A certain witty Man who perceived how it was with them, told that it was much
easier to entertain their Appetites with the hopes of good Cheer, than to
entertain the Butcher with the hopes of his Pay.

Observations. The Sophies are the most eminent and noted of all the Religious
Mahometans, both because of their Orthodox Sentiments as to Religion, the
Regulation of their Life, and the Purity of their Morals, according to the
Original of their Name, which signifies Pure and chosen Ones. The Kings of
Persia, of the present Race, are also called by the Name of Sophi, as deriving
their Original from Mouca Cassem the seventh of the 12 Imams, who died about
the Year of the Heg^ra 183, and of Christ 799. pretending that the Sect of Ali,
from which the 12 Ima^s are descended, is the best and most pure, because their
Ancestors have always distinguished themselves by a singular Zeal for the
Mohammedan Religion.

The City of (...) was formerly a considerable Town in that Part of Arabia
which carries the Name of Erak.

107. An officious Mohammedan entertained a Derviche belonging to a very rich
Man, and told him he was persuaded that that Man would be very bountiful to him
if he were well informed of his Poverty; nay, he was at the trouble himself to
go to the rich Man's Gate, and procure him Entrance. The Derviche went in, but
seeing the Man melancholy and hanging his Lip, he came out again imm^diately,
without so much as speaking one word to him. His Guide, who waited for him,
asked why he came out so speedily? To which he answered, I did not like his
Looks; I acquit him from all the Charity that ever I expected from him.

108. Hatemtai was in his time the most bountiful and freehearted of all the
Arabians; and being asked, If ever he had seen or heard of any one Man who had
a nobler Heart than himself? He answered, That one Day after I had made a
Sacrifice of forty Camels, I went out to the Fields with some Arabian Lord,
and seeing a Man who had gathered a Burden of dry Thorns to burn, I asked him,
why he did not go to Hatemtai, where there was a great Concourse or People to
partake of his Feast? he answered me, He that can furnish himself Bread by his
own Labor, needs not be obliged to Hatemtai: This Man, said he, had a nobler
Soul than I.

109. A certain King having need of a Sum of Money to give the Tartars to
prevent their Incursions ino his Country, understood that a Beggar had a very
considerable Sum by him; and sending for him, demanded part of it in loan,
promising that it should be repaid as soon as the Revenues came in. The Beggar
answered, That it would be very unworthy in his Majesty to defile his Hands
with that Money which he had scraped together by Begging. To which the King
replied, That he needed not trouble himself about that; it was to be given to
the Tartars, so that it would be such Men such Money.

Observation. These Tartars are those of Grand Tartary, who have been always
accustomed to make Incursions upon their Neighbors; and from them the Crim
Tartars, though they have been separated a long time, do still retain this
Custom; which has cost the Germans and Poles so many Thousands of Men since
the beginning of the last War.

110. The Author of Gulistan, from whom we have had some of the preceding
Articles, speaks of himself in the following Terms: I knew, says he, a Merchant
who traveled with a hundred Camels laden with Merchandise, and had forty
Slaves and Domestics to wait upon him. One Day he got me along with him into
his Warehouse, and entertained me the whole Night with a Discourse which had
no end: He told me that he had such a Man for his Partner at Turquestan, such
and such Funds in the Indies. Then he showed me a Bond due to him for so much
Money in such a Province, and told me that he had such a Man bound for such
another Sum; and then changing his Note, he said that he designed to settle
himself in Alexandria, because there they had a good Air: but correcting
himself forthwith, No, says he, I will not go thither, the African Sea is too
dangerous; I have a Mind to take one Journey more, and after that will retire
to a Corner of the World, and leave off Trading. I asked him what Journey that
was? He answered, that he would carry Sulphur from Persia into China, where it
is sold at a great Price; from thence I will bring China-Ware to sell in
Greece; and from Greece, I will carry Stuffs of Gold to the Indies; from the
Indies, I will bring Steel to Halep; from Halep, I will trade with Glass into
Arabia Foelix; and from Arabia Foelix, I will carry painted Cloths into Persia;
and when I have done this, I will bid farewell to Trade, which is carried on by
so many toilsom Journies, and spend the rest of my days in a Shop. He spoke so
much upon this Subject, that at last he made himself weary, and concluded with
an Address to me to tell him something of what I had seen and learned in my
Travels: To which I answered, by asking him if he had ever heard what a certain
Traveller said when he fell from his Camel in the Desert of Gour, viz. That
there were only two things which were capable of filling the covetous Man's
Eye, viz. Sobriety, or the Earth which is thrown upon him after his Death.

Observations. This Narrative is not only excellent for the Character which it
gives of a Merchant who sets no Bounds to his Avarice, but is also curious in
imparting to us after what Manner, and with what Sorts of Merchandise they
trade in the Levant. Those long Journies abovementioned, are at this very Day
undertaken by Land; and oftentimes one Man performs them all, and sometimes
more.

Turquestan is a Province of Great Tartary, of vast Extent, of which the City
of Caschgar is the Metropolis: It took its Name from the Turks who inhabit the
same; and from thence it is that vast Swarms of People of that Name have come
at different times, of which the Turks who do now enjoy the Empire of
Constantinople, are a part.

By the African Sea, the Author of Gulistan understands the Mediterranean,
which washes the Coast of Africa on the South: And as to his calling it
dangerous, it was because the Christians were Masters of it in his time, and
that the Mahometans had not a free Trade therein.

The Desert of Gour lies upon the River Jordan, betwixt Damascus and the
Dead-Sea, through which lies the Road from Syria to Arabia. There is also a
Country of this Name near the River Indus, which borders upon the Khorassan.

111. The same Author of Gulistan says of himself, that a certain Man of little
Sense, but big and fat, and richly clothed, passing by on a brave Arabian
Horse, and having an huge Turban upon his Head, he was asked, What he thought
of the Brocard with which that great Fellow was clothed? To which he answered,
That it was just like sorry Writing in Characters of Gold.

Observation. At this very Day those belonging to the Law in Constantinople,
viz. the Mufti, the Cadileskers, the Mullas, or the Cadis of the first degree,
wear Turbans of a surprising Bigness; for without an Hyperbole, there are some
of them almost two Foot broad. They are made with very much Art and Curiosity;
and though they be so mighty large, yet are very light, there being nothing in
them but the sinest of Cloth and Cot^on: and when any of these Gentlemen fall
short of the Capacity which they ought to have, then woe be to him; for the
Turks in imitation of the Author of Gulistan, make their Mocks at him and his
big Turban.

112. An Highway-Man asked a Beggar if he were not ashamed to hold out his Hand
to every Body that he met, and beg Money? The Beggar answered, It is better to
hold out the Hand to obtain a Farthing, than to have it cut off for robbing a
Penny.

113. A Merchant having had a considerable Loss, forbad his Son to speak of it
to any Body: the Youth promised to obey, but asked what Advantage he should
have by his Silence? The Father answered, that thereby we shall only have one
Misfortune to bear instead of two, viz. the Loss it self, and our Neighbors
rejoicing at it.

114. A certain young Man who had made a great progress in his Studies, but
naturally ^imorous and reserved, being at a time among other Students, did not
speak one word: His Father thereupon says to him, Son, why don't you also show
us something of what you know? The young Man answered; Because I am afraid that
something be also asked at me that I know not.

115. Galen seeing a base common Fellow treat a Man of Learning in a scurrilous
manner, said concerning the Learned Man, that he would not have had any thing
to do with the other, if he had been really a Man of Letters.

Observation. Galen was not only a Physician, but a great Philosopher; and
therefore we have no Reason to wonder that Saadi should have mentioned this
witty Saying of his; which he might have learned from some Greek Book
translated into Arabic, or from some Learned Christian in his Travels.

116. The Courtiers of Sultan Mahomet Sebecteghin asked at Hassan de Meimend,
Grand Vizier to that Prince, what the Sultan said to him concerning a certain
Affair? The Vizier begged their Pardon, saying, that he would take care how he
informed those of any thing, who knew every thing. They replied; You are
Minister of State, and the Sultan will not stoop so low as to communicate to
such as we, what he will communicate to you. The Vizier rejoined, that is
because he knows that I will tell it to no Body, and therefore you don't do
well to ask me such Questions.

Observation. Meimend is a City of Khorassan, the Birthplace of the Grand
Vizier to Sultan Mahomet Sebecteghin.

117. Saadi says also, in speaking of himself, that he was about buying a
House: but not fully resolved on it, when a certain Jew said to him, I am one
of the Elders of the Quarter; you cannot make Application to a fitter Man than
my self, to tell you what that House is, buy it upon my word, I Will engage to
you that it has no fault. Whereupon I answered him, says Saadi, it has one
great one, viz. to have such a Neighbor as you.

Observation. That though the Mahometans have a great Aversion for all those
who are not of their Religion, yet they hate the Jews more than they do the
Christians; and therefore it was, that Saadi was unwilling to hire an House in
that Quarter where there were Jews.

118. A Poet going to see a Captain of Robbers, repeated some Verses which he
had made in his Commendation; but instead of being pleased with his Verses, he
ordered him to be stripped and chased out of the Village, and set the Dogs after
him. The Poet stooped to take up a Stone to defend himself against the Dogs;
but it was frozen so hard that he could not pull it up: whereupon the Poet
said, These Highway-Men are wicked People, they let loose the Dogs, and fasten
the Stones.

Observation. The Author of Gulistan adds, that this witty Saying made the
Captain of the Highway-Men laugh, who heard it from a Window; so that he called
to the Poet to ask what he pleased, and he should have it. The Poet answered
him, If you have a mind to do me a Kindness, I demand no more but the Garment
that you have robbed me of: The Captain of the Highway-Men taking Compassion on
him, did not only restore his own, but gave him another furred Vest.

119. An Husband lost his Wife, who was a great Beauty; but her Mother, who was
very hateful to him, dwelt still with him by virtue of a Clause in the
Agreement at her Daughter's Marriage, in case she survived her. A Friend asked
him, How he took with the Loss of his Wife? To which he answered, That I am not
so much troubled that my Wife is dead, as that her Mother is alive.

120. I lodged, says the Author of Gulistan, with an old rich Man at Diarbekir,
who never had any Children but one Son, who was then in Company: the old Man
told me, that God had often heard his Prayers in a Valley not far from the
Town, where great Devotion used to be performed near a certain Tree. His Son,
who heard those Words, said, with a low Voice, to his Comrades, I wish I knew
where that Tree were, I would go thither, and pray for my Father's Death.

Observation. Diarbekir is a great City of Mesopotamia, which our Geographers
call by the Name of that same City; and being upon the Grand Signior's
Frontiers toward Persia, there is a Bassa there who has diverse Sangiacs under
him.

121. The same Author says of himself; That by an Excess of youthful Folly and
Passion, he did once on a time abuse his Mother with ill Language; who being
vexed at his bitter Taunts, retired to a Corner with Tears in her Eyes, and
said to me, Now that you have the Strength of a Lion, you have forgot that you
were once young, as appears by your being unsensible of what I have done for
you: You would not treat me thus as you do, if you remembered the Time of your
Infancy, and how I hugged you in my Bosom.

122 The Son of a certain covetous Wretch b^ing dangerously ill, his Friends
advised the Father either to cause the Alcoran to be read, or to offer a
Sacrifice, saying, that perhaps it might prevail with God to restore his Son's
Health. The Father, thinking upon this about the space of a Moment, said; It Is
best to read the Alcoran, because the Flock is at too great a distance. One of
those who heard this Answer, said, He prefers the Reading of the Alcoran,
because that is only Lip-labor; but the Money that he must have expended for a
Sacrifice, lies at the bottom of his Heart.

Observation. The Mahometans read, or cause to be read, either the whole
Alcoran, or Parts of it, on diverse Occasions, as for the Soul of the Deceased,
for one that is sick, before a Battle, in public Calamities, and other
pressing Necessities, as believing it a proper Method to appease the Wrath of
God; and they do also sacrifice Sheep upon the same account. Schahroch Son of
Tamerla^, being about to give Battle to Emir Cara Jousof, who had declared
himself King of Persia, and established his Throne at Tauriz, ordered the
Chapter of Conquest, which is the 48th of the Alcoran, and contains 29 Verses,
to be read 12000 times by the Hasiz; that is, those who have the Alcoran by
Heart, and followed his Army.

123. A certain old Man being asked, why he did not marry? answered, that he
did not care for old Women: To which it was replied, that it were easy for him
who was rich, to find a young one. To which he rejoined, seeing I do not care
for old Women, because I am old my self, how do you think that a young Woman
should have any Inclination or Love toward me?

124. A certain Sage said to an Indian who learned to throw Wildfire, That
Trade is not proper for you, whose House is built of Cane.

Observation. The Eastern People speak often of this Wildfire; and by their
Account of it, it would seem that they make use of Bitumen in the Composition.

125. A Mohammedan who was a silly Fellow, and had sore Eyes, addressed himself
to a Farrier for a Cure, who applied the same Plaster to him that he used to
do to the Horses: whereupon the Man became blind, and made his Complaints to
the Courts of Justice. The Cadis being informed of the Matter of Fact, chased
him away, saying, Be gone, you have no Cause of Action against this Man; for
you would never have gone to a Farrier instead of a Physician, if you had not
been an Ass.

126. A Son being sat in a Churchyard on the Tomb of his Father, who had left
him a great Estate, discoursed thus to the Son of a poor Man: My Father's Tomb
is of Marble, his Epitaph writ in Characters of Gold, and the Pavement round
the same of regular inlaid Work: But your Father's Tomb, what is it? two
Bricks, one at Head and another at Feet, with two Inch thick of Mould upon his
C^rps. The poor Man's Son answered, Hold your Peace; for before your Father
shall be able to move the Stone, with which he is covered, at the Day of
Judgment, my Father will be arrived in Paradise.

Observation. It is the Custom of the Mahometans to put one Stone at the Foot,
and another at the Head of the Tombs of their Deceased; and according to the
Person's Estate, those Stones are the more or less polished or adorned: and
oftentimes they put fine white Marble instead of the Stones; and then the
Marble or Stone is in form of a Column, and very often with a Turban cut out
upon the Head thereof, conformable to the Profession of the Deceased; or with a
Woman's Head-dress if it be that of a Woman: and upon the Column there is
usually an Epitaph in Sculpture, or in Characters engraven in Relief; for I do
not remember that I have seen any engraven hollow, as we do usually in Europe.
The Epitaph does for the most part contain the Profession of the Mohammedan
Religion, the Name and Quality of the Deceased, with an Invitation to those
that pass by to repeat the first Chapter of the Alcoran for the repose of his
Soul. And some of them are in Characters of Gold. The richer Sort are at great
Expense in Representations, and in the Neighboring Buildings; as Mosques,
Hospitals, Fountains and Schools, with Revenues for their Maintenance. The
public Burying places are always without the Gates of the Cities; and none are
interred in the Cities but Princes, and Persons of great Note, who are buried
with their Families near the Mosques which they founded. This same Method is
observed in Villages and Country Towns, where the Burying-places are always
apart from the rest of the Houses, and along by the Highway, that those who
pass by may be thereby excited to pray for the Souls of those who are interred
there: And besides the Stones and Marble, there are Places where the Friends of
the Deceased plant Rosemary, or some other Plant, at the Head and Feet of the
Deceased: And in some Places, Women go on Fridays and lament over the
Sepulchers of their Husbands, or other Relations and Friends.

127. The Great Iskender, or Alexander the Great, having taken a certain Town,
he was informed that there was a Philosopher of great Note in the same; and
ordering him to be brought before him, he was amazed to see him such a deformed
Fellow, and could not forbear to utter some words, which signified as much: The
Philosopher understood him, and although he was in great disorder, because of
the Sacking of his Country; yet answered, smiling, It is true that I am
deformed; but you must consider my Body as the Scabbard, whereof my Soul is the
Sword, and that it is the Sword which cuts and not the Scabbard.

Observation. I don't remember this Passage of Alexander the Great in any Greek
or Latin Author, nor never heard that any of 'em did mention it; neither do I
find that any of the Philosophers, whose Names are come to our Knowledge, did
ever mention it; and in effect, it savours more of the Sagacity of the Eastern
People, than of the Greeks. But however that is, it deserves to be remarked;
and the Easterlings not knowing the true Author, may be allowed to ascribe it
to Alexander the Great, whom they have ranked amongst the Heroes of their
Country.

128. A Philosopher said, I have writ 50 Volumes of Philosophy, but they did
not please me; I extracted 60 Maxims out of them, neither did they give me
Satisfaction: In sine, I picked out 4 from amongst those 60, wherein I found
what I sought for, which are as follow, viz.

Never esteem Women so much as you do Men; for a Woman is always a Woman, let
her Birth and Quality be never so good.

Let your Riches be as great as possible, set not your Heart upon them, because
the Revolutions of Time scatter them.

Discover your Secrets to no Body, no not to your most intimate Friends;
because it happens oft-times that Friends fall out, and then become Enemies to
one another.

Set your Heart upon nothing in the World but Knowledge, accompanied with good
Works, for you will be found criminal at the Hour of Death if you despise that.

129. The Philosophers of the Indies had a Library so large, that no fewer than
1000 Camels were sufficient to transport it. Their King wished that they would
make an Abridgment of it; and then they reduced it to 100 Camels Load; and
after many other Retrenchments, this Abridgment was brought into four Maxims:
The First concerned Kings, saying that they ought to be just. The Second
respected the People, saying that they ought to be pliable and obedient. The
Third regarded Health, and ordered that we should not eat but when we are
hungry: And the Fourth recommended it to Women to turn away their Eyes from
Strangers, and to hide their Countenance from those to whom they were not
allowed to show it.

Observation. As to that of the Library carried by Camels, Saheb Son to Ibad,
who was Grand Vizier to two Kings of Persia of the Boian Race, a great Lover of
Learning, and who died in the 385 of the Hegyra, and the 995 of Christ, had a
Library which was always carried after him by 400 Camels, even in those
Campagns which he was obliged to make. The Grand Vizier Kupruli, who was killed
at the Battle of Salankement, had a well furnished Library, and never went to
any Place without several Coffers full of Books; for he spent all the Time that
he could spare from his Business in Reading or Teaching, which he practiced
particularly at the beginning of this last War with the Emperor, when he had no
Employment till after the Death of the Grand Vizier Cara Mustapha Pacha, who
procured his Disgrace because he was the only Man in Council who opposed him as
to the Declaring of that War: and during that Interval, he gave a Lesson every
Day to 60 Scholars, whom he did also maintain and clothe. There are many
perhaps who will not believe this, because they have not been accustomed to see
such things; but this was transacted upon a Theater public enough, viz. in the
Middle of Constantinople.

130. Four potent Monarchs, in different Places of the Earth, did each of them
utter a Remarkable Saying much to the same purpose. One of them, a King of
Persia, said, That he never repented of having held his Peace; but that he had
repented full sore of several things that he had spoken. Another, being Emperor
of Greece, said, My Power over that which I have not spoken, is far greater
than over that which I have spoken, for I can no more conceal that which I have
once uttered. The third, being an Emperor of China, said, It is much more
vexatious to speak those things which we ought not to speak, than easy to
conceal our Repentance for having said it. The last was an Indian King, who
expressed himself thus; I am not Master of that which I have once spoken, but I
dispose of what I have not spoken as I please; and can say it, or not say it,
according as I list.

Observation. Instead of the Emperor of Greece, the Text of Gulistan says,
Emperor of Roum; which is the same thing, because in general under the Name of
Roum, the Easterlings understood all those Countries which were possessed by
the Romans: and though from the Romans those Countries passed to the Greeks,
yet they always retained the Name of Rome because of their first Original; at
which we have no reason to wonder: For ever since the Time of the Romans, the
Greeks have been called (...), and call themselves so to this Day. The word
Roum in particular, is also simply taken for the Countries which the
Selgiucides possessed in Anatolia, whose Capital was Iconium; and this did
occasion their assuming to themselves the Title of Kings of Roum. The Reason of
this was, because the Emperor of Constantinople having defended that Country a
long time against the Mahometans, who called them by the Name of the Emperors
of Roum, the first who seized that Country, and rendered themselves Masters
thereof, afterward affected to be called by that same Name.

131. Three Sages, one of them a Greek, another an Indian, and the third
Bouzourgemhir, discoursed together in presence of the King of Persia; and the
Subject of their Conversation was upon that Question, viz. Which of all things
was the most grievous? The Grecian Sage answered, Old Age overwhelmed with
Infirmities, Poverty and Want. The Indian Sage answered, Sickness, and to be
impatient under it. But Bouzourgemhir replied; The Approach of Death under want
of good Works: to whom all the Company agreed.

132. A Physician being asked, What was the best Time to eat; replied, It Is
best for the rich Man to eat when he is hungry, and for the poor Man to eat
when he can get it.

133. A Philosopher forbid his Son ever to go out in a Morning without eating;
for in that Case he would be of a better Temper of Mind; and if affronted by
any Body, would suffer it more patiently: for Hunger, says he, dries and turns
the Brains up-side down.

Observation. I know not whether the Easterlings do it because of this Maxim,
which is very true and full of good Sense; but generally they eat betimes, and
ordinarily before their Morning-Prayers, which they say before Sunrising: and
what they eat then is Milk, Liquid Confections, and other cool things, but no
Meat; after which they drink Coffee. It is certain that the serious, cloudy,
and melancholy Air which one may perceive in those that are fasting in a
Morning, does but too much prove the Necessity of putting this Maxim in
practice.

134. Bouzourgemhir being asked, Who was the justest King? answered, It is he
under whose Reign good Men are most at ease, and ill Men are most afraid.

135. The Arabians said to Hagiage their Governor, who treated them roughly;
Fear God, and don't torment the Mussulmans with your vexatious Doings. Hagiage
who was eloquent, went up to the Seat of Justice: and haranging them, said, God
has set me over you to be your Governor; and though I should die, you would
be nothing the happier, for God has many Servants such as I am; and when I am
dead, perhaps I shall be succeeded by a Governor more wicked than I.

136. Alexander the Great deprived an Officer of his Employment, and gave him
another of less Value; with which the Officer was contented: Some-time after
Alexander the Great saw the said Officer, and asked him, How he took with his
New Office? He answered respectfully, It is not the Office which makes him who
exercises the same, any thing the more noble or considerable; but the Office
becomes noble and considerable by the good Conduct of him who is in it.

Observation. Alexander the Great was very well satisfied with this Answer, and
restored the Officer to his first Employment. In the Eastern Courts which are
very stormy, the Courtiers have need of these sorts of Examples, to prevent
their falling into despair if they happen to be obliged to go back, after
having been advanced in Service.

137. A certain Derviche used to visit a Sultan very familiarly; but he
observed one Day that the Sultan did not look so kindly upon him as he had
usually done, and thinking what might be the Cause, conjectured that it might
be because he came to him too often: whereupon he forbore to visit, and make
his court to him as he was wont to do. Some time after the Sultan met him, and
asked, Why he forbore to visit him? The Derviche answered, I thought it better
to have your Majesty ask me that Question, than to witness your Displeasure at
my seeing you too often.

138. A Favorite...... to Cobad King of Persia, had a great deal of trouble to
keep in his Horse, which would needs be up foot-sides with the King's Cobad
taking notice of it, demanded of him what Regard Subjects ought to have for
their King when they...... The Favorite answered, The principal thing they are
to observe, is not to let their Horse eat so much Barley, as was customary, the
Night before they are to have the Honor...... that so they may avoid such
confusion as I am in at present.

Observation. Cobad King of Persia was Father to Nouschirvan, who succeeded
him; in whose Reign Mahomet was born. In the Levant they give Barley to their
Horses, and not Oats, they not being so common as Barley there.

139. Nouschirvan, King of Persia, having treated all his Court with a
magnificent Feast on the Day of Nevrouz, observed during the Treat, that a
Prince, one of his Kinsmen, hid one of the Golden Cups under his Arm, but took
no notice of it. When the Guests rose from Table, the Officer who had the
Charge of the Golden Vessels, cried, Let no Man go out, for he missed one of
his Golden Cups, and must have it again. Nouschirvan answered, Don't trouble
your self about that, he that took it will not restore it, and he who saw him
take it will not tell who is the Thief.

Observation. Nevrouz is the Day when the Sun entered into Aries, and signifies
the New Day, because among the Persians it is the first Day of the Solar Year;
which was observed in the Reigns of the ancient Persian Kings, but the
Mahometans observe the Lunar Year. Yet the Persians continue ever since to
celebrate that Solemn Festival upon the Day of Nevrouz, by a great Treat to
their Court; and at that time they drink all their Wine in Golden Cups, as may
be seen by the Relations of the Travelers of our Time.

140. Hormouz King of Persia, Son of Sapor, bought a Bargain of Pearls, which
cost him 100000 Pieces of Gold, but he was not pleased with them. One Day his
Grand Vizier told him that a Merchant offered 200000 for them, and that the
Gain being so considerable, he would do well to sell them, seeing his Majesty
did not like them. Hormouz answered, 100000 Pieces of Gold which we have
disburs'd, is a small thing for us; and the other 100000 which you propose, is
a Gain too inconsiderable for a King: and besides, if we play the Merchant, who
must act the King's Part, and what will become of the Merchants?

Observation. There were four Kings of Persia named Hormouz, according to the
Catalogue that we have in the Eastern Histories; and he who is mentioned here,
was the first of the Name, and third of the fourth, and last Race of the
Ancient Kings of Persia; which the same Historians call Sasanians, from Sasan
Father of Ardischir Babecan the first King of that Race. Sapor his Father
caused Tchendi Sapor in the Khouzistan to be built, from whence came the
Physician Bacht jesch^ua, of whom we spoke before. There was another Sapor King
of Persia before this; but he was of the Ascanian Race, as the Easterlings call
it, and are the same whom we call Arsacides. He was Successor to Ask, who gave
the Name to all the Race, and rendered himself so formidable to the Romans. Of
Ask the Greeks and Romans made Asak, and from Asack, Arsack; whence came the
Name of Arsacides.

141. During the Minority of Sapor, Son to Hormouz King of Persia, Tair Prince
of the Arabians made a cruel War upon the Persians; wherein he pillaged the
Capital of the Kingdom, and made Sapor's Sister a Slave. But when Sapor came of
Age to govern himself, he attacked Tair, and took him in a Fortress by the
Treachery of Metaca his own Daughter, who opened the Gate of the Fortress; and
having rid himself of Tair, he made a great Slaughter of the Arabians: and
being at last wearied of his Butchery, that he might render his Cruelty so much
the greater by a lingering Death, he ordered that they should only break the
Shoulder-Bones of such as they met. Melik, one of Mahomet's Ancestors, asked
him, What Animosity it was that inspired him with so much Cruelty against the
Arabians? Sapor answered, The Astrologers have told me, that the Destroyer of
the Kings of Persia was to be born amongst the Arabians; and it is in hatred of
him, that I exercise this Cruelty whereof you complain. Melik replied, It may
be that the Astrologers are mistaken; and if it should happen as they say, it
were better for you to cause this Butchery to cease, that so he may entertain
less Prejudice against the Persians when that time comes.

Observation. Sapor, mentioned in this Article, is the 2d of the Name of the
Race of the Sasanians, as his Father Hormouz was in like manner the 2d of that
Name of that same Race; and because of his Cruelty in breaking their Shoulders,
the Arabians gave him the Name of Sapor Zou l'^^ctaf; i. e. the
Shoulder-Breaker: and thus they did always distinguish him from others, when
they spoke of him in their Books.

142. A very young Highway-Man was brought before a Calife; who commanded that
his Right Hand should be cut off, saying, that so the Mussulmans might not be
exposed to his Robberies any more. The Highway-Man begged the Calife's Mercy,
saying, God made me with both Hands, I pray you don't suffer me to be made
Left Handed. The Calife commanded still to cut off his Hand, for it was against
the Will of God that Robbers should be suffered. The Criminal's Mother being
present, answered, O Emperor of the Faithful, he is my Son, and gets my Living
by the Labor of his Hands, I beseech you that you would not suffer him to be
maimed for my sake. The Calife persisted in his Resolution, and said, I will
not take his Crime upon me. His Mother insisted, and said, O Emperor consider
his Crime as one of those for which you beg God's Pardon every Day: Whereupon
the Calife granted what was desired in favor of the Highway-Man.

Observation. Emperor of the Faithful, or Believers, is the true Interpretation
of the Title of Emirelmoumeni^, which the Califes have arrogated to themselves;
as did the Arabian Kings, and other Mohammedan Princes in Spam, according to
their Example. Osmond, second Successor to Mahomet, was the first who assumed
it instead of the Title of God's Successor, which they gave him at first, that
being thought too long, as Aboulfarage has observed.

143. A Criminal being brought to a Calife, he condemned him to the Punishment
which he deserved. The Criminal says to the Calife, O Emperor of the Faithful,
it is Justice to take Vengeance for a Crime, but it is a Virtue not to revenge
one's self; and if it be so, it is not suitable to the Dignity of a Calife to
prefer Vengeance to Virtue. The Calife being pleased with the ingenious Saying,
pardoned him.

144. A young Man of the Family of Haschem, which is a considerable Family
amongst the Arabians, had offended a Person of Note; whereof they complained to
his Uncle, under whose Government he was. The Nephew perceiving that his Uncle
was about to chastise him, says to him; Uncle, I was not in my right Senses
when I did that thing, but remember that you do that in your right Senses which
you are about to do.

145. Hagiage examined an Arabian Lady who was taken with the Rebels; but she
cast her Eyes downward, and did not regard him: One of those who sat by said,
Hagiage speaks to you, don't you regard him? She answered, I should think that
I offended God if I regarded such a Man whom God does not regard.

Observation. We have already observed that Hagiage was Governor of Arabia,
and one that committed great Cruelties.

146. One asked of Alexander the Great, By what Methods he arrived at such a
Degree of Glory and Greatness? He answered, By the good Treatment which I
always gave to my Enemies, and by the Care that I took to keep my Friends
constant in the Amity which they had for me.

147. Alexander the Great being with his Generals, one of them said, Sir, God
has given us a great and potent Empire; take many Wives, that so having diverse
Sons, your Name may be preserved to Posterity. Alexander answered, It is not
the Sons who perpetuate the Memory of their Fathers, but their own good Actions
and Manners: Neither should it become such a great Conqueror as I am, to suffer
himself to be conquered by Women, after I my self have conquered the Universe.

148. Under the Reign of Sultan Mahmoud, Sebecteghin Fakhr-edde-Vlet King of
Ispahan, of Rei, Korn, Kaschan, and the Province of Catristan in the Khorassan,
died, and left for Successor his Son Meged-edde-Vlet very young. During his
Minority Seideh his Mother, a Princess of extraordinary Wisdom, administered the
Government with the general Approbation of all the People of the Kingdom. When
he came of Age to reign himself, being found incapable of such a Charge, they
left him only the Title of King, while Seideh continued the Administration.
Sultan Mahmoud King of Maveran-nahar, Turquestan, and the greatest Part of
Khorassan, and the Indies, being puffed up with the Possession of those
powerful Dominions, sent an Ambassador to this Queen, ordering her to
acknowledge him for King, to make Prayers be said in his Name in all those
Mosques which depended upon her, and to coin all her Money with his Stamp; but
if she refused to submit to these Conditions, he would come in Person to seize
Rei and Ispahan, and cut her off. The Ambassador presented the Letter, which
was filled with those Menaces; and having read it, Seideh said to him, In
answer to Sultan Mahmoud's Letter, you may tell him what I am about to say to
you; So long as the King my Husband lived, I was in a continual Fear that your
Master would attaque Rei and Ispahan; but as soon as he died, that Fear
vanished, because Sultan Mahmoud being a very wise Prince, I persuaded my self
that he would not employ his Arms against a Woman: but seeing I am deceived, I
take God to witness that I will not fly if he come to attack me; but that I
will wait for him without fear, to assert my good Pretensions and Right by
Arms: If I have the good Fortune to obtain the Victory, I will make it known to
all the Universe that I have conquered the great Sultan Mahmoud; which will be
an immortal Glory for me to conquer him who has conquered a hundred Kings: But
if I be overcome, Sultan Mahmoud will have nothing to boast of, but that he
has conquered a Woman.

Observations. Seideh was Daughter of one who was Uncle to the Mother of
Kikiaous King of Mazanderan, as he takes notice himself in relating that Part
of the History for his Son's Instruction, of which we have spoke already. That
same Part is also related in the Select History, which is also an Abridgment of
the Mohammedan History in Persian.

Fakhr-edde-Vlet King of Persia, the Seventh of the Race of Boieh, who began to
reign in the 321 of the Hegyra, and of Jesus Christ 933, by Ali Son of Boieh;
and this Boieh pretended that her Original was from Boheram Gour the Ancient,
King of Persia, of the Race of the Sasanians. Fakhr-edde-Vlet reigned eleven
Years, and died in the Year of the Hegyra 387, of Christ 997. Saheb Ismail Son
of Ibad, who made his Bibliotheque be carried after him to the Campagn by 400
Camels, as we mentioned formerly, was his Grand Vizier.

Seideh disarmed Mahmoud Sebecteghin by her Constancy, and this resolute
Answer; but as soon as she died, he dethroned Meged-edde-Vlet, and made him die
in Prison.

149. One having asked an Arabian, What he thought of Riches? he answered, They
are Childrens Play, give and take.

150. Schems-elmaali King of Gergian and Tabaristan, or, which is the same,
King of Mazanderan, was endowed with excellent Qualities; but was extremely
passionate, and would kill his Subjects on the Spot for the least Trifle, never
sending any to Prison, or observing the least Form of Justice: But his Subjects
growing weary at last, laid Hands on him* and shutting him up in Prison, where
he died, said to him; Lo, this has be^allen you for depriving so many People
of their Lives. He replied, It is because I cut off too few; for I had not been
here to Day, if I had destroyed every one of you.

Observation. Schems-e^maali called himself Schems-elmaali Cabous, and was
Grandfather to Kikiaous, Author of the Instruction that we have already
mentioned oftener than once; which he entitled Cabousnameh, in honor of him.
He was starved to Death by Cold in that Prison in the 403 of the Hegyra,
because they put him in there without his Clothes, as they had surprised him,
and would not so much as allow him what they gave Horses for their Litter,
although he begged the same as a Favor; and that which they litter Horses with
in the Levant, is dry Horse-dung. Schems-elmaali was learned in Astronomy, and
diverse other Sciences; and left several Works both in Prose and Verse writ in
Persian.

151. Nouschirvan King of Persia asked at one of the Grecian Emperors, by an
Ambassador, By what Methods he became so firm and stable in his Empire? The
Emperor answered him, We employ none but such Persons as are experienced in the
Administration of our Affairs; we promise nothing but what we perform; we
punish no Body according to the Height of our own Passion, but according to the
Merit of their Crime; we give Employments to none but Persons of Quality, and
take Advice from none but Persons of good Sense.

152. That same Nouschirvan would have this engraved upon his Tomb: All that we
have sent before us is our Treasure; and he that would rather reward Evil than
Good, is not worthy to live quietly.

Observation. By that Expression, All that we have sent before us, Nouschirvan
meant all his Good Works.

153. Plato said that Hunger is a Cloud which rains Knowledge and Eloquence; and
Satiety is another Cloud which rains Ignorance and Dullness. He said further,
When the Belly is empty, the Body becomes Spirit; but when it is full, the
Spirit becomes Body. He said moreover, That the Soul finds its rest in sleeping
a little, the Heart in few Disquiets, and the Tongue in Silence.

Observation. I don't know that those remarkable Words of Plato are to be read
in his Works; or that they are to be found in any of our Ancient Authors. I
found them in a Collection of different Matters in Arabian, Persian, and the
Turkish Language, which I brought from Constantinople. He who collected them,
cites his Author whence he had every Article, except in some places, as in
this, which I think worthy of its room here.

154. A Poet read some Verses to an Emir which he had made in his Praise; and
as he read them, the Emir said, That is well, that is well: The Poet finished
his Reading, but the Emir said nothing else to him. Upon which Silence, the
Poet told him you say, that is well, that is well; but that will not buy Meal.

Observation. By the Name of Emir, we are to understand the General of an Army,
or Governor of a Province.

155. One told Alexander the Great that a certain Prince, whom he had not yet
conquered, was able and experienced in Martial Affairs, and that therefore it
were advisable to surprise and attaque him by Night. To which he replied, What
will People say of me, if I overcome him as a Robber?

156. One demanded of a wise Man, What a Friend was? He answered, That it is a
Word which has no Signification.

157. The Sage Locman being on his Deathbed, sent for his Son; and as he gave
him his Blessing, said to him, My Son, that which I would more especially
recommend to you now in the last Moments of my Life, is to observe six Maxims,
which comprehend all the Morals of the Ancients and Moderns.

Never engage your self to the World, but in proportion to the short Duration
of your Life.

Serve the Lord your God with all that Zeal, that the Occasions which you have
of his Help does require.

Labor for Eternity which abides you, and consider the Time of its Duration.

Do your utmost to rid your self of Contention, whence one can never get out
again after they have been once thrown headlong into it.

If you be in haste to commit Sin, consider beforehand what Strength you have
to bear the Fire of Hell, and the Chastisement of God.

When you have a mind to sin, seek for a Place where God cannot see you.

Observation. The Eastern People have a Collection of Tables under the Name of
Locman, whom they call the Wise, and give much the same Account of him that the
Greeks do of Aesop; but they do neither agree as to the Time when he
flourished, nor his Country: some hold that he was one of the Patriarchs, and
Job's Sister's Son; others write, that he was contemporary with David, and was
30 Years at his Court; but most say, that he was an Abyssine, and by
Consequence a Black, and Slave to a Merchant. And all agree, that he was a Man
of consummate Prudence and Wisdom, and endued with an extraordinary Quickness
of Wit. His Tomb is according to them at Remlah, the same that we call Ramah in
the Holy Land, betwixt Jerusalem and Joppa. Mahomet speaks of him in the 31st
Chapter, or otherwise the 31st Sourate of the Alcoran, which is called the
Sourate of Locman.

158. Locman being asked from whom he learned his Virtue? answered, From those
that had none, for I abstained from every thing that I observed vicious in
their Actions.

159. Ali recommended to his Sons Hassan and Hussein to practice the following
Directions, My Children, says he, never despise any Man, look upon your
Superiors as your Fathers, upon your Equals as Brethren, and Inferiors as
Children.

160. Hagiage, who was afterward Governor of Arabia, besieged the City of
Mecca, and Abdullah the Son of Zebir defended the same; who being reduced to
Extremity, and perceiving that he was in hazard to be taken by Storm, retired
to his own Habitation: Whereupon his Mother said to him, Son, if you sight for
a good Cause, it cannot be maintained but by your Sword; return then to the
Battle, and consider that you fall a Martyr if you be slain. Abdullah answered,
Mother, I am not afraid of Death, but hate to have my Head cut off after I am
dead. His Mother replied, Son, the Sheep after its Throat is cut, feels no Pain
when it is roasted.

Observations. After the Death of Caliph Maavia, Son to Iczid, this Abdullah
possessed himself of Mecca, with its Dependancies, and several other Countries,
and maintained himself above nine Years, till he was killed in the last Assault
at taking of the Place. After his Death Hagiage cut off his Head, which he sent
to Medina, and affixed his Body to a Cross.

This Siege of Mecca, and the Death of Abdullah happened in the 71st of the
Hegira, and the 690th Year of Christ.

The Mahometans never make War but some way or other Religion is concerned in
it, and therefore they look upon all those who are killed as Martyrs.

161. The Caliph Mehdi, Father of Caliph Haroun Erreschid, was in the Temple of
Mecca, and said to a certain Mansour, ^f you want any thing, ask it of me. The
Mansour answered, It would be a Shame for me to ask any thing that I needed
from any other but God, in the Temple of God.

Observation. According to the Mohammedan Tradition, the Temple of Mecca was the
first Temple consecrated to God; and they will have it to have been built by
Adam, and rebuilt afterward by Abraham and Ishmael, and therefore they make it
one of the five Precepts of their Religion to go thither in Pilgrimage.

162. The Caliph Haroun Erreschid having a mind to reward Bakht Jeschoua, who
cured him of an Apoplexy, made him his Physician, and allowed him the same
Salary that he did to the Captain of his Guards, saying, The latter guards my
Body, but Bakht Jeschoua guards my Soul.

Observation. Bakht Jeschoua is the same with George the Son of Bakht Jeschoua,
mentioned before: He was very young when he cured Haroun Erreschid of that
Apoplexy, which was the first thing that raised his Fortune at the Court of the
Caliphs.

163. The Caliph Mamoun, Son of Haroun Erreschid, took great Delight in giving
Pardons, and said, If it were known what Pleasure I have in pardoning, all
Criminals would make Application to me to feel the Effects of my Clemency.

Observation. Mamoun was not only a sweet-natur'd, mild and merciful Prince, as
appears by this Piece of his History, but also very liberal and skilful in the
Art of Governing, and was moreover the most learned of all the Caliphs; and
being an Admirer of Philosophy and the Mathematics, caused several Books of
those Sciences to be translated from the Greek and Syriack into Arabic. He was
also well versed in Astronomy, and ordered several Astronomical Tables to be
composed, which were called Mamoun's Tables.

164. The Caliph Vathik Billah being at the Point of Death, said, All Men are
alike, and become equal at the Hour of Death, from which Kings, Subjects, nor
no Man is exempted; and then addressing himself to God, said, Thou whose
Kingdom does never perish, have Mercy upon him whose Kingdom is perishing.

Observation. The Caliph Vathik Billah was Grandson to Caliph Haroun Erreschid,
and Nephew to Mamoun: His Father to whom he succeeded was called Mutassem
Billah. He was valiant and bountiful, and being a Lover of Poesy, he always
made Poets welcome to his Court, and was their Benefactor. He reigned only five
Years and some Months, and died in the Year of the Hegira 231. and of Jesus
Christ 845.

165. The Caliph Muterid Billah stood in need of Money to prepare for a
Campaign, and was informed, that one of the Magi who dwelt at Bagdat had great
Sums in ready Cash: and having called for him, demanded a Loan of the same; to
which the Wise Man answered, that it was at his Service: Upon this Frankness
the Caliph asked him if he had an entire Confidence in him, and if he was not
afraid that he would never restore him his Money? He answered, God has
entrusted you with the Government of his Servants who acknowledge your Power,
and the Public believe that they may trust your Word, and that you govern with
Justice; and after all this can I be afraid to trust you with my Estate?

Observation. This Caliph died at Bagdat in the 289th Year of the Hegira, and
the 901st of Christ.

166. Gelal-Eddevlett Melec Schach, one of the first Sultans of the Family of
the Selgiucides, who reigned in Persia, did one Day say his Prayers to Mesched
in the Khorassan, at the Tomb of Ali Riza, when one of his Brothers rebelled
against him: as he came from Prayers, he asked of his Grand Vizier, if he could
guess what he had prayed to God for? The Grand Vizier answered, You have prayed
that he would grant you the Victory against your Brother. The Sultan replied, I
did not pray so, but thus, Lord, if my Brother be more sit to govern the
Mussulmans than I, give him the Victory against me; but if I be more proper
than he, grant me the Victory against him.

Observation. Those Sultans or Kings called Selgiucides take their Denomination
from Selgiuc, the General of a mighty Inundation of Turks who passed the Oxus
into the Khorassan in the Reign of Mahmoud Sebecteghin, who is mentioned
before. Dogrulbeg, Grandson to Selgiouc, began their Empire, which was divided
into diverse Branches, in the 429th of the Hegira, and 1037th of Jesus Christ.
Some Authors have very corruptly called him Tangrolipix, and Monsieur Bespier
in his Notes upon Ricaut's State of the Ottoman Empire has taken a great deal
of Pains to find out the Correction of it; that of Togrulberg is the best, and
he might have also found out Dogrulbeg, if he had known that the Turks
pronounce the Arabic Ti as D: but this he could not know, for the little
Turkish Language which he understood he learned in Normandy. Nor does that Word
come from Tangri, which signifies God in Turkish, as he pretends, but from
Drogu, which signifies Right; and Dogrulbeg signifies the right Lord.
Gelal-Eddevlett Melek-Schach, which another Author calls Gelal-Eddin, was the
third Sultan after Dogrulbeg, and died in the Year of the Hegira 485. and of
Jesus Christ 1092.

167. The Caliph Soliman, who was of comely Personage, looked upon himself in a
Glass, in Presence of one of his Ladies, and said, I am the King of the Youth.
The Lady replied, You would be the finest Merchandise in the World, and the
most sought after, if you were to live always; but Man is not eternal, and I
know no other fault in you but that you are mortal.

Observation. The Caliph Soliman was the 7th of the Race of the Ommiades, who
did reign before the Abassides: He died in the 99th Year of the Hegira, Anno
Christi 717.

168. At his Return from the unsuccessful Siege of Moussol, Salahh-din King of
Egypt and Syria fell into a very dangerous Distemper, which had well nigh cost
him his Life. Nassir Eddin Mehemmed his Cousin hearing the News of it, wrote
forthwith to Damascus from Hims, where he himself was, to solicit those whom
he thought his Friends, to order it so that he might be declared Sultan in case
Salahhdin should die: But Salahhdin recovering, a little time after, Nassir
Eddin Mehemmed fell sick and died himself: Salahhdin, who had been informed of
his Procedure, seized all his Estate and Riches, and some time after had a
Desire to see his Son, whom he had left behind him, of about ten Years of Age;
who being brought before him, the Sultan knowing that there was Care taken of
his Education, asked of him, what part of the Alcoran he was reading: To the
Surprise of all that were about him, he answered wittily and boldly, that he
was at that Verse which says, that those who devour the Estates of Orphans are
Tyrants.

Observations. Salahhdin is that Saladin who is so famous in our Histories of
the Croisades, and retook Jerusalem in the 585th of the Hegirah, and of Christ
1189, four Years after the Siege of Moussoul here spoken of, which was the
first Enterprise that ever miscarried with him. When he came before the Place,
Sultan Atahek Azzeddin Masond demanded Peace, and offered to quit him all
Syria; but Salahhdin being overruled by his Council, continued the Siege,
which Azzeddin sustained with so much Vigor, that he was constrained to raise
it with Shame, and retire, after having made a Peace far less advantageous than
that which he had rejected.

Hims is the Name which the Arabians give to the City of Emessa in Syria.

169. In a Battle which Ginghizkhan won, the Officers of the contrary Army did
Wonders, which retarded his Victory for some time; Ginghizkhan seeing them,
said with Admiration, that a Monarch who has such brave Fellows in his Service
may live very securely.

Observations. There are none almost but those few who understand the Oriental
Books that have heard any thing considerable of Ginghizkhan: But the Public
are to hope for this Advantage from his History, that M. de la Croix the Father
has collected from several Arabian, Persian and Turkish Authors, which he is
about Printing. Mean while being to report some of his remarkable Sayings taken
out of Mirkhond, one of his Historians, I shall only acquaint you passingly, to
give you some Idea of his Grandeur, that by his Conquests he became Emperor of
Great Tartary, China, the Indies, Persia, and all those Countries which lie on
the South of Muscovy upon the Caspian and Black Seas. He died in the Year of
the Hegira 624. and of Jesus Christ 1226.

The Victory abovementioned he gained from Taiank Khan King of best part of
the Greater Tartary, in which that King was so wounded as he died in a few Days
after; and this Victory opened the way to all the other Conquests which raised
Ginghizhan to that Height of Grandeur already mentioned.

170. Giongikhan prayed Ginghizkan his Father to spare the Life of a young
Prince of Mecrit who was very dexterous at his Bow, his Father and two Brethren
being killed just before in a bloody Battle. Ginghizkan refused, and said to
him, the People of Mecrit are those whom of all People of the World we have
least Reason to trust. The Prince of whom you now speak is at present no more
than a Pismire, but may in time grow a Serpent: And moreover, a Prince has
never less Cause to dread an Enemy than when he has put him in his Grave.

Observations. Giougikhan was the eldest Son of Ginghizkan, who gave him the
absolute Command over all the Country from the Great Tartary to the Caspian
Sea, and the Euxin Sea, a part of Muscovy being included therein. He died some
time before Ginghizkan.

The Country of Mecrit is a Province of Mogolistan, in the Greater Tartary,
whose King and People had traversed Ginghizkan's Designs in his Youth, and
entered into all the Leagues which were formed against him; and therefore
there is no Reason to wonder that he would not listen to the ^ntreaties of his
Son Giougi, but sacrificed that young Prince to his own Resentment.

171. Ginghizkan seeing his Sons and nearest Kinsmen assembled about him, drew
an Arrow out of his Quiver, and broke it; then he drew out two and broke them
both at once; and so he did by three, and by four: but at last took out so many
that it was not possible for him to break them, and then discoursed to them as
follows; My Children, says he, the same thing will befall you that has happened
to these Arrows: Your Ruin will be unavoidable if you fall by one or two at a
time into the Hands of your Enemies; but if you be strictly united together, it
will never be in the Power of any to hurt or destroy you. And to persuade them
yet more to such an Union, he told them further, that in the time of a great
Frost a Serpent which had diverse Heads would have crept into a Hole to prevent
its being frozen to Death, but the Heads did so embarass one another, that he
(...) impossible to creep into any Hole, and so was killed by the Frost; but at
the same time another which had but one Head and many Tails, sheltered it self
in the first Hole it met with, and so saved its Life.

Observation. Ginghizkan succeeded in his Design of establishing a good
Correspondence in his Family, which continued for many Years amongst his
Posterity, who preserved for a long time that great and potent Empire which was
formed under the Absolute Sovereignty of one: But he who had the Government did
not obtain the same by the Right of Succession or Priority of Age, but by
Election with the Consent of all the rest in a general Meeting, where they
agreed that the Person elected should enjoy the same Authority with which
Ginghizkan did reign: which will be made appear more fully in the History of
Ginghizkan and his Successors, when the same is published.

172. Ginghizkan had taken into his Service the Secretary of a Mohammedan King
whom he had conquered, to employ him in his Dispatches; and having occasion to
write to the King of Moussoul to demand Passage for a Detachment of Troops that
he was sending toward that side, he sent for this Secretary, and told him in
very precise Terms what he would have writ: The Secretary being accustomed to a
pompous Style, and abounding with Emphatical Titles, which all the Mohammedan
Princes of that time did arrogate to themselves, wrote a Letter in Arabic,
garnished with fine Thoughts and curious Words, and presented it to Ginghizkan
for his Approbation, who caused it to be interpreted to him in Mogul, which was
his Language; but he found it of a Style contrary to what he intended, and told
the Secretary, that that was not it which he had ordered him to write. The
Secretary would have defended himself, and answered, that that was the ordinary
manner of writing to Kings. Ginghizkan, who would not bear with any Body's
making Replies to him, repartee'd in Anger, You have a Rebel's Heart, and have
writ in such Terms to Bedr-eddin (which was the King of Moussoul's Name) as
will render him more haughty upon reading my Letter, and less disposed to do
that which I demand.

Observations. Ginghizkan did not content himself with this Reprimand, but did
also cause the Secretary to be slain for being so bold as not to do precisely
what he commanded.

Bedr-eddin King of Moussoul was at first no other than chief Minister of State
in that Kingdom under Azz-eddin Masoud, of the Race of the Atabecks, to whom he
succeeded after his Death. He reigned long, and died in the 659th of the
Hegira, and 1260th of Jesus Christ.

The Reader will not be displeased if we exhibit the Contents of the Letter
which Ginghizkan wrote to the King of Moussoul in his own Style. It is reported
by Mirkhond as follows; The Great God has given to me and my People the Empire
of the Surface of the Earth. All those who submit without Compulsion have their
Lives, Goods, Estates and Children safe. God who is eternal knows what is to
befall them. If Bedr-eddin submit himself, and give Passage to our Troops, it
shall be well with him. If he do otherwise, what will become of his Country,
his Riches, and the City of Moussoul, when once we shall come before it with
all our Troops? Ginghizkan and his Successors assumed no other Title than that
of Khan.

173. Ginghizkan having rendered himself Master of the City of Bokhara,
assembled the Inhabitans, and making an Harangue to them, said, amongst other
things; People, your Crimes must needs be very enormous, since the Anger of the
Almighty has sent me against you, who am one of the Scourges of his Throne.

Observation. Bokhara is a City of Maveranahan or Transoxiana, which was very
large, rich, and well peopled; but Ginghizkan after he rendered himself Master
of it, ordered Fire to be set thereunto; and being for the most part built of
Wood, it was burnt down in one Day, all but the Great Mosque, and some Houses
built with Brick. Ogtaikhan, Son and Successor to Ging^i^kan, caused it to be
rebuilt. It continued famous in the Reign of Tamerlan and his Successors, and
subsists still under the Reign of the Vzbecs.

174. After the Destruction of the City of Bokhara by Ginghizkan, the People of
Khorassan demanded of one of the Inhabitants who had sled thither, if the
Desolation made there by the Moguls was so great as reported? he answered in
Persian, which was his Language, in these few Words, They came, they destroyed,
they burnt, they killed, and carried away.

Observation. Having spoken of the burning of Bokhara in the foregoing
Observation, I shall speak one Word of the Blood shed there by the Army of
Ginghizkan: That same Day on which they came before it 20000 Men sallied in the
Evening to surprise them, but the Moguls perceiving it, made so great a
Slaughter amongst them, that there were but a very few who returned into the
City; and next Morning at Sunrising the Inhabitants having observed from the
Ramparts that the Fields looked like a great Lake of Blood (as Mirkhond
expresses it) they capitulated and opened their Gates.

175. A Scheich of great Reputation and Learning dwelling in the City of
Kharezem, the Capital of the Kingdom of that same Name, when Ginghizkan came
out of Great Tartary to extend his Conquests toward the West. The Mahometans
about him understanding that he designed to lay Siege to that Town, by the
three Princes his Sons, prayed him to be so kind as to give the Scheich notice
to retire elsewhere. Ginghizkan granted them that Favor, and notice was given
to the Scheich from him, that he would do wisely to go out of the Town to
prevent his being Partaker of the Misfortunes of his Fellow-Citizens if the
Town should happen to be taken by Storm, as it was, for in that Case the
Inhabitants would all be destroyed. The Scheich refused to go out of the Town,
answering, that he had Kinsfolks, Allies, Friends and Disciples in the Town, so
that he should be criminal not only before God, but also before Men, if he did
abandon them.

Observations. This Scheich, whose Name was Negem-eddin Kebri, was killed in
the sacking of Kharezem* but though he was of a great Age, he killed diverse of
the Moguls who forced his House, before he fell himself.

Without speaking of the Kharezemians, who were killed in the last Assault, by
which they were forced after having held out six Months Siege, Mirkhond
reports, that the Moguls, when they became Masters of the Town, made all the
Inhabitants go out, according to their Custom when they took a Place, and made
them Slaves, viz. the Merchants and Tradesmen, with the Women and Children that
were above 14 Years of Age, and distributed the rest amongst the Soldiers to
be killed. He adds, That the Soldiers were above 100000; and that Historians
affirm, that each Soldier had 24 to kill for his Share; which if true, there
were above two Millions and 400000 Souls cut off in that Slaughter alone. It
may well be doubted whether one Town could contain so many People; but we must
consider that the City was very large, as being a Capital, and that the
Inhabitants of the Neighboring City, and the adjacent Country, fled thither
before the Siege.

176. Ginghizkan being at Bokhara after his great Conquests on this Side the
Oxus, and about to return into his own Country, the Great Tartary, where he
died sometime after his Arrival, had a Conference with two Mohammedan Doctors
concerning their Religion, which he was very desirous to understand; and having
said diverse remarkable and sensible things on this Occasion, they deserve to
have a Place here.

The Mohammedan Doctor, who took the Speech upon him, says to him; The
Mussulmans acknowledge one only God, the Creator of all things, who has none
like him. To this Ginghizkan replied; That he had no Reluctance to believe the
same thing. The Doctor added; The Almighty and most Holy God, has sent an
Ambassador to his Servants, by whose Means he teaches them what they are to do,
so as they may do Good and avoid Evil: Which was no way dis-relishing to
Ginghizkan, no more than the other; so that he answered in these Terms: I who
am the Servant of God, dispatch Messengers every Day to acquaint my Subjects
with what I would have them to do, or not to do; and I make Ordinances for the
Discipline of my Armies. The Doctor went on, and said; This Ambassador has
fixed certain Times for Prayer; during which, he has commanded us to give over
all Labor and Occupation to worship God. Perceiving that Ginghizkan agreed
also to this, he added; That he has also commanded us to fast one entire Month
in the Year. Ginghizkan replied; It is but just to eat according to Rule one
Month, to acknowledge the Favors of the Lord, after having spent eleven in
eating without Rule or Management. The Mohammedan went on, and said; The
Ambassador has also commanded the Rich to give half of what Money they have
each Year to the Poor. Ginghizkan commended that Statute exceedingly, and said;
The Eternal God has created all things indifferently for all Men; and
therefore it is reasonable that those who have an advantageous Share, should
impart to those who have not. The Doctor added, That the Mahometans have
further an express Commandment to go in Pilgrimage to the Temple of God at
Mecca, there to adore him. To which Ginghizkan answered; All the World is God's
House; we may meet with him from all Parts of the World: God can hear from the
Place where I am now, as well as from the Temple which you speak of.

Observations. The Doctor who maintained this Discourse, concluded from
Ginghizkan's Answers, that he was a Mohammedan; but his Colleague maintained the
contrary, because Ginghizkan did not acknowledge the Necessity of a Pilgrimage
to Mecca: which was very remarkable; for as Mirkhond has observed, it is
certain that Ginghizkan was not addicted to any particular Religion of the
People that he had subdued, but left every one to the Liberty of professing
what they would, and constrained no Body to embrace that which he professed
himself. On the contrary, he had an Esteem for all Persons of Learning and
Merit, without any regard to their Religion, as appears by his History; and as
Mirkhond observes, it was one of the great Qualities that recommended him. And
if we consider his Religion by the particular Entertainment with these Doctors,
the Circumstances of his own History, and that of his Predecessors, it would
seem that we may affirm, that their Religion had not degenerated very much from
that which Japhet, or his Posterity, brought into Tartary.

Whether that Opinion was imbibed by the Arabians in the Time of Mahomet, that
Abraham and Ishmael built a Temple to God at Mecca, or that Mahomet invented it
himself, it is that which gave him occasion to make it an Article of his
Religion, that every one of his Followers should go thither in Pilgrimage at
least once in their Lifetime. And they observe it to this Day, there being few
of them who are able that do it not, believe that they ought to do it, or at
least design to do it.

177. It was told to Ogtaikhan, the Son of Ginghizkan, and his Successor in
those great and powerful Dominions which he left behind him, that it was found
in a certain Book, that the Treasury of Afrasiab, an ancient King of
Turquestan, was in such a Place not far from his Capital, which they thought
would be very welcome News to Ogtaikhan; but he would not hear of it, and said,
We have no need of other Men's Treasures, seeing we distribute that which we
have to the Servants of God, and our Subjects.

Observations. Ogtai was 3d Son to Ginghizkan, who declared him his Successor
by his Testament in preference to Giagatai his 2d Son, who submitted to his
Father's Will, and acknowledged Ogtai as his Sovereign in a General Meeting of
the States, when he was confirmed, about two Years after the Death of
Ginghizkan. That Convention could not be held sooner, because so much Time was
at least requisite for those who composed it to come to the Place of meeting,
from the remotest Parts of Ginghizkan's Empire. Ogtaikhan died in the Year of
the Hegyra 639, and of Jesus Christ 1241. He was a merciful and peaceable
Prince, and above all very liberal; as appears by the following Articles.

Ogtai was particularly called Kaan instead of Khan, according to the corrupt
and coarse Way of Pronunciation amongst the Moguls, says Mirkhond.

178. A Merchant presented Ogtaikhan a Bonnet of the Fashion of Khorassan, at
such time as he was a little in Wine. The Bonnet pleased him, and he ordered
the Merchant a Bill of 200 Balisches. The Bill was drawn and delivered; but the
Officers who were to pay it, did not, as thinking it an excessive Reward for a
Bonnet, and that the Khan had not considered it in the Condition that he was
then in. The Merchant appeared next Day, and the Officers presented the Bill to
the Khan, who remembered very well that he had ordered it; but instead of that,
ordered the Merchant a Bill of 300. The Officers deferred the Payment of that,
as they had done of the former. The Merchant complained of it, and the Khan
ordered him a Third of 600 Balisches; and the Officers were forced to pay it.
Ogtai being the most moderate Prince of the World, did not fall in a Passion
with them for retarding the Execution of his Will; but asked at them, if there
was any thing in the World that was eternal? The Officers answered, There was
nothing. He replied, That was not true; for a good Name, and the Remembrance of
good Actions are to endure for ever: In the mean time, by your Delays in
distributing my Bounty, because you imagine that I do it in Wine, makes it
appear that you are my Enemies, seeing you would not have me spoken of in the
World.

Observation. That a Mogul Balische is worth about 500 French Livres, or 41 l.
13 s. 4 d. English: so that by the Sum which Ogtaikhan ordered the Merchant for
his Bonnet, we may judge of his Liberality. But here follows another Instance
thereof, which is no less surprising.

179. A Persian of the City Schiraz presented himself before Ogtaikhan, and
acquainted him, that upon the Fame of his Bounty he was come from the Middle of
Persia, to implore his Assistance, to acquit himself of a Debt of 500
Balisches. Ogtai received him very kindly, and ordered him 1000 Balisches. His
Ministers remonstrated, and told him, That that was not Bounty, but Prodigality
to give more than was demanded. Ogtai replied; The poor Man has traveled
through the Deserts, and over the Mountains, upon the Fame of our Liberality;
and that which he asks is not sufficient to pay his Debts, nor for the Charges
of his Journey which he has made, and that which he must make ag^in to return
home.

Observation. Schiraz is the Capital of that Part of the Kingdom of Persia,
which is properly called by that Name. Dela the Persian, who is here spoken of,
traveled almost from the farthest Part of the Great Tartary to China, to the
Court of Ogtaikhan; who had therefore a Regard to his great Confidence in his
Liberality, upon which he had undertaken so great a Journey.

180. Ogtaikhan passing by the Market of Caracoroum his Capital, saw Jujubes,
and commanded one of his Officers to buy him some. The Officer obeyed, and
returned laden with Jujubes. Ogtai says to him, Surely such a great Quantity
as you have there, have cost above a Balische. The Officer thinking to make his
Court, answered, That they did not cost above the 4th Part, and that was also
twice as much as they were worth. Ogtai answered him angrily; There was never a
Chapman of my Quality that went by that Merchant's Door till now; and therefore
commanded him to carry him ten Balisches.

Observation. Caracaroum in Great Tartary, was the Birthplace of Ginghizkan,
and the Patrimony which fell to him by his Ancestors; so that he made it the
Capital of his Empire. Under the Reigns of his Successors, it became a very
Great City by the Confluence of People, who came thither from all Parts of the
World.

181. A Merchant having lost a Purse with a considerable Sum, and a great
Number of Jewels, published that he would give one half to him who should bring
it back. A Mohammedan, who found it, carried it to him; but he would not give
him any thing, alleging that the whole was not there. The Affair came to
Ogtaikhan's Ears, who would take Cognizance thereof himself. The Mohammedan
swore, That the Bag was entire, and that he had taken nothing out of it: and
the Merchant did also make Oath, That it had both more Silver and Jewels.
Ogtaikhan gave Sentence, and bid the Mohammedan take the Purse, and keep it
until he to whom it b^long'd came to demand it: and for the Merchant, let him
go, and seek that which he has lost elsewhere; for by his own Confession, this
Purse is not his.

182. Timour being Master of Anatolia, after the Defeat of Sultan Bajazet
Ildirim, had a Mind to see the Scheich Koutbeddin of Nice upon the Reputation
of his Doctrine, and the Retired Life which he professed. The Scheich took the
Liberty to tell him, that it was a Thing unworthy of a Conqueror to massacre
the Servants of God, and sack the Countries as he did: Those who aspire to
Glory, ought to refrain from shedding innocent Blood. The Mussulman Religion
which you profess, requires you to protect the Country where it is flourishing.
Timour answered; Scheich, each Encampment that I make, the Entrance of my
Pavilion is opened in the Evening toward the East, and in the Morning I find
it opened toward the West: Moreover, when I mount on Horse-backs, 50 Horsemen
who are visible only to my self, march before me, and serve me instead of
Guides. The Scheich replied, I thought you to be a wise Prince; but that which
you now say, lets me see that I am deceived. Timour replied, How? The Scheich
answered, because you glory in turning all things topsy-turvy, like a Devil.

Observations. Timour is the true Name of Tamer Lan, and the Word of Tamerlan
is a Corruption of Timo^r Lank, i. e. Timour the Lame, being called so
apparently by those who had Reason not to love him; but it ought not to be used
amongst us, who never had any Cause to be angry with him.

As Timour came from Persia to Anatolia, he entered his Pavilion by an Entrance
which looked toward the East; but came out of the same on the West Side,
because he advanced toward the West. He had no better Answer to give to
Scheich, and therefore he answered him thus by way of Railery.

183. Timour being one day in a Bath with several of his Emirs, and the Turkish
Poet Ahmedi, whom he entertained as a Man of Learning and Wit: he asked at
Ahmedi, If my Emirs whom you see there, were to be sold, what Price would you
value them at? Ahmedi rated each of them as he thought sit; and when he had
done, Timour asked him, And what do ye value me at? He answered, at 24 Aspers.
Timour replied; Your Estimation is not just; the Linen-cloth with which I am
girded is worth so much alone. Ahmedi replied, I speak only of the Linen; for
as for your Person, it is not worth a halfpenny.

Observations. It Is easy to think that such Conversation might happen amongst
those who bought and sold Men every day, as it is practiced still throughout
the Levant, and particularly in Baths; where it is easy to judge of the good
Disposition, or Defects of every one's Body.

According to what has been formerly observed, 24 Aspers make 40 French Sols.

Timour was not angry at the Poet's Boldness; on the contrary, he listened to
his Railery, and did not only laugh at the Pleasantness of his Discourse, but
presented him with all the things which he made use of on that Occasion; as
Basins, and great Cups of Silver and Gold, and Vessels of the same Metal, to
pour out Water in.

The Mahometans both Men and Women, do for Decency's sake cover themselves from
the Shoulders downward in the Bath with a blue Linen Cloth, which hides all
behind and before down to their very Feet; that so there is nothing seen which
may offend Modesty: And this Cloth they call Fota, which is the Word made use
of by Essendi in relating this Story. They bathe also in cold Water with the
same Modesty, but make use rather of Calico than Linen. If the same Precautions
were used in France, the Ladies would not be reproached with their Walk in the
Summertime along the River, without St. Bernard's Gate.

Ahmedi was of Sultan Bajazet Ildirim's Court, and after that Timour withdrew
from Anatolia; he yielded himself to Emir Soliman Son to the same Bajazet, and
dedicated the History of Alexander the Great to him in Verse, which he had
composed under the Title of Iskender Nameh.

184. Timour having one Day dispatched a Courier for an Affair of Consequence;
that he might make the more haste, gave him Power when he should stand in need
to take all the Horses which he found in his way, without regard to those that
they belonged to, be their Quality what it would. As he passed by a Meadow, he
saw some fine Horses, and would have taken one of them instead of that which he
rode on: But the Horse-keepers opposed his Design, and broke his Head when they
found that he would use Violence: So that being forced to withdraw in this
Condition, he showed his bloody Head to Timour, and complained of the ill
Treatment which he had met with. Timour being in a Rage, commanded the Master
of the Horses and his Servants, to be inquired after, and put to Death. But
those who had received that Commission, understanding that they belonged to
Mouphti Saadeddin, would not put the same in execution, because of the Dignity
of the Person, until they had given Timour notice of it, and knew his Mind
further. When Timour understood whose the Horses were, his Anger was appeased;
and sending for the Courier, says to him, If my Son Schahroh had done any such
thing, nothing could have prevented my putting him to Death: but how can I
revenge my self upon a Man who has not his Equal in the World, a Man whose Pen
commands not only in the Countries subject to me, but also Abroad, and in such
Climates as my Sword can never reach?

Observation. This Mouphti was Native of a Place in the Neighborhood of Herat,
which was called Tastazan: And because of his Abilities, he was consulted by
all those Countries that professed Mahomet's Religion; and therefore Timour was
willing to preserve that Respect for him which he had acquired by his great
Authority.

185. Mirza Omer, Grandson to Timour, being banished from the Countries which
his Grandfather had left him in Conjunction with Mirza Miranschach his Father,
and Mirza Ababckir his eldest Brother, he fled to Khorassan to Schahroh his
Uncle; who did not only receive him kindly, but made him also Sovereign of
Mazanderan, which he conquered a little time after his Arrival. But Mirza Omer
was no sooner settled in his Kingdom, than he revolted and declared War against
Schahroh his Uncle and Benefactor. When Schahroh heard the News of this
Rebellion, one of his Officers, in whom he had abundance of Confidence, and who
had given him Advice not to treat that Prince so kindly as he had done, put him
in mind of what he had the Honor to say to him upon this Subject, viz. That
there was no Likelihood of his living in a better Understanding with an Uncle,
than he had done with his Father and Brother, and now the Event had made it
appear that he was not mistaken. Schahroh answered; We have done him no Evil,
and the Kingdom which we gave him, did not belong to us: Know that Kingdoms
belong to God, and he gives and takes them away as he pleases.

Observation. Mirza Omer did not prosper long in his Ingratitude; for Schahroh
overcame him in Battle almost without stroke of Sword: And as he fled through
Schahroh's Dominions, he was seized and carried before the Conqueror, having a
great Wound which he had received in defending himself. Schahroh was still so
kind as to give him a Physician and Surgeon, and send him to his Capital to
be cured, but he died by the Way.

186. Schahroh gave the Kingdoms which depended on him to his Sons, his
Kindred, or Emirs; but ordinarily on Condition of a Tribute, and that they
should coin Money with his Stamp. He did moreover give each of them such Advice
as he thought needful for their governing well; and most part of his Counsels
are collected by Abdunrizzac Efendi his Historiographer. He said to his Son
Mirza Vlug-Beg, when he made him King of Maverannahar or Transoxiana, and
Turquestan; The Almighty made us this high Present which we now enjoy, and has
gratified us with that absolute Authority that I do at this time possess,
without any regard to my Weakness and Faults: A Sovereign who is convinced of
the Worth of an Empire, ought in the first place to return Thanks for his
Kindnesses: He ought to be tender and compassionate toward all those who are
in Adversity; and to remember what God said to the Prophet David, whom he
established as his Vicegerent upon the Earth, To render Justice to Men.
Entertain Learned Men with Veneration and Respect, and don't go astray from the
Precepts of the Law, nor of those who have explained it: Maintain those who are
the Interpreters thereof in their Honors and Dignities; and do your utmost to
make the Judges do their Duty according to the Laws. Take the people of the
Country under your particular Protection, so that none may vex them; but that
on the contrary, they may have all manner of Justice done them, for it is they
who contribute to the Support and Increase of the Revenues of the State. Govern
your Soldiery with pleasant Looks and good Words, for they are the Strength
and Stay of your Kingdom. Take care also that they be duly paid; and augment
the Salaries of such as signalize themselves, and expose their Lives for the
Preservation of the Public; but chastise those who come short of their Duty.
In fine, take care that you never depart from Justice upon any Occasion; and
entrust your Frontiers to none but Governors of great Experience, who will take
care to keep the Fortresses in good Repair.

Observations. Vlugbeg the eldest of Schahrob's Sons reigned a long time in the
Kingdom of Maveranna^ar and Turquestan during his Father's time. After his
Death he had some Wars to maintain his Right of Succession to the Country which
his Father left him at his Death, but he was quickly disturbed in his
Possession by Factions which were formed against him, and particularly by the
Revolt of his own Son Mirza-Abdulletif: for that unnatural Wretch made War upon
him, overcame him, and committed a Patricide on his Person; so much the more
detestable, that he had not only acquitted himself well as to his Valor, but
was also bountiful, wise and learned; by which, and his Love for learned Men,
he obtained a Reputation which distinguished him from all the Princes of his
time. In effect the Observator which he built at Samareand will perpetuate his
Fame; for thither he drew Mathematicians and Astronomers, who from their
Observations published Astronomical Tables.

The Alcoran being the Foundation of the Religion and Civil Laws of the
Mahometans, the Interpreters of that Book have acquired great Authority amongst
them; and therefore Schahroh, who understood it very well, and observed
religiously what it contained, recommended it to his Son to have a Veneration
for them, and to maintain them in their Honors and Dignities, as one of the
principal Means to get the Love of the People, who cannot bear it with Patience
to see the Chiefs of their Religion, and those who have the Administration of
the same, despised and ill-treated.

187. That same Schahroh said to Mirza Mehemmed Gehangir, one of his Nephews,
when he gave him a considerable Principality on the Condition before mentioned;
To the end that you may carry your self as you ought, consider that God never
deprives those who do Good, of the Reward which they deserve: Be merciful and
good toward those who depend upon you, because they are God's Creatures.
Command your Officers not to treat them harshly, but to cherish the Poor, and
to observe the Laws and Statutes. And as to your own particular Concern, do
nothing but with Prudence and Wisdom; and set the good Advice which I give
always before you.

188. He said also to Mirzakidon, another of his Nephews, to whom he gave the
Kingdom of Candahar with its Dependancies; Exercise Justice, and be not guilty
of Vexation, Injustice nor Tyranny, for that is the way to ruin your self:
Forget not that Kingdoms which are governed by just and equitable Princes,
although Infidels, continue a long time, but that the Reigns of Tyrants is never
of long Duration. Behave your self with Moderation and Wisdom in every thing.
Take Care of your Reputation, and to draw the Blessing of your Subjects upon
you by your Liberality and Bounty; and thus you may reign a long time.

Observations. Mirza Kidon was the Son of Mirza Pir Mehemmed, Son of Mirza
Gehangir, the eldest Son of Timour: and Mirza Gehangir died while his Father
was alive. After his Death Timour gave the Kingdom of Candahar to Mirza Pir
Mehemmed, who made the Town of Balkh his Capital; but his Reign continued not
long after Timour's Death, for he was assassinated by Pir Ali Taz, whom he
entrusted with the Administration of his Government. Schahroh chastised this
Rebel, and in the first place gave Balkh and its Dependances to Mirza Kidon;
and some time after the Kingdom of Candahar. But this Prince did not follow
Schahroh's Advice as he ought to have done: He rebelled some Years after, but
was taken, and Schahroh contented himself with keeping him in Prison.

The Mahometans persuade themselves that their Religion is true, and know that
just Kings of other Religions, as Christians and Pagans, do reign, and have
reigned a long time; and therefore it is that they made this Maxim which
Schahroh makes use of here to persuade Mirza Ki^on, that being of the true
Religion, as he believed, his Reign should a sortiori be of a long Continuance
by a good Administration of Justice.

189. He said also to Mirza Baikra, another of his Kinsmen, when he gave him
the Countries of Hamadan and Loristan; Exercise Justice over the People with
whom I entrust you; govern them peaceably and gently, and take care that no Man
attempt to treat them harshly: Take the same Care of the Poor and Mean that you
do of the Rich and Great: Protect the Merchants and Tradesmen, they are the
Birds of the Commonwealth, and bring Plenty into the same by their Traffic and
Commerce.

Observations. Mirza Baikra took no more care to improve Schahroh's
Instructions than Mirza Kidon did, and became a Rebel also like him: But
Schahroh was also indulgent to him, as he was to Mirza Kidon.

In calling the Merchants the Birds of the Commonwealth Schahroh alluded to
those which transport Merchandise from Kingdom to Kingdom, as is still
practiced in the Levant.

190. He said, moreover, to Mirza Ibrahim Sultan his Son, when he established
him King of Persia in the City of Schiraz, The greatest Glory of a Kingdom
consists in having numerous Troops, a great Train, Following, and Equipage; but
its chief Strength consists in having a good Counsel, keeping their Frontiers
well fortified, the Passes well guarded, in preserving their Subjects from
Oppression, and maintaining Religion: Thanks be to God, my Son, I know that you
have no need of Advice, yet my fatherly Affection obliges me to tell you, that
you ought to carry your self so as your Subjects may bless you when they sit
under the Shadow of your Clemency and Bounty, and have a true Relish of the
Pleasures of a quiet and peaceable Life under a good Government. In order to
this take care that your Officers exact nothing from them but according to
Justice, and that they don't exceed the Limits of the Law in levying the
Revenues of the Kingdom. By this Conduct you and I shall both of us be
esteemed, praised and blessed, and our Subjects will wish us all manner of
Happiness; and those powerful Motives will prevent our falling short of our
Duty. I hope that you will practice all these things, for I am persuaded that
you aspire to be as glorious a Monarch as any upon Earth.

Observation. Mirza Ibrahim Sultan made a good Use of the excellent Education
and those good Advices which Schahroh gave him on making him King of Persia, in
the 827th of the Hegira, and 1414th of Jesus Christ. His Seat was in the City
of Schiraz, where he died in the 838th of the Hegira, and 1434th of Christ,
Schahroh his Father being still alive. He loved Virtue, and those who professed
it, but particularly learned Men, to whom he gave great Gifts, and chiefly to
Schereseddin Ali of the City of Jezd, who wrote the Life of Timour or Tamerlan
in Persian, which M. de la Croix junior has translated into French, that the
Public may have the Benefit of the same, as being the best History of that
Conqueror, all that have hitherto been published being defective in abundance
of things.

191. Schahroh had disposed of the Kingdom of Persia to Mirza Iskender one of
his Nephews, before he gave it to Mirza Ibrahim Sultan, but Mirza Iskender's
Loyalty was not long-lived. Schahroh would not believe the first News which he
had of his Revolt; and upon the Representation made to him by his Ministers,
that his Empire would never be in Peace while that Prince lived: He answered,
that they spoke like wise Politicians; but if through Ignorance or Heat of
Youth my Son Mirza Iskender is hurried on to this foolish Enterprise, it may be
that good Advice will oblige him to come to himself, and acknowledge his Fault;
but if he do not, then it belongs to us to take such Measures as may prevent
his disturbing the Peace of our Subjects.

Observations. Mirza Iskender was Son to Mirza Omer Scheich, one of the Sons of
Timour; and Schahroh had given him the Kingdom of Persia after the Death of
Mirza Pir Mehemmed, the other of Mirza Omer Scheich's Sons. Upon the certain
News of his Revolt Schahroh attempted to reclaim him by a kind Letter; but
understanding his Obstinacy, he marched and took the City of Ispahan from him
by force, which he had taken from Mirza Rustem: Mirza Iskender fled, but being
overtaken by some Horsemen, they brought him to Schahroh, who put him into the
Hands of his Brother Rustem, whom he ordered to take care of him, and comfort
him; but Mirza Rustem put out his Eyes, that so he might render him incapable
of raising any farther Commotions, or attempting the Kingdom again.

From those remarkable Sayings of Schahroh and other Particulars of his Life,
which we have related in pursuance of this Design, we may easily judge that his
History deserves to be published; and it is so much the more considerable, that
it includes a Reign of 4^ Years full of singular Occurrences: for Schahroh
began to reign Anno 1404, and died in 1446. And for Abdurrizack E^endi the
Author, he was his Iman and Judge of his Army when it was in the Field, his
Father having had the same Employments before him: And he was besides employed
by Schahroh in diverse Embassies; so that what is writ, is from very good
Memoirs: And this History, together with that of his Son Schahroh and his
Successors, almost to the Beginning of the Sophies of Persia, who reign at this
Day, by that same Author is translated into French from the Persian, and ready
for the Press.

192. In the Reign of Vlugbeg King of Maverannahar and Turquestan, Kadi-zadeh
Roumi, who was very learned in the Mathematics, was Professor at Samarcand, in
a College with three other Professors, where he taught with so much Reputation,
that those Professors attended his Lessons with their Scholars, after which
each of them taught their own Lessons in their several Schools. Vlugbeg
displaced one of these Professors, and put another in his Place, which
occasioned Kadi Zadeh Roumi to keep at home, and teach no more Lessons. Vlugbeg
having notice thereof, thought he had been sick; and having a great Veneration
for him, because of his Learning, he went to see him, and found him in perfect
Health; and asking why he discontinued his Lessons, Kadizadeh answered, A
certain Scheich did once give me Advice not to engage in any Court-Imployment,
because Courtiers were subject to be displaced, and I engaged in a Professor's
Place, thinking it had not been a Court-Imployment; but now I understand the
contrary by my Collegue's Disgrace, and therefore retired, for ^ear of being
exposed to the like Affront.

Observations. Vlugbeg took this Answer in good part, and did not only restore
the deposed Professor, but made an Oath that he would never depose any other.

Kadizadeh Roumi was called otherwise Mouca Pacha, and was Son to one Cadis of
Brousse, in the Reign of Sultan Murad I. Son to Sultan Orkhan; and therefore he
was called Kadizadeh Roumi, i.e. the Son of Cadol of the Country of Roum in
Khorassan, whither he went upon account of the Reputation of the learned
Mahometans of that Kingdom, which did then flourish. He understood the
Mathematics, and was one of those concerned in Vlugbeg's Astronomical Tables,
but he died before they were finished and published. These Particulars are
reported by Cogia Efendi, in his Ottoman History, toward the End of the Reign
of Sultan Murad I. where he mentions the learned Men who were famous at that
time.

193. A Mohammedan seeing an Arabian Book, whose Text was in red Letters, with
short Notes in black, so that there was more red than black, said, that they
looked like Flies upon Beef.

194. Schems-eddin Mehemmed Fanari Cadis of Brousse, in the Reign of Sultan
Bajazet Ildirim, was worth 150000 Sequins, and had a great Train and Equipage.
In the mean time he affected to appear Poor, by a very plain Suit, and a little
Turban, though the Cadis of his Rank wore them very large: And whereas he
bought his Clothes with Money made of the Silk of his own Worms, to excuse the
Riches which he had from other Places, and the Splendour of his House, he said,
I cannot gain any more by the Labor of my Hands.

Observations. 150000 Sequins make about a Million of Livers in French Money.

This Cadis, who was very learned, has writ several Books, which are much
esteemed by the Turks, and was called by the Name of Fanari, because he was
born in the Village Fanar.

195. The Poet Scheichi was poor, and sold a Medicine for sore Eyes to gain his
Livelihood: but having sore Eyes himself, and not making use of his own Remedy,
one who had need of it bought as much from him one Day as came to an Asper; and
paid him two: Scheichi would have returned one, but his Chapman refused it,
telling him, that the one was for the Medicine that he had bought for his own
Use, and the other I give you, says he, to take as much to rub your own Eyes,
for I perceive you stand in need of it.

Observation. This Poet lived in the Reign of Sultan Murad II. who won the
Battle of Varna. By the Check he had given him on this Occasion, he did so well
comprehend how ridiculous it was to sell a Medicine to others which he did not
make use of himself, though he stood in need of it, that he never thought on it
but he laughed heartily.

196. Sultan Murad II. after having gained the Battle of Varna* went through
the Field, and viewed the dead Bodies of the Christians, and said to Azab Beg,
one of his Favorites who was near his Person, that he was amazed, that amongst
all those Christians there was not one whose Beard was not black: Azab Beg
answered, If there had been one among them whose Beard was white, they had
never thought upon such an ill-contriv'd Design, in which it was apparent the
Heat of Youth had engaged them.

Observation. The Battle of Varna was won by Sultan Murad II. in the Year of
the Hegira 848. and of Jesus Christ 1444. He died in the Year of the Hegira
855. and of Christ 1451.

197. A Pacha, who every time that he retired to the Apartment of his Wives,
after having been in public to give Audience, caused the Drums to be beat, had
a mind to jear a Poet who did often make his Court to him, and asked him, if
when he went home, he did not cough, to give his People notice that it was he.
The Poet, who was himself very good at Railery, and understood what he meant,
replied, My Quality is not great enough to imitate such a Pacha as you, who
have Drums beating before you.

Observations. The Governors of Provinces amongst the Turks, are called
Pacha's; which according to some, is a Persian Word, and contracted from Pai
Schah; which is to say, the King's Foot, because the Pacha's represent the
Royal Authority in those Places where Kings themselves cannot come.

The Drums here spoke of, are little ones about half a Foot Diameter. The
Pacha's have also great Drums, Trumpets and Hautbois, which play before them as
they march, and at public Ceremonies, all on Horseback.

198. Ali said, that he heard Mahomet say, When Alms goes from the Hand of the
Giver, before it comes into that of the Receiver, it utters five fine Sayings
to him who gives it: I was little, and you have made me great: I was small in
Quantity, but you have multiplied me: I was an Enemy, but you have rendered me
Amiable: I was a Passenger, and you have made me Permanent: You were my
Guardian, and now I am your Guard.

Observations. Alms is here taken passively, i. e. for that which is given in
Alms.

Ali is Mahomet's Son-in-Law, and the Fourth of his Successors; of whom we have
formerly made mention.

199. A Cadis arriving at a Place where he was to exercise his Function, lodged
with the Governor, who did his best to treat him handsomely. In Conversation,
the Governor says to the Cadis; May one without offense ask your Name? The
Cadis answered, They looked upon me to be so very severe in those Places where
I was Cadis before I came hither, that they never called me any otherwise than
Azrail, which is the Name of the Angel of Death. The Governor fell a laughing,
and said, And I, my Lord, am known by the Name of Cara Scheitan; that is to
say, the Black Devil: Never could two better meet together than you and I, to
bring the People under our Charge to Reason; for I assure you that they are
very troublesome, and inclined to Rebellion, and that there is no way to tame
them: Therefore let us act by Concert; and while you deprive them of Life, I
will take care to make them renounce their Religion, otherwise they will never
submit.

Observations. The Offices of Cadis amongst the Mahometans, and particularly
among the Turks, are neither vendible for Life, nor Hereditary. They are
distributed by the Cadileskers, according to Capacity and Merit, and are
changed every two Years: At the End of which, the Cadis are obliged to return
to Constantinople to solicit to be employed elsewhere, unless they have an
Agent, or a Friend to solicit for them that they may be sent to anothe^^ Place
immediately, after the two Years are finished* They pay but one Tax for drawing
their Patents* by virtue whereof, they do exercise their Office* and that falls
to the Cadileskers, who dispatch them in the Grand Signior's Name. There are
also some other Fees which belong to the Cadileskers Officers.

The Mahometans believe that there is an Angel whom they call Azrail, i. e.
Azriel, whose Office it is to bereave dying People of their Souls. This they
have either borrowed from the Jews, or communicated to them who have one that
they call the Angel of Death, and a Destroying Angel, named Samael; the one
they represent with a Sword, and the other with a Bow and Arrows. Monsieur
Gaulmin, in his Notes on the Life of Moses, which he translated out of Hebrew
into Latin, makes mention of him on occasion of the Dialogue betwixt Samael and
Moses before his Death. He observes also that the Jews in Germany, when any one
dies among them, throw the Water out of all the Pots and other Vessels which
are in the House, out of a superstitious Conceit that the Angel of Death has
washed his Sword in them with which he bereft the Deceased of his Soul.

The Turks are ingenious above all other Nations at giving Names to People,
according as they please or displease them, and spare no Person of what Rank
soever: And thus they named Scheitan, who had been Pacha of Candia, the brave
Pacha for maintaining the first Siege of Buda so gallantly against the
Imperialists, and never giving his Soldiers rest, but keeping them continually
in Action: And of late we have heard of Caplan Pacha, i. e. the Leopard Pacha;
and oftentimes of Pachas Schahm, i. e. Falcon Pachas: They have also Satirical
Names.

And thus they called a Favorite of Sultan Mehemmed IV. Coul Oglou, because of
his Birth; that is to say, Son of a Janisary. They give also Names from Defects
of the Body; and so have a great Number of Top^ls, Kiors and Kusehs, whom they
denominate the Lame, the One-ey'd, or thin-Beard.

200. A Stamme^ing Man being a bargaining for a Fur at Constantinople, vexed
the Leather-seller mightily* because he took so much time to express himself.
The Leather-seller having asked, What he would do with it? He answered, but
stammering always excessively, That he would make use of it in Winter. The
Leather-seller replied, The Winter will be over by that time you can speak it;
and when will you make use of it then?

201. One of Ali's Offspring standing in need of Wood, went out betimes in a
Morning to wait for the Peasants as they came to Town to sell it, but with
intention to buy it only from one whose Name should be Ali: So that as every
Peasant arrived, he asked his Name: One called himself Aboubekir, another's
Name was Omer, a third Osman, and a fourth by another; so that he let them all
pass without buying any Wood: and having attended till it was almost night, as
an Addition to his Trouble, it begun to rain; so that as he was ready to
despair, he saw a lame Man walking before an Ass laden with sorry Wood, and
very ill sorted. He went near him, and asked his Name: The Lame Man answered
Ali: The other inquired, how he sold his Ass's Load? He answered, Have a little
Patience, I am in Company with another who follows me, you shall bargain with
him. Ali's Descendant answered, Poltron that thou art, thou sellest Wood after
having been Calife, and say thou have a Partner; cannot you do your own
Business without a Partner?

Observation. Ali was the 4th Cali^e after Mahomet, as I have already observed;
but that Dignity which ought to have gone to his Successors after him, fell
first upon the Ommiades, and then upon the Abbassides; so that the Reprimand of
Ali's Descendant is founded upon that Point of History.

202. There was never any Man seen who had so little Beard as Kuseh Tchel^bi;
who was thus named, because of that Singularity: He had none at all upon his
Chin, and not above 25 for his Mustachos. The Poet Bassiri complaining to him
of his Poverty, he answered, I wonder that you are poor, for I have been told
that you had abundance of Money. Bassiri replied, My Lord, I have no more than
there is Hair in your M^sta^hos.

Observations. We mentioned the Poet Bassiri formerly; and I have already
observed, that Kus^h signifies a Man that has little Beard.

Tchelebi is a Title of Honor given to Persons of good Birth. The Word is
probably derived from the Persian Word Geleb or Tcheleb; which signifies the
first Flowers, or first Fruits, and every thing that comes to Maturity before
its ordinary time. This Original pleases me much, because the Turks give this
Name particularly to handsome young People of good Parentage, who are pleasant,
well-bred, and of greater Wit than is usual for their Years. Others will have
it, that it comes from Tcheleb an old Turkish Word, which signifies God; but
this Etymology seems to me to be ^oo far fetched.

203. The Jews at Constantinople having a Controversy with the Turks about
Paradise, maintained that they alone should have entrance thereinto. The Turks
asked, Seeing your Opinion is so, where do you think then that we shall be
placed? The Jews, not daring to be so bold as to say that the Turks should be
wholly excluded, answered only; That they should be without the Walls, and look
upon them. This Dispute coming to the Ears of the Grand Vizier, he said, That
seeing the Jews place us without the Walls of Paradise, it is but just that
they should furnish us with Pavilions, to defend us from the Injuries of the
Weather.

Observations. At the same time the Grand Vizier taxed the Jews over and above
their ordinary Tribute, a certain Sum for the Grand Signior's Pavilions, which
they pay to this day.

I never read this in any Book, but it is commonly talked of at Constantinople,
where I heard it.

204. The World appeared to Isa the Son of Mary, in the Form of a decrepit old
Woman. Isa asked her, How many Husbands she had had? The old Woman answered, So
great a Number that it is not possible to tell. Isa replied, They are dead in
all likelihood, and abandoned you at their Death. She answered again, On the
contrary, it is I who killed them, and deprived them of Life. Isa replied,
Seeing it is so, it is a Wonder that any other, after having seen how you
treated the rest, should have any Love for you, and that they don't take
Example by them.

Observation. That Isa signifies Jesus Christ among the Arabians, who ascribe
many other Sayings to him that are not to be found in the New Testament, but
are nevertheless very edifying: And here follows another which is no less
remarkable.

205. In the Time of Isa three Travelers found a Treasure in their Way, and
said, We be hungry, let one of us go and buy something to eat. One of them went
accordingly, with an Intention to bring them some Victuals; but he says within
himself, I will poison the Provisions, that so they may die as they eat, and I
shall enjoy all the Treasure alone; and he put Poison amongst the Victuals
accordingly: But the other two, who had formed the like Design against him in
his Absence, murdered him upon his return, and so became Masters of the
Treasury. But after they had slain him, they did eat of the poisoned Meat, and
both of them died. Isa passed by this Place with his Apostles, and says to
them; Behold, what sort of a Thing the World is: See after what Manner it
treated those three Persons; W^ be to him who asks riches of it.

THE MAXIMS OF THE Eastern Nations.
THE Fear of God is the greatest of Perfections, and Vice the greatest of
Imperfections.

The Fear of God purifies the Heart.

I fear God, and next unto God, I only fear those who do not fear him.

The Fear of God is the safest Harbor.

Piety is the greatest Wisdom, and Impiety the greatest of Follies.

The Worship we pay to God mortifies I ^ust.

In serving the Devil we run to Perdition; but in serving God we serve our
selves.

We sin too much in sinning once, but a thousand Acts of Worship are not
sufficient to honor God as we ought to do.

Do not despise God in swearing by his Name, l^st he should despise you.

Whoever betrays his Religion for the sake of the World is miserably mistaken.

We cannot know our selves well unless we know our Creator.

He whose Lust prevails over his Reason, must Perish.

Did Man consider his End, and the transitoriness of this Life, he would be
str^^k with horror at his proceedings, and at the deceit of them.

Life is a dream out of which Death only awakens us.

The Life of Man is a Road toward Death.

Men are more apt to follow the corrupted Manners of their Times, than the good
Examples of their Forefathers.

Virtue, Science, and true Learning, are the main things which render us
estimable.

Those are not Orphans who have lost their Father; but those who want Science
and good Education.

Want of good sense is the worst degree of Poverty.

Nothing conceals a Man's want of sense better than silence.

Sense is the richest of all Possessions.

We create many Friends by the mildness of our Conversation.

Vanity proceeds from want of Judgment.

Revenge does not argue greatness of Soul.

Science in a Child is a Diadem, and Wisdom a golden Collar.

Those are absolutely wretched who sink under the weight of Misfortunes.

Those who love Virtue do not always practice it, and those who practice it, do
not do it with all the Perfection that is necessary.

Clownishness and Incivility breed Discord, even among Relations.

The Heart of the Foolish is in his Mouth, and the Tongue of the Wise is in his
Heart.

He that abandons himself heedlesly to his hopes, runs to his own ruin.

Envy has no rest.

When you receive favors do not make your self unworthy of them for want of
Gratitude.

The desire of Vengeance is an invincible obstacle to live happy and contented.

When you have an advantage over your Enemy, forgive him, to express your
acknowledgments to Heaven for that advantage.

You deprive your self of the Honor you receive by a Friend's Visit, in not
receiving him kindly.

It is not safe to rely on the Word of a cross ill-natured Man.

When you are joyful, you need desire no other revenge on him who envies your
happiness than the mortification he receives by it.

How advantageous is Science to him who possesses it, since it is of so great a
value that it is not to be purchased by Money.

Three things sooner or later undo a Man; his Wife when another possesses her
Heart, a Snake in his Bosom, and a heedless Friend.

Nothing obtains Pardon sooner than Repentance.

It Is a folly to appear before a Judge without being called; it is a greater yet
to speak without being questioned; and that which is worse than either is to
boast of being learned.

The most dangerous Illness is want of good sense.

Of all Vices, Vanity and Litigiousness are those which Men least correct
themselves of.

Our discourse occasions the Good or Evil which happens to us.

It is not amiss to make Visits, but we must not do it so often, as to give
those we visit cause to say, it is enough.

It is an affront to reprehend any body before Company.

Few words are a sign of perfect Wisdom.

Humility is a powerful means to obtain what we love.

The true Service of God in a Prince is to remain within his bounds, to
maintain Treaties, to be contented with what he has, and patiently to suffer
the privation of what he has not.

In obliging one to ask Pardon a second time, we remember that we have been
abused.

A General who Acts is more necessary than a General who Speaks.

Nothing is so like Flowers planted on a Dunghill, as the Favors we bestow on
Ignorant or mean Persons.

Whatever Community, Company, or Society you are in, never engage your self on
any thing relating to Public Affairs; seeing that if you succeed, the Company
will attribute it to themselves, and if you have no success, every one will
impute the fault to you.

When Men suffer Impatiently, Vexations and Troubles cause far more torment
than when they suffer with Patience.

When the Soul is ready to take its flight, what matters it whether we dye upon
the Throne or upon the Du^t?

The more our Enemies Malice is concealed, the more it behooves us to be
diffident of it.

Take Example by those who have preceded you, and strive to do Good.

Be not negligent, and then others will not be negligent toward you.

Take and give with Equity.

We need not wonder that those, who desire and seek after things which are not
proper for them, fall into unexpected Misfortunes.

Wealth remains no longer in the hands of Liberal Persons than Patience in the
Heart of a Lover, and Water in a Sieve.

As soon as a Man delights in hearing Slanders, he is of the number of the
Slanderers.

What Men suffer for this World covers the Heart with darkness; but what they
suffer for the World to come fills it with light.

Fortune and Glory have so strict a relation together, that he who has no
Fortune has no Glory.

The greatest Tranquillity we can enjoy is that which we enjoy when we desire
nothing.

Men seldom obtain what they desire, when they prosecute it with too much
eagerness.

Why do you upbraid me with the Sin I have committed, since God forgives it me?

He who drives a Jest too far, never fails of being hated or despised.

The Man who truly deserves the Title of Man, is known by the following Marks.
Whatever accident befalls him he remains Immovable; he is humble in Greatness;
he discovers no weakness in occasions which require Courage; he aims at nothing
but Honor and Reputation, and if he be not Learned, at least he is a Lover of
Learning.

The Condition of him who obeys his Passions is worse than that of a miserable
Slave.

The Conqueror must be satisfied with his Victory, and forgive the Vanquished.

We often labor hard to succeed in an Affair which creates nothing but Trouble
in the sequel.

An Officer who has lost his Place, must behave himself as if he enjoyed it
still.

Those are free who desire nothing; but those are Slaves who rely on their
Hopes.

Learn Sciences before you Marry.

The Council of the Wise stands in lieu of Predictions.

He who observes what passes in the World, takes Example by it, either to do
good, or to avoid the defects he observes in it.

Though you had two hundred excellent Qualifications in you, they would prove
useless, if Fortune be against you.

The most vexatious of all Affairs is to have Enmity.

Endeavor to get sincere Friends that you may live under the shadow of their
Protection, they will add to your Joy in Prosperity, and will comfort you in
Adversity.

We do not know what we do when our Heart is wounded.

Be sincere, though your sincerity were to cost your Life.

Men are Wise, proportionably to the good Education they have had.

Do not trust, you will live in Liberty.

Modesty forsakes us, as soon as we abandon our selves to unlawful Pleasures.

The Wise practice three things particularly: They forsake the World before the
World forsakes them. They build their Tombs before it is time to enter into
them, and do all things in order to be agreeable to God before they come before
him.

Whoever Commands those who are below him too Imperiously, often finds a Master
who Commands him in the like manner.

Do not Sin, you will have the less Grief at the hour of your Death.

It is scarce impossible not to succeed in what we undertake, when we advise
before hand.

Take care what Family you contract an Alliance with in marrying your Son,
because the Root communicates its Illness to the Stem, and to the Branches.

Those who have a consideration for, and behave themselves justly toward every
body, succeed in their Undertakings.

Greediness occasions Poverty; but those are Rich who desire nothing.

Too much Familiarity breeds detraction, and Friends are not far from Enmity
when they censure all things.

Whoever entertains you with the faults of others, designs to serve you in the
same kind.

The more Men hope, the less they obtain; because hope is often a means not to
obtain what they expect.

Whoever pardons his Inferiors meets with Protection from those who are above
him.

Always give a favorable construction to your Friends behavior, until you
find something to tire your Patience.

Observe your Friends, except those you are sure of; but you can never be sure
of a Friend unless he has the fear of God before his Eyes.

Love your Friends with caution.

The most perfect Pleasures in the World are mixed with Afflictions.

Whoever considers Consequences with too much attention, is not commonly a Man
of Courage.

The World is a Hell for the Good, and a Paradise for the Wicked.

God's decrees render the finest Projects in the World useless.

Precautions are vain where God commands.

Never enquire into things which are to come; but inform your self of those
which are past, in order to improve by them.

Gratuities shut the Mouth of those who have ill Intentions against us.

Wine, though never so violent, deprives us no more of Reason than an irregular
Passion.

True Nobility consists in the Virtue, not the Number of our Forefathers.

The best Inclination proceeds from good Education.

It is better to Hammer Iron upon an Anvil than to stand Idle before a Prince.

Advise in your Affairs with those who fear God.

Nothing is more vexatious than Poverty. Nevertheless Dishonesty is worse yet,
and therefore Wisdom is an inestimable Treasure.

Men never meet with ill success, when they are sensible what they are capable
of.

Nothing induces Men more to shun us than the good Opinion we have of our
selves.

The Miser has the Vexation to find his House a perfect solitude.

The more Men love to Jest, the more troubles they create to themselves.

Whoever has lost his Modesty has a dead Heart.

It is a piece of Imprudence to refuse the Favors which are offered us: We may
chance to meet with a denial, when we stand most in need of them.

The Poor must learn Sciences to become Rich, and the Rich for an Ornament.

We must suit our selves to the Weakness of our Inferiors, to receive that
Service from them which we stand in need of.

All prospers to him who avoids Covetousness, Anger, and Lust.

The Fool shows himself by his Discourse.

Whoever has forsaken all things to devote himself to a retired Life, must have
no complaisance for any one.

The Tongue of the Wise regulates it self according to the motions of his Heart.

Do not return the Good that is done to you with Ingratitude.

In all other cases the Husband must appear a Child in respect to his Wife; but
he must show himself a Man when she desires what he has.

We discover our most secret thoughts by our Discourse, and by our Looks.

It is better to possess an Art fit to get our Livelihood by, than to hold out
our hand to beg for it.

The Miser runs directly into Poverty, he lives like a Beggar in this World;
but he will be called to a Rich account in the day of Judgment.

Those that are happy in their Riches are known by the care they take to return
god thanks for them.

Integrity is paid by Integrity.

The greatest advantages we can procure to our Children, is to give them a good
Education.

Who can cure the Frenzy of a Man that would be thought a Hero, and yet hurts
no body?

Return good for Evil, and you will obtain the Victory.

We ought to look on him as our Brother, who relieves us with his Fortune, and
not on him who is only related to us by Blood, and forsakes us.

The Friends of this Age are the Spies of our Actions.

Men have the advantage over Beasts by Speech; but Beasts are preferrable to
Men, unless their Speech is attended with good sense.

Misfortunes must be concealed under the Veil of a gay and modest outside
toward every body.

Patience overcomes all things.

The mildness which is most agreeable to God, is that of a Just Prince, who is
easy of Access; but the barbarity which is most odious to him, is that of a
violent passionate Ruler.

The greatest Enemy we have is our Lust.

Good Actions are the blessing of our Life.

The greatest Misfortunes are occasioned by the Tongue.

Whatever Nation a Man is born in, he is only estimable according to his
Industry to recommend himself.

We must acquire that toward the end of our Life, which we have neglected at
the beginning.

He who has left the World, and still Courts the Rich, is still of the World.

A sign of Plenty is to have many Friends at our Table.

Do not constrain your Daughters to take deformed Husbands; because they love
what you love.

God bless him who discovers our Vices to us.

Three things ruin Men: Vanity, Covetousness, and Lust.

The wisest Man is he who has most complaisance for others.

We may avoid the Punishments of Heaven by Repentance; but we cannot free our
selves from the Tongues of Men.

The Body feeds on Meat, and the Soul on good Actions.

Do not put off the good Actions you may do to day, till to morrow.

Whoever does not know Evil, falls into Evil.

The goodness of a Discourse consists in briefness.

The Company of good Men is a Treasure.

True Glory comes from God.

Two things are inseparable from Falsehood, many Promises and many Excuses.

A sweet-temper'd affable Man stands in need of no Man's assistance.

Advise Relations and Friends to see and to visit each other; but never advise
them to live near one another.

Fulsome nasty Discourse is less tolerable than sluttishness in Eating.

Cheats, Liars, and all sorts of Persons who lead Irregular Lives, are drunk
with the Prosperity which attends them in all things; but that Drunkenness is
the just reward of their ill Actions.

Those who possess an Art possess a Treasure.

Read Poetry, it is a sign of good Inclinations.

The best way to live in quiet is to keep a check over our Passions.

The truest Friend is he who puts us in the right way.

A Man's genius is known by Conversation.

A good Friend is known by his steadiness in keeping his Word.

The best Wife is she who Loves her Husband and gets many Children.

Increase your Children and your Family; you do not know that it is on their
account you find wherewith to subsist.

The best remedy in all Afflictions is to submit to the Will of God.

A Man's Wit is known by his Words; and his Birth by his Actions.

It is vain to speak Truth where it produces no effect.

The best way always to be joyful and contented, is to have many Friends.

Avoid the Friendship of a Fool. Though he designs to serve you, he will prove
hurtful to you.

The Miser has no more advantage by his Money than if he had Stones in his
Coffers.

All the Felicity of Kings consists in administering Justice.

We say, The Age is Corrupted. We speak improperly, it is not the Age, but the
Men of the Age who are corrupted.

To commit one fault is too much, and it is not enough always to do our Duty.

Whoever is in necessity, resembles a Madman, who has no other way to follow
but that of his ill Fate.

The remembrance of having been young only creates regret.

Drunkenness is the Gate through which we pass toward forbidden things.

Nothing comforts more than the sight of a sincere Friend.

Tranquillity and quiet are the sole comforts of Life.

We grieve for want of Riches, and we Entangle our selves in the love of them
when we enjoy them.

Science is above whatever we think most sublime.

Business is troublesome; but Idleness is pernicious.

Birth is the harbinger of Death.

The good choice of a Friend shows the sense of him who makes it.

Friendship renews among Friends when ever they meet.

The comprehension of God consists in the difficulty of comprehending him.

It Is better to apply our selves to imbellish our Soul than our Body.

Ill conduct must be looked upon as a Precipice out of which it is hard to
escape.

Let your Heart be pure and clean before God. Be generally Civil toward all
Men. Master your Passions; be submissive to your Superiors, and bear their
Imperfections. Advise with the Wise. Be mild toward your Enemies; respectful
toward the Learned; and silent before the Ignorant.

By the ill Conduct of Men it is easy to judge of what they conceal most.

New Troubles are always the most vexatious.

Complaints are the Weapons of the weak.

No ill accidents are to be feared with Patience; but no good can be expected
with impatience.

Useless Discourses dishonor Wisdom.

Death is a Cup which all Men must Drink, and the Grave is a Gate through which
they all must pass.

What precedes Death is more dreadful than Death it self; but Death is more
tolerable than what follows it.

Affairs go ill when Wealth is possessed by Men who cannot make a good use of
it, when the Sword is in the hand of those who cannot wield it; and when those
who are endued with Wisdom do not know how to improve it.

Avarice is the Punishment of the Rich.

A Rich Man who is Covetous is poorer than a poor Man who is Liberal.

Three things fall on the head of him who practices them: Injustice,
Disingenuity, and Deceit.

One of the Laws of Friendship is to lay aside Ceremony.

Whoever walks uprightly can never stray.

Whoever Writes, and does not reflect on what he Writes, loses half his Life,
like him who Reads and does not understand what he Reads.

Silence prevents Troubles.

It is strange that Men will Inhabit Sumptuous Palaces, knowing that the Grave
is their true abode.

We need not fear the attempts of the Wicked when we have good Friends.

The Ignorant conceals his Ignorance by silence.

Whether you Pardon or Punish, use no vain Words, lest Men should not believe
you when you Pardon, or fear you when you threaten.

The most grievous offense is that which proceeds from a Friend.

Do not threaten to chastise more rigorously than the Crime deserves. If you do
it you will be unjust; and if you do it not you will be guilty of a Lie.

The worst of Crimes is to abandon Religion to follow the Vanity of the World.

You will not be exposed to be reprehended by others, if you reprehend your
self.

Happy is he who has Riches and puts them to a good use.

Do not affect to be losed when you promise.

We may say that Life is long when it is free from Vexation and Afflictions.

When Good offers it self to you embrace it; but reject Evil as soon as it
appears to surprise you.

Whoever submits to the Will of his Enemy exposes himself to an inevitable
ruin.

The Tyranny of Kings is more tolerable than the Insurrection of Subjects.

The Groans of the Oppressed are not useless.

The Life of a Tyrant is not lasting.

The length of discourse makes Men forget part of it; and yet it is contrary to
the Intention of those who speak.

Memory is preferrable to a vast Library of Books.

Be Mild and Complaisant, and you will meet with an equal return.

It is no wonder that a Man should suffer, and yet be Patient; but we have
reason to admire him who suffers, and blesses God for his Sufferings.

Perfect Health is a Treasure.

Do not mix your Secret with those things you expose in Public, you will find
the benefit of it.

Conceal no circumstance from him you take advice from, for the evil it might
occasion would lie at your own Door.

The Honors we acquire by Virtue, are infinitely greater than those we derive
from Nobility.

We discover the greatness of our Birth, by the Elevation of our thoughts.

Ungrateful Men never profit by the Favors they receive.

The Ignorant easily take the first Places; but the Learned, who understand the
Rules of Civility, never do it.

During the space of Time you enjoy in this World, you are on this side your
last hour. Before that hour comes, employ the Time you have to dispose of, to
prevent what must befall you when it is expired, and do not stay till all manner
of hope is taken from you, and till you are called to an account for the Ills
you have done.

The Infirmity of Old Age is sufficient, without adding any other Troubles to
it.

According to the course of the World Life is a Misery without Wealth, and
Science without Dignity is but a heap of coherent Discourses, which avail
nothing.

The comfort of those who have received some sensible Affront, is that they are
not to live to Eternity.

Whenever any great Wickednesses are committed in a Nation, God sends a general
Affliction after them.

Nothing engages Hearts more than fair Words.

Old Age ought not to be reckoned as a part of Life.

Do not magnify your self. Where is the Glory of being created out of Dust, to
be reduced to it again to become Worms Meat? To Live to day, and Die to morrow?

Dread the Prayers which those whom you Afflict send up to Heaven.

Have Patience, nothing can be done without Patience.

A Learned Monarch never repents his being so.

Mind what you say, and at what time.

The Reputation Men pretend to acquire by Insensibility, is a very ill one.

Whenever you ask Council, speak Truth, that the Council you receive may also
be true.

In order to receive good Intelligence, allow every body a free entrance in
your Army.

The greatest Enmity may be dissipated by an accommodation, excepting the enmity
of envious Persons.

Men never repent holding their Tongues.

Men heap a Treasure of all sorts of Perfections in the Company of Worthy Men.

Be not severe in Punishment. It is harsh, though never so mild. Neither use it
frequently, you may compass your Ends by other means.

The best method to acquire Reputation is to weigh and regulate ones Words.

He who has no Wealth, has no Honor in the World, and he who has no Honor
according to the World, has no Wealth.

Behave your self bravely in Fight, and be not disheartened, lest you also
dishearten your Soldiers.

The true use of Wealth is to dispose generously of it.

The World and Paradise may be compared to two Women who have but one Husband,
who loves the one more than the other.

The Friendship that is contracted with a Mad Man, involves Men into speedy
Misfortunes.

It is better to be alone than in the Company of the Wicked.

Answer the Friendship of your Friends, and have the same regard for them they
have for you.

A Miser who hoards his Money, is like a Man who has Bread before him, and yet
Starves.

Make use of your Wealth to gain the good Will of all Men.

We are daily respected and honored while Death is closer to us than the Seam
of our Shoes.

We die in the midst of Pleasures and Debauches without knowing that we die.

People never abandon their Monarch, nor withdraw from their Allegiance without
effusion of Blood.

The Wise can never be Poor.

Falsehood is always attended with Dishonor.

A Lie which tends toward Peace is to be preferred to a Truth which occasions
Sedition.

Whoever is absolutely weaned from the World, is free from all Vexation.

No Man discovers his want of sense more than he who begins to speak, before he
who speaks has done speaking.

There is no true Wealth without Virtue.

Whoever intrusts an affair of Consequence to one who is not capable to
discharge that Trust, soon repents it, and shows the shallowness of his
understanding to Men of good sense.

An Enemy may become a Friend by Gratifications, but the more we indulge our
Passions, the more they rebel.

We acquire the good Will of our Neighbor by being kind to him.

Wise Men never give hopes to take them away again.

Those who are of a generous Nature seldom have any thing to give, and those
who are Rich are seldom Liberal.

He who would be thought Learned passes for an ignorant Person, before God and
before Men.

He who designs to attain any perfection in Learning, must never suffer himself
to be governed or ruled by Women.

Wealth is designed to live more at ease, but we do not live to heap up Wealth.

We afflict the Poor in pardoning those who oppress them by Extortions.

Take heed of those you do not know.

Those who suffer themselves to be guided by their desires are commonly Poor.

The best way to succeed in our Projects, is to conceal our Secrets.

Two sorts of Men labor in vain, he who gets, and does not enjoy what he gets;
and he who learns of a Master whose Actions are not answerable to what he
knows, nor yet to what he Teaches.

The Learned Man whose Manners are Vitiated, resembles the Blind who holds a
Flambeau in his hand to light others, whilst he does not see himself.

The Trees we Plant yield us Fruit; but Men destroy those who have settled them
in the World.

It is better to keep our Secrets to our selves than to confide them to others.

He who rails at other Men's Behaviors before you, uses you in the same manner
before others.

The Learned know those who are Ignorant, because they have been Ignorant
themselves; but an Ignorant Man can pass no Judgment on the Learned, because he
has never been Learned.

He who flatters you, hates you in his Soul.

Kings stand more in need of the Counsel of the Wise, than the Wise stand in
need of the Favor of Kings.

How should one rely on the Friendship of an ignorant Man, since he is an Enemy
to himself?

Three things are not lasting in Nature: Riches without Trade, Science without
Dispute, and a Kingdom without Severity.

Ill grounded Hopes are never lost till death.

We wrong the Good in pardoning the Wicked.

The more Experience we have, the Wiser we are.

The World would perish were all Men Learned.

Laziness and over-sleeping do not only divert us from the Service of God, but
they also introduce Poverty.

Excess and Vanity ruin the best Estates.

We must do Good* if we expect to receive any.

It Is necessary to seek out a good Neighbor before we take a House; and a good
Companion, before we undertake a Journey.

Do not discover all your Secrets to your Friend, because he may become your
Enemy. Neither do your Enemy all the harm you can, because he may become your
Friend.

We must take as much care to blame our selves, as to blame others.

Anger begins with Folly, and ends with Repentance.

He must needs be unhappy, who suffers his Reason to be swayed by his Passions.

A wise Enemy is more estimable than a foolish Friend.

There is no Virtue like Prudence, no Mortification equal to the Consequences
of Vice; no Goodness like the Goodness of Manners, and no Riches equal to the
Pleasure of being contented with what we have.

Whoever contracts a Friendship with his Friends Enemies, seeks an occasion to
offend his Friends.

It is not necessary to venture our ^ife in Affairs which may be accommodated
by Money.

It is better to be Poor, than to get an Estate by indirect means.

It is not safe to follow the Counsel of an Enemy: Nevertheless, it is proper
to hear it, in order to do the contrary of what he says; and good Sense
requires it.

Nothing is worse than a learned Man whose Science is useless.

Excessive Passion makes all Men fly you; and ill-timed Carresses make them
disrespect you. Therefore you must not be too severe, lest they despise you;
nor too kind, lest they insult over you.

Two sorts of Men are never satisfied; those who seek after Science, and those
who hoard Money.

Strike the Serpent's Head with your Enemy's Hand, you can never fail of
success one way or other: If your Enemy overcomes, the Serpent will be killed;
and if the Serpent get the advantage, your Enemy will no longer be in the World.

Never be the Harbinger of ill News to one who may be troubled thereat; leave
that Task to another.

He who has no Education, is like a Body without a Soul.

Never accuse any one of Rebellion to the Prince, unless you are sure the
Prince will credit you, otherwise you will ruin your self.

The Wise, though deprived of all Necessaries, are to be preferred to the
Ignorant, who abound in all things.

The stupid or ignorant are full of themselves.

Whoever speaks too much is apt to Lie, or to say useless things.

Too much Precipitation is attended with Repentance, and Patience with good
Success.

Those are Rich who are satisfied with little.

Hearken to learn, and keep Silence for thy own preservation.

Men are divided into two Classis: The one find what they seek for, and yet are
not contented; the others seek and do not find.

Whoever advises a conceited Man, wants Counsel himself.

Every Man thinks he has more Wit than his Neighbor, and every Father fancies
his Son surpasses all others in Comeliness.

Well governed Subjects are better than great Armies.

He declares himself guilty who justifies himself before he is accused.

Kings will admit no equals; the Envious have no rest; and Liars act without
any consideration.

Beware of great Men whom you have laughed at, of a Fool when you have ralli'd
him, of a wise Man when you have offended him, and of an ill Man when you have
contracted a Friendship with him.

All the World cannot satisfy a covetous Man; but, a sober Man only desires
Bread to satisfy Nature.

The Devil has no Power over the Good, nor the Prince over the Mind of the Poor.

Three sorts of Men can get nothing that is good from three others: The Nobles
from the Yeomen, the Good from the Bad, nor the Wise from the Ignorant.

The Affairs that are done by degrees, are soon ended.

A Man is known by his Tongue* as an ill (...) is known by its lightness.

Whoever disputes with a wiser Man than himself to be thought Learned, shows
himself an Ass at last.

A Man ought to possess Science to that degree as to be able to show it at
pleasure.

Prudence obliges to consider the end of all things.

The Service of Kings has a double Prospect, the hope of making ones Fortune,
and the ^ear of lo^ing ones Life: but it does not consist with the Prudence of
a wise Man to expose himself to such a ^ear, for such a hope.

There are three things which are only known on three occasions: Valor in War,
a wise Man in his Passion* and a Friend in Adversity.

If any one begins to speak before you, do not interrupt him, though you know the
thing better than he.

Do not publish the Vices of your Neighbor, because you defame him, and lessen
your own Reputation.

He who cannot distinguish Good from Evil, must be ranked among Beasts.

He who t^aches Science* and does not practice what he teaches, is like him who
ploughs* and does no^ sow.

It ^s possible to discover a Man's acquired Parts in one Day; but do not trust
him as to what relates to his Morals; because the wickedness of his Soul is not
to be discovered in many Years.

A weakly Man who undertakes to sight with one who is stronger than himself,
enables his Enemy to destroy him.

Whoever does not hearken to good Advice, must expect to be reprehended.

Science is increased by Experience, and Lies are augmented by believing them
too easily.

The wise Man who holds his Tongue, says more than the Fool who speaks.

Wisdom only appears by the opposition of Folly and of Stupidity.

We are Slaves to a published Secret; but, a Secret is our Slave as long as we
conceal it.

Apply your self to the search of Science, from your Candle to your Death.

The wise Man who happens to be among Fools, must expect no honor from them.

Nothing is more difficult than to know ones self.

It is no wonder if the Ignorant sometimes get the better of wise Men by their
Prattle. Emrod wears out precious Stones.

The Understanding that is offuscated by Lust, may be compared to a Husband who
is governed by his Wife.

The Wise must not easily excuse the Levities of the common People; because
they prove ill for both. The Authority of the Wise is lessened by it, and the
common People are thereby confirmed in their Disorders.

Whoever praises ill Actions, is apt to commi^ them.

The love of the World and of Riches, is the source of all Evils.

Heaven has granted all Men wherewith to live; but, on condition that they
shall work to get it.

Shame hinders us from obtaining what we desire.

We forget the Name of him whose Bread we have not eaten while he was alive.

In an ill Year, we must never ask the Poor how it fares with them, unless we
design to relieve them.

The best Conduct in great Assemblies is to say nothing against any ones
Sentiments.

The Good are joyful in the midst of their Poverty, and the Wicked are sad in
the midst of their abundance.

A senseless Man is known by six different Marks; First, In being angry without
a cause. Secondly, In saying things which signify nothing. Thirdly, In
trusting all sorts of Men. Fourthly, In changing when he has no reason to
change. Fifthly, In being troubled at what does not concern him. And Lastly, In
not being able to distinguish a Friend from an Enemy.

The Schoolboy who learns against his will, is like a Lover who has no Money:
The Traveller who wants good Sense, like a Bird without Wings: A learned Man
who does not practice what he knows, like a Tree without Fruit: And a Priest
without Learning, like a House without a Door.

It does not suit with good Sense to take a doubtful Remedy; nor to travel
without a Caravan in an unknown Country.

True Riches consist in being contented with what one has; and the worst part
of Poverty, is not to bear it with Patience.

We vainly expect five things, from five different sorts of Men: A Present from
the Poor, Service from the Negligent, Success from an Enemy, Advice from the
Envious, and true Love from a Woman.

We ruin our selves two different ways; by excessive Wealth, and by a great
itch of Talking.

Be not over pressing to inform your self of what you may know at some time or
other of your self; because it prejudices the good Opinion Men have of you.

He is no Man who suffers himself to be governed by Anger.

Suit your Words to the Capacity of those yo^ speak to.

Those are Rich who are contented with what God allows them.

A little Beauty is preferrable to a great deal of Wealth.

Whoever frequents the Wicked, wrongs his Reputation, though he be not yet
corrupted by their Company. It is with him as with one who frequents Taverns;
no Body says that he prays there; but, that he drinks Wine.

Moderation must be considered like a Tree; the Root of which is to be
contented; and the Fruit, to be at rest.

The Poor whose end is happy, is preferrable to a King whose end proves
unfortunate.

A wise Man ought never to reprehend a Fault he is apt to commit himself.

Heaven gives Rain to Earth; but, in return, Earth only sends up Dust to
Heaven: It Is because a Vessel can yield no more than it contains.

The Pleasure of this World consists in having Necessaries, and not
Supe^fluities.

Those who are too much delighted with the World fall into Evil.

Friendship increases in visiting Friends; but, in visiting them seldom.

None are fit to Counsel Kings, but such as are not afraid of losing their
life, and who expect nothing from them.

He wrongs himself most who is submissive to him who has no regard for him, and
who maintains a Friendship which is of no use to him.

Do not suffer those to pass before you who do not know your Merit.

He who will not for a while patiently suffer the trouble of Learning, remains
long in the obscurity of Ignorance.

Man is the noblest of all Creatures, and the Dog the most despicable:
Nevertheless it must be granted that a grateful Dog is more estimable than an
ungrateful Man.

Noble Men who are easy of Access derive a double advantage by it; the one, in
that it sets off their Nobility; and the other, in that they are the more
respected for it.

He who obeys his Passions is capable of nothing, and for that reason he is not
fit to Command.

Perfection consists in three things: In being observant in the Religion we
profess, in being patient under Afflictions, and in behaving our selves
Prudently.

Since the World is but a Passage, it behooves us at least to endeavor to leave
a good Reputation behind us.

A Camel is so gentle, that a Child may lead him an hundred Miles by a Halter.
Nevertheless, if the Child leads him through a dangerous way, he resists and
obeys no longer. This shows that we must reject Mildness when Severity is
necessary.

A Prince without Justice, is like a River without Water.

As Meat is useless to a sick Man; so all Advertisements, all Counsels and
Preachings are vain to him who is blinded with worldly Love.

Three sorts of Persons discover in three different occasions what they are,
and what they are capable of: Men of Courage, in Combats; honest Men, in
returning what has been confided into their Hands; and Friends, in times of
Adver^^^y and ill Fortune.

Falsehood is like a Wound which leaves a Scar. A^^ ^yar is not credited, even
when he speaks Truth; as it happened to Joseph's Brothers.

A learned Man, who does not practice what he knows, is like a Cloud which
yields no Rain.

Though we have a thousand Friends, we still lack more; but one Enemy is too much.

Science removes Ignorance, but it does not correct ill Nature.

The more an Enemy appears submissive, flattering and complaisant, the more a
good Politician ought to mistrust him.

It Is dangerous to speak, when we should hold our Tongues; and to be silent,
when we ought to speak.

A Man may chance to kill a hundred other Men with his Sword; but, by his
Prudence he may destroy a whole Army.

A rich Man without Liberality, is like a Tree without Fruit.

Provided you are not tired with seeking, you will find what you seek at last.

If you cannot keep your own Secret; what reason have you to complain that he
to whom you have revealed it does publish it?

The Poor Man who has no Patience, is like a Lamp without Oil.

Though Patience is bitter, the Fruit of it is sweet.

He who to show his Eloquence and Wit, chances to say more than he is capable
to do, soon repents his Imprudence.

The Administration of the Affairs of Kings, may be compared to Sea Voyages, in
which some get, some lose, some heap up Treasures, and some lose their Lives.

A Woman without Virtue, is like unseason'd Meat.

He that is voluntarily Poor, possesses nothing, and nothing possesses him.

A Brother who promotes his own Interest to the prejudice of his Brother, is
neither a Brother nor a Relation.

One Day of a learned Man, is more precious than the whole Life of an ignorant
Person.

It Is less grievous to die in Want, than to declare ones Poverty.

It Is better to die honorably, than to live miserably.

The Wicked ought to be reputed as dead even while they are living; but, the
just Man lives even among the dead.

A cruel King must not expect to Reign long; a proud Man to be praised; an ill
Man to have many Friends; a covetous Man to be thought honest and good natured;
and a self-interested Man to be reputed just and equitable.

You must never discover your Aversion to those who envy you, nor to your
Enemies.

The Friendship of great Men, hot Weather in Winter, the fair Words of Ladies,
and the joy of Enemies, are four things we must never trust to.

We must never undertake any thing, without having first examined it.

The Heart of a Person who has no dependence, ought to be the Grave of the
Secret he is entrusted with.

You ought never to converse nor keep company with Fools; because they are
ashamed of nothing.

Whoever possesses an Art, may call himself a great Man.

Envy is as inseparable from Envy, as Fire and Smoke are inseparable from one
another.

If a good Counsel does not succeed at one time, it will succeed at another.

The Country in which a Man has no Friends is an ill Country.

Envy is a Fire which kind^es in an instant, and which equally burns both green
and dry. It is a Torrent which sweeps away Cottages and Palaces.

Great and small are often banished from Home for one Fault committed by one
only Man in a whole Nation.

Honors, Employments, and Dignities, do not reward us for the Trouble we are
at to obtain them.

A Slave often deserves more esteem than a Gentleman.

At certain times a Book stands in stead of good Company.

A solitary life often proves the life of M^^ who neither can or will do any
thing.

The Day we pass without doing some good Action, must not be numbered among the
Days of our Life, no more than the Day in which we learn nothing.

Mediocrity is the Rule of all Affairs, and of all Enterprises.

Without Complaisance it is impossible to avoid Trouble, even among Friends and
Relations.

A great Monarch's chief Object ought to be good Reputation; seeing that of all
the Grandeurs and Hurry of the World, it is the only thing which remains after
him.

Never put off what you are to do to Day till to Morrow.

The Mark of a great Soul, is to pity an Enemy in distress.

Liberality is so agreeable to God, that it disarms his Wrath, and induces him
to show Mercy.

A small Estate well managed lasts long; and great Treasures are soon wasted
when in lavish Hands.

Never leave an old Friend for a new Acquaintance, or you will repent it.

Whoever does Good never loses his Reward. A good Action is never lost either
before God or Man.

Those who are in Health, have Bread, and a dwelling Place, ought never to put
themselves to Service, nor to Travel.

When you respect brave and valiant Men, they are wholly yours: But when you
have the same regard for Cowards, they hate you, and become the more insolent.

Grediness leads to Infinity, the safest way is to fix our selves. Those who do
not fix themselves are never rich.

A little Friendship well placed, is better than a great Friendship contracted
without Consideration.

There are but two ways to get out of great Troubles, constant Steadiness, or
Flight.

A Monarch who abandons himself wholly to Divertisements, makes his Life the
first Life in the World in relation to Pleasures; but, in order to perform his
Duty, he must be in his Kingdom, like the Rose in the middle of a Garden where
it lies on Thorns.

You must not despise Men because they are creeping and ill-habited. The Be is
a disagreeable Insect to the ^ight; nevertheless, its Hive produces abundance
of Honey.

Great Honors exalt a Man who is well born; but, they lower an ignorant Man.

Subjects enjoy Peace and Tranquillity when they are governed by Princes who do
not lay their Heads on the Pillow to take rest. The Monarch who allows himself
none, procures it to others.

It is necessary to compare our Sentiments with the Sentiments of a Second,
because two Heads are better than one.

We should not rejoice at the Death of an Enemy. Our Life will not last
Eternally.

We must act in order to avoid Laziness; we must also attribute to God whatever
we acquire by Labor, otherwise we live in a continual and condemnable Idleness.

The Trips of the Tongue do more harm than a false Step. The Head pays the
forfeit of the Tongue, but we are not so apt to stumble in walking warily.

The best of Men is he who does good to Men.

It Is very difficult to make him Learned who knows nothing; because his
Ignorance persuades him, that he is wiser than he who pretends to Teach him.

The major part of your Friends court you to share your Fortune, but as soon as
your Estate diminishes they forsake you.

One Suit of Clothes, one House, and Provision for one day is sufficient. If we
die at Noon, one half of the last is superfluous.

The Miser is an object of Malediction, as well in relation to the World, as in
respect to Religion, and an Enemy to all the Poor.

You had better do Good and be railed at, than to be Wicked and be well spoken
of.

Bear the attempts of those who envy you with Patience; your moderation will
drive them to despair, and you will see them all perish in time.

Self-interested Friends are like the Dogs in public Places, who love the
Bones better than those from whom they receive them.

When you are in Prosperity, take care to maintain your self therein; for you
may chance to deprive your self of it by your own Folly.

Neither Birth nor Valor are required to obtain great Places, but Vivacity and
force of Wit. Men of sense may aspire to any thing.

The advantage an honest Gentleman ought to aspire to at Court is, if possible,
to obtain a higher Dignity than that he is already possessed of, to be able to
serve his Friends, and to hinder his Enemies by his Authority from being able
to hurt him.

In order to live well, we must die to the Affections of the Senses, and of all
things that have a dependence on them.

A Thousand Years of delight do not deserve the venturing of one moment of our
Life to enjoy them.

The violent desire of living plentifully and without venturing any thing, is
the forerunner of a despicable and ignominious Life.

We propose to behave our selves well when we are Ill; and we are no sooner in
Health again, but we relapse into new Debauches. We place our hopes in God in
our fears, and we offend him as soon as we are well again. That shows that
there are no pure and sincere Actions.

In all Enterprises we must consider the end as well as the beginning.

You only receive proportionably as you give.

He who would advance himself at Court, must observe five things. The first is
to correct the tendency he may have to Passion, by mildness and complaisance:
The second, not to suffer himself to be seduced by the Devil of Pride: The
third, to avoid being Vanquished by Interest: The fourth, to be sincere and
upright in the Administration of the Affairs that are committed to his Care:
And the fifth, not to be shaken by any Casualties whatever.

The Service of Kings is a vast Sea in which Merchants Sail; some are ruined by
it, and others get great Estates.

Avoid him who does not know what he is capable of, who is obstinate in
Enterprises that are above his reach, and who suffers himself to be guided by
his Passions. He will have one days Satisfaction, and many years Repentance.

Affairs are governed by the Wise while they go well; but the Wicked take the
management of them as soon as they abandon them.

Fear him who fears you.

You must do nothing without design.

Prudence is one half of our Life.

Men must be submissive in asking, in order to be raised in obtaining their
desire.

The Familiarity of great Men is dangerous, it is a Fire which often scorches.

Avoid the Familiarity of Kings, with as much care as you would keep dry Wood
from Fire.

A wicked Woman in an honest Man's House is a Hell for him in this World.

The beginning of Joy is the immediate consequence of Patience.

Those who do not combat, fear danger, and never reach Glory.

We acquire Riches with Patience, and we are secured from dangers by silence.

It is the interest of Kings to court and to favor Men of Merit, because they
receive Services from them proportionable to the favors they bestow upon them
to that end.

We cannot say that the Miser possesses his Wealth, though he places his felicity
in it.

The thoughts of Evil proceed from Idleness.

Value your self upon your Virtue, and not upon the Antiquity of your Family.
Do not produce a living Creature by a dead one; and do not give a dead Creature
for a living one.

Never speak ill of the Dead, to the end that the good you do may live in the
memory of good Men.

To employ your Wealth well, is better than to increase it.

Kings and Subjects are equally unhappy, where Men of Merit are despised, and
where ignorant Persons enjoy the best Places.

The best way not to be abused by the Wicked, is to be complaisant toward them.

That Wealth which is not employed toward the sustenance of Life, is useless.

It Is worse to return Evil for Evil, than to be the Aggressor.

Men do not obtain whatever they desire

Answer those who question you, in such a manner that they may have no reason
to take Offense.

The only way to punish the Envious, is to load them with Favors.

Those who assist you in necessity are your Brothers and your Friends.

Prudence suffers between Impossibility and Irresolution.

We best express our gratitude toward God for the Wealth he bestows on us, in
disposing of it generously.

Contract no Friendship with any unless they are free from Passion.

When you speak, express your self so that your words may not want an
Explanation.

The most precious Acquisition is that of a faithful Friend.

Never trust appearances, whatever noise a Drum makes it is only filled with Air.

Have a good Conscience; but be diffident, lest you be surprised or deceived.

Whether you do Good or Evil, nothing remains unpunished or unrewarded.

Good success in Affairs, even in the most dangerous occasions, depends neither
on Force, nor on the assistance we receive from abroad, but on Prudence and
good Conduct.

Wisdom is preferrable to Force, because it executes things which Force cannot
perform.

A Wise Man, by his words, does things which an hundred Armies joined together
could never execute.

Happy is he who corrects his faults by the faults of others.

Favors are not a sufficient reward for the low things a Man must do to obtain
them.

Men should never speak before they have considered what they are to say, nor
do any thing without Reason.

Those who expect to meet advantages in Troubles and Seditions, never fail to
promote them.

The best Friends of this Age are those who mind our Faults.

We shall never have Friends, if we expect to have them without faults.

When a Minister who is Invested with an absolute Power, is equally an
Arbitrator of secret Affairs, and of the general affairs of the State, it is a
Miracle if he does not aspire to Sovereign Power, and if he does not destroy
him who stands in his way.

The repose of the Soul consists in not hoping for any thing.

Men need not fear on that side which they are diffident of; but on that side
on which they think themselves secure.

A Learned Imprudent Man is a burden to every body.

An ill constitution can never be turned into perfect Health; neither can
corrupted Manners be turned into such as are laudable and irreproachable.

Those who are virtuous are esteemed and respected in all Places, the Ignorant
are strangers in their own Country.

Whoever applies himself wholly to learn Sciences, puts himself in a way to
possess all sorts of Goods.

Give your Children a good Education, it is the best thing you can do for them.

He who does not succeed in the Execution of the Orders which have been given
him, because he was supposed capable to perform them, ought to be excused; for
it is very likely that he has omitted no cares in order thereunto.

Those who regard and respect the Wicked, cultivate a Thorn and breed a Serpent
in their Bosom.

Be kind to the Wicked and you will make them grow honest.

True Wealth consists in Virtue, and not in the Possession of a great Estate,
and Wisdom is found in the Understanding, and not in Years.

A Servant who is inclined to Evil, never leaves the World without paying his
Master with Ingratitude.

Kings are only Kings because they have Men, and Men cannot live happy without
a King.

Why do you who have great Employments and Dignities, rely upon others for what
you ought to do your self? Why do you lay the blame of the faults you commit,
upon others?

Every Action requires a particular Genius.

Riches increase according as they are distributed to the Poor.

Too much Reputation is often prejudicial.

Men are not despicable for being poor. A Lion in Chains is never the less
Valiant for it.

A single Man cannot resist many. A Fly overthrows an Elephant, notwithstanding
his monstrous bulk, and all his strength; and many Ants together put a Lion to
a strange loss, when they assault him.

Good Actions make Life happy.

Whoever gives Council, does all he has to do; let him who receives it, take
care to put it in execution.

Riches and Children occasion nothing but Misfortunes.

A Sovereign must be reduced to great streights before he destroys the Work of
his own hands, in putting a (...) out of favor.

A young (...) who has the Wisdom of an old Man, is (...) upon as an old Man
among the Wise.

A Just P^^nce is the Image and Shadow of God on Earth.

The Service of great Men is like the Sea, the more Men are engaged in it, the
more risque they run.

Truth is bitter and hard to be understood.

We can never obtain the Possession of all, but by an absolute renunciation of
all things.

Virtue appears no sooner, but Vice insults over it with Insolence.

Man has no greater Enemy than his Belly.

The Life of this World is Childrens Play.

We cannot say that we have maturely considered what we do, when the end does
not answer our expectation.

That Friend we have least reason to value, is he we must express most regard
for.

To the end that what you wish for may prove advantageous to you, never wish
any thing but what is proper for you.

Raillery is looked upon as an accomplishment among Debauchees; but that
Liberty is unseemly among those who profess Wisdom.

Covetousness is a very dangerous Distemper, it attacks the Soul and Heart; and
it is so pernicious, that all Men avoid those who are tainted with it.

The worst of Men are those who will not forgive.

Some pretend that it is impossible to avoid our Fate; but it is good to do
nothing without precaution.

You make a double Present, when you do it with a cheerful Countenance.

Nobility is not perfect unless it be attended with good Actions.

Detraction and Calumny never quit their hold, until they have annihilated the
Innocent they have once attacked.

Mind those things at the latter end of your Life, which you have neglected at
the beginning.

It is safer to rely on the Promises of honest Men, than on the Debts of bad
Pay-Masters.

That Minister is guilty of a Crime, and of Rebellion, who persuades a King to
break his Word.

Justice does more good than great Armies, and defends more securely than the
best fortified Citadels.

Self-interested Friends are like Curs, who are good for nothing but to be
about a Table.

Never frequent those who do not know your Worth.

Respect is the Tie of Friendship.

Consider your Condition, and leave Playing and Jesting to young People.

Anger is sooner appeased by Mildness than by Roughness. Fire is sooner
quenched by Water than by Fire. Fire would only serve to increase it.

These five things are the most useless things in the World: A Flambeau at
Noonday; a beautiful Face before a blind Man; abundance of Rain in a Desert,
and in a barren Heath; a great Feast to Men who have no Stomach; and Truth with
Science proposed to an ignorant Person.

The Wise are only to give their Advice: They are not to answer for the
execution; it is the part of those who consult them, if they have good Sense.

Men become Venerable, and challenge Respect in abstaining from Wiles and
Tricks.

Four things rejoice the Sight particularly: A Meadow enameled with Flowers, a
purling Stream, pure Wine, and the presence of Friends.

Science and Learning without Practice, is like Wax without Honey, like Words
without Deeds, and like a Tree without Branches, which is only fit to be thrown
into the Fire.

Do not frequent the Fool who thinks himself Learned.

Whoever is in Favor with the Prince, does all the Mischief he pleases, and
yet is applauded.

Speak Truth, though you know it is odious.

The Number of Guests at Table, is the Blessing of the House.

Five things are useless unless they are attended each with another: Words
without Deeds, Wealth without Occonomy, Science without good Manners, Alms
without Intention and out of Season, and Life without Health.

If you would keep your Secret from your Enemy, do not reveal it to your Friend.

Avarice, Lust, and Self-Love, are three things which shorten Life.

The Nobleman who lives without Honor, must not be deemed among the Living.

If you design to live without disquiet in great Places, do Actions worthy of
your Character.

When Subjects are abused by Inferior Officers, and cannot make Remonstrances
to the Prince, because the overgreat Authority of the Minister awes them;
their Fate is like that of a Man, who being pressed by drought, goes down to
the Nile to drink, and there perceives a Crocodile, the sight of which will not
permit him to take Water.

The Grave alone can extinguish Lust.

It is better to starve, than to wrong the Poor.

Meat is the Nutriment of the Body, but Conversation is the Food of the Soul.

Those who are guilty of the most enormous Crimes, are in some measure more
tolerable than a proud Beggar.

Lies last but a moment; but Truth will endure for ever.

Princes are like Beauties; the more Lovers a beautiful Lady has, the greater
is her Glory. So the more numerous a Prince's Court is, the more the Prince is
esteemed and respected.

Nothing can reflect more on any Man, than to affirm a thing which is publicly
known to be false.

The basest thing in Nature, is to have the Power to do good, and not to do it.

Good Manners ought to be the Ornament of Men, and Gold the Ornament of Women.

If any Man reprehends you for your Faults, be not angry at him, but act the
things he tells you.

Science is prejudicial to him who possesses it, when it is not accompanied
with Wisdom and good Conduct.

Poisoned Victuals are preferrable to dangerous Discourses.

If you design not to be an ill Friend, be not of a revengeful Temper.

There are six things on which we ought never to ground our Hopes: The Shadow
of a bare Cloud, because it only passes: The Friendship of disaffected Persons,
because it passes like Lightning: The Love of Women, because the least trifle
extinguishes it: Beauty, because it tarnishes at last, though never so
accomplished: False Praises, because they signify nothing: And finally, the
Riches and Goods of this World, because they waste and consume.

If you are desirous to live without Crosses, do not fix your Affections on the
World.

In order not to receive an Affront, do not remove that which you have not
placed.

A wicked Man who is happy, is unworthy of his happiness.

If you would not have Men to discover your Faults, never discover the Faults
of others.

Combat against your self, you will acquire the Tranquillity of the Soul.

Do nothing out of Passion, you will free your self from a long Repentance.

If you would be esteemed by others, esteem them.

In order to please every Body, suit your Discourse according to every ones
Inclination.

Never laugh without Cause, for so to do is a double Folly.

Fine Raillery gives a relish to Conversation, as Salt does to Meat.

Jest with your Equals, lest you grow angry when they return you Jest for Jest.

Men take after those they frequent.

Never quarrel with any one: Quarrels are below a Man of Honor. None but Women
and Children are allowed to quarrel.

The M^ney which is best employed, is that which is (...) out for God's sake.

The Remedy of an afflicted Heart is to submit to the Will of God.

If occasion obliges you to quarrel, do not say all the Evil you know of him
you are sallen out with; do it in such a manner as to leave room sor an
Accommodation.

Lust is the distemper of the Soul.

Words show the Wit of Man, and his Actions show the bottom of his Heart.

It is harder to manage a good Estate well, than to acquire it.

The presence of Friends, causes a real and a lasting Joy.

A small Estate managed with Prudence, is better than great Treasures ill
employed.

The Elevation of Men without Merit, is a vexation to honest Men.

Great Expenses, bring in Poverty.

The greatness of Kings, appears in the Administration of Justice.

Tranquillity and Health are acquired by Labor.

Lend your Friend Money as seldom as you can, to avoid the Vexation of asking
for it again. When you are obliged to lend him any, suppose you give it him,
and never ask for it again; but, tarry till he gives it you.

Be moderate toward him who does you harm, you will confound him.

The Consolation of those that are in Affliction, is to see their Friends.

A Friend easily becomes an Enemy; and when once he is an Enemy, he can hardly
become a Friend again.

We commonly prejudice Enterprises by applying our selves too earnestly and too
eagerly to them.

The Pleasures we enjoy near Princes commonly scorch our Lips.

Eloquence is the source of Riches.

Impart what you have to those who deserve it; but never covet what others
enjoy, if you would be thought a very honest Man.

If you desire your Wife should be honest, do not take her above your Condition.

A Father must be grave and serious with his Children, that they may always
fear him, and never despise him.

Honor your Father, your Son will honor you.

Beware of a Friend who loves your Enemy.

The Degree of Science is the highest of all the Degrees of Elevation.

You must break absolutely with Friends who break with you.

No Man is without Faults; but yet endeavor to have none.

We must keep a fair Correspondence with the Wicked as well as with the Good;
because we sometimes stand in need of the assistance of the first as well as of
the last.

The Joy of Life proceeds from a pure and clear Conscience.

A Dram of Gold given to a poor Relation, is more than a hundred Drams
given to another who is not related to thee.

Measure every one according to his Measure.

You must be faithful and sincere in Friendship, and live with your Friends as
if you were to fall out with them at some time or other. For ought you know
they may turn Enemies at last.

It Is easier for Science or Learning to perish, than it is easy for learned Men
to die.

Frequent the World, every one in proportion to his Merit.

The Peoples Devotion is Superstition.

The Poor ought never to contract a Friendship with those that are more
powerful than themselves; because those that are above us, never love us
Cordially.

Considering the Offspring of Man, it is strange he should magnify himself.

Every Man is sensible of the Good or Ill he does.

Never contract a Friendship with Self-interested Friends; because they only
aim at their own Interest, and have no real Kindness.

Be ever diffident of two sorts of Men; of a Potent Enemy, and of a Dissembling
Friend.

Whatever part of the World we are in, we must always suffer.

Avoid making an Enemy who is greater than your self.

Never Railly those who are of an uneven Temper or giddy headed.

It Is better to adorn the inside than the outside.

Whoever has no Friend, is a stranger wherever he goes.

Diffidence is a sign of Wisdom and of Prudence.

The Pleasures of this World are nothing but deceit.

If any ill Action be imputed to you, take great care to clear your self of
(...).

If you have any orde^ to execute, do it alone and without a Companion, to the
end you may not fail in the execution, and that you may have the approbation of
him who has employed you.

If any one begs your Pardon for any Injury he has done you, grant it straight,
and persuade your self that he has only offended you to make trial of your
Clemency.

The Learned are the true Nobles, and the true Lords in every Nation.

Never offend any one, to avoid being obliged to beg pardon.

Irregular Manners are the Drunkenness of Mortals.

If you should have the misfortune to be obliged to beg Pardon, do it quickly,
to avoid the blame of Obstinacy.

The elevation of Man consists in Humility.

Court no Dignities, unless you deserve them.

The greatest Offense may be Pardoned.

The Ignominy of Learning, is to have a very small stock of it.

Covetousness is the Punishment of the Rich.

A little discernment in our Actions is better than a multitude of Actions done
without choice or consideration.

Gray Hairs are the Harbingers of Death.

One of the Laws of Friendship is never to be Importunate.

Whoever is in the Service of Princes, and of great ones, must observe five
things to avoid giving his Enemies any advantages over him. He must never be
surpised in a Lie by his Master; he must never speak ill of any body before
him; he must never dispute any thing with him; he must never do any thing
contrary to his Orders; and finally, he must never reveal the Secret he has
consided to him.

We lose the Credit Wealth gives us, proportionably as it wastes.

Honesty consists chiefly in three things; to perform what we are obliged to
do, never to do any thing against Truth, and to moderate our selves in our
Actions.

Patience overcomes all things.

He is more than a Tyrant over himself, who humbles himself before those who do
not matter it, and follows those from whom he can expect nothing.

Those who are Envious have no longer any regard to Religion, nor to the L^^^s
of Equity and Justice.

Travel forms the Mind, and moreover we thereby learn Virtue; it is also the way
to acquire Wealth.

We have an Inclination to become Enemies* when we refuse to hearken to the
Council of a Friend.

Men betray Folly on five different occasions; when they build their happiness
upon the Misfortunes of others; when they attempt to gain the love of Ladies by
rigor, and by giving them rather marks of Hatred than of Love; when they
design to become Learned amid'st Repose and Pleasures; when they seek Friends
without making Advances; and when being Friends they refuse to do any thing to
assist their Friends in time of need*

Men maintain themselves, and get out of Troubles by Sincerity.

Silence is a Veil under which Ignorance conceals it self.

The most sensible Injuries are those we receive from a Friend.

Whoever spends beyond his Revenue falls into Poverty at last.

Order and equality are laudable in all things; but particularly in Domestic
Affairs.

The hands of the Poor are always empty, and therefore they never obtain what
they desire.

Whoever has a narrow Soul is worse than he who is close sisted.

We ever succeed better in that which belongs to our Profession than in any
other thing.

The clearest Waters can never wash a Black-a-Moor white; neither is it
possible to alter the Nature of the Wicked.

Whenever you are admitted to a Great Man, let your Compliment be short, speak
little, and retire soon.

The World is too narrow for two Fools who quarrel together.

We may deceive the Creature, but we can never deceive the Creator.

Three sorts of Persons incline to Rebellion. The Subject who does not pay the
Prince what he owes him. The Patient who conceals his Distemper from his
Physician; and he who does not discover his Poverty to his Friends.

Fathers, your Children and your Wealth occasion your ruin.

Whoever is not open-handed is always close-hearted.

He who has no Friends should retire in a Desert, rather than live among Men.

All those who seem to be Friends are not really so; and we are often deceived
when we think we have met with a true one.

He who will not allow himself some Patience in the acquisition of Sciences, is
like to sigh long under the Clouds of Ignorance.

Do not frequent the Wicked, because you will be esteemed Criminal in
frequenting them, though you are Innocent.

Borrow nothing of your Friend, if you desire to preserve his Friendship.

Happy is he who enjoys his Health.

Wisdom is a Folly among Fools, as Folly is Folly among the Wise.

The less we suffer, the longer we live.

Frequent the World, solitude is a kind of Madness.

The more we are filled with hopes, the more we suffer.

Men may be considered as divided into four Classis: The first want all things
in this World, and have all things in abundance in the next: The second have
whatever this World affords, and have nothing in the next: The third, want for
nothing and are happy in this World, and in the next: And the fourth, have
nothing in this World nor in the next.

Avoid Lawsuits. They are like a Fire* which Men have much ado to extinguish,
when once it is kindled.

Tyranny overthrows the Tyrant in a short time.

The Tyrannical Government of Kings is more tolerable than Popular Government.

The Grandees court those who are greater than themselves.

Good Reputation is the most desirable thing in the World.

If you do good, you will receive good for good; if you do evil, you will
receive a greater evil.

The Passion of Riches is yet more violent than drought.

We are Slaves to Presents when we receive them.

The more pains we take in an Enterprise, the sooner we succeed in it.

Great Souls perform their Promises, and excuse those who do not perform theirs.

Every Man does his own business best.

A Man of Letters values one Line of the Compositions of a Learned Man more
than a Treasure.

Silence is Wisdom it self, but few keep it.

Live contented, you will live like a King.

Whoever is free, and will live free and contented must observe two things; the
one not to Marry, though the Emperor of Greece should offer him his Daughter; and
the other not to contract Debts, though Men should give him Credit to the day of
Judgment.

Never respect a Man without Virtue, though he were the greatest and most
powerful Man on Earth.

Nothing vexes more than to have been kind to an ungrateful Person.

All things are difficult before they are easy.

Never trouble your self about the Goods of this World; when to morrow comes it
will bring its Provision along with it.

A sudden Death is the Punishment of a Tyrant.

He who designs to deceive others, is commonly deceived himself.

The more a Man is advanced in the Service and Favor of Princes, the greater
the danger is to which he is exposed.

Our Love to the World is the origin of all Vice.

The Company of those we have an aversion for, is worse than Death.

Truth is so essential to Man, that it is far better for him not to speak, than
to say any thing contrary to it.

It Is a sign of an ill Cause when we rail at our Adversary.

The Tongue of the Wise Man is behind his Heart, and the Heart of the Fool
behind his Tongue.

Diligence is only good in easy Affairs

The Reputation a Man acquires by Virtue is preferrable to the greatness of
Birth.

True Prudence consists in seeing the consequence of a thing before we engage
in it.

Whatever we undertake out of Ignorance never succeeds well.

When ill Men speak to the disadvantage of an honest Man, it is a testimony of
his Virtue.

It Is better to dye with Honor, than to live with Infamy.

The less Money one has, the less Credit one has in the World.

The Wise Man who is truly Wise does not value Riches.

Every Heart has its peculiar Care.

Do not grieve at your being deprived of the Goods of this World, they are
nothing. The same reason forbids your being Proud at the Possession of them.

He who denies his having received a favor, destroys the Merit of receiving it.

An honest Man never dies, but we may reckon him dead who is not so.

Whoever does not Combat never obtains the Victory.

Persevere in your Enterprise, you will overcome the difficulties of it.

Those live with Pleasure who have Friends; but Life is full of disquiets when
we have Enemies.

Good Actions rebound on those who do them; but the Evil which the Wicked
commit is against themselves.

Old Men want no greater Distemper than their Old Age.

The unhappiness of the Wicked, is that the remembrance of their Wickednesses
is never lost, though they amend their Lives.

We must suit our Discourse to the Capacity of those we speak to.

Old Age is no part of Life.

Science does a Monarch no harm.

The enmity of the Envious only is Irreconcilable.

Great Profits may accrue by Sea Voyages; but to avoid the danger, the safest
way is not to Imbark, and to remain a Shore.

He who speaks cheerfully, shows that he speaks Truth.

Riches ought to serve for the ease of Life; but we must not employ our Life to
hoard them.

Nothing is less excusable, than to bestow favors where they are not necessary.

It behooves us more to fly from our selves, than to fly before a Lion.

We cannot lay any great stress on the Friendship of Courtiers, because they
change upon the least occasion.

He that has no Virtue, is not Rich.

Some Men seek after their own Riches in the same manner as they seek after
those of other People.

Carry your self between two Enemies so as they may have no cause to complain
of you, if ever they should happen to become Friends.

When any business does not succeed one way, try another that may be more
advantageous to you.

We gain Authority over a Nation by Generousness and Liberality.

We ought not to put our Lives into danger for any thing that may be
accommodated by Money.

A Man becomes happy by the Friendship of a happy Friend.

Don't be afraid, so long as your Enemies keep divided; but withdraw from them
as soon as ever you find they cabal and unite together.

He that advises only with himself stands in need of another Counselor.

Men gain an Esteem in the World proportionably to the good Qualities,
Accomplishments, and Learning they are endued with.

Do not trust to the Caresses of your Enemies, neither be you puffed up with the
Compliments that Flatterers give you: For the one lays Snares to catch you, and
the other longs to get your Estate.

Those who Talk, and never say any thing that is good, ought to be told that
they do not speak well.

Do not commend your self either in your Discourses or your Thoughts; nor
likewise do you applaud the Discourse of an Ignorant Person.

Impatience under Affliction is the very height of Affliction.

He who does no good in Prosperity, suffers more when he is under Disgrace.

The Misfortune of him who treats all the World ill, is not to be able to find
a Friend when he himself is in Misery.

Health and Debauchery by no means agree together.

That which we gain with ease, seldom continues long with us.

Silence is the best qualification in an Ignorant Man, and it is not to be
Ignorant, in some measure, to have it.

When any one tells a Story better than you can, never interrupt him, though you
believe you know it never so well.

Is not Fortune favorable to you? ne'^ be troubled at it, but learn to comply
with her Humors and Caprices.

Never publish the Miscarriages of your Friend, for you will bring a contempt
upon your self by blaming of him.

It is not at all surprising for a Learned Man to hold his Peace when he is in
the Company of Officers; the noise of Drums stifles the harmony of the Lute.

It is not safe to put ones Confidence in a Person of a fickle Humor.

We ought not to be ashamed to instruct our selves in what we do not understand.

It Is no Calamity to want Treasures heaped up. There is still the Treasure of
Poverty to be chosen, of being contented with what one enjoys. He who has
given the former to the Kings and Princes of the Earth, has given the blessing
of the latter to the Poor.

Of all Maladies, Ignorance is the most dangerous. There is not any Remedy can
cure her, no Light that can disperse her Darkness, nor any Comforting Property
that is able to recover her from her Errors.

It is very severe for a Man to be under Command, that has already commanded
others; and to be exposed to ill usage after he has been bred up with all the
softness and indulgence imaginable.

A thousand Crimes in a common Fellow shall hardly be taken notice of; but if a
Prince chance to make one false step in Government, he is oft-times prosecuted
from one Country to another.

For a Man to excuse himself more than once, will put him in mind that he has
done amiss before.

Do not use your Servants ill when there is no occasion for it, for you did not
create them. Lay aside your peevish humor toward them, and remember they have
a greater Master than your self.

It is undecent to reprehend any one publicly.

A good Mediator is as wings to an humble Petitioner.

Kings are to maintain the Laws, and to cause them to be observed, and Laws
well observed highly advance the Honor of Kings.

The I argesses of one that is Ignorant, are like fine and beautiful Flowers
set on a Dunghill.

Discouragement is a great deal more afflictive than Patience.

There are no Kings without Subjects; but if Subjects be not Rich, Kings ought
to account themselves very poor and inconsiderable.

He of whom any thing is asked is free, until he has made a Promise.

The reason why we like our own Country better than any other is, because we
think our selves more safe there, than any where else.

The most dangerous Enemy is he that conceals his Designs.

He that asks and obtains that which is not suitable to his Request, can derive
no benefit from it.

He that hearkens to Detraction, is himself of the number of Detractors.

It is the lowest of all baseness to be hankering after other Peoples Estates.

Prudence in Hero's ought to go before Valor.

Tre^ties, Contracts, and Promises are of no fur^her avail than the sincerity
of Men's Intentions to keep and observe them.

Unruly desires never attain to what they aspire at.

We know Men of Courage upon dangerous occasions; a Man of Conscience and
Integrity, upon our desiring him to return the Pledge we committed to his
charge; and Friends in Necessity.

A Slave to his Passions deserves more to be despised than a Slave that is
bought with our Money.

The envious is always enraged against him that has not offended him.

Be always Humble in whatsoever station you shall find your self.

We oft-times busy our selves about that which is prejudicial to us.

In what House soever you come, be sure be Master of your Eyes and your Tongue.

Before you speak, think on what is possible to be objected against you.

We are free without Hope, and Hope is a slave.

We ought to be very moderate upon two occasions, in our Eating and in our
Speaking.

A Friend, whose Friendship is interessed, is like to a Hunter that flings down
Corn for his own private Interest, and not to feed Birds with.

Do not procure to others what you believe will be of no advantage to your
self. Neither Communicate your Secrets to Women nor young Persons.

Miserable and Cursed are those whose thoughts are wholly taken up in heaping
Riches together; for they dye at last, and then they leave them with regret.

Do not you take upon you to teach what you have not learned your self.

Hold no long Discourses with Persons above you.

He that is not helped by his Inferiors, is vanquished by those above him.

Death is the Poor's repose.

In Traveling take care how you go first, unless you be in Company.

An Action that is wicked at the bottom, and only good in outward appearance,
is esteemed but for a time; but the value that Men have for an Action that is
really good, lasts for ever.

It is better to go leisurely, and rest now and ^hen, than to run full drive,
and lose our strength by making overmuch speed.

Why do we repent a second time of an Action that we have already repented of?

Why do we imagine that we live, when we do not live independantly on any?

Why do you contract Friendship with Persons that have no Merit? Such neither
deserve any ones Friendship, nor Enmity.

Do Justice to others, that so they may do the like to you.

If you would acquire Authority with ease, be Complai^ant.

If you desire to have your own Merit owned, acknowledge the Merit of others.

To be accomplished, you should not approve that in others which you don't
approve in your self.

Agreeable Raillery has the same effect in Conversation, as Salt in our
Victuals; but Raillery that is pi^quant begets aversion.

Don't rally with those below you, lest you lose the respect which they owe
you; but only with your Equals, that so you may not be confounded, if they
return Railery for Railery.

The most excellent of all Moral Virtues is to have a low esteem of our selves:
It has this advantage in it, that it attracts not the Envy of others.

Never give Advice unless you are asked, especially to those who are not
capable to receive it.

Speak of good things, and then you shall hear nothing but what is good.

Be not prodigal of your Benefactions to those who are not recommendable for
any good Qualities; for it will be the same thing as if you sowed in barren
Heaths.

When you have no Learned Persons near you from whom you may learn, learn from
the Ignorant by observing their Defects, to avoid falling into them.

An Ignorant Person is not a Man, and the Learned without Virtue is not Learned.

Make your self esteemed by the reputation of speaking Truth; that so if
necessity should oblige you to tell a Lie, Men will yet believe that you have
told the Truth.

A pleasant Lie is preferrable to a Truth one knows not how to swallow.

Man ought to speak, because it is Speech that distinguishes him from a Beast;
but in speaking he ought to know what he says, that so he may be accounted a
Man of Wit.

Say what you know in proper time and place, but do not speak it out of time,
lest you dishonor Knowledge.

Whisper to none in Company, though you tell them very good things, because
naturally Men are apt to be Jealous one of another.

Though you be Learned, nevertheless think your self Ignorant, that you may not
hinder your self of the advantage of being able to learn.

Though he that speaks much, may be wise sometimes, yet notwithstanding he passes
in the World for a Blockhead and an Impertinent busy body.

Whatever Perfections you have, do not boast of them, because Men will not
believe you on your own Word.

Be not weary of hearing; for we learn to speak by hearing others

How securely do those sleep, that are the Favorites of Kings?

Why don't we call him an Enemy that sees and suffers his Benefactor to be ill
treated?

We may live well enough without a Brother, but we cannot live without a Friend.

What Friends soever you have, yet don't neglect your self: For though you should
have a Thousand, none of them loves you more than you ought to love your self.

As Kings are above all, so their Words and Actions ought to surpass the Words
and Actions of all, that so they may have the reputation of Greatness added to
their just Title.

The Character of a Wise Man consists in three things; to do himself what he
says others ought to do, to do nothing contrary to Justice and Equity, and to
bear with his Neighbor's Defects.

The greatest of Obligations is that of a Scholar toward his Master.

Force consists not in utterly destroying an Enemy, but in subduing his
Irascible Appetite.

Do not rejoice at the Death of any one, for you will not live always, and you
will die as do others.

He who is a Friend to the Good, has nothing to fear from the Wicked.

Two things cause Affliction; a sorrowful Friend, and a joyful Enemy.

Have no Intimacy with eight sorts of Persons, with an Envious Man, with him
who shall have no regard for you, with one that is Ignorant, a Madman, a
Covetous Man, a Liar, a mean Fellow, nor with a Calumniator.

Life is a Sleep, and Death is the time of waking out of it, and Man marches
between them both as a Phantosme.

The Liberal Man is beloved of God, acceptable to Men, near to Paradise, and
far remote from the Flames of Hell.

How much kindness soever you have shown your Wife, how long soever she has
boarded and bedded with you, yet after you are dead, tho your Carcass be not
then laid in the Grave, she is thinking where and how she may have another
Husband.

Hatred between Relations is worse than the bite of a Scorpion. The pain which
this latter causes is soon over; but the hatred of the other is seldom, if
ever, at an end.

The way not to be uneasy to good Company, is to be very pleasant in it, or
else to hold ones Peace, and hear others.

Good Council has a much greater effect than a good Sword, it may entirely ruin
an Army, and it is very much if one Sword can kill an hundred Enemies.

The Raven will sooner become white, than he that seeks for Knowledge without
serious Application will become Learned.

He that will Marry without Money, is like a Huntsman that would take a Stag
without Dogs; and he that would needs be Devout without understanding, is like
Paper whereon nothing is written.

In Summer we long for Winter, and when Winter is come we curse it; so true is
it that Man can never be contented with one condition of Life.

In the World we esteem those that do not deserve our esteem, and are apt to
despise those who really merit it; but the World is like the Sea, where the
Pearl lies at bottom, and nothing but Carrion swims at top.

Is not Wine a thing to be admired, that makes a Liberal Man of a Covetous one?

The World is like an Inn, where the Traveller lies to day, and from whence he
departs the next.

He that has no Money is like a Bird without Wings, and a Ship without Sails.

Raillery is good, but then it must not exceed the bounds of good Manners.

Shut not your Gates against those who would come in, and do not refuse your
Bread to those who would eat.

The Will of God confounds the Designs of Men.

Do the Good to God that you would to your Neighbor.

Beware of other Men's Misfortunes, that so others may not take Example by yours.

The thing that hurts us is our bad Education.

Words are for Women, Actions for Men.

Though your Enemy seems no more than a Pismire, yet watch him as an Elephant.

Eat and Drink with your Friends, but neither sell to, nor buy any thing of
them.

To speak to a senseless Man, is all one as not to speak to him at all. The
more you shall speak to him, the more you will create trouble to your self.

Every one ought to speak according to his own Profession, and not according to
the Profession of other Men.

The best is not to speak of things you cannot remember without Grief.

Neither ask nor desire what is impossible.

Learn to bear with courage and resolution the changes of Fortune.

Every Night always produces something that is new; and none knows what will
happen before the Sun rises.

A beautiful Woman and Wine are two Poisons.

Wherever the Poor happens to be at Night, he finds there his Palace.

A thousand Robbers cannot steal from a Poor Man that is Naked.

Man returns after the same manner he came.

The more things are forbidden, the more we long after them.

He who sees a Friend without Faults, dies without a Friend.

Communicate to none what you design to do, because you may be laughed at if you
succeed not.

Rest, both in the one and other World, consists in two things; to live in good
Correspondence with ones Friends, and to dissemble with ones Enemies.

He that no longer cares to live, says all that he has in his Heart.

Respect and Civility between Friends ought to be mutual.

The stupid with his Stupidity, acts what the wise Man does with his Wit.

Desire of living diverts us from great and noble Undertakings, and begets in
us a habit of Idleness and Sloth.

How short would Life be, if Hope did not eke it out.

None in this World can truly be called a Man, but he that mistrusts every Body.

The way not to commit any Faults in speaking, is to hold ones peace.

Guard your self once from your Enemy; but twice take heed of your Friend.

Hope is an admirable Companion; if it be not always leading us where we long
to come to, at least its Company is very agreeable and entaining.

He that fishes for Pearls, plunges himself into the Sea; and he who aspires at
Greatness, spends whole Nights in watching.

He that knows very well what he looks for, never regards the Dangers he must
meet with before he finds it.

The easiness of giving is as much to be condemned in Women, as Avarice and
tenaciousness in Men.

Great Souls appear in public, when ever they are in a capacity of doing good;
but they conceal themselves when in Poverty, and importune no body by begging.

When you see the poor Man at the Gate of one that is Rich, lament the Fate of
the Poor, that he has need of the Rich; and lament also the Fate of the Rich
Man, for the sordid love he bears to his Riches. But when you see the Rich at
the Gate of the Poor, bless the Poor Man in that he has need of nothing, and
bless the Rich Man for the Honor he does to the Poor.

Long Discourses are tiresome, and lull the most patient as well as the wisest
asleep.

The bigger a Book is, and the more it weighs in your hand, it does not follow
that it is ever the better.

Consider that what you love is nothing but Skin that covers Blood and Bones.

He that will become a puissant Lord obtains what he desires at the Court of
Kings.

Three things make an easy access to Kings; curious Arts, Riches, and
Eloquence.

It is no Wisdom to go by a way that you know nothing of.

Three things render the Reigns of Kings agreeable; easiness of Access, Justice
and Liberality.

Ignorance is unjust toward all the World.

A Story becomes old after you have once told it.

In the Age we live, to discover what we know, and what we are capable of, is
the same thing as to throw away Pearls on purpose to have them lost.

Don't complain of the World, for what good can be expected from it? Kings
themselves suffer in it, What rest then or quiet will the Poor find in it?
therefore if you desire Quiet, you must find it in Retirement.

He that has Virtue protects and maintains Virtue, just as Diamond polishes
Diamond, and that Person loves Virtue who commends it, and conceals its flaws.

Virtue is now no longer in the World, the Honey is taken out of it, and only
the Wasps remain in it.

He is to be looked upon as the least of Friends that is the most Ceremonious.

We might yet live pretty happily, were not Ceremonies the obstacle in the way.

With Strangers we ought to use Ceremonies, but let them be banished from
Friends.

It Is less troublesome to be Sick ones self, than to have the care of a Sick
Person.

Every one according to his degree has his Afflictions to undergo, and none of
us all have Letters of Exemption as to that point.

Man ought to be firm and steady as a Rock, and not flitting and moveable as
the Wind.

Meekness and affability is the Salt of good Manners and excellent Qualities.

Patience is the Pillar that supports Prudence.

An honest Woman loves her Husband, and though ugly, she ceases not to be the
Ornament of his House.

How Poor soever the Husband is, he is as happy as a King, when his Wife is
Wise and obedient.

In the Judgment of the Wise we ought to avoid Marrying five sorts of Wives; a
Widow that has Children by a former Husband; a Woman richer than himself; a
Widow that bewails the loss of her other Husband; a Woman that speaks ill of
her Husband in his absence; and lastly, a Woman that has Beauty, yet is but of
mean Extraction.

Liars commonly are most given to Swearing.

Persons of Birth and Probity are Friends to the highest degree; but the
Friendship of Persons of a base and mean Extraction is seldom solid.

The Innocent may speak what they please with good assurance.

Those who are below being envied, are not troubled with over many good
Qualities.

Do not approve that in others which you condemn in your self.

Shun the Company of such Persons as take pleasure in tormenting others; you
may justly fear being burnt your self, when you stand too near the Fire.

He that bestows his kindnesses on the Wicked, does the same thing as if he
returned nothing but Evil on those who are Good.

Patience is the best Buckler in the World to defend a Man from being affronted.

Considering what a troublesome World we live in, there is no great Satisfaction
to be taken in it*

We must do as the Ant, work hard in Summer, to get wherewithal to live
comfortably in the Winter.

You are a Slave to your bodily Pleasures; yet there is no Pleasure but what
you may enjoy in the Retirement of your Mind.

Little Quarrels now and then among Friends result in the endearing of
Friendship between them.

To go about to instruct a wicked Man, it is to put a drawn Sword into the
hands of a Murderer.

A dissolute Wretch is capable of doing all the mischief imaginable.

The reason wherefore Courtiers make their Court to Kings with so much Zeal and
Passion, is, because they know this to be the most ready way to elevate them to
the Honors and Dignities to which they aspire.

A Monarch that only indulges himself in his private Pleasures and
Satisfactions, and suffers his Subjects to live in Misery, will quickly see the
Luster of his Greatness eclipsed.

Hope comes after Despair, just as the bright shining of the Sun succeeds to a
dark and dismal Night.

When an Ignorant Person is advanced to an honorable Station, his extravagance
is so great, that he will not suffer a Learned Man to come near him.

Let Beauty be never so miserable, yet this is always peculiar to her, that she
attracts the Eyes of all the World.

A Man of Wit, if he pleases, will make you believe the Moon is made of a Green
Cheese.

Learning has this advantage, that it makes those who are great Masters of it
command those to whom they are Inferior.

We ought never to glory either in our great Estates or Friends; but, if in any
thing, that we are Learned, Virtuous, and of good Morals.

It Is a mighty Disgrace for a Learned Man to be Vicious; but an Ignorant Dervis
is a thing that is much worse, and both of them do teach a Religion they know
little of, and at the same time despise.

A Man that has Wit, and yet in every thing consults others, is but half a Man;
and he that has none, and yet will take no Advice, is not a Man.

Don't desire to be informed of him whom you intend to make your Friend, but
enquire of him who is his Friend; because every body does naturally incline to
tread in the same steps as his Friend does. If he be Wicked, do not pretend to
keep at distance from him, but do it in earnest; but if he be good, keep close
to him, and you will become good too.

Have no familiarity with the Sluggard, the Wicked do easily corrupt the Good.
Don't you see that Fire turns to Ashes, by being so near them?

The greatest Debt we owe is that to our Master who teaches us, and it is the
first which ought to be paid, and that largely too; not so much to be quit of
our Obligations to him, as out of a Respect to his Person.

Learning, with relation to proud Men, is much what like Water, with reference
to Mountains and eminent Places; for in the same manner as it is contrary to
the nature of Water to rise of it self, so also is it contrary to the nature of
Learning to make Men become Proud.

Do you desire to be Learned without taking pains for it? This is one of the
Thousand Species of Folly that are in the World.

He that Watches all Night, is glad of the approaching Day.

What Shame! What Affronts! What Vexations does a Man bring upon himself, only
by his damnable Idleness!

He who Teaches, and does not practice what he Teaches, is like a Hen that has
Wings, but does not fly with them.

The Wealth after which you run with so much eagerness, is like your Shadow;
which, if you offer to pursue, it still keeps before you, but if you ^ly from
that, it follows you.

You who are Learned, be content with your Fortune, lest an over-affluence
oppresses and troubles your Mind. A Brook derives pure Waters from its source,
but it grows muddy as soon as ever it overflows its Banks.

What is Time, but a precipitate course, that is continually hurrying us on to
Death in spite of our Teeths? And what surprises Wise Men is, that the
Traveller is jogging on in that way, even then when he is taking his rest.

You that Weep when you are Born, whilst the Gossips are rejoicing and
Merry-making, endeavor so to live, that you may be able to rejoice and triumph
at the time when your Friends are lamenting, I mean, at the hour of your Death.

Patiently endure all the Attacks of those that Envy you, you will by that
means conquer them all. Thus Fire it self is put out, when it meets with
nothing that it can burn.

Would you overcome your Enemy without Fighting? confound him with Vexation,
and make him mad at you; Scorn him and be Virtuous: these are ways that will be
more tormenting and cruel to him than either Sword or Pistol.

Whatever care is taken to avoid all occasions of Detraction, there are none
can keep themselves from falling under the lash of Men's ill Tongues. If you be
silent, they will say you are Dumb; if you are not Prodigal, then presently you
are Covetous; and if you are Generous and Beneficent, then you are Prodigal;
wherefore let such foul Mouths say their Pleasure, don't you fear the Judgment
of God.

Despise no body, how low soever their Circumstances are. Fortune may raise
them up, and bring you down.

Whilst Fortune smiles on you, and you command others, carry your self
prudently; because you must shortly leave all these things. Consider those who
are gone before you, consider Empires, all is past, and of all that has been,
nothing remains but the footsteps of Virtue.

Memory soon is lost, but Writing continues long.

Do not shorten long Nights by sleeping them away, nor lengthen out the day
which is so short, by Wickedness.

We see those of most excellent Qualifications oftentimes in a starving
Condition; and the most unworthy wallowing in Riches; and the greatest Wits
(without knowing any reason) do rank themselves in the number of the latter.

How do all things turn topsie turvy by time! Manners are corrupted,
Inconstancy reigns over all things. It Is just like our Shadows in the Water,
where our Heads, which is the noblest part, hangs downward, and our Feet, though
the vilest, is uppermost.

The World is Mad, and favors those that are most like it. Woe then to 'em, if
eve^ the World should come to its Wits again!

If Knowledge without Religion were highly valuable, nothing would be more so
than the Devil.

Keep your distance from Kings, and their Wrath, and make no Court to those,
whose words are no sooner pronounced than executed.

To attain to the height of Wisdom, we must neither Eat, nor Sleep, nor Speak
too much.

Nothing does better set forth a great Talker, then a tedious and cold Winter's
Night.

All manner of Wickednss derives its Original from sight, as a great Fire is
kindled by a small Spark.

A good Book is the best of Friends: You can entertain your self pleasantly
with that when you have not a Friend on whom you may safely rely. It is no
Blab to reveal your Secrets, and it will teach you Wisdom.

The Body grows fat by much Sleeping; but the Mind improves by much waking.

He that spends his time about things of little use, loses that which might be
of great Service to him.

The more Wit any Man has, the less he speaks; wherefore it is as certain that
He who talks much has little Wit.

Few of those who ask advice find themselves d^ceived* and their business never
succeeds the worse for it.

By patience we come to the end of all things; but that is such a Virtue as few
Persons practice, and that too very rarely.

Great Fortitude of Mind appears in an hour of Patience.

There is none so Learned but some body may be more Learned than he.

Meditate much, and you will understand the better.

Words are like Arrows shot at a Butt, before they are let go, you endeavor to
make them hit the Mark.

Knowledge is an Inheritance belonging to Man. It ought to be taken where ever
it is to be found, and we are to leave every thing else, as having no right to
it.

The love of Riches is a sore Disease; it is putting a Man into an Agony to
make him crave an Alms, and it is Death to him to be denied.

We seek after Wealth, and oft-times do not find it; and yet, a most strange
thing! we never regard the end of our days, but yet we find that.

It would not be so troublesome to a Learned Man to employ his Nails in
polishing Marble, to bite an Anvil with his Teeth, to be continually roving up
and down on the Sea, to undertake a Voyage to Meccha, and not have wherewithal
to Eat by the way, to go to Mount Caucasus, and bring from thence a Stone of an
hundred pound weight, as only to see (and that at a distance too) the
countenance of an Ignorant Coxcomb.

He that is not contented with what he has, if it be a sufficient competency to
live upon, neither knows God, nor Honors him.

Wisdom and Courage signify nothing when Fortune leaves us.

Fortune comes to us with leaden Feet; but flies from us with Swallows Wings.

When a King spends his whole time in Sports and Pleasures, you may justly say
his Kingdom will be made up of Calamities and Wars.

Nothing is so bit^er and melancholy to Mankind as the loss of Friends.

Where are Kings? Where are other Men? they have trod in the same Paths as thou
do now.

You, who have preferred this perishable World to all other things, and who
have accounted those happy who have made the same choice as you have done, take
of this World what necessity requires you should take of it, viz. That Death is
the last moment thereof.

Speak nothing that is indecorous or unseemly; if you hear any such thing said
by others, think on somewhat else, and make as if you did not hear it.

The World is like an Inn which receives Travelers: He that neglects making
Provision for Necessaries to go further, is a Madman

Don't be seduced by a Multitude, because you will stand alone by your self
when you die, and shall be called to give your Account.

Think seriously from whence you came, and whether you are to go, and where you
are to be, to all Eternity.

Riches consist in what is sufficient, and not in superfluity.

Just as Fire is kindled by Wood, so is War by Words.

The Fault that Detraction cannot be excused of, is, fullying of Truth.

Don't wonder that you see Virtuous Persons in Disgrace and Contempt, or high
Places filled with those that do not deserve them: Open your Eyes, and consider
that the Stars which are innumerable, lose nothing of their Light, and that the
Heaven turns only to make us see sometimes an Eclipse of the Moon, sometimes an
Eclipse of the Sun.

FINIS.
A New and easy Method to understand the Roman History: With an exact
Chronology of the Reign of the Emperors: An Account of the most Eminent
Authors, when they flourished; and an Abridgment of the Roman Antiquities and
Customs. By way of Dialogue, for the Use of the Duke of Burgundy. Done out
French, with very large Additions and Amendments, by Mr. Tho. Brown.

Miscellaneous Letters, giving an Account of the Works of the Learned, both at
Home and Abroad. To be published Monthly.

Both printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane; and
William Lindsey, at the Angel in Chancery Lane. Books sold by Richard Baldwin.
THE Works of F. R^belais, M. D. in five Books; or the Lives, Heroic Deeds and
Sayings of the good Gargantua and Pantagruel, and his Voyage to the Oracle of
the Bottle. As also his Historical Letters. To which is added the Author's
Life, and Explanatory Remarks. By Mr. Motteux. Never before printed in English.

Bibliotheca Politica: Or an Enquiry into the Ancient Constitution of the
English Government; with respect both to the just Extent of Regal Power, and to
the Rights and Liberties of the Subject. Wherein all the chief Arguments, as
well against as for the late Revolution, are impartially represented and
considered. In XIII Dialogues. Collected out of the best Authors both Ancient
and Modern. To which is added, an Alphabetical Index to the whole Work.

The World b^wit^h'd (is now published) containing an Examination of the common
Opinions concerning Spirits, their Nature, Power, Administration, and
Operations; as also the Effects Men are able to produce by their Communication.
Divided into four Parts. By Belthazer Bekker, D. D. and Pastor at Amsterdam.
Vol. I. translated from a French Copy, approved of, and subscribed by the
Author's own Hand.

A Collection of Speeches of the Right Honorable Henry late Earl of
Warrington, viz. I. His Speech upon his being sworn Mayor of Chester, in
November 1691. II. His Speech to the Grand Jury at Chester, April 13, 1692.
III. His Charge to the Grand Jury at the Quarter Sessions held for the County
of Chester, on the 11th of October, 1692. IV. His Charge to the Grand Jury at
the Quarter Sessions held for the Country of Ch^ster, on the 25th of April,
1693.

Letters of State, written by Mr. John Milton, to most of the Sovereign Princes
and Republics of Europe, from the Year 1649, till the Year 1659. To which is
added, an Account of his Life. Together with several of his Poems; and a
Catalogue of his Works, never before printed.

Mathematical Magic: Or the Wonders that may be performed by Mechanical
Geometry. In two Books* Concerning Mechanical Powers, Motions. Being one of the
most easy, pleasant, useful (and yet most neglected) part of Mathematics, not
before treated of in this Language.

Mercury; or the secret and swift Messenger, showing how a Man may with privacy
and speed communicate his Thoughts to a Friend at any distance. The second
Edition. By the Right Reverend Father in God, John Wilkins, late Lord Bishop of
Chester. Printed for Richard Baldwin, where is to be bad, The World in the Moon.

England's Interest: Or, a Discipline for Sea men: Where in is proposed a (...)
Method for raising qualified Seamen for the well manning their Majesty's
(...). Also a Method whereby Seamen will be obliged mutually to relieve each
other on board the Men of War yearly, or thereabout; except where any Seaman
by his own voluntary Consent shall be willing to stay longer. Likewise is
showed the Advantages which by these Methods will accrue to the Nation in
general, and in particular to the Merchants and Seamen: For hereby the Wages
now given in Merchant-Ships will be brought lower, and every Seaman will have
the liberty of choosing his own Commander, after the first Year, and continuing
with him, if he so like^* By Captain George St. Lo.

An Answer to a Paper written by Count d'A^^^x, the French King's Ambassador in
Sweden, concerning the Proposals of Peace made by France to the Consederates.

An Essay concerning Obedience to the Supreme Powers, and the Duty of Subjects
in all Revolutions. With some Considerations touching the present J^ncture of
Affairs.

An Essay concerning the Laws of Nations, and the Rights of Sovereigns. With an
Account of what was said at the Council Board by the Civilians upon the
Question, Whether their Majesty's Subjects taken at Sea, acting by the late
King's Commission, might not be looked on as Pirates? With Reflections upon the
Arguments of Sir T. P. and Dr. Ol. The Second Edition. Both by M^tth. Tyndal,
Doctor of Laws.

The Antiquity and Justice of an Oath of A^juration In answer to a Treatise,
(...), The Case of an Oath of Abjuration considered.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the Court of
Aldermen of the City of London, at ^t. Mary-le Bow^ (...) the 29th of May.
1694. By John Trenchard, M. A. Rector of Wr^^^^ll in the County of Somerset,
and ^haplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester.

A Poem on the late Promotions of severa^ Eminent Persons in Church and State.
By N. Nate, Servant to their Majesty's.

The Doctrine of the Holy Trinity placed in its (...) Light, by an Answer to a
late Book, entitled, A^^madversions upon Dr. Sherlock's Book, etc. Also the
Doctrine of the Incarnation of our Lord asserted and explained.

Liturgia Tigurina: Or, the Book of Common-Pray^ and Administration of the
Sacraments, and other Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, usually practiced,
and solemnly performed in all the Churches and Chapels o^ the City and Canton
of Zurick in Switzerland, etc.

The Tragedies of the last Age, considered and examined by the Practice of the
Ancients, and by the common sense of all Ages; in a Letter to Fleetwoo^
Shephard, Esquire Part I. The Second Edition.

A short View of Tragedy; its Original, Excellency and Corruption; with some
Reflections on Shakespea and other Practitioners for the Stage. Both by Mr.
Rimer, Servant to their Majesty's.

A new, plain, short and complete French and Eng^^^^ Grammar; whereby the
Learner may attain in few Months to speak and write French correctly, as they
now do in the Court of France; and wherein all that is dark, superfluous, and
deficient in other Grammars, is plain, short, and methodically supplied. Also
very useful to Strangers that are desirous to learn the English Tongue; for
whose sake is added a short, but very exact English Grammar. The third Edition,
with Additions. By Peter (...).

Truth brought to light; or the History of the first 14 Years of King James I.
In four Parts, etc.

Travels into diverse Parts of Europe and Asia, undertaken by the French King's
Order, to discover a new way by Land into China; containing many curious
Remarks in Natural Philosophy, Geography, Hydrography, (...) Together with a
Description of Great Tar^^ry, and of the different People who inhabit there.
Done out of French. To which is added a Supplement extracted from (...) and
Purchase, giving an Account of several Journies over Land from Russia, Persia,
and the Mogul's Country, to China together with the Roads and Distances of the
Places.


