A LETTER TO A FRIEND, IN ANSWER to a LETTER Written against Mr. LOWTH, IN
DEFENSE OF Dr. Stillingfleet.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall,
1688.

A LETTER TO A FRIEND, IN ANSWER to a LETTER Written against Mr. LOWTH.
SIR,
YOU seem to be much concerned, that such considerable Members of the Church of
England should be whetting their Pens against each other, whilst they are
enclosed with their Adversaries: And I think every good Man will bear a part
with you; and does heartily wish, that there had been no occasion, or that it
could be taken away. But since you require my thoughts concerning the late
Answerer of Mr. Lowth's Letter, I will answer your Request with as much brevity
and impartiality as my mean skill will enable me: The Man wants not wit, but
indulgeth it so far, as to renounce both Civility and Reason, good Manners and
Religion. I had perused his Letter with the same pleasure I read a Play, or
hear a Prevaricator's Speech, but that the seriousness of the Matter, wherein
it was concerned, was a continual check upon me, and converted that Pleasure
into Grief, to think that any Man who pretends to Gravity and Reverence to
Religion, should allow himself the liberty to Wantonize at that rate, in most
sacred Things. So that I think the Man is so far from doing the learned Dean
any real Service, that he will prove a disparagement both to his Cause and
Person; and the more for this reason, That being the Dean had formerly justly
lashed Mr. Alsap, for his lightness in a Case near akin to this; it will seem
very indecent for him now to set up a Jack-Pudding or Merry-Andrew in his own
Defense; and that it should come forth without his privity and consent, scarce
any Man will believe, who considers how long and by whom Mr. Lowth's Book of
Church Power was stopped, in despite of all the interest he could make.
Neither is the attempt to jeer Truth out of Countenance less intolerable at
this time, when it is apparent from the Letter it self, that the Dean does
endeavor to come up to Mr. Lowth; and it is much the best part of the
Scriblers Plea to own it in his behalf. Several Pages are spent merely in
pickeering at Words and Phrases, without one Syllable as to the merits of the
Cause, though there be no want of Malice as to Mr. Lowth's Person. But I love
not to rake in Canals, though I have to do with Scavengers, and therefore shall
pass it all over; but where I meet with any thing material, I shall give you a
concise account of my Thoughts of it.

The chief Ground of this bitter Quarrel I find to be this; That he (the Dean)
is imperiously Summoned, and little less than commanded (viz. by Mr. Lowth) to
satisfy the Church of God, by a Recantation as public as his Error, Scandal
and Offense. This latter Clause I remember in Mr. Lowth's Book; but the
imperious Summons is another Interpretation, and the little less than
commanded is added by the Author, least he should seem to do nothing, if he did
not lay on more load. But in what manner soever it was done, I confess that in
one respect it was very unreasonable to call for such a Recantation, for we are
all too fond of our selves to appear against our selves: But when a Man has
gotten a name in the World, is admired by his Followers, applauded for his
Parts and Learning, and looked on as the Coriphaeus of his Age, this Man is
above all Recantations, and it is well if he do not think himself above any
Error, Scandal or Offense. For such a one to lessen himself by the public
acknowledgment of Error, is such a prodigious piece of Ingenuity, as cannot
reasonably be expected; and indeed it is never to be expected from any, but
those who can be content to take the shame to themselves, that God may have the
Glory; and who value Truth above all their Reputation, yea, all their Interest
in the World; and such are rare Birds, whether they have Pockets or not.

But then, if we lay aside Men's over-dearness to themselves, and the frightful
tenderness of their Reputation, (as we ought in this Case) and look into the
reason of the thing, the Case will be quite altered; and it will appear
altogether unreasonable, that the Church of God should be wronged, or the Truth
suffer, for the Advancement, or salving any Man's Reputation. And if any offend
in this kind, they ought to give satisfaction, though few are willing to do it.
I have no prejudice against the Dean's Person, and shall readily do him all the
right I can. I acknowledge, that he has taken a great deal of pains in defense
of the Church of England; I honor him as a Man of extraordinary Parts,
Learning and Industry, second to few, if any, of his Age. But does this secure
him from Error? Does this make him infallible? Are we so zealous to pull down
the Pope at Rome, that we may set up another at St. Paul's? Or have not meaner
Men sometimes corrected the Errors of far greater? Apollinaris was a Man of
such curious Parts and Learning, that he was the Admiration of his
Contemporaries, and he did the Church great service, by his clear and
convincing way of writing against Heretics; and yet (as some think) the very
confidence in his Parts betrayed him into a foul Error; and even those who
pitied him, who admired him, who acknowledged themselves much inferior to him,
wrote against his Error, and have transmitted him to posterity, branded with
the name of an Heretic. Tertullian, for acuteness of Parts, and variety of
Learning, doubtless out-stripp'd all the Men of his Age; and I question whether
any thing written in behalf of Christianity against Heathens has outdone his
Apology, or any thing has been more convincingly penned against all sorts of
Heretics than his Book de Praescriptionibus: And yet this very Man, not
without much ado, has escaped the Title of an Heretic himself, if he have
escaped it. However it is notorious, that he maintained some such foul Errors
as are rejected on all hands. In these we may see, that the Church of God did
not suffer the singular parts, or even merits of any Man to patronize his
Errors; but in that cafe always left him to the Merits of his cause; and
perhaps it is most reasonable, that the more considerable the person is, the
more severe Trial he should be put upon; because the Authority of his Person is
more like to make the Error spread, than if it came from another Man. And in
this particular, even the Author of the Letter, though, like the Fish Saepia,
he muddles himself in his own Ink, yet is forced sometimes in downright terms
to confess, that the Dean has been guilty of Error in that very matter,
wherein Mr. Lowth accuses him; and when he does his best to wash it off, he
does only plaster the Sore over.

To make this good I must descend to particulars, and then we shall quickly
see, whether the Letter-maker be as good at his reasoning, as he is at trifling
and railing. The first thing he lays hold of is a civil Concession of Mr.
Lowth, as to the Deans unreasonableness of Separation; whereby he grants it to
be competently well done upon the Dean's Principles, and that he had abundantly
set forth the reasonableness of our Book of Common Prayer, etc. and urged
Obedience thereto, from the destructive consequences that must inevitably
follow. And when he has got this by the end, he will not endure to hear that
any thing is left as Matter of Dispute, but runs away with it full cry, That
every Man is bound to yield to reason, and then tramples on Mr. Lowth at
pleasure: But his heat could not stay to consider, that all this amounted to no
more than motives to Compliance, in the judgment of Interest or Discretion, and
were for the most part such as, mutatis mutandis, might be urged for any settled
Constitution, even at Geneva or Amsterdam: And though they might incline Men to
a present Obedience, yet they did not so link men to the Church of England, but
that they still had a fair Pretense to join with any other Church Government,
which in time the Civil Power might advance or favor. Upon this account I
suppose it is, that Mr. Lowth writes thus to the Dean. In your Treatise of the
Unreasonableness of Separation, you no where (that I could take notice of) have
pressed Christians to Obedience; as they are a Corporation imbodied under
Government and Laws of their own (which is the original and fundamental
Obligation to Submission and Conformity) arising from the nature of that
Kingdom, which Christ has erected by the promulgation of the Gospel, of which
Kingdom every true Christian is a Subject. (p. 78.) And had the Arguments been
taken from this Topic, they would have proved the Obedience not only
reasonable but necessary, secured Persons to the Church of England, and kept
things in the right Chanel. And there is the more reason to urge this at this
time, when in a Paper attributed to no less person than the late King, I find a
charge drawn up against our whole Body in these Words, That that part of the
Nation, which looks most like a Church, dares not bring the true Arguments
against the other Sects, for fear they should be turned against themselves.
Now, though for my own part I am possessed with no such fear; yet I must
confess, that when men purposely avoid such Arguments, when the nature of the
thing requires them, it gives a shrewd suspicion, that either they do not
approve them, or are afraid to use them. And it is by some thought that the
Dean's way of manageing the Argument, as well against Romanists as Fanatics,
gave no small occasion to that and some other expressions in the Paper; and
indeed to the whole Discourse that is levelled against Erastianism, which is
there supposed the Sense of the Church of England, because it is so represented
by Mr. Dean and his Party: And when you have considered these things, I leave
you to think whether there was any great reason for that immoderate triumph
over Mr. Lowth's civility.

The next thing, which after some idle, foolish, flourishings of Wit the
Epistolizer adventures on, is the business of the Iraenicum; and truly he
adventures hardly, who trips up his own heels, and gives up the cause at the
same time that he undertakes to defend it. He tells us, that at his late
Majesty's Restoration in those Ecclesiastical Confusions, the Dean at that
time but a very Young Man, boldly ventures upon the reconciling part; it must
(says he) be confessed, and he has acknowledged it himself, that according to
the fate of most Reconcilers, he was too liberal in his Concessions. And
'pray', was this Mr. Lowth's fault, or the Deans? But then if those Concessions
were such as were not only prejudicial to the Church of England, but injurious
to the Church of God (as it is apparent they were) might not Mr. Lowth or any
other Man, lawfully tax them for being so; and step in, at least, for the
defense of that Church of which he was a Member, and to which he was engaged by
most sacred Obligations? Is the Dean's Reputation so great, that it over-weighs
the good, yea the very being of the Church? or must he have the liberty with
applause to make erroneous Concessions, whilst the other must not speak Truth,
without being shamefully Reproached and Abused? For, as to the main of the
Controversy, I do not find, that even the very Enemies of Mr. Lowth do lay the
Error at his Door; but hence their Indignation swells, that a poor Country
Vicar should correct the Dean's Errors, and dares to see that Truth, which the
Dean either did not or would not. A Man accustomed to Hobnail-Proverbs, (as our
Letter-man expresses it) would have said in this Case, That some may better
steal a Horse, than others look over the Hedge, though with an intent to make a
discovery.

But he thinks amends is made for all this, because though some enamoured on
their own Fancies, could not be moved; yet such as gave themselves the liberty
of considering calmly, were gained over to our Church, and it did not want
success in that way, both here and in a Neighbor Nation. And he tells us, That
there is no reason to question the Truth of this. But, with his good leave, I
am of another Opinion; and, notwithstanding his confidence, shall either
question the Truth or the honest meaning of it. For what was this mighty gain
and success, but the filling the Church with men of no steady Principles? The
stubborn Dissenters obstinately made good their party, and continued expecting
a time for their Advantage; but those who were of more moderate Persuasions, or
more favorable to their own Interest, found a more gentle Temper in the
Iraenicum to justify their compliance with any Church Government; and so these
Lukewarm persons flocked into the Church, thereby corrupting its Body, and
ready to serve their purposes who stood out, when any fit opportunity should be
offered: They were so far satisfied as to make their Benefit of the Episcopal
Government; but if that should happen to be removed, they were as ready to
embrace the Presbyterial or Independent, and perhaps more heartily. And, for my
part, I do not think that the Church was any gainer by the Conversion of any
such professed Dissenters into false Friends: I should think it safer to see
the Serpent hissing before me, than to put him into my Bosom. By such means it
has been brought to pass, that in the Church of England we have had so few
Church of England Men, and that many who fed plentifully at her Table, either
durst not maintain her upon her own just Grounds and Principles, or have been
ready to betray her by their new Models, and underhand dealings; and this
dreadful Outcry against Mr. Lowth, seems to me a thing utterly unaccountable,
but from the Churches abounding with Men of Latitudinarian and Erastian
Principles, who are resolved to maintain the positions of the Rector of Sutton,
though the Dean of St. Paul's pretend to disclaim them; and therefore I think
Mr. Lowth might well call it an unlucky Book.

And yet no one living can believe this, who admits the Character which is
given of the Book. It might be compared (says our Learned Author) to one of
those Trees, that are thick hung with plenty of Fruit of several growths; some
ripe, some green, some in the blossom, and some in the bud, which altogether
affords a very pleasant Prospect, argue an exceeding luxuriency and fertility
in the Soil, and may be all brought to perfect Maturity in their due time. God
forbid, that all these should come to perfect Maturity! for what can this Fruit
be, but the several sorts of Church Government mentioned in the Iraenicum?
There a curtailed kind of Episcopacy is coldly and faintly allowed, Presbytery
strongly pleaded for, Independency much favored; and (if my memory fail me
not) in the matter of Tithes, there is a spicing of Anabaptistry and Quakerism.
Now certainly Episcopacy must be the present ripe Fruit, and therefore fit to
be cropp'd; and no doubt but Presbytery, as green as it is, will be quickly
ready for its place: Independency, though in the bud, yet upon occasion is a
very great grower, and ripens apace, and will soon be endeavoring to lend the
Presbyter a lift; and others that are only in the blossom, upon these
encouragements, will doubtless come on as fast as they can; now would it not be
a brave World to see all these come to perfect Maturity; i. e. to thrust out
one another, to take their place by turns, and run round by the help of some of
J. O's. Providential Revolutions? I cannot tell what else to make of this
Orainge-Tree Similitude, and if any one can give a kinder and more natural
Interpretation of it, I should be glad to hear it. If the Author had said of
the Fruit that it was some Ripe, some Rotten, I think he had given a much
truer, though nothing so glorious a Character. I have formerly read the Book,
and truly my thoughts of it then were, that in all my Life I had never seen so
many ill things so confusedly put together; and the best excuse that I can make
for it, is, to plead our near Twenty Years Confusions; the variety of Opinions
which then got in Vogue; the prejudices which prevailed, and the great
disadvantages most Men labored under, as to their Studies, who were forced to
lanch forth into the World before his late Majesty's Restoration. But if any
Man plead for it in downright terms at this time of the Day, he deserves to be
casheired, not only out of the Church of England, but the Society of Learning.

But for this I had best look to my self; for the Author of the Letter assures
us, that the Bishops were of another mind, and that the Prudent and Reverend
Governors of our Church did admire the performance. Well then there is no help
for such as I, unless we can shelter our selves under such Imprudent and
Irreverend Governors as did not admire it. So perhaps the Letter-Maker may
think, and that he is safe now he has set the Bishops on their Backs, who
shall dare to open their Mouths against the Iraenicum. And yet for all this I
am nothing concerned, for I have learned that there is a great deal of
difference betwixt admiring and approving; and we more often admire Men's Folly
and Wickedness, than their Wisdom and Goodness. I shall easily grant, that,
considering the Time, the Person, and his Age, there is much in that Book to be
admired, and perhaps more to be censured; and I hardly think that the Bishops
have a better Opinion of that Book, than the Dean professes to have himself,
who for some Years of late has been sick of it: But it would be the strangest
Paradox in the World, that they should be so desperately enamored on a Script,
which Sacrifices their whole Order to the pleasure of the Magistrate, or the
Mobile, and actually degrades them into the Rank of Presbyters. What will such
Insinuations make men think of our Bishops? It is insufferable Impudence thus
covertly to expose the highest Order in God's Church. But let the Reverend
Bishops look to themselves, for our Author thinks he can prove what he says,
and tells us, that the great Sufferers for Religion and Loyalty had such an
Opinion of Mr. Stillingfleet (and that doubtless upon the account of the
Iraenicum) that they made choice of him to undertake the Defense of the
Conference with Fisher. And what of all this? Does it thence follow that they
approved the Iraenicum? I rather think the contrary. I suppose our Author may
have heard of Mr. Prynn, a Man of a restless Spirit, and unsettled Judgment, who
spared no Times or Persons: Now because they could not tell what to do with
him, but put him to the Records in the Tower to employ his busy Mind, will our
Author conclude that they applauded all he wrote? But to bring an instance yet
nearer to our Case, of all the Schismatics that ever assaulted the Church of
England, possibly none will be found more Inveterate, nor yet more able and
learned than T. Cartwright; and yet some of the Governors of our Church thought
sit to put him upon Writing against our Countrymen at Rhemes: And I suppose
their design was to sweeten his bitter Spirit, by such an honor done to him,
and to win him what they fairly could, or at least to divert a direct War upon
the Church, and to hinder his making the People run mad, at which he was an
excellent Artist. It Is true that his ill Principles stuck so close to him, that
his Performance did not answer expectation, and other hands were forced to be
set on work; but if this Author had been then living, it seems he would have
hence concluded, that not only all the Bishops, but even Archbishop Whitgift
himself. who had wrote against him, did approve of what Cartwright had wrote
before; and he had done the Bishops no mean favor, if he had not made them all
Fanatics. Something more perhaps may be said in behalf of the Rector of
Sutton; for the Irenicum, though a pernicious Book, yet did vouch thus much for
its Author, That he was a Man of luxuriant Parts, and indefatigable Industry;
and being he seemed himself to be unsettled, who shall accuse the Wisdom of our
Governors for endeavoring to take him off, before he was too far gone; and to
employ him in an honorable Work, which might at once oblige him, and better
instruct him? And he that had maintained an ill cause, with so good appearance
of Learning, might reasonably be thought to manage a good one with much more
advantage. And I am apt to think that this course had totally secured him, had
not some men, who applaud his Failures above his best Performances, persuaded
him that he could do nothing amiss, and made him cling too close to his early
mistakes: For doubtless the Dean, after so long Experience and vast Reading,
cannot but discover the mischievous Consequences of many things in that Book,
which his Juvenile Heat and too forward Zeal sent over hastily into the World:
And I am willing to believe, that we might in time see as great Evidences of
Candor and Ingenuity, as of Parts and Learning from him, could these men leave
him to himself. But this I think may satisfy you of the reasons of those
persons employing him at that time, though they could not approve the Irenicum.
It may be needless perhaps to add more in respect of you, yet for the sake of
some others, who may be more difficult, because unwilling to be convinced, I
will fling you in a Royal Instance double twisted: It is no unknown thing, That
Bishop Bilson let drop some passages from his Pen, which might be interpreted
to savor too much of Commonwealth Principles, and were particularly distastful
to King James the First; and yet that Wise King not only suffered him to enjoy
the richest Bishopric in his Kingdom, but seemed to afford him some particular
Favor and Countenance. This some Schismatics afterward laid hold of, and
made use of it to their Advantage; against whom our Royal Martyr thus defends
his Father (in his Third Paper to Mr. Henderson.) As for Bishop Bilson, I
remember very well what Opinion the King my Father had of him for those
Opinions, and how he showed him some Favor in hope of his Recantation, as his
good Nature made him do many things of that kind. And had this occurred to the
Dean's Memory, as it could not escape his Reading, it might have been a strong
Temptation upon him to have drawn the Father into his Party, as well as he has
done the Son; and indeed they are both much alike on his side: But I think that
it better serves to show, that, respect to men's Persons, and approbation of
their Opinions, are very distant things, and that he who passes judgment upon
no better Evidence, follows a very fallacious Rule.

From this we are lead to consider the design of this unlucky Book, which I
could wish had never been designed at all. And we are told, That but two
designs can be tolerably pretended, the one is the Dean's own, the other Mr.
Lowth has made for him. The one is applauded, the other insolently and
scornfully condemned: they are represented as inconsistent with each other; and
yet, with this Author's leave, I think it not impossible that they may be both
true. And, First, I must tell you, that a man though very zealous and serious
may be mistaken, as to the Justice and Goodness of his own design, and may
actually design that which is really evil, and effect it too, whilst he thinks
to do great good. Thus it was with no less a person than St. Paul before his
Conversion in persecuting the Christians. And our Blessed Savior himself tells
us (John 16. 2.). The time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think he
does God Service. And I believe the Author of the Letter would be very
unwilling to have his Throat cut with such a Religious design, notwithstanding
he is so brisk an Advocate for Men's well meaning. And there is not a
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, Quaker, or any Sectary whatsoever, who
seriously desire and endeavor to ruin the Church of England, but they think
they design well; and our Author, if he please, may undertake their defense.
Well, but the Dean has solemnly profossed, that his design was to heal the
Wounds of the Church. Now, though I never liked the Plaster, yet I am willing
to believe this to have been his design, and it is a very Christian and noble
Design. But then, in the next place we are to consider, that a Man, who carries
on a very just and laudable design, may yet proceed in such untoward methods,
and use such unagreeable and unhappy means, that he may not only miscarry as to
his design, but may do as much hurt as he designed good. And in this case it is
apparent, that there is a Twofold design, the one personal, the other natural,
the one which the person intends and fails in; the other, that which the means
he uses naturally tend to. And therefore, when Mr. Lowth says, That the
design was merely or mostly (or what you will) against the reestablishment of
the Church of England, I cannot believe that he meant to enter into the Dean's
Thoughts, but that he did judge what was the natural tendency of his Arguments;
and so let the Dean's design be what it will, he might be in the right as to
the design of the Book; and whether he was or not, must be tried by the proofs
he brings for it. And our Author confidently asserts, That all that he (Mr.
Lowth) offers in proof of this, is his (the Dean's) denying Episcopacy to be by
the Laws of Christ always binding and immutable, and that he attributes too
much power to the Civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastical Affairs; and this (says
our Author) will be freely confessed. A pretty fair Confession: And is it not
an admirable way to procure the Establishment of the Church of England, by
pleading, that Episcopacy may be turned out of doors at the pleasure of the
Civil Magistrate? For, supposing the mutability of Episcopacy, and the power of
the Magistrate there asserted, this will be the natural consequence. And is it
not hard, that a man should confess Mr. Lowth to be in the right, and in the
same Breath revile him? But our Author has a trick to prove that this Argument
will not hold; and tells us, That he will turn the Tables, and suppose Mr.
Lowth a zealous Presbyterian; and then, (because the Irenicum denies that
Government to be immutable, as well as Episcopal, and gives away some of the
power to the Civil Magistrate, which is wont to be assumed by their Classical
and Synodical Assemblies) he might have made the same complaint in favor of
the Consistory, etc. Very true, and there is no doubt but Mr. Lowth would have
done so, had he been such a zealous Presbyterian; or else he must have been
false to his Principles. But could not this man turn the Tables, without
turning Mr. Lowth into a Presbyterian? I pretend not to much skill at Tables,
but I had thought, that those who turned the Tables had left the Persons as
they were; and if he had done so, he might have turned and overturned his
Tables till his heart had aked, before he could have made Mr. Lowth open his
mouth in favor of the Consistory, though the Dean's Design and Arguments had
been never so violent against it. And let us suppose it true which this Author
alleges, That the design of the Irenicum may be as easily levelled against
the Presbyterian, as the Episcopal Church, yet it does not follow hence, that
Episcopacy and Presbytery stand upon equal terms; and though both proceeding
upon the same su^position, do equally complain, yet that part which really
suffers wrong does justly complain: And if he please now to set his Tables
right again, I am apt to think that he will give it on the Episcopal side. But
there is something farther, for which the Presbyterian my justly complain,
though this Author had cast such a mist before his own Eyes, that he could not
see it. For the Presbyterian in the general Notion asserts a great Truth; and
it is not his fault that he pleads a divine right of Church Government, but
that he takes it out of those Hands, wherein Christ and his Apostles left it,
to commit to those to whom it was never entrusted, and thus licks up Aerius's
Vomit. Now in this case Mr. Lowth had proved the Presbyterian concerned as well
as the Episcoparian. For when the Author of the Irenicum, to avoid the Argument
from the Superiority of the Apostles, and their Jurisdiction over the Pastors
of the Church by an Act of Christ, had pleaded, That it must be farther proved,
that it was Christ's intention, that Superiority should continue in their
Successions, or it makes nothing to the purpose. To this Mr. Lowth replies,
That at this rate of Arguing, though the Apostles, by an Act of Christ were
invested with the ministerial Authority, yet it must be farther proved, That it
was Christ's intention, that the same power should continue in their
Successors, or it makes nothing to the purpose for a settled Ministry; and the
same Argument which overthrows a Superiority of Churchmen, for want of an
express of Christ's intention, overthrows the very Ministry it self, both
having the same bottom and alike promises. And here the Episcopal Man was not
left alone to complain, but the Presbyterian might honestly put in for a share.
And this indeed was a fatal Argument, for it overthrew the whole project of the
Irenicum; for, if you well observe, you will find the Scheme of that Author to
lie thus: He asserts in general a divine Right of Government, or that it is the
Will of Christ, that his Church should be Governed one way or other; but then,
as for any particular Form of Church Government, he does not think that Christ
or his Apostles erected any with an Obligation of its continuance, but that it
was left to some body, I know not who, to establish the particular Form
according to the necessity, convenience, and circumstances of Times, Places,
and Persons, and from time to time to new mould and change the same, as they
should find cause, yet always containing themselves within the bounds of what
the Author thinks lawful. I grant that he is not always true to this, but the
whole Work seems to be bottomed upon this supposition, and for his
inconsistencies, he himself may take care of them. Now the Argument here used
has undone himself, and is levelled not only against the divine Right of any
one particular Form, but against the divine Right of a Ministry, and all Church
Government whatsoever. Neither do I know to what purpose we should wrangle,
whether the House shall be built in this or that Form or Shape, when it does
not appear that we have any Right or Authority either to build any at all, or
to enter any formerly built. And now let any man judge, whether this was an
effectual way of arguing either for the re-establishment of the Church of
England, or for men's complying with it.

But tho this be enough to prove what Mr. Lowth has alleged; yet it is
untruly said of the Letter-maker, that this is all: For Mr. Lowth had accused
the Author of the Irenicum, that, notwithstanding his Pretense of the
Mutability of Church Government, he had invested the Presbyter with the full
Power of Order and Jurisdiction, and that he had perpetually fixed him by
divine Right unalterable, and he there proves his Charge (p. 29.) and you may
find several other things in Mr. Lowth's Letter to this purpose, to which I
refer you; for they having received no Answer, I am no further at present
concerned for them; only I think this a very unlikely way of persuading the
establishment of the Church under Bishops; and leave you to judge, let the
Author's Design be what it will, whether the Book do not carry on the Design
which Mr. Lowth pretends.

I fear I grow troublesome to you, but now my Hand is in, I am resolved to
follow this Author to see, if he have done the reverend Dean any better Service
in the remaining part of his Letter: And the next thing he falls on, is, the
Business of a Recantation. And here, supposing what I had read in the former
part of the Letter would have been of the same piece with what followed, I
expected to have met with strange tragical Exclamations, and that the
unreasonableness of the Demand should have been bitterly cried out against: But
I was quite disappointed, and he is clear too quick for us, for he says, That
a Recantation has been already made, and that as public as the Error, Scandal
and Offense, and too before the Demand was made. This Language I confess
surprised me. It seems then, that Mr. Lowth and the Dean were agreed, and did
not know it. What pity is it, that such a Noise should be made all over the
Kingdom, and such Disturbance among Church of England Men about a Quarrel
between Two Peasons, who are both become of the same Mind? But is it not a
stark Shame, that when Mr. Lowth is acknowledged to be in the Right, and the
Dean has receeded from his former Tenets to come up to an Opinion which Mr.
Lowth has always maintained, he should be reviled and exclaimed against in all
places for this, with as much Fierceness and Bitterness as if he had set the
Church on Fire? At least those, who confess thus much, ought to condemn the
Practice as Unreasonable. And if this be true, I think the Quarrel ought to be
at an end. But now I am afraid to read on, least in looking after the Proof of
this I should meet with a second Disappointment, and I find all to amount to
little better than a mere Say so. And indeed much thus it happens: For tho I am
willing to persuade my self, that the Learned Dean is really and truly of
another Mind, and has quitted many of the loose Opinions of the Rector of
Sutton, yet this Author is so Unfortunate in the Proof of it, that he has done
him no small Diskindness. And the First thing which he cites from the several
Conferences is so far from a formal Retractation, as he would bear us in hand,
that it is indeed only a scurvy Palliation of the matter, and I am sorry there
to find this Assertion; That what Proposals he makes about tempering
Episcopacy, they were no other than what King Charles 1st. and Mr. Thorndike
had made before him. How? No other? If there be not some Propositions (which
when you please go for Proposals) in the Irenicum relating to Episcopacy, which
King Charles 1st. and Mr. Thorndike, were they living, would abominate, I will
never more pretend to any common Understanding of what I read. As for our
glorious Martyr, it is very hard to say what Concessions any man could have
made, who had been reduced to those miserable Straits, which he was by the most
impudent and barbarous Rebels. And yet thus far I am confident, that nothing
stuck more close to him, than his Opinion concerning the Government of the
Church by Bishops; nothing rendered him more suspected both to the Presbyterian
and Independent; nothing was a greater Obstacle in all Treaties; nor was any
thing pleaded for by him with more Vigor and Smartness. But I will trouble you
no farther on this Account, because I know that the blessed King Charles and
judicious Mr. Thorndike will be vindicated in this Point by another Hand. But I
could not forbear smiling at a pretty Fetch of this Author, who when he had
cited the King's Proposal (as he calls it) from the Deans Epistle Dedicatory,
and made his Comment upon it, immediately adds, This is very consistent with
the Practice of the First Ages, and this I take to be the same that by Law is
established in our Church. Surely the Dean did himself much wrong to talk of
tempering Episcopacy. For let him say what he would, he was for it just the
same that it is now. And do you not think that our Author had good Eyes, who
could discover how Episcopacy has been all along by Law established, just
according to the Proposals in the Irenicum? I should commend him at a dead
Lift, but that he over does it so unmercifully. Some other passages indeed this
Author cites, which seem to imply some kind of retractation; and I am ^pt to
believe that the Dean really intended them with reference to some things, which
he had formerly alleged in prejudice of the Church of England; but then what
the particulars are we are left to guess: And I remember I have read of an old
Hob-Nail'd Axiom, that dolus versatur in universalibus. And for any thing
contained in those Expressions, any Man upon occasion may easily get of them;
and each Party, as the Tide turned, might apply them to their own advantage for
any thing that could be said to the contrary, without a more particular
Explanation from their Author.

But, to put the whole matter out of Dispute, this Author at last descends to
particulars, and instances in three things, wherein lies the main Charge, i. e.
the Manuscript, the Power of Church Officers, and Episcopacy. And if this be
satisfactorily done, I know no reason but that the Quarrel should die; but
instead of that I rather meet with idle Cavils, than fair Answers. As to the
Manuscript, the first thing charged is, the altering the general Method of it;
and of this he in some measure clears the Dean, and lays it upon Doctor Burnet,
and undertakes to give the reason of it. But whatever might be the reason, yet
it is confessed, That it was altered, and no Record ought to be altered upon
any reason whatsoever, without Forgery; and therefore Mr. Lowth spoke Truth,
and ought not to be abused at this rate upon that account. And though this
Author tells us how easy a matter it is to put it in its first Order, yet I
believe many might have been to seek in it, had not this Contest given occasion
for the fuller explaining the mysteries of it. And for my part I like not of
men's doing thus unwarrantably, and worse of their giving reasons for it.

The other charge in reference to the Manuscript, is, That they have left out
Bishop Cranmer 's Subscription to Doctor Leighton 's Opinion concerning Church
Power, by which he retracted his former erroneous Judgment. This the Author
acknowledges to be so soul a thing, that it would leave those without any
excuse, who should be proved guilty of it. but he quarrels Mr. Lowth's proof,
and finds no less than four mistakes in it; and if he had pleased he might have
made them fourscore, and I know not who could have contradicted him, for the
Manuscript is to be seen only by choice Friends, and whilst they keep it so
close to themselves, they may say what they please of it, without any bodies
being able to disprove them. But if there had been so many mistakes, they
cannot fairly be laid at Mr. Lowth's ^^or; for he does not pretend to have seen
the Manuscript, but took it upon the credit and relation of Doctor Durel, late
Dean of Windsor; and therefore at him the Argument ought to have been levelled:
And yet I do not see how the Dean of Windsor can be blamed, not only because
they took no notice of it in his life time, nor in the least offered to
disprove him; but also, because that learned person does intimate, that he had
perused the Manuscript, and followed his own Eye sight in what he wrote. And it
is farther considerable, that Mr. Lowth gave notice of this by Letter, whilst
the Dean of Windsor was living. All this while no mistake was heard of, but now
the Dean is dead, and can tell no Tales, here are four of a cluster. But until
this Author's Reputation can outweigh that of the Dean of Windsor's, (which I
think it will not do in haste) amongst all disinteressed persons it will remain
a Quaery where the mistake lies, and give a suspicion of Juggling.

I was in hope that we had now done with this Mushroom Manuscript, which surely
either sprung out of the Ground, or like the Trojan Palladium, or Image of
Diana fell down from Jupiter for I can yet learn nothing further of its
Pedigree, than that it came by Providence. But this Author is not content to
maintain the abuse of it, unless he may also justify the publication of it;
and most basely and unchristianly insinuates, as if Mr. Lowth were a Man for
Fire and Faggot, merely because relating a Story out of Livy he seems to dislike
it. I wish the Author would consider with what manner of Spirit he wrote that
Paragraph; I am ashamed of the malice of it. Surely this Livy is an Unlucky
Book too. I have heard the Story told, That during the long
Parliament-Rebellion, an honest Loyal Gentleman was soundly Plundered, and
carried Prisoner to the next Rebel Garrison; those Janizary Troopers finding
Titi Livii Patavini Historiae Romanae Principis, to lie in his Parlour; and
they had just so much Latin and Sense as thence to conclude him a Roman
Catholic. But though Mr. Lowth has met with such hard usage for a slight
insinuation of his Thoughts, I will run the hazard of telling you more plainly,
that I think the Manuscript to have been much sitter for the Fire than for the
Press; nor can I think to what end it was published, unless to scandalize our
Reformation, or to expose the greatest Prelate that was concerned in it. I have
known some very good men who have been very solicitous, that such Papers which
might any ways discover their indecencies, their weakness, their oversight, or
their neglects, might be burnt, and they never so much as suspected, that this
was an unwarrantable Artifice, or that they or others should get the Title of
Roman Senators, either for desiring or performing of it. And what is there in
these Papers, that deserves such an extraordinary Care? Why truly no great
matter of Good is pretended, but this Author thinks they cannot do us much
Hurt. For (says he) we do not think we can suffer so much by any private
Opinion of his (i. e. Cranmer 's) that we should be tempted to destroy his
Papers. Nor do I think the suffering much or little could be a Temptation to
publish them. If that was his private Opinion, I wish they had suffered it to
be so still; and that they had observed a Difference between destroying and
making public. But suppose it was his private Opinion, yet it was not so long;
nay it received such faint Entertainment at best, that it scarce deserved to be
called his Opinion. For this Author tells us, that he subscribed it with much
Dubiousness: And he was so far from being satisfied in the Point, that it seems
he retracted it not long after. And Doctor Burnet expressly says, That he
subscribed the Book that was soon after set out, which is directly contrary to
those Opinions set down in these Papers. And now is not this wise Work, that an
Opinion which Cranmer never heartily embraced, which upon Debate he grew
ashamed of, discarded, and under his Hand frankly retracted, should be retrived
from Darkness, and not only set up for the Pole Star, whereby the Rector of
Sutton steers his Course thorough that fluctuating Irenicum, but published with
all Advantage to debauch others, and lead them into the loosest and most
extravagant Opinions concerning Church Government? And here I cannot but
observe the unpardonable Partiality of this Author; who, without any Remorse,
rakes into the very Ashes of poor Cranmer, and revives a supposed Opinion of
his, from which he certainly departed, that he might lay him to open Shame; and
at the same time will have the Dean to be Sacred and Inviolable, and not suffer
the least Reflection to be made upon him, though he formerly printed the same
Opinion only new vampt, which they would father on the Archbishop. Certainly
some deference ought to have been paid to Cranmer, either upon the Score of his
Sufferings, or his Station in the Church, or the Distance of Time, or the
Uncertainty of the Thing; and if none of these could prevail with this Author,
yet methinks he should have been more Merciful, than to trample in a man's Urn,
and to expose one, who has been so long dead, and can say nothing for himself.
As for the Dean, he is alive and well, and a Thousand times better able to
defend his own Cause, than this Whiffler. And therefore such Tenderness over
the one, and such Neglect, or rather Severity, toward the other, is neither
fair nor ingenuous. And after all, it is not improbable, that it never might
have been Cranmer's Opinion, which is set down in the Papers: For the great
management of Affairs passing thorough his Hands, he might state the Case by
way of Experiment, to put others upon a more full, free Debate and Consultation
of the Matter, and to discover the true Grounds and Reasons of the Right, as
well as the Mistakes of the Wrong; and by a contrary Determination to give a
Check to some Opinions, which it is probable some Court Parasites might be then
setting on Foot. For it is scarce Credible, that a Man of his Greatness and
Influence should so quickly, so easily, so spontaneously depart from an Opinion
of such moment, if he had been really possessed with it, and not only used it
by way of Trial of others. For that such an Opinion would have been grateful
enough to the then prevailing Court Party, there can be no Question, and
(except the bare perusal of Leighton's and others Papers) we do not hear of any
considerable Means used to take him off this Opinion; and that such a Person as
Cranmer should leave an Opinion so lightly, and that at a time, when it served
his particular Interest, seems to me very unlikely. And therefore, though the
Authority of the Manuscript should be good (which to me seems very suspicious)
it may fairly be supposed, that not a fixed Opinion, but some other Reason,
which we see not, moved him to state the Case at that manner, and at that time.
And whilst a Matter is under Debate, it may for removal of Objections, and for
the better beating and clearing up the thing in Question, be useful sometimes
induere personam alterius, and to start and move such things, which he may have
no Kindness for. But when the thing is determined, and he as freely yields to
it as any other, he has very hard Measure if all his Proposals must be fixed
on him as his settled Opinions, and be represented to the World ever after as
heterodox or heretical.

But though Cranmer be sufficiently exposed by the Manuscript, yet, since
others will have it so, for me let him bear his own Burden, provided that the
publishing of it may serve either our Church or the Reformation: For otherwise
I see no reason why Men should be so enamoured of it. And as for so much as
concerns Cranmer, what Service can that do our Church, which yields up its
peculiar Rights and Powers to be ravished at Pleasure by lay Hands? What Honor
can it do our Reformation, which represents the greatest Instrument of it, and
him, who had the best Authority to promote it, as a Man tainted with the
loosest Principles? It is true, that things in themselves not only good but
commendable may be done by ill Men; but though that does not alter the Nature
of them, yet it is apt to create Jealousies, and cause a Prejudice in men's
Minds against them. And therefore it was wisely done of the Athenians, who,
when they had received excellent Council from a very bad Man, to avoid the
scandal of following so ill a Person, caused another of unblemished Reputation
to give the same Advice in open Senate as from himself. I must therefore beg
your Pardon, if I cannot but think it ill done, that upon so weak Grounds as
the Credit of a musty Manuscript, which has no other Voucher but Providence,
so great a Man as Cranmer should be blasted, even in such matters, that the
Shame will in some measure rebound upon our selves. And it seems strange to me
that these Men should decry Doctor Heylin for his impartial Dealing, in
exposing some ill things done in the Entrance of the Reformation, which
certainly is best defended by separating the Cause from the Rapaciousness, self
Ends, and ill Actions of some particular Persons; and yet they themselves
unnecessarily and groundlesly should publish some pretended Opinions of
Cranmer's, which border too near the Cause it self; and are not content so to
do, unless they may also espouse them. And it is still worse, in that it
ministers too fair an Opportunity for our Adversaries to reproach us, who
doubtless will not be wanting to improve every thing of that Nature to their
utmost Advantage. And of this I will give you only one Instance, in a Book
lately printed at Oxford, whose Author was apparently of greater Temper than is
usual with most Romanists, who is conversant in our best Authors, and has the
Skill to convert even our Sufferings into our Ruin; in that Book (I say) I
find this severe Charge drawn up against both Clergy and Reformation,
occasioned purely and solely from this pretended Manuscript. As for the King's
Supremacy (says he) how far now some of the complying Clergy extended or
acknowledged the just Power thereof, even as to Ordination and Excommunication,
and administering the Word and Sacraments, I think I cannot more readily show
you, than by setting down the Quaeries proposed concerning these things, in the
first Year of this Kings Reign (he means Edward the VI.) to Archbishop Cranmer,
and other Bishops and learned Men, when assembled at Windsor for establishing a
public Order for divine Service; and the Archbishops Answer to them, printed
lately by Mr. Stillingfleet out of a Manuscript of this Archbishop (Iren. 2
par. 8 chap.) and then he sets down the Quaeries, and the wild Answers
thereunto; and for any thing I can see, very fairly; and what he subjoins, is,
I think, as modest a Reflection as could be expected to flow from the Pen of an
Adversary. This Text (says he) needs no Comment, it is plain enough; and
perhaps Posterity might have done better to have covered this Nakedness of
their Forefather; than to have published it after so long a Silence. (Church
Government par. 5. concerning the English Reformation, cap. 8. page 120, etc.)
Now is it not mad Work to beray our own Nest, and persist in it still, after
our Enemies show themselves ashamed of our Unadvisedness, though it be their
great Advantage.

By this you may perceive, that some still remain unsatisfied, as to the
Manuscript, and by no means approve the publishing of it; and I wish our Author
may give a better account of the next particular, which is the Power of Church
Officers. And here the Appendix to the Irenicum comes in the Van, a Treatise
written on purpose to help out the defects of the former, and to purge himself
from Erastianism; and therefore with some reason one might expect, that that
matter of Church Power should have been clearly stated; and certainly he did
intend it so far as his Thoughts were; for why else does he refer Mr. Lowth to
this very Book on that Scorce, and upbraid him, That he had not produced one
considerable Argument which he had not made use of in a Discourse published
above Twenty Years since? which saying can be meant of no other than his
Appendix. Against this (as this Author tells us) Mr. Lowth's exception is, That
it is limited to the Power of Excommunication. And this he wipes of with a wet
Finger, saying, That was the Subject to be treated of, and to have extended it
farther in that place had been to little purpose. It seems then, that to come
up to a Case is to little purpose, but to do it by halves is to mighty purpose.
But it is observable of this Author, that he rarely mentions an Objection of
Mr. Lowth's, but he represents it either not in his Sense, or not in its due
force. For Mr. Lowth's Objection lay thus, That it was so limited to the Power
of Excommunication, that all other Acts and Offices of the Church (teaching and
administering the Sacraments excepted) were left in the hands of the civil
Magistrate; so that the power over sacred Things, was annexed entirely to the
civil Power. Now with the Epistolizers leave, I think it had been nothing
impertinent so to have handled the matter of Excommunication, as not to have
left so considerable an Objection always dashing at his Heels. To the Objection
in this sense there is not a tittle of Answer, and now we may go look for the
so much boasted Satisfaction elsewhere; for on all hands it is agreed, that it
is not here to be found.

To help out this matter we are led to the Treatise in Vindication of
Archbishop Laud, a laborious and learned piece: But as I will not be bound to
Answer for all things in that Book, so neither will I raise any new Quarrels
against it; I wish Mr. Lowth's Objections could be fairly answered. For though
he thence cites many intricate perplexed Passages; yet our Author with his
wonted Ingenuity, tells us only, That he had happened upon a little piece of a
Sentence, which he thought might have an ill Aspect upon Church Power, and it
is this, The being of a Church supposes this antecedent belief (or assent to
the Doctrine of Christ) in Christians. And this piece of a Sentence is more, I
fear, than he ever well understood, though he thinks it may be so easily
defended: For though in a Church to be constituted or gathered out of Heathens
it holds true, yet in a Church already constituted, he ought to distinguish
between an actual and federal Belief. For in all Societies both sacred and
civil, Children follow the common Condition of their Parents, unless by their
own subsequent act they alter the case. Thus the Children of Slaves are born
Slaves, and the Children of Freemen born Free. And as under the old Law, the
Children, as parts of their Parents, and in the same Covenant with them, were
initiated by Circumcision, so under the Gospel or new Law, by virtue of a
covenant-Right, without any express declaration or consent of their own,
Children are admitted into the Church by Baptism: And for want of
distinguishing between those who are Born to Rights and Privileges in the
Church, and those who are not capable of acquiring them, but by an explicit
Belief of their own, that proposition became liable to very ill construction,
and gave too much advantage to the Socinians and Anabaptists; and yet I take
this to be the least of the Quarrel in that particular; and if this Author can
so easily defend that proposition, he ought either to defend it in the Sense,
in which Mr. Lowth alleges the Dean to have wrote it; or he must prove that
not to have been the Dean's Sense. For there is no question but the Proposition
it self might have been so qualified, that both might have easily agreed in it.
But hence arose the Contest, that they drew very different or rather opposite
inferences from it; for Mr. Lowth from this antecedent Belief infers, not only
a capacity but an indispensable Obligation upon such to enter into a Church
Society and Ecclesiastical Communion (i. e.) ordinarily, and where there is a
settled Church; for they were not discoursing about the State of Men in the Isle
of Pines. And he gives a reason of his Assertion to this effect, That, as no
Man ought to limit God's Power and Mercy in extraordinary Cases, so neither
ought any to enlarge them, where God by his revealed will has set bounds and
limits; and consequently, that the promises and assurances of Salvation ought
to be given to none out of the Church, where God has a Church, as to her
Offices and Administrations in actual Being and Settlement. But quite contrary
hereto, upon this supposition of antecedent Belief, the Dean infers, That a Man
may be in a State of Salvation in his single and private Capacity apart, and
out of all Church Society and Ecclesiastical Communion, though he live where it
is to be had, which utterly overthrows any necessity of attendance to
Ordinances, and all Church Communion: And to prove this Mr. Lowth cites several
passages out of that Book. Now if this Author will not see how this Opinion can
be destructive of Church Power, he must be blind still for me; but then he will
be very ill able to disburthen the Dean of those consequences wherewith Mr.
Lowth has loaded him; and indeed, supposing the Truth of the charge, the Dean
himself can never be able any other ways to do it, than by quitting the Opinion.

And thus this Book not doing the Business, is laid aside to make way for The
Answer to several Treatises, wherein the Dean (as our Author says) has reduced
the Authority of the Governors of the Church to three Heads. And to much
purpose, if it be arbitrary whether men shall enter or continue in any such
Society. But we will suppose them obliged; (which is so much more than I need
grant to the foregoing Principle, that it is rather directly against it) and
then the first Two Heads may be easily allowed; only it is objected, that what
the Dean gives with one Hand he takes away with the other; and by his
unconstancy both in Opinion and Practice has undermined his own Positions. To
this the Author says nothing, nor will I urge it further; but quietly take what
is at any time well given. The Third Head is, An Authority of proposing Matters
of Faith, and directing Men in Religion. And this is such a cautious mincing
Expression, that I cannot tell what to make of it, nor where to find any
distinct Authority in it. For, as for proposing, I do not know but that any
private Person upon a just Occasion, and in a lawful manner may do the same:
And if any thing of that nature be pretended to be peculiar to the Clergy, yet
Proposals in their own Nature are so far from inferring an Authority to command
their Reception, that they rather imply a Power in those to whom they are
proposed, at Discretion to reject them; and so in the issue gives the Authority
to the People. But that I may do him no wrong, besides the proposing Matters of
Faith, there is also mentioned an Authority of directing Men in Religion. And
truly this is a very liberal Grant, which allows as much to the Church as was
given to the Statues of Mercury, which of old were set up to direct Passengers
in their Way, and leaves men much at like Liberty to regard either. I think
this far from a Power to make her Declarations Law. And yet our Author with his
accustomed Confidence affirms, That it is plain that here is an Authority to
Command attributed to the Church, and a Power to enforce her Commands by
inflicting of Censures, etc. But to what matters this Authority reaches, he
durst not acquaint us, for fear this great Mountain should dwindle into a
Molehill: For, as the Matter is here laid, the Exercise of what he calls the
Power of the Keys must be limited to the Churches Authority in making Rules and
Canons about Order and Decency. For in other matters she can only propose or
direct, which is so precarious a sort of Authority, that I see not how her
Censures can be justifiable, where it extends no farther. And thus he has made
some kind of Fence about the Church against Schismatics, but laid her open to
all manner of Heretics. And thus far I cannot find that abundant Satisfaction,
which he tells us we must be convinced has been made for any former Mistakes.
For, as for what he repeats concerning the Treatise of the unreasonableness of
Separation, it has received its Answer already; and I am not willing to follow
this Man through all his Vagaries, who is willing to say any thing but to the
Purpose.

We are now come to the last thing, which is Episcopacy, as to which it seems
Mr. Lowth had charged the Dean, that he had not asserted it in the number of
those Institutions and Practices Apostolical, which are perpetual and
immutable. To prove the contrary we are bid to look into the Discourse of the
unreasonableness of Separation. But why should he send us to look that which he
could not find himself? And I have another Reason, why I shall not follow the
Advice; because I have looked long ago, and could not find it. Though otherwise
I had no mean esteem of the Book. And here it is very observable, that all the
Dean's Treatises fail our Author: We may if we please go pore out our Eyes in
the unreasonableness of Separation, but not one word is thence cited; and no
other Book so much as mentioned: And for his last Refuge he is forced to fly to
the Ordination Sermon and Epistle, which ought not to be admitted for Proof;
the Controversy being what was done before, and the Performance of that
acknowledged. And had the Dean's Wrath suffered him to have the Ingenuity to
acknowledge, what he had the Honesty to retract, and had he not disparaged so
excellent a Sermon with that inconsiderate, angry Epistle, I am apt to think he
had heard no more of Mr. Lowth, unless in respect and kindness. But when he
endeavors to agree with Mr. Lowth in the Sermon, and loads him with Crimes and
Reproaches in the Epistle, I think he gave him a just Provocation in that
manner to defend himself.

And yet here Mr. Lowth has granted more, than our Author knew how to prove.
For he is so unlucky, that he would tempt one to think that he had rather a
design to expose than vindicate the Dean. In the Epistle Dedicatory, which he
is mightily pleased to call the Two-Penny Paper, the Dean (as he says) tells
us, That he does now think much more is to be said for the Apostolical
Institution of Episcopacy, than he at that time apprehended; (that is, when he
wrote the Irenicum) and I believe the Dean did mean honestly, but our Author
did unadvisedly to write this passage, because it comes not up to the Case. For
how much that more was, or whether it was enough to prove Episcopacy of
Apostolical Institution, is not expressed: And it is well known, that very much
is often said for a thing, and yet it does not mount to a just proof. And
though I should grant more than I need, viz. That Episcopacy is here
acknowledged of Apostolical Institution, yet that does not imply it to be
perpetual and immutable, as he would persuade us. It Is true, that it happens to
be so in this case; but he is more beholden to his luck, than any good Cunning
for being in the right, for his consequence is not simply good, because the
proposition is not universally true, That whatsoever is of Apostolical
Institution is perpetual and immutable: Neither is his distinction between
Apostolical Practice and Institution of any force here: For there were
Institutions as well as Practices Apostolical, which related to matters
temporary and of indifferency: And amongst several of these he might have found
Episcopacy herded in the Irenicum, though Mr. Lowth here mentions only the
order of Widows. And I have known some persons, who have refused to eat black
Puddings, alleging for themselves that Text, Acts 15. 29. which sure our
Author will not deny to be an Apostolical Institution; and had he been
acquainted with them, do not you think that his way of arguing would have
excellently enabled him to convince them of their Folly? He ought not therefore
barely from the Institution to infer the immutability, but rather from the
terms of the Institution, the design of the Author, the nature of the Thing, or
the constant judgment of the Church, to have proved it to have been of that
sort of Institutions, which are unalterable. There only remain two more
passages, and those cited from the Ordination-Sermon; in one of which, the Dean
mentions the consent of the Ancients; in the other the judgment of the Church
of England concerning Episcopacy. Now, though I believe the Dean did use their
Authority both to express and confirm his own sense, yet in strict arguing it
will not follow, that he must be of the same mind. For it is well known, when
Doctor Owen readily granted what was the Opinion of the Fathers concerning
Schism, and yet at the same time knocked them all down at a Blow, most
Magisterially (and indeed most Impudently) asserting, That they were all out.
But since enough might have been fetched from that Sermon, which speaks home,
and to the present purpose; nothing of this ought to be urged in prejudice of
the Dean, though it discover the injudiciousness of our Author in his choice,
and how miserable a Defender he makes, when he becomes any thing serious. For
my part, in a Case of this Nature, I am so far srom upbraiding any Man with
what he publicly disowned, and much more for the very disowning of it (as the
Dean complains) that I think he has attained to a greater measure of that
Virtue so peculiar to Christianity, Self-denial, than is usual among Men, who
can prevail with himself to do it, and certainly a particular honor is due
unto him for it. But then I ought to be so just to Mr. Lowth as to say, that
upon the best search I could make, I could not find any thing, that could
fairly amount to such a thing, till that Sermon was published. And though the
Dean, following his judgment in the Sermon, depart from the Irenicum, yet in
the Epistle, gratifying his displeasure, he takes too much pains to defend it.
And being he there causelessly falls so foul upon Mr. Lowth, I think he might
justly defend himself in proving what he had formerly wrote to be true. And
indeed he has very hard measure; for as to the Tenets controverted I do not
find that any accuse Mr. Lowth to be in the wrong; and it is somewhat odd at
one and the same time to acknowledge the goodness of his Cause, and rail
against his Person. As for the Epistolizer, he pretends to no more in the
Dean's behalf, than to prove that he had publicly disowned his juvenile
Mistakes, which if he had done, he might well have charged Mr. Lowth with
disingenuity; but failing in his proof, it returns upon himself. For certainly
nothing can be more disingenuous than for a Man to clamor against another for
maintaining the Right, whilst he himself has the confidence at the same time
to defend the wrong. As for the Ordination-Sermon, I grant, that it gives much
Satisfaction to the matter of Episcopacy, but not in Mr. Lowth's particular
Case, which was concerning what the Dean had wrote and done before. However I
am glad that some Satisfaction comes at any time, and I hope it will prove a
means to sopite the Quarrel, and that when men meet in their Judgments, they
will not maintain a War for the sake of their Passions; for I am ready to
persuade my self, that he, who has thought fit to assert the immutability of
Episcopacy, will not divest Church Officers of that power, which will render
them incapable of performing their Trust.

I had now done with the Letter, but that there remains some scattered
passages, which though they reach not the merits of the Cause, yet are very
Scandalous, and therefore some cursory Notice may be taken of them. He often
accuses Mr. Lowth of dealing severely and coursely with the Dean, and
therefore thinks he has just cause to expose his ill Manners. (as he calls it)
though he does it much after the same rate, that Diogenes trampled on Plato's
Pride. To this I return, that I have often observed, that Mankind bears nothing
with more impatience, nor thinks of any thing with greater bitterness, than
Contempt: A real Injury, or considerable Damage, does not touch them half so
near the quick. And possibly, upon a due examination, good reason may be found
at the bottom of this. Now Mr. Lowth had dealt fairly; he had privately
acquainted the Dean with his Intentions, he had promised upon honest Conditions
to expunge his name out of his Book; but to this he received no other Answer
than scorn, and some foul Play. And it is likely, that this might make his Pen
somewhat the keener: Besides, he is, in nature, no great Courtier; and we
Countrymen are accustomed to plain dealing; or, as our Polite Epistolizer
phrases it, Hob-nail'd Proverbs, to call a Spade, a Spade; and an Error, an
Error. And though it may be no great Crime in a justifiable Case for men to act
like themselves, yet perhaps it might be very displeasing to this Author, who
writes at that capering rate, as if he had been bred at a Dancing School, and
at this time kept one.

Mr. Lowth had requested, That if an Answer was returned to his Letter, it
might be done in a Scholar-like way (i. e.) by Argument. Upon this our Author
huffs and swaggers, and pours out such a deal of Filth and frothy Stuff, as
would turn a Man's Stomach; he is clearly for cashiering the Man, not arguing
the Case. And indeed I think he might be very excusable for not answering like
a Scholar, who throughout his whole Letter never gives us any occasion so much
as to suspect him to be one. But it does reflect upon the Dean, that he should
decline the Scholar-like way in a matter of such weight, and set up a Fellow,
who is mightily pleased to think that he shall gain the Reputation of so vile a
Man as Andrew Marvel. Men's Humors may be tickled, but their Judgments are
rarely satisfied with fooling: And serious Persons will be apt to think, that
there was great scarcity of Argument, where they betake themselves to such a
course.

Another Quarrel against Mr. Lowth is, That he made his Animadversions no
sooner. But he might have considered, that Mr. Lowth's business was to state
the Case of Church Power, and the subject wherein it resided; which was a
matter too nice to be done over-hastily; and what he Animadverted on the Dean,
was only by the way, wherein he had forestalled and laid a prejudice against
his Opinion; and it was in the Dean's power to prevent any Animadversions at
all, by a civil Answer to his first Letter: And after all it matters not
whether they were sooner or later, if they be true, unless he will admit Error
to the Privilege to plead Prescription: and then he that girds at Mr. Lowth for
Animadverting on the Dean after Twenty years space, and in his life time, would
certainly have been very severe (had he been then living) upon Theophilus
Alexandrinus, and Epiphanius, for condemning some Opinions of Origin above Five
times twenty Years after he was dead. But though few may be concerned for
persorns at that distance; yet there are many who would not have so easily
pardoned him upon the score of our Reverend Hooker, who must necessarily have
fallen into the same condemnation, for taking T. C. to Task above Forty Years
after he had appeared in Print against the Church of England; and that too when
he had been answered long before in every minute particular by A. Whitgift. It
is well for us, that the judicious Author of the Ecclesiastical Polity, was not
of the same mind with our Letter-man, for then we had been deprived of one of
the best pieces that ever was wrote in that kind.

But he is mightily troubled, and cannot imagine, what should give Mr. Lowth
the Confidence to attack the Dean. And for once I care not, if I tell him: It
was the Dean's printing several things in Prejudice of the true State and
Exercise of Church Government; and what gave Mr. Lowth that Confidence, would
have been any other Man's Warrant to have done the same. And he, who had all
along labored to be the Dean's Compurgator, could not (had he so pleased) but
have seen this, and been so far in the right: But, that he might run from that
as far as might be, he has devised another scandalous Reason, and with
abundance of Circumlocution, and Coffee-house Phrases, tells us to this effect,
That Mr. Lowth pretending to have been Conversant in some of the best Authors,
had associated himself with Men of little or no Skill in that way, that he used
to dictate to his ignorant Admirers, give Laws to his Companions, and to
swagger with the great Names of Bishops, Doctors, Fathers, etc. whilst all
stood amazed and took him for an Oracle; and this puffed him up, that he
thought himself an over-Match for the Dean, (i. e.) a parcel of Fools made him
think himself Wiser than he was, and enterprise beyond his Strength. Whether he
has or not must be left to others to judge from the Arguments used on both
sides. If the Dean must have no Equal, I wish him Joy of the Prerogative: But
could this Man no otherways raise his Reputation than upon the Ruins of
others? Could not he make him a public Concern, without making the country
Clergy public Ninnies? What Necessity was he under to represent the Clergy of
the prime Diocese of England as a company of Sots and Dunces, who understand
little or nothing in their own Business and Employment? Or does he really think
that whilst all sorts of Persons are really tripping at our Heels, we are so
senselesly stupid as not to consider upon what Legs we stand? Is it not an
effectual way to persuade People to adhere to the Church of England to tell
them, that they are led by a parcel of blind Guides, who gape and stare at a
Discourse of Antiquity, as if News were brought them from another World? 'Twas
kindly done thus to sacrifice us by whole Hecatomb's to the Honor of his Idol.
Surely if he be not an ignorant, yet he is a very malicious Admirer. But had he
thus causelessly blasted a whole Rank of Men in any regular Times, he would have
been enjoined to a severer Penance, than to walk to Highgate with Pease in his
Shoes.

After he has thus set us out for Fools, he thinks he has frighted us away; and
would persuade us, that Mr. Lowth is left as Melancholy as the poor Vicars Cow,
and that all have deserted him. But I can assure you, that Mr. Lowth is not
destitute of Friends; and though they are such as are not willing to become
Partisans, yet they are Men who dare stand their Ground; and are so far from
being driven from their Judgments by Noise and Buffoonry, that they are rather
confirmed, seeing so little of Reason appear against them. His talk of siding
smells of Faction: But for me, he may be of what Persons Side he pleases. For
my own part, I am without Respect of Persons on the Church of England's side,
and shall neither be of the Dean's, nor any other Man's side, farther than they
come up to her Constitutions: And in Matter of that Concern, the Honor and
Interest of the Church will with me ever overweigh the Reputation of any single
Person, be he otherwise never so great or learned. And by how much more
Difficult the Times, or greater the Danger, so much the more necessary is it
with all Carefulness to preserve our Body entire and sound. For therein, with
Gods Blessing, consists her Strength and Safety. But if one Man may be allowed
to depart from her Constitutions in one thing, another will take the like
Liberty in another thing, till in the End she either fall in pieces of her
self, or become an easy Prey to any Adversary, who cannot want Temptation to
set upon such a shattered, disjointed Body; which Mischief, that God would
prevent, shall be the daily Prayers of,

SIR, Your obliged Friend and Servant.
Aug. 1st. 1687.
A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
I Did suppose that the Author of the Letter in defense of the Dean, had been
some little flurting Wit of the Town, who had been wheedled in to lend a Lift
to a desperate Cause, and supply the Penury of Argument with Tricks and
Trifling: But since I wrote these Papers, and had put them out of my own Power,
I am credibly informed, that he bears no less a Character than D. D. and is
withal of considerable Reputation. On this Account some Reflections upon him
may be thought severe: But he that will leave his Station, and make himself a
Buffoon, may thank himself, if he be treated accordingly. And I am sorry, that
my Apology must be to tell you, That he deserved somewhat worse, who would
hackney out himself to defend a particular Interest against his own Sense, and
the true State of the Church; and that he stood in need of strong Diversion
from Merriments and Jests, whose Conscience flew in his Face for what he forced
himself to write; for that his private Judgment agrees not with his public
show in this Matter, I could (if one Person give me Leave, who I think will not
deny it) make appear from his own Letters, if it be required. But he, who will
suffer himself to be a Tool, though otherwise sharp and good, must be content
to be put upon such ill Services as his Masters please; and though he deserve
better Usage, yet shall be allowed neither the Choice nor Judgment of his own
Employment. But possibly upon better Consideration he may perceive that there
is much Difference between writing against Mr. J a Nonconformist Teacher, and
running his Head against a downright Church of England-Man, who thinks
primitive Positions and Practice, to be the fairest Comment on the Charter of
Christ Jesus.

FAREWELL.
FINIS.

