A Brief NARRATIVE And Deduction of the several Remarkable Cases of Sir William
Courten, and Sir Paul Pyndar, Knights; and William Courten late of London
Esquire, Deceased: Their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, together
with their Surviving Partners and Adventurers with them to the East Indies,
China and Iapan, and diverse other parts of Asia, Europe, Africa and America:
Faithfully represented to both Houses of Parliament.

Reduced under four Principal Heads, viz.

I. The Discovery and Plantation of Barbados. II. Their Undertakings, and
Expeditions to the East India, China and Japan. III. The Denial of Justice upon
their civil Actions depending in Holland and Zealand. IV. Their Loanes and
Supplies for the Service of the Crown, upon the Collection of Fines and
Compositions out of the Popish Recusants Estates, etc.


Recollected out of the Original Writings and Records, for public Satisfaction.

London, Printed in the Year 1679.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal: And to the
Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, in Parliament, Assembled.
Right Honorable, and most Worthy Patriots;
THE following Narrative, and Deduction of the several Cases, gives a brief
Account of the vast Improvement and Riches of England by Trade and Enterprises
of those two famous Merchants, Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar,
Knights, Deceased, who for their Public Spirits and Loyalty, had not their
Equals in the Age they lived: Their Names being as well known, as their
Memorable Actions throughout the World: Their great disbursements upon several
emergent Occasions, and their Greater Losses, occasioned by the unhappiness of
the late troublesome Times, when Justice was not only Obstructed, but perverted
to their great prejudice and oppression. Wherefore the Complaynants thought it
most seasonable and convenient to give this following Relation of their
Services and Sufferings; and consequently of the Losses and Damages sustained
by their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Creditors, which include many
Hundred Families within the City of London and this Kingdom. The causes of
Complaint continuing so long are the more grievous, under a Government so
renowned for the Laws, Liberties and Properties of the Subjects. Yet since it
is the Privilege of English men to represent their Grievances in Parliament,
the Complaynants have modestly done it, being ready with their Vouchers upon
Record to justify every particular of their Charge, promising to themselves in
this Iuncture, that the Cause of the Widows and Fatherless may be heard and
relieved.

It is very remarkable, That the Ancestors of Sir William Courten, fled out of
Flanders into England for Protection of their Lives, Liberties and Estates in
the time of Queen Elizabeth, from the Spanish Inquisition, under Duke de Alva:
And that William Courten Esquire was forced out of England, to preserve himself
from Want and Imprisonment: And even his Son William Courten, the Grand Child
of Sir William, constrained to live in Exile, to escape the Prosecutions of his
Fathers and Grandfathers Creditors (inter alia) for those very Moneys lent, to
supply King James and King Charles the First, toward the Support of the King
of Bohemia, and Relief of Rochel and the Isle of Ree.

The several Abstracts of these following Cases, being of very high import to
the Honor and Interest of the King and Kingdom, may easily invite every person
that is a Lover of his Country, to a through perusal, and even to gratify
himself with some remarques not vulgarly known,

Obliging thereby, Among all the rest of the persons interessed and concerned
Your most Obedient and Devoted Servants, Edward Graves Thomas Townesend
Elizabeth Whitaker James Boeve Gilbert Crouch Thomas Norton Richard Powell
Nath. Hill George Carew Thomas Coppin William Hinton Volentina Lloyd


A Brief Narrative, and deduction of the several remarkable Cases of Sir
William Courten, and Sir Paul Pyndar, Knights; and William Courten late of
London Esquire, Deceased: Their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
together with their Surviving Partners and Adventurers with them to the
East Indies, China and Iapan, and diverse other parts of Asia, Europe, Africa
and America: Faithfully represented to both Houses of Parliament. Reduced under
four Principal Heads, viz. I. The Discovery and Plantation of Barbados. II.
Their Undertakings, and Expeditions to the East India, China and Japan. III.
The Denial of Justice upon their civil Actions depending in Holland and
Zealand. IV. Their Loanes and Supplies for the Service of the Crown, upon the
Collection of Fines and Compositions out of the Popish Recusants Estates, etc.

As follows, viz.

I. Barbados.
THAT Sir William Courten at his own proper Costs and Charges first Discovered,
Planted and Possessed the Island of Barbados, before any Subject or Inhabitant
belonging to any Nation or Kingdom whatsoever.

That he Fortified the said Island, and expended 28600 l. sterling in
Fortifications, Buildings and settling Plantations, before he had a Patent
under the Great Seal of England, for the Government thereof, in the third year
of King Charles the First, which subjected the same to the Dominion of the
King: And being in the quiet Possession of the said Island, for the space of
two years and upwards, had allotted out several Plantations to others, under
acknowledgments of Quit-Rents, so that he could not be disseised thereof
without manifest Injustice. That by the Law of England, The Heirs and Assigns
of Sir William Courten retain a Freehold in the said Island, according to the
Original of all Propriety, Notwithstanding James late Earl of Carlisle by an
Arbitrary and pretended Power and Authority, as Lord Proprietor of all the
Carribee Islands, in the year 1628. with his Accomplices Subjects of England)
entered the said Island of Barbados by force of Arms, and spoiled Sir William
Courten, his Servants and Planters of their Lands, Houses, Fortifications and
Possessions, which Intrusion does not create a Right to any that claim under
the said Earl, or others that got into Possession afterward by Color of his
pretended Title. The Honor of the King being to be preferred before the Profit
of the King: Bracton lib. 2. Cap. 2. de acquirendo rerum dominio si insula in
Mari nata sit occupantis, sic occupanti conceditur; and the Book says, It is
tantum divina natura aperante. That these wrongs and oppressions have been
diverse times made appear both in matters of Fact and Law. But in regard there
was no Parliament held in England for the space of 13 years after the said
Force and Injury committed: Sir William Courten and his Son could not find any
relief against the said Earl of Carlisle or his Agents and Accomplices, the said
Earl being so powerful with the chief Ministers of State at that time. And by
reason of other Spoils and Depredations committed upon Sir William Courten and
his Son by the East India Company of the Netherlands (hereafter particularly
mentioned) all further prosecution for satisfaction and reparation of Damages
was suspended pro tempore.

That William Courten, Son and Heir of the said Sir William fled into Italy,
where he died indebted to his own Creditors 64000 l. And as Heir and Executor
to his Father, in the Sum of 146000 l. more, unto those Creditors, contracted
upon Accounts of the Linen Trade, Barbados and East India.

That several Addresses were made by your Complaynants between the years 1646
and 1660, to the Powers then in being, setting forth Sir William Courtens Right
and Title to the Barbados, which were most evidently made out before several
Committees of Parliament, and other special Commissioners appointed to examine
the same, as by the Depositions of the first Planters and Servants of Sir
William Courten ready to be produced may appear: but the many Changes and
Revolutions of Government in those days, and the Domestic and Foreign Wars
obstructed the determination of the said Cause.

In which Juncture several discontented persons prompted your Complaynants to
transfer their Interest and Property in the said Island to some Foreign Prince,
then Mr. Kendal, a chief Agent for the Planters that Claimed only by a bare
possession indeavored to get an Act of Parliament to annex the said Island to
the Crown of England, and was willing to give a Considerable Sum of Money to
your Complaynants for their concurrence in the same, for the quieting of the
Possessions to the said Planters and their Heirs for ever, but meeting with
some Opposition, nothing proceeded farther than mere Proposals.

That since His Majesty's most Happy Restoration your Complainants continued
their Claim by several Addresses to the Council Board and the Parliament, And
the Lord Chancellor Hyde gave for Answer at the Council Board, That the
Complainants Right should be preserved, but that they must have Patience until
the Government of the said Island was settled, and all matters composed between
His Majesty and other Neighboring Princes and States.

That the Lord Willoughby clayming a Lease of several Plantations in the said
Island, and the Government thereof under the pretended Title of the said Earl
of Carlisle, went over present Governor, Whereupon your Complaynants rested in
expectation of some seasonable time to be relieved upon the whole matter by the
Justice of Parliament, (the Committee for Grievances, seldom sitting in any
Session of the last long Parliament, dissolved in the Year 1678. and now Humbly
hope the Cause of the Widows and the Fatherless may be heard, and such Sums of
Money raised out of the said Island in compensation of Sir William Courtens
Original Costs, Charges and Damages, or in lieu thereof, such a yearly
Quit-Rent out of the Lands of the said Island forever, as may be proportionable
to the said Costs and Damages; Many Families having raised great Estates out of
the Ruins of the said Sir William Courten his Right and Property.

II. East India Expeditions.
IN the second place it is Humbly represented, That whereas King Charles the
first, being truly informed in the year 1635. by Captain John Weddal and
Nathaniel Mountney Merchants (who formerly had been in the East India Companies
Service) That since the erection of that Company, notwithstanding the manifold
Privileges granted them, They neither had so Planted nor Settled Trade in
those parts, nor Fortified themselves in any places of Strength, as might
secure and encourage others in Future times to Adventure and Trade thither:
whereas the Portugeeze and Dutch had Planted and Fortified themselves so
considerably, That they were likely to establish a Rich and Lasting Trade in
those parts of the World, for the good of their Posterity, and by the advantage
of which Improvements they not only rendered the English Subjects Trading there,
liable to their Insolences and frequent Injuries, but in a manner had beaten
them out of that Trade, which usually had employed the Shipping of England, and
vented great quantities of English Manufactures. Whereupon his Majesty gave a
special Commission and Charter under the great Seal of England to Sir William
Courten, Endimion Porter, Thomas Kynaston, Captain Weddal, Mr. Mountney and
their Partners and Adventurers with them, in the Eleventh Year of His Reign, to
fit out Ships for Trading Voyages, to Traffic with a Joint Stock in several
Goods, Moneys and Merchandises to Goa, the parts of Mallabar, the Coasts of
China and Iapan, and diverse other parts adjacent, in which Joint Stock Sir Paul
Pindar advanced the Sum of 36000 l. at several times.

In pursuance of this Grant the said Sir William Courten and Company settled
several Factories at Maccao, Carwarr, and other Places on the Coast of India,
and freighted from thence the good Ships named the Draggon, Catharine and
William which were (as has been made appear by many Circumstances) destroyed,
Men and Ships by the Dutch homewards bound, with Goods to the value of 150000
l. Sterling, for which the Lord St. John's being sent in the late Troublesome
Times in Quality of an Ambassador, to the States General Demanded Satisfaction
at the Hague with Interest for the same. That diverse others of Courten and
Companyes Ships escaping the Danger of the Seas and some Rencounters with the
Dutch, returned Safely home.

Afterward the Ship Bona Esperanza laden with Goods, Monys and Merchandise,
Bound from Goa to Maccao, was in a Hostile manner in the year 1643. seized in
the Streights of Mallacca, by the Men of War belonging to the East India
Company of the Netherlands, who converted the said Ship and Goods to their own
use, designedly to spoil the Trade of Sir William Courten and Partners, and
destroy their Factories in India.

In the same Year, the said Dutch Company took into their Possession another of
Courtens Ships called the Henry bona Adventura, with her loading, which they
also converted to their own use, to the Damage of Courten and Company 75000 l.
Sterling. whereof Proof being made in the High Court of Admiralty, The
Complaynants made their Addresses to the Lords and Commons in Parliament in the
Year 1646. for relief; Setting forth the Circumstances of the said spoils and
depredacions, and that they were done in time of Peace, contrary to the Laws of
common Amity and Alliance between both Nations, and that the Dutch East India
Company had refused to make Satisfaction and Reparation of the Damage.
Whereupon a War followed in the nature of General Reprize between the Commons
of England and the States General, which continued for several years, till at
last Oliver Cromwell having Usurped the Government, made a sudden and
disadvantagious Peace, for his own present Security, with the said States in
the Year 1654. taking only 84000 l. for the Spoils and Barbarous Murders
committed by the Officers and Ministers of the Dutch East India Company at
Amboyna; referring the satisfaction for the loss and value of the said two
Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry bona Adventura to the Arbitrament of the
Protestant Cantons of Switzerland, who were not only to compose that difference
of the said two Ships, but all other Spoils and Damages that the Dutch had
committed upon the English ever since the Year 1611. But the said Cantons
refusing to undertake or meddle therein, all things remained in statu quo.

Soon after the said Spoils and depradations, Maurice Thompson, of London,
Merchant, and others upon a private Account, set forth several Ships for
Trading Voyages to the East Indies, upon the same Foundations laid by Sir
William Courten, (The said Thompson having first gotten the Books and Papers of
Instructions for that Trade, from the Lady Katharine Courten) and made Returns
of Ten for one upon those Trading Voyages, as the said Thompson himself
Confessed before Credible Witnesses, yet living.

Afterward the Usurper Cromwell having settled the East India Company by a New
and Large Charter of Privileges, conformable to Sir William Courtens Grant
from the King; Which Charter was renewed to the East India Company since his
Majesty's Restoration.
Three of the Companies Ships called the Postillion, the Frederick, and the
Francis and John upon the like Trading Voyages, being stopped in their passage in
the East India (by the Officers and Men of War belonging to the Dutch
East India Company) and their Voyage spoiled. Upon their Complaint to Cromwell,
he immediately required, by his Ambassador at the Hague, satisfaction and
reparation to be made for the said Loss and Damages sustained, which the
East India Company of the Netherlands were enjoined by the States General upon
his Demand, forthwith to satisfy and pay, at the Price Current, upon a
computation of Returns, as if they had made their Voyages home from those Parts.

Farther Prosecutions since the 29th. of May 1660.
Upon the Kings most Happy Restoration, the Complaynants made fresh
Applications to his Majesty in Council, for Satisfaction of the said Spoils,
and Damages of the Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bona Adventura: and after sixteen
Months debate between the Dutch Ambassadors in England, and the Kings
Commissioners, appointed to Treat with them at White Hall, it was agreed in the
Treaty of Peace concluded at Westminster, the 14 th of September. 1662. That the
said spoils and Damages of the Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bona Adventura should
be reserved from the general Abolition and extinguishment of all Offenses,
Injuries, Losses and Damages whatsoever, for satisfaction and reparation to
be-composed in an amicable way.

In pursuance whereof, two several Memorials were given in at the Hague to the
States General by Sir George Downing, Envoy Extraordinary from his Majesty, yet
nothing could be obtained but impertinent Offers of Commencing Suits at Law
against Jacob Pergens and Peter Boudaen, at that time Bayl for the said
Pergens, who had defrauded the Dutch East India Company of 85000 Gilders, upon
false pretenses of Assignments from William Courten of his Interest and Share
in the said Ships, which he had formerly granted to Sir Paul Pyndar, the said
East India Company having intimation thereof.

After all which fruitless applications and endeavors at a great expense, Dr.
Exton, Judge of the High Court of Admiralty in England, by the Kings Command,
upon the proofs made before him, reported the Damages to amount to 151612 l.

Then upon the Humble Petition of Francis late Earl of Shrewsbury, Sir John
Ayton, Knight, Charles Whitacre, and others of the Complaynants on the behalf
of themselves and the rest. His Majesty with the Advice of the Lords of his
Privy Council* was graciously pleased to grant Letters of Reprizal for the said
Sum of 151612 l. under the great Seal of England, in due form of Law, grounded
upon several Acts of Parliament and Statutes of this Realm (wherein every
Subject of England has an Interest) unto Sir Edmund Turner Knight, and George
Carew Esquire their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for the Use and Benefit
of your Complaynants, to continue in full force and effect, until the sum of
151612 l. should be recovered with damages, or the matter composed between the
East India Company of the Netherlands, and your Complaynants, concerning whom,
his Majesty has declared in his Grant, That he was obliged in Justice and
Honor to see them satisfied and repayed, And that no Treaty whatsoever between
his Majesty and the said States should obstruct the Recovery or Payment thereof
by force or a fair agreement, the said 151612 l being the only Debt liquidated,
ratified and confirmed, judicially to be satisfied, as is more at large recited
in the Letters Patents, bearing Date at Westminster, the 19 th. day of May in
the Seventeenth Year of the Reign of King Charles the Second, and Enrolled in
the High Court of Chancery.

Actions at Law depending in Holland and Zealand against Jacob Pergens, and the
Executors of Peter Boudaen and David Goubard, at the Suits of the Executors,
Administrators and Assigns of Sir William Courten, Sir Paul Pyndar and William
Courten Esquire

An Action upon the Accounts concerning the Linen Trade against the Sons and
Daughters of Peter Boudaen, for 122000 l.

An Attachment in the Bank for 12000 Gilders of David Goubards.

An Action against Jacob Pergens, and the Heirs of Sir Jacob Gats, for 3000 l.
lent by Sir William Courten upon Bond.

An Action against the said Jacob Pergens for 5500 l. sterling, upon his
Covenant, for Moneys received in Trust for William Courten Esquire

Three several Actions against the Heirs and Executors of Peter Boudaen for
4000 l. Legacies, given to Sir William Courten, James Boeve and William Courten
Esquire by Sir Peter Courten and John Money.

These Actions came not under any Consideration whatsoever upon Public
Treaties, neither can they fall under the construction of Offenses, Injuries,
Damages and Losses, arising by Spoils and Depredations upon the Sea, for which
another proper Remedy is Granted.

Nevertheless, The War having continued between the King and the States
General, for the space of two years and a half. A Treaty was concluded at Breda
on the 21 of July 1667. Old Style, mentioning, that all Offenses, Injuries,
Damages and Losses should be extinguished, without any notice taken in the said
Articles of any compensation to be made to the Complaynants that lay under all
the Circumstances aforesaid.

Justice denied in Holland and Zealand.
IN the Third place, your Complaynants do most humbly represent the Injustice
done them by the States of Holland and Zealand, as follows, viz. Sir William
Courten, of London, Merchant; Sir Peter Courten, of Middleburgh in Zealand,
Merchant; and John Moncy of London, Merchant; entered into Partnership in Trade,
with a Joint Stock, in the year 1606, the moiety of the said Stock belonging to
Sir William Courten, and to each of the other a fourth part, with which they
Traded to Italy Spain, Portugal, the Coast of Barbary, and other parts of the
World, But chiefly carried on a great Stock in the Linen Trade, both from
Holland and Flanders, during their Lives: Besides, they yearly employed four or
five Ships fitted out of Zealand, for Greenland, with Biscayners for their
Harponeers in the Whale Fishing.

This Copartnership continued thirty years, wherein they made Returns of Two
Hundred Thousand pounds Sterling per Annum at least. But the Accounts were not
liquidated in Fourteen years before the Death of Sir William Courten, who took
up of your Complaynants diverse great Sums of Money upon Exchange and
Obligations on the account of their Copartnership.

That Sir Peter Courten at the time of his Death stood indebted to the General
Stock 129426 l. 00 s. 10 d. as by the Balance of the Books of Accounts, kept
in London, appears, which rests in the hands of Peter Boudaen, and his Sons,
Executors of Sir Peter Courten.

That the Executors of Sir Peter Courten and John Moncy, living in Middleburgh
aforesaid, refused upon the Death of Sir William Courten, to come to any
Account for the said 129426 l. 0 s. 10 d. in their hands, whereupon a Suite was
commenced against them by Mr James Boeve in Middleburgh (the said Boeve having
been formerly a Servant and Book-keeper to John Moncy,) who had a Procuration
for that purpose, and advanced very far in the prosecution thereof, until the
Boudaens caused the said Boeve to be Arrested upon a great feigned Action, and
kept him several years in Prison, on purpose to obstruct him in carrying on the
Action of Account Commenced against them, and depending in the ordinary Courts
of Judicature in Holland and Zealand, And to avoid the said Action, do now
insist, That by the general Words of the Articles of the Treaty at Breda, (viz.
all Offenses, Injuries, Losses and Damages,) the Executors of Sir Peter
Courten, John Moncy, Peter Boudaen and Jacob Pergens are discharged and
released of all Actions relating to Accounts, Obligations, particular Contracts
or Covenants whatsoever with English men, upon which any Suite was depending
before the said Treaty at Breda, And that the States of Holland having made
that Construction upon the said Articles, and consequently interdicted their
Courts of Judicature from doing Justice to your Complaynants, they hold
themselves discharged accordingly, Which is a President of that dangerous
Consequence against all Civil Society and Commerce, that no English man can be
safe in his Property and Estate that Trade with the Hollanders, if such forced
interpretations shall take effect. Which are left to the great Wisdom and
apprehension of this Parliament, to report their Opinion, with an effectual
recommendation thereof to the King.

Further Prosecutions concerning the Bona Esperanza, etc.
That new Differences arising between the King of England and the States General
in the Year 1671. another War was Proclaimed against them in London, and about
the same time the French King also denounced War against the said States, your
Complaynants then made farther applications to the King and Council at
Whitehall for relief in the Premises, which were referred to a Select
Committee of the Lords, who fully represented the said Spoils, Debts and
Damages to his Majesty, with their Opinion, That the States not performing
their Covenants and Agreements with the King, the Obligations of all past
Treaties were Cancelled and of no force: and that it was Just and Seasonable
for his Majesty to insist upon satisfaction and reparation for the
Complaynants, as freely as if no such Treaties had ever been made, as by their
Report under their Hands, Dated the 29 of June 1672, appears. And which will
be a continual claim from one Generation to another, until an actual
Satisfaction and Reparation be made to the persons interessed and injured.

That in pursuance thereof, several Letters from the King, and Orders from the
Council Board, with special Instructions from the Principal Secretaries of
State, were sent to the Lords Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries from his
Majesty, during the Treaties both at Utrecht and Cologne, to insist upon
Satisfaction and Reparations for your Complaynants; His Majesty having declared
under His Sign Manual, that His Care in this Singular Case should be
exemplarily manifested in protecting his Subjects in their Just Rights, as well
as to assist them in Recovery thereof.

The said States General and their Subjects then lying under a necessity of
doing Justice, (the last War having continued for the space of two years in
Conjunction with France:) The Queen Regent of Spain, interposed on the behalf
of the States General with offers to the King for a separate Peace, excluding
France, promising to secure the payment of eight Hundred Thousand Pattacones to
his Majesty, which was proposed by the Spanish Ambassador, the Marquess del
Frenzo, who had a special Procuration from the States General, to treat upon
Articles ready framed, and sent to him from the Hague: who found Friends in
Parliament to promote that Treaty by Addresses to the King, although at the
same time the Plenipotentiaries at Cologne were Treating upon better Conditions
for your Complaynants?

Yet a sudden Peace was concluded at White Hall, and the Articles Signed and
Sealed the 9 of February 1674. New Style, by H. Finch, C S. Latimer, Ormond,
Arlington and H. Coventry, Commissioners from the King of Great Britain, and Al
Marquess del Frenso, Commissioner for the States General, wherein the Seventh
Article was worded as follows: Quod Tractatus Bredae conclusus Anno Domini
1667, sicut etiam omnes alij praecedentes tractatus per illum tractatum
confirmari renoventur and maneant in plena vi ac vigori in quantum praesenti
tractatus nullatenus contradicunt.

The Breda Treaty (which the Hollanders style their Glorious Peace) being
attended with those Horrid Circumstances, after the expense of five Millions
and half of pounds Sterling, in those three dreadful years of Plague, Fire and
War: The very nomination of Breda sounds doleful in all English men's ears, that
suffered under the Conduct of those persons, who drived on their own private
Ends and Advantages, before the Honor and Interest of the King and Kingdom: and
still the Politic Statesmen, would eternize the Glory of their Nation, by
recording the Infamy of others. In their own Words, That the Treaty of Breda,
made in the year 1667, as all other former Treaties Confirmed by the said
Treaty, be renewed and remain in their full force and vigor, so far forth, as
they contradict nothing in this present Treaty.

The Complaynants being surprised at the last Treaty, finding no other
provision made but the Pattacones, concerning their reparation, notwithstanding
the report aforesaid, so lately made to his Majesty by a Committee of the Lords
of his Council (viz.) that all Obligations of past Treaties being Cancelled, it
was most Just and Honorable for his Majesty to insist upon satisfaction of the
Debt and Damages ascertained under the great Seal of England, as aforesaid: And
there being a rumor spread abroad in the Hague and Amsterdam, That the Lord
Latimer, Lord High Treasurer of England, and another Minister of State, had
persuaded the King to Assign three parts of those Pattacones to the Prince of
Orange for an Old Debt, due to Prince Henery Fredrick (his Grandfather) from
King Charles the First, and the remain for other Services, after all the Blood
and Treasure spent upon account of the Subjects of England, which ought to be
strictly inquired after,

Iure naturae aequam est neminem cum alterius detrimento and injuria fieri
locupletiorem.

Then the Complaynants, for preservation of their Right, caused a Protest to be
made in Holland and Zealand, by a Public Notary, who delivered Copies thereof
to the chief persons concerned, reciting the Substance of all the proceedings,
with a praecaution to the Directors of the East India Company, concerning the
Patacoones, and to the States of Holland; concerning their Letters to the
Ordinary Courts of Judicature, prohibiting any Justice to be done upon the
Actions depending upon Obligations, Covenants and matters of account in Trade,
protesting for all Damages aleady sustained, or that should be sustained by
reason thereof.

Afterward the Complaynants Addressed themselves by their Humble Petitions to
his Majesty, and the Lords of his most Honorable Privy Council, praying that
the 151612 l. so ascertained under the Great Seal of England, might either be
paid out of the said Pattacones, Or otherwise, that the Complaynants might be
at liberty to reprize the said Debt and Damages, by force of their Grant
remaining upon Record: and as to the Civil Actions depending in Holland and
Zealand upon Obligations, Covenants and Merchants Accounts, (whereupon Justice
was positively denied) that satisfaction and reparation might be required of
Monsieur Van Beuninghen, then Ambassador Extraordinary from the States General,
or that Commissioners might be appointed to determine the same; Whereupon two
several Orders were made on the 23. of July 1677. that all parties concerned
should be heard at the Council Table, on the 10th. of October following, to
which purpose the Complaynants attended with their Council and Advocates from
time to time, but could not obtain any hearing thereof, or receive any
satisfaction or reparation to this day, in the Premises either at home or
abroad.

Loanes and Supplies for the Service of the Crown.
IN the fourth and last place, your Complaynants do Humbly take leave to
represent and offer to your Consideration: That Sir Paul Pindar most faithfully
served King James and the Honorable Turkey Company, for the space of Eleven
Years together at Constantinople, in the quality of an Ambassador, where he
much improved the English Woollen Manufactures, and the Levant Trade. And at
his return into England set up the Allome Works in Yorkshire and other
Counties, wherein he employed many Hundreds of poor People, out of which
improvement, a certain Revenue of Ten Thousand pounds per Annum, did accrue to
the Crown, and as much more to the Stock of the Kingdom, by importation of
ready Money and Staple Goods for Allome exported: which Allome Works are now of
little or no Advantage to the Crown or Kingdom.

That Sir Paul Pindar in the years 1638 and 1639, having lent and advanced of
his own Estate, and of Moneys taken up upon his Credit, Eighty five Thousand
pounds, to Furnish the Crown with Jewels, and to supply the Queen of Bohemia
and her Children in their Wants and Necessities, as also for Supplies of
Foreign Ambassadors and other Services in his Majesty's Domestic affairs, The
late King Charles was Graciously pleased to Assign for the Security and
Repayment of the said Moneys, with usual Interest, part of the Revenue arising
by Fines and Compositions upon Recusants Estates in the Northern Counties,
under the Collection of Thomas Viscount Wentworth, And also other Moneys
payable out of diverse branches of the Revenue, as by Tallies struck upon the
same, and the several Assignments under the Great Seal of England appears,
which Payments were diverted in the late Troubles, before any considerable part
of the said Debt was paid, that still remains a Charge upon the Crown, to the
value of Fifty Thousand pounds and upwards.

That the said several Assignments under the Great Seal of England, and all
Writings concerning the same, and all Sums of Money whatsoever payable from
the Crown, upon the said Assignments, being Granted, Transferred, and Assigned
to Richard Powel of the Inner Temple, Esquire and Nathaniel Hill, of London, Gent.
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in Trust, for the Use and Benefit
of themselves, and all the rest of the Persons interessed; according to their
several and respective Debts and Demands: They lately exhibited their Humble
Petition to his Majesty, setting forth the State of their Debt, and for other
reasons contained in their Petition (more especially, for that Sir Paul Pindar,
for the Preservation of the Royal Family, and transportation of his now Majesty
when he was Prince of Wales, in the time of the late Troubles, had Voluntarily
supplied the late King with Moneys to a considerable value in Gold, which
Loyalty and Care, his Majesty has lately owned for a most acceptable Service,)
Humbly prayed, That his Majesty would be graciously pleased to grant them
Satisfaction for their said Debt, out of the Fines and Compositions, payable by
Recusants, vested in the Crown by several Acts of Parliament. Whereupon His
Majesty was Graciously pleased, to refer the Consideration of the said Petition
to the Right Honorable, the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, to Report
their Opinions upon the same, what was fit for his Majesty to do therein, for
the Petioners relief, and then His Majesty would declare His further Pleasure.
Whereupon the Petitioners attended several days at the Treasury Chamber, to be
Heard; and being once called in, their Lordships informed the Petitioners, that
the then Parliament intended to appropriate the said Revenue, and that it was
proper for the Petitioners to apply themselves to the Parliament, and that the
Petitioners might have a Report from their Lordships at any time, when they
thou ght it Convenient: The Complaynants therefore Humbly hope, That if this
Parliament enter upon the Consideration of appropriating that Revenue, they may
be secured their Just Debt by a Proviso, in any Bill that shall Pass to that
effect, They having already made a great Retrospect into that Revenue, and are
willing at their own Charge and Expenses, to make a perfect return into the
Exchequer of all the Papists in every County throughout England and Wales, with
the true value of their Estates, which will bring in a considerable yearly
Revenue to the Crown, and be a great Satisfaction and Safety both to the
Parliament and the whole Kingdom.

A Brief State of the Allome-Works.
BEfore Allome was made in England, the Kingdom was served with Romish Allom,
being the Popes Commodity, whereof he made a large Revenue, it being sold here
for 50 and 60 l. per Tun, and sometimes more: To gain this Manufacture, King
James undertook the management, and perfected the said Work, at a vast Charge;
whereupon Sir Paul Pyndar and William Turnor took a Lease of the said
Allome-Works for 12 years, paying the yearly Rent of 11000 l. to the King, for
the sole making and vending of Allome, it being the Kings Manufacture by
Purchase, whereby many hundreds of poor Families were maintained to the great
increase of Shipping and Mariners, the saving of much Treasure within the
Realm, and his Majesty's Kingdoms served with their own Native Commodity.

This great Work was so acceptable to the Kingdom, that in the Statute against
Monopolies 22 Iacobi, The Parliament amongst other Grants, made this Provisoe
following.

Provided also and be it Enacted, That this Act or any Declaration, Provisoe,
Disablement, Penalty, Forfeiture or other thing, before mentioned, shall not
extend to any Commission, Grants, Letters Patents or Privileges heretofore
made, or hereafter to be made, of, for, or concerning the digging, compounding
or making of Allom or Allom Mines, But that all and every the said Commissions,
Grants, Letter Patents and Privileges shall be and remain in like force and
effect and no other, as free from the Declarations, Provisoes, Penalties and
Forfeitures contained in this Act, as if this Act had never been made.

In Hillary Term, 9 Carol. prim. Edmund Earl of Mulgrave and others, levy a
Fine to the King and his Heirs and Successors of the Castle and Manor of
Mulgrave, and of all the Lands and Tenements in and belonging thereunto,
formerly granted to the Ancestors of the said Earl by Queen Elizabeth.

Primo Martij 9 Carol. prim. the King being seized in Fee of the said Manor of
Mulgrave with the Allom Mines and Allom Works, did by his Deed Indented, Demise
the same Allom Mines and Allome Works within the said Manor of Mulgrave to Sir
John Gibson Knight, (Trustee for the Earl of Strafford his Executors and
Administrators, for 31 years, after the expiration of the Lease of 12 years, to
Sir Paul Pyndar and William Turnor, under the yearly Rent of 12500 l. whereof
10860 was to be paid to the King, and 1640 l. to the Trustees of the Earl of
Mulgrave.

Then the King 4th. of March, 9 Carol. prim. by his Letters Patents, did Grant
to the said Edmund Earl of Mulgrave and his Heirs the said Manor of Mulgrave
reserving the Rents for the Allome Works. In the year 1640, the Earl of
Strafford and Sir John Gibson assign over the remainder of their Lease of 31
years to Sir Paul Pyndar upon a valuable consideration, which expired Anno 1668.

And the said Allome-Works were accordingly enjoyed, and the Rents paid, and
his Majesty's Title and Interest to the said Allom-Works never questioned by
any Parliament since Allom was first made in England, but on the contrary
Protected and Strengthened by them until the year 1647. The then Earl of
Mulgrave being very powerful in the House of Lords, and the Ruling Members of
the House of Commons, made it his business to destroy the Kings Grant, for the
sole making and vending of Allom (and those Privileges and Liberties in the
Letters Patents,) under the notion of a Monopoly.

And consequently made his Addresses by Complaint, to both Houses of
Parliament, whereupon concurrent Votes passed, that the said Letters Patents,
Granted to Sir John Gibson for the sole making and Sale of Allome were Illegal
and Void, and that the same and all Assignments of them, should be called in
and cancelled, (notwithstanding King James expended 120000 l. in accomplishing
the said Art and Manufacture,) without any regard to the Provisoe aforesaid.

Then he also procured an Order in the Lords House 4 th. of May 1648. that the
said Earl should enter into and upon all the said Allom Works, Mines and Houses
and should take the profits of them, from March 31, 1648, by force whereof, he
entered and took possession of all the Materials, Works and the Kings Stock.

Sir Paul Pyndar being so outed by Votes and Orders, without any proceedings at
Law, or any thing passed into an Act, depended upon the Kings Grant and the
equity of his Cause, having advanced many considerable Sums of money upon that
Account into the public receipt of the Exchequer.

IT is to be remarqued that Sir Paul Pyndar paid the Rent of 1640 l. yearly to
the Earl of Mulgrave and his Trustees, to the time of those Votes and Resolves
in Parliament, notwithstanding the interruption of making Allome during the
War, and had also paid the Crown Rent of 10860 l. before hand to that time,
although the soil of the Land whereupon the Allome-Works were erected, and the
Mines or Rocks employed, were not worth 40 l. per annum, That the Earl of
Mulgrave and his Trustes enjoyed the said Works, Materials, Mines and Rocks,
and made Allome, during the remainder of Sir Paul Pyndars Assignment of Sir
John Gibsons Lease; out of which in equity, Sir Paul Pyndar ought to have been
repayed all those sums of money due from the Crown upon that Allom Account,
according to the Conditions and Covenants by way of allowances and
defalcations, contained in the Letters Patents to Sir John Gibson and his
Assigns, which do amount unto the sum of 55301 l. 18 s. 6 d. as by a stated
Account under the hands of Auditor Bingley and Auditor Beale in the Year 1647,
delivered to the Commit of the Revenue appears. And the Earl of Mulgrave and
Sir John Monson having made 15301 Tun of Allom, during Sir Paul Pyndars Lease
by which means they raised a very considerable Estate, that in Justice and
Equity stands accomptable and chargeable to the Administrators and Assigns of
Sir Paul Pyndar, for that no Act of Oblivion has taken away Sir Paul Pyndars
Right, neither did he forfeit the same.

It is very observable, that neither the Heirs, Executors or Administrators of
Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar, or either of them, have at any time
since the Kings Restoration, received any kind of Preferments, Favors or
Advantages from the Crown, otherwise than the Letters Patents for the recovery
of 151612 l. Sterling, from the States General and their Subjects, who pretend
they have satisfied the King.

Postscript. Several Weighty Considerations upon the Letters Patents for
special Reprisals against the States General, and their Subjects.
THE said Patent being grounded upon the Laws of Nations, and upon several Acts
of Parliament, Statutes of this Realm; the King was not deceived in his Grant;
it being consistent with Prerogative and Law, to resort unto Letters of
Reprisal in times of Peace, without any breach of Amity and Alliance, where the
parties will not give satisfaction.

And if a particular Debt so established, should be Sacrifized for a public
Peace (all Circumstances aforesaid considered) its most reasonable that the
private loss should be recompensed out of the public Purse, and of this there
are diverse Presidents and Examples, otherwise it will revive again.

Treaties of Peace being mutually and reciprocally binding, if either party
breaks one link, the whole Chain falls to the ground, and sets the other party
at liberty. By the I. and V. Articles of the Treaty Marine, concluded at London
between the King and the States General, on the first day of December, 1674.
grounded upon the IX. Article of the last Peace, for a Free and undisturbed
enjoyment of Trade and Navigation, and to take away all differences by Sea and
Land, it was agreed, That it shall and may be lawful for every of his Majesty's
Subjects freely and safely to Sail and Trade in all Kjngdoms, States and
Countries, in Peace, Amity or Neutrality with the King of Great Britain, so
that they shall not be hindered or any way molested in their Navigation and
Trade by any Military Forces, nor by the Ships of War or Vessels whatsoever,
belonging to the States General or their Subjects, and being entered into any
Road or Port under the Obedience of the said States toward their Voyage, they
shall not be obliged to pay any Toll or Custom, only show their Passports to
what places they are bound, and from whence they came. Notwithstanding all
this, some of the Complaynants have been stopped by a Man of War near Lillo, by
the Military Forces of the States upon that Ancient and Navigable Stream the
Scheld, since the said Treaty, and their Voyage from England to Antwerp
spoiled, contrary to the said Treaty Marine, and to the Ancient Treaty with the
Dukes of Burgundy, whereas the States General themselves, do claim their
freedom of Fishing upon the English Coast under the XIV. Article of the same
Treaty, concluded between Henry the 7th, and Philip Duke of Burgundy, in these
Words, Poterunt ubique ire Navigare per mare secure piscari absque aliquo
impedemento licentia sen salvo conducto, etc. And why the Freedom of Trade
shall not be open for English men from London to Antwerp, as for Hollanders
from Amsterdam to Hull or Bristoll, but be forced to unlade their Goods and
lade them again at Flushing or Rotterdam; and from thence to Antwerp to the
Damage of his Majesty's Subjects 200000 l. per annum, is a question fit for the
Parliament to resolve. And why the Hollanders and Zealanders are suffered to
keep those two small Islands called Stacia and Sabia, near St. Christophers,
purposely to take in Goods there, from the English Plantations, and Transport
them into their own Provinces, without touching in England, contrary to the Act
of Navigation, is a National Concern, fit for the Parliaments Inspection and
Reformation.

FINIS.
A Copy of Letters Patents for Especial Reprisals from the King of Great
Britain, (under the Great Seal of England,) against the States General, and
their Subjects, Enrolled in the High Court of Chancery.
CHARLES the second by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all Christian People to whom
these presents shall come, Greeting: Whereas our loving Subject William Courten
Esquire deceased, and his Partners Anno 1643. by the depredation and hostile act of
one Geland, Commander in chief of two Ships belonging to the East India Company
of the Netherlands, was between Goa and Maccao in the Streights of Malacca,
deprived and most injuriously spoiled of a Ship named the Bona Esperanza, and
of her Tackle, Apparel and Furniture, and all the Goods and Lading in her, upon
a very hopeful Trading Voyage to China, which were carried to Batavia, and
there all de facto without due Process of Law confiscated; And that also in the
same Year another Ship of our said Subject, called the Henry Bonadventure being
come on ground near the Island Mauritius, was there both Ship and Goods seized
upon by some of the Officers and Ministers, and others under the Command of the
said East India Company, and utterly detained from the right Owners. And
whereas the said William Courten, and his Assigns in his life time, used all
possible endeavors to recover the said Ships and Goods, and to procure further
Justice against the Malefactors, and yet could obtain no Restitution or
Satisfaction, whereby they became to be much distressed, and utterly undone in
their Estate and Credit: And that thereupon, and upon the most humble
supplication and Addresses of Francis Carl of Shrewsbury, and William Courten
Esquire Grandchild and Heir of the said Sir William deceased, Sir John Ayton and
Sir Edmond Turnor Knights, George Carew and Charles Whitaker Esqs; on the
behalf of themselves and diverse others Interested in the said two Ships Bona
Esperanza and Henry Bonadventure, and in the Estates of the said Sir William
Courten deceased, Sir Edward Littleton Baron. and Sir Paul Pyndar knight
deceased, that We would take their Case into Our Princely Consideration. We out
of a just Sense We then had, and still have of their unjust sufferings in that
business, both by Our own Letters under Our Sign Manual to the States General
of the United Provinces, and by Sir George Downing Knight and Baron. Our Envoy
Extraordinary, to whom We gave special Command so to do; required satisfaction
to be made according to the rules of Justice, and the Amity and good
correspondence which We then desired to conserve with them firm and inviolable.
And Whereas after several Addresses made to the said States General by Our said
Envoy, and nothing granted effectual for Relief of our said Subjects, (whom We
take Our selves in Honor and Justice, concerned to be satisfied and repaid,)
We lately commanded the said Sir George Downing to intimate and signify to the
said States, that We expected their final Answer concerning satisfaction to be
made for the said Ships and Goods by a time then prefixed, and since elapsed;
that We might so govern Our selves thereupon, that Our aforesaid Subjects might
be relieved according to Right and Justice; And yet no satisfactory Answer has
been given, so that We cannot but apprehend it to be, not only a fruitless
endeavor, but a prostituting of Our Honor and Dignity, to make further
Application after so many denyals and flightings. And Whereas John Exton Doctor
of Laws, Judge of our High Admiralcy Court of England, upon Our Command, to
certify to Us the value of the Losses and Damages sustained by the said
William Courten and Partners, whose Interest is now vested in Our Loving
Subjects, Sir Edmond Turnor Knight, and George Carew Esquire and Partners, has
upon full Examination, and Proofs thereof made by Witnesses in Our High Court
of Admiralty, reported and certified under his Hand, that the same do amount to
the sum of One Hundred Fifty One Thousand Six Hundred and Twelve Pounds.

Now Know Ye, That for a full restitution to be made to them for their Ships,
Goods and Merchandises; of which the said William Courten, and the Assigns of
the said William Courten and Partners, were so despailed as aforesaid, with all
such Costs and Charges as they shall be at for the recovery of the same, We by
the Advice of our Privy Council have thought fit, and by these presents do
grant License and Authority under our great Seal of England, unto Our said
Subjects Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, for and on the behalf of themselves, and other Persons interessed
as aforesaid, to equipp, victual, furnish, and to set to Sea from time to time,
such and so many Ships and Pinaces as they shall think fit. Provided always
that there be an entry made and recorded in the Admiralty Court of the Names of
all Ships and Uessels, and of their Burden and Ammunition, and for how long
time they are victualled; And also of the Name of the Commander thereof, before
the same or any of them be set forth to Sea; And with the said Ships and
Pinaces by force of Arms to set upon, take and apprehend any of the Ships,
Goods, Moneys and Merchandises of the said States General or any of their
Subjects, inhabiting within any their Dominions or Teritories wheresoever the
same shall be found, and not in any Port or Harbor in England or Ireland,
unless it be the Ships and Goods, of the Parties that did the wrong. And the
said Ships, Goods, Moneys and Merchandises, being so taken and brought into
some Port of Our Realms and Dominions, an Inventory thereof shall be taken by
Authority of Our Court of Admiralty, and Judgment shall be given in Our Court
of Admiralty by the Judge or Judges thereof, for the time being, upon proofs
made before him, or them, that the said Ships, Goods, Wares, Merchandises, or
Money, did belong to the States General, or any (...) and George Carew, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns as aforesaid, to retain and keep in their
or any of their Possessions, and to make fale, and dispose thereof in open
Market or howsoever else, to their and every of their best Advantage and
Benefit, in as ample manner as at any time heretofore has been accustomed by
way of Reprisal, and to have and in joy the same as lawful prize, and as their
own proper Goods, so that neither Captain Master nor any of the Company, that
shall serve in his own Person, or shall promote and advance the said enterprise
in manner and form aforesaid, shall in any manner of wise be reputed or
challenged for any Offender against any of Our Laws. And that also it shall be
lawful for all manner of persons as well Our Subjects, as any other to buy the
said Ships, Goods and Merchandises so taken, and apprehended by the said
Captains, Masters and others, and adjudged as aforesaid, without any damage,
loss hinderance trouble or molestation, or encumbrance, to befall the said
Buyers, or any of them, in as ample and lawful manner, as if the Ships Goods
Wares and Merchandise, had been come and gotten by the lawful Traffic of
Merchants, or of just prizes in the time of open War. Provided always that all
Ships, Goods, and Merchandises, taken by virtue of this Our Commission shall be
kept in safety, and no part of them wasted, spoiled, or diminished, or the Bulk
thereof broken, until Judgment have first past as aforesaid. That they are the
Ships and Merchandises of the States General or some of their Subjects
aforesaid. And if by color of this our Commission, there shall be taken any
Ships, Goods, or Merchandises of any of our loving Subjects, or the Subjects of
any Prince, or State in good League, or Amity with us (except the States
General) or their Subjects as aforesaid, and the Goods therein laden, sold and
imbezelled or diminished, or the bulk thereof broken in any place before they
shall be adjudged to belong to the States General or some of their Subjects as
aforesaid. That then this Commission shall be of no sufficient Authority to
take the said Ships, Goods, and Merchandises, or to warrant, or save harmless
such as shall receive buy or intermeddle therein, but that the prizes so taken,
and the said Ship of War, shall be confiscated to Our use. And further We do
hereby declare that it is Our will and pleasure, that this Our Commission shall
remain in full force and power, to all intents and purposes, until the said Sir
Edward Turnor and George Carew their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
as aforesaid, shall by virtue thereof have by torce of Arms apprehended, taken,
seized, recovered, and received from the said States General, or their
Subjects, one hundred fifty one thousand six hundred and twelve pounds
according to the appraisement to be made by sufficient Appraisers upon Oath
nominated and authorized in Our said Court of Admiralty, of all such Ships*
Goods, Wares, and Merchandises, as shall be taken from the said States General,
or any of their Subjects, by virtue of this Commission, or shall otherwise
receive satisfaction of the Debt aforesaid, by Composition to be made between
those of the East India Company of the Netherlands, and the said Sir Edward
Turnor, and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns as
aforesaid, Notwithstanding it so happen, the present difference between Us, and
the States General depending upon general Reprisals, may be agreed and
composed, and that in the interim a Peace and good Correspond may be renewed
between Us and the said States General; In which case nevertheless, it is Our
will and pleasure, that in the execution of this Our Commission no violence
shall be done to the Persons of the said Subjects of the said States General,
but only in case of resistance, and that after in cold blood, the Subjects of
the said States General, if hurt or wounded shall be used with all convenient
office of humanity and kindness. And Further Our will and pleasure is, that
although it shall happen that all hostility between Us, and the States General
and Our respective Subjects shall cease, yet this Our Commission shall remain,
and be in full force and power, to the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew,
their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as aforesaid, by virtue thereof
to apprehend, take, and seize by force and Arms, so many more of the said Ships
and Goods of the States General, or any of their said Subjects, as besides the
said sum before mentioned shall countervail satisfy, and pay all such Costs
and Charges as the said Sir Edward Turnor and George Carew, their Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns as aforesaid, shall from time to time make proof to
have disbursed and paid toward the equipping, manning, paying, furnishing, and
victualling of the said Ships so licensed and Authorized as aforesaid, by this
Our said Commission to be equipped, manned, furnished, and victualled by the
said Sir Edward Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, as aforesaid for the purpose aforesaid. And Our Will and pleasure is,
and We do hereby require Our Judge or Judges of Our High Court of Admiralty,
for the time being, and all other Officers of the Admiralty, and all other Our
Judge, or Judges, Officers, Ministers, and Subjects whatsoever to be aiding and
assisting to the said Sir Edward Turnor, and George Carew, their Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, as aforesaid, in all points in the due Execution
of this Our Royal Commission, and to proceed to adjudication, and adjudge all
Ships, Merchandises, Moneys, and Goods by virtue hereof to be taken according
to our Princely intention, hereby signified and expressed, and to take care
that this Our Royal Commission be duly executed, and favorably interpreted and
construed in all respects, to the benefit and best advantage of the said Sir
Edward Turner and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
as aforesaid. In Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made
Patents.

Witness Our self at Westminster the 19. day of May, in the 17. Year of Our
Reign. Per ipsum Regem.


