Great and Bloody News, FROM FARTHING-ALLY, In St. Thomas's SOUTHWARK, Or the
True and Faithful RELATJON* Of a Horid and Barbarous MURDER*
Committed on the Body of Walter Osily, by his own Wife on the 31 of this
Instant July. Who first strangled him with a Bow-string, and afterward cut him
with a Hatched on the bare Head, and sliting his Nose, giving him a Mortal
Wound under the right Ear, with several other Barbarous Inhumanityes, and how
afterward she discoverd it to a neighbor, as of her being Apprehended, and
confession before the Justice of Peace, as likewise her Commitment to the
Marshelseas Prison, where she remains: with several particulars relating to her
Life and Conversation. August:2: 1680
WOnderful are the prevailing Insinuations of Hell to delude poor mortals here
below as may be well observed in this most barbarous and inhumane murder
committed by Margaret Osilly upon her Husband Walter Osilly, The Relation of
which in all its horrid circumstances being as follows, her Husband having
been abroad on Friday at the Beargarden, to try a Dog that he had lately
purchased, came home about nine of the Clock in the Evening somewhat disordered
in drink, yet notwithstanding went out with her to a neighbors house, where
they drank together, after that they went home seemingly well, but it proved
not so, for the being no sooner entered the house but a quarrel arising between
them, her husband gave her some blows, the which she to outward appearance
seemed not to regard, but converting her resentments to private Revenge, the
which she in time found opportunity to effect.

Her Husband being over powered with drink, falling fast asleep she went to a
Lodgers Chamber of hers, telling him that her Husband was dead drunk, and that
he lay like a Swine upon the Flore, and that he had grievously abused her,
whereupon he persuaded her to let him alone till he came to himself and then to
get him up to bed; this Discourse being no sooner ended but she returned, and
locking the Doors close after her, having awaked him, got him (as she since
confessed) to Bed; where he no sooner fell asleep but the Devil prevailing with
her prompted her for to commit a Murder that has since amazed mankind, for in
her search for a mischievous weapon to work her revengful Rage she chanced to
light upon a Hatchet, the which she poising in her barbarous hand for some
small time, at last concluded on the Tragecal Exploit, and with a downright
blow struck her sleeping Husband, who dreamed of no such force, just on the
Forehead, making there a wound three inches in length and an inch in depth; but
not content with that, being desperately bent on his Destruction, she repeated
it with a second just under his right Ear, the which was about an Inch and a
half deep which no doubt was mortal an sufficient to translate him to
immortallity and after that another that slit his Nose, and a fourth on his
hand between his Fingers, the which he was supposed to receive in making
resistance; after which, as it is verily conjectured, he lying weltring in his
Blood and not presently expiring, she with a Bow-string to make all secure
strangled him, and so put him out of the pain; she being resolved to perfect
the Cruel Deed, and make end in Death. This Bloody exploit being acted under
the Covert of darkness as near as can be conjectured about two of the Clock in
the morning, she continuing with the Lifeless Corpse till the Light appeared,
and without doubt often viewed the dreadful Deed her Cruel hands had done, but
with what horror I leave the reader to conjecture by the Guilt. About 8 of the
Clock she leaving her Husband in the bloody Bed, went to one Mr. Fowlers in the
Maze Yard, where no sooner entering the House, but she desired to speak with
him in private, which being granted, she declared to him the horrid Murder,
and how she had acted it in every circumstance desiring him to conceal it or
some Report to let her bury him privately in his Ninepin Place; and after
having drank there, returned home, but he being a man that detested inch horrid
Impieties, went instantly and acqainted one Mr. Daniel a Hatband maker, with
what she related to him, who delayed not to search into the Truth of this
strange report so that coming to her House he Knocked at the Door the which she
unwillingly opened, being then smoking a Pipe of Tobacco in her Chair, but at
his importunity she arose and let him in, who no sooner entered, but asked for
her Husband, to which she replied he was gone out, but he did not believe it,
for was informed that she had murdered him and that he was resoved to search,
demanding the Key of the Chamber, the which after some denials she delivered to
him and thereupon retird into the next Room lo^king her self in, upon which
going into the Chamber foun the murdered Corpse lie welterred in Blood all
mangled on Flore, where upon he putting his Head out of the Window, called
several neighbors, giving them to understand, that there was Murder done in
the House, at which several came in and found the dismal spectacle, at which
they started back with horror, some of them immediately running for a Constable
to seize the Murderer, whilst others watched to hinder her from making an
escape, but in fine she being apprehended was carried before Justice Freeman
where Mr. Fowler appeared to give Evidence against her who related what she had
declared unto him, with many other circumstances, whereupon he was bound over
to prosecute; It was likewise told her that for that horrid Fact she had
committed she would be burnt, to which she replied, she burned already and that
would prepare her for the Flames to come; or words to that effect: after a full
Examination she was committed to the Marshalsea Prison, there to remain till
she shall be delivered by due course of Law the Coroner and his Jury sitting
upon the Corpse returned it upon their Inquest wilful Murder, etc. This Walter
Ossily was formerly her Apprentice, when upon the Death of her former Husband,
she married, his time not being out when he was murdered, it was reported that
he was very Familiar with her during the Life of her former Husband, and that
he lay with her the night after he was Buried:

He having been married to her about a twelvemonth, in tha^ time as it is said,
he had spent and made away of hers about tw^ hundred pounds, which extravigance
of his and the abusing her a^ it is conjectured were the causes for which she
murdered him for which no doubt she gave him cause, being a Woman of a
Turbulent Spirit, and living much at Varience with her former Husband who was a
Castermaker by Trade, of which employ was also the person now murdered. May
this sad Crime and cruel murder be a warning to all Christians to deter them
from the like Barbarity,

FINIS.

