A Great and Wonderful DISCOVERY, OF The Bloody Villains, and inhumane
Murderers, committed to Newgate and other Places; since that great and
lamentable Fire, at Mr. Delaun's's house in Loathbury: With the manner how they
were apprehended and taken, as they were sharing of their ill-gotten Goods: And
a more perfect Relation, touching that strange and lamentable Accident; and
those dear Souls that perished in the Flames.



London, Printed for J. Johns^^, 1663.

A Great and wonderful discovery of of the bloody Villains, and inhumane
murderers, that fired the House of Mr. Delaunes, etc.
AMongst the rest of the sad and lamentable accidents, which have happened of
late years, none so great and full of astonishment and terror, as that which
proceeds from the furious and unspeakable flames of a firce and vehement fire;
Indeed true it is, many poor souls have too: often, been exposed to the
mercyless fury of fiery flames; that have happened several ways. But the late sad
and lamentable Accident, which happened in Loathbury it exceeding deplorable the
whole Family and all in the house being burnt to Ashes: for they had not been
many hours (on Friday night, to Christmas time! in their beds, but the fire
brake forth most vehemently, in the lower Rooms, and immediately took hold of
the lower Seilings, and so to the rest, and in such a sad and lamentable
manner, that in less then three hours time the whole house was burned down to
the ground, and the people in it all perished in the flames, to the unspeakable
grief and astonishment not only of their Relations, but of all good Christians
in general: Yet great was the good hand and Providence of God, toward a
Gentlewoman who being there over night, was importuned to stay but she resused,
and went home to Alderman Allens, A mercy never to be forgotten: otherwise; who
knows, but that this Dear soul might have also Perished in the flames, as to
her out ward Estate and Condition: But blessed be God for her Deliverance, and
the Lord grant she ma for ever walk answerably, to the honor and Praise of his
great and glorious Name, for so high and signal a mercy: And truly, so great a
mercy was it, to the families adjoining likewise that every member thereof
ought highly to praise the name of the Lord, and as long as they have a being
in this life, to return humble thanks to the great Jehovah, their great and
Omnipotent Preserver, who was pleased in great mercy to give a period to those
destroying flames. For indeed so great and vio ent they were, that they seemed
for a while unquenchable; notwithstanding the utmust endeavors of the good
People thereabouts, for the allaying of them, who left no mean^ unattempted
after it was Discovered.

But it had taken too great a head, to the unspeakable grief of many before it
was discornable, and had not providence so decreed, that a Woman (who sat up
with a Child that was not well hearing as it were, a great eracking, and
fearing that a Villain might be breaking into the house, looked out of a
Chamber window, and espied a great light in the Merchants lower Rooms, as if
there had been many hundred Candles burning in the Windows: whereupon, though
much amazed, she cried out, Fire, Fire, insomuch as the Coffee man looked also
out of his Window, and immediately heard the doleful cries, Lord have mercy
upon us we are all undone: which was all the words that they were heard speak.
This being about two of the Clock on Saturday morning, the 2^ of December. But
before three or four, the merciless flames had brought that goodly building for
the most part even to dust and ashes, and all that was in it. So violent it
was, that it burnt even like fire in an Oven. And had it not been for the great
dare and vigilance of the manisold inslruments that God was pleased to raise,
for the preservation of the adjoining houses it had undoubtedly made great
ruin thereof; but by the unwearied pains of many persons casting great store
of water from the other houses upon the fire that burnt up so fiercely, it
pleased God at last to allay the flames, and by long hooks, and other
instruments, Mr. Teryls house and many others were preserved, but not without
great damage to many; for so hot were the Brick wall, both on that and the
other side of the way, that the people were fain to cast water thereupon, and
to hang wet Blankets, Coverlids, and other things, both upon the out and
insides to allay the heat, and to prevent the near approaching dangers; for so
sad and dismal a thing is fire that where it breaks forth too violently great
calamities there ensues. It is indeed a good Servant but a bad Master; and from
such a Ministering Spirit and the fury thereof Good Lord deliver this City.

Thus much for the Relation, as it was taken at first: That which further
remains, is, A Relation (as it is reported) of the bloody Villains and inhumane
Wretches, that were Actors in this sad and lamentable Tragedy: six being taken
(as it is said) and carried to Chelmsford Gaol, being discovered on Friday last
near Burntwood; as their quarrelling about sharing of their ill-gotten goods;
and it is said, that these Villains having got privately into the house took an
opportunity, when all was in bed and asleep, to cut the Maids Throats, gag and
bind all the rest in their beds, ransacked the house of all the Moneys and
Plate they could find, and afterward, set fire on the house, locked the doors,
and cast the Key over the Wall. This, if true, is the most barbarous and
inhumane Action that was ever heard of; and, no doubt, but a short time will
make manifest the truth of all things. For have we not daily experience of many
wonderful Discoveries; as that touching the Pewterer, who having got his Maid
with Child, pretended to send her into the Country; but wickedly designed two
Villains to murder her by the way; and leading her into a Wood, and stripping
her naked, hung her up by the hair of her head to a Tree, gagged her, and tied
her hands behind her; in which sad condition, she remained all night; but the
next morning, a Drover coming that way, and the Swine running into the Wood, he
espied this sad Spectacle, cut her down, and put his Coat about her; which
done, he ran to the next Town, raised the People; but she is since dead, and
the Conspirators taken, and committed to Newgate.

FINIS.

