Great and Bloody News FROM TANGIER, Or a full and True RELATION OF A Great and
dreadful Fight Which happened on the 3d. of this Instant November Between the
English and the Moors, And continued for the space of six hours, during which
time 2000 of the Moors were slain, and several taken Prisoners, their whole
Army consisting of 30000 put all to Flight, with the loss of six pieces of
Cannon, and many Ensigns and Standards.
With the Relation how they Cowardly Shot and mortally wounded that Right
worthy Gentleman, Sir Palms Fairborne, as he was Riding without the Walls.
As also of the brave Behavior of the Spanish Horse, who took part with the
English, and many other remarkable Passages, the like Victory not having been
obtained these many years.
STill in what place soever the English are resident, Victoria Crowns their
Arms with good success, their Valor are as dauntless as in their Native
Land, when ever for the honor of their Prince and Countries Renown, Stern Mars
does summon them into the Bloody Field, as has been seen in their many
Victories against such ods of Foes as Sunburnt Afric has opposed against our
famous Garrison of Tangier, which has so long defended it self against a
Continent that has one part of the World for its large Portion.

The Relation of the late dreadful Fight as we have it from very good hands,
was as followerh, The Moors since the expiration of the Truce, having with an
Army of thirty thousand Horse and Foot advanced themselves, making many Lines
of Incroachment, Circumvaliation and Counacrvaluation, so that by degrees they
had brought their main works within a Furlong of the Wall of the Town, and many
of their advance Works were so near that with Hand-slings they could throw into
the same and hit our Men as they stood upon the Fortifications, as likewise
they had planted several great pieces of Cannon upon distant Batteries, which
they began to play, which the ever worthy Gentleman Sir Palms Fairborne
Governor of the said Garrison perceiving, took a Party of Horse, and Rode
without the Walls to observe more narrowly their Approach, but long he had not
rode before he unfortunately received a Shot in his Body from one of the
Enemies, who lay entrenched upon the Right, which Wound proved so mortal that
he fell from his Horse and was carried into the Town, to the great grief of all
his Soldiers, but was alive when these Letters came away, the Spanish Horse
seeing this, who were about 200 in number, mounted, and violently charged the
Moors in the Front, beating them from their works, and were seconded by the
English, consisting of about four thousand Horse and Foot, under the Command of
Colonel Sackville, the Van being composed of the Spanish Horse, and the
English Horse making a right Wing to the Main Body, the Sally being made on the
third of November between eleven and twelve of the Clock at Night, as well
hoping to surpr^ze the Moors in their Trenches or Works, but that expectation
failed, for the Sentinels upon the approach of the Garrison gave the Alarm to
the whole Army, who came up very resolutely, but were as bravely repulsed, for
the Spanish Horse and our English Foot breaking into their Ranks, put them into
great disorder, and made great Slaughter amongst their best men, so that our
main Body pressing on with undanted Resolution. The Enemies were forced to
Abandon their Trenches, and fly to their Army for shelter, many of them being
killed in the flight. After two hours Dispute the Moors Horse retired and left
their Foot to Dispute it with our Horse and Foot, who though they were six
times as many yet the Shot pressing on, and the Charge increasing on all sides,
they began to shrink together, yet being encouraged by some Christian
Runagadoes, they made some small resistance during which their disordered Horse
had put themselves into a tolerable posture, and rallied, who being met and
Charged by the English Horse, who were then advanced in the Front of the
Battle, a number of them were killed upon the Place, and some taken Prisoners,
so that the Fight continued very smartly, for though many of the Moors were
slain, yet they being so numerous still brought up fresh supplies to fill up
the Gaps Death Made. Yet were they as often put to the worst, disordered, and
at last totally routed. The Colonel himself, who all the time behaved himself
Gallantly, and encouraged the English, he with several other brave Commanders,
and about eight hundred Foot forced their main Body which was drawn up. and
fronted with Musketeers and Harquebussers, so that their Orders being again
broken and many of their prime Commanders slain, they began to show the small
liking they had to continue the Battle.

Several of them turning their backs, rushed through the Ranks of their own
friends, and fled, disordering them in many places, which our Commanders
observing, took the advantage of their Confusion, and ere they could close the
points of their Circle; killed a number of them, whilst this was doing in the
Front, the Horse that served for our Right Wing, charged them so furiously in
the Front, that they were forced there likewise to open their orders, which
their General observing, came to the side in great have, to stay his flying
Soldiers, but could by no means do it, so that finding himself worsted on all
sides, he gave order to sound a Retreat, whereupon the English were so
encouraged, that they pursued them with great Slaughter for the space of two
Miles, but not thinking it convenient to venture any further for fear of an
Ambuscade they returned, having taken 7 or 8 of their Ensigns, killed about
2000 of their Men, and taken about 30 Prisoners with 5 or 6 pieces of Canon, so
that having cleared the Field and laid the Moors dead bodies up in several
piles, they returned and filled up all their Trenches, and demolished their
Votes, they returned Victorious into the Town. There were in this Action about
10 or 12 of the Spaniards killed, and about 100 English, among whom we do not
hear of any Officers of Note when they were come into the Town, for the better
encouragement of the Soldiers, each who had taken an ensign received thirty
pounds, and those who took the Prisoners, who were about 20 in number, had free
leave to make the best of them, This action had caused a general Joy to the
Inhabitants, had it not been dashed with the unfortunate hurt of our Governor,
not long after the Moors desired a Truce to bury their dead. which was granted
upon the 8th of the same Instant, they having been Reinforced, made an other
Attempt, but were as bravely repulsed with considerable Siaughter. The
particulars of which, we shall shortly give you a faithful account of; farther,
we have Letters that Informs us, the Earl of Plymouth by reason of his tedious
Voyage at Sea, sell into some disposition which turned into a Fever, of which
he dyed, etc.

London, Printed by D. Mallet 1680.


