GREAT NEWS From Hertford-Shire. Being a particular Account of a Late
ENGAGEMENT Between A New Gang of Highway-Men, And several of The Country
People, near Barnet: WITH A True Relation of the Killing Three of the
Countrymen, and several Horses; and of their Committing two great Robberies
near Hertford. As also, of the Countries Pursuing them, and the manner of the
Rogues escape that Day. Likewise the Taking one of them since, that is supposed
to be the Chief, and of his Commitment to Goal.
Licensed according to Order.

HErtford-Shire and the adjacent Counties, having for some time past been
Infested with the Robberies of several New Highway-Men, on Saturday the 14
Instant, being Marker-Day at Hertford, about the Hours of Six and Seven in the
Morning of the said Day, four of this Gang, all well Mounted and Armed, set
upon three Men that were going to Hertford Market, in a Lane called
London-Lane, being the direct Road to the Town; from these People they took
away about the Value of Twenty Pounds in Money, etc. Within an hour after this,
they had the Impudence to set upon two other Countrymen in a narrow Lane that
leads between Chesson and North-hall Common, just by a small Cottage House:
while they were rifling one of the Countrymen, the other quitted his Horse,
and made to the Cottage, where he conveyed 6 l. of the Money he had with him,
leaving himself only 40 s. the Rogues soon entered the House after him; and,
after they had taken taken the 40 s. they miserably beat and abused the
Countryman for running away, they took away from the former of them, the value
of 10 l. in Money; then they run both the Country-mens Horses through, to
prevent their being Pursued, and made the best of their way over North-hall
Common, toward St. Alban's; but, by this time, the Persons that they first
Robbed, had raised the Country, and were in Pursuit of them; and, in a Lane
between Sir Thomas Pope Blunt's and Barnet, the Countrymen got up with the
Robbers; at which time, the latter made a stand (their Horses being satiegu'd)
and placing themselves in a breast, they pulled out about Seven pair of
Pocket-Pistols each, and stuck them round their broad Waste-Belts, putting one
in each Hand, and then bid the Country defiance, declaring they would never
yield as long as their Powder and Bullet lasted, and that they would live and
dye by each other; which Resolutions so startled the Countrymen
(notwithstanding they were much superior in number) that they retired into a
Farmers-yard near adjacent, from which place the Rogues dared them out, and,
soon after, made into the Yard after them; which the Countrymen perceiving,
all that were on Foot run into the House, and others quitted their Horses and
left them, only Four or Five bravely stood it, and opposed them; among which
were Sir Thomas Pope Blunt's Cook, and a Farmer, Two as Stout Men as any in the
Country, but both of them were soon Killed: The Robbers received the Cooks
first Fire, from which one of them (as he said) was shot in the Leg, and then
one of the Rogues ride up close to him, and shot him Dead, they had shot
several times at the Farmer and mist him, during which time he had knocked one
of them from his Horse, but another of them soon came to his Assistance, and
shot the Farmer Dead, by a wound in the Head, the other three made into the
House as soon as they saw the Cook drop, after this the Highway Men stayed
near half an hour, changing two of their Horses, for two of the Country Men's
that they liked better, changing the Saddles and Bridles, etc.

After which they shot and stabbed six of the Countrey-Mens Horses, and their
own two they left in the Yard, to prevent being further pursued, and so marched
off taking their way a cross the Country, toward Vxbridge and Harrow on the
Hill, but the Country about being more Alarmed, and fresh Horses coming in;
they were still pursued, one of the pursuers being better mounted then the
rest, and over-riding his companions, the Rogue took the advantage, and in a
Lane leading to Wale common, shot him dead; They passed within two Miles of
Vxbridge, where was Quartered a Troop of Horse, that were going for Flanders,
who took the Allarm and were ready mounted, the Officers offering the Town,
that if they would engage to make good, whatever Horses should happen to be
either killed or spoiled, the Troop should disperse themselves in parties, and
pursue the Highway Men, but the Town refused: From near Harrow they walked
their Horses a Foot pace, defying the Contrymen all along as they went, and
so over one of the Hounslow-Heaths, near which place they met a Gentleman very
well mounted, whose Horse they took away and left their own, which they ran
through; Night coming on, they took the advantage of it, and got clear away,
Riding through Kingstone Town, and so in Surry; and since by all the
Intelligence Major Richardson can get, they made the best of their way toward
West Chester, and so for Ireland; the said Major useing all diligence
imaginable to take them, having sent to most parts of England.

Since this Robbery, one Witnal a Butcher whose Wife kept an Inn in that
Country, and a Noted High-way-Man, has been taken and secured in Northampton
Goal, who is generally thought to be one of the Four concerned in the Robbery
abovesaid, upon which Major Richardson sent two persons from Newgate to view
him.

LONDON, Printed for Ed. Golding, in the Old Baily, 1691:


