GREAT NEWS FROM Derbyshire: Being a Full and True RELATION OF THE DISCOVERY OF
Above Thirty Priests, Living and Residing in and about Halam, in the said
County. TOGETHER With an account of the taking of one Busby a Priest, and two
Women, notorious Papists, by Justice Gilbert, a worthy and active Prosecutor of
Priests and Jesuits; and how they had contrived to Charge Mr. Gilbert with
Felony, which by the Confession of Dudley, one of their own Party, by the
Providence of God, was fully detected and discovered, and they committed to the
County-Gaol, where they now remain.
Written in a Letter from a worthy Divine in that County, to a Friend in London.
SIR,
I Cannot but acknowledge my neglect, by so long a silence, since I received
your last; but yet I doubt not of a pardon from so candid and ingenuous a
Nature; when I shall acquaint you, that partly Business, and partly want of
something new, wherewith to divert you, from these parts, did occasion it. But
having now an opportunity in some measure to make you Reparation, I resolved
not to let slip a Relation, which, at present, is the Subject of our whole
Discourse in these parts, and which is this.

There was, the last Week, a Meeting of the Justices of the Peace hereabouts,
to consider of an Information which was exhibited before them, against one
Busby a Romish Priest, who they understood was entertained and harbored at the
House of one Mr. Pouthrel, of Halam, in this County, a notorious and obstinate
Papist; after whom Mr. Gilbert (a Justice of the Peace, a worthy good
Protestant, and zealously active against those of the Church of Rome) had
several times searched at the said Mr. Pouthrel's house, but to no effect; till
at length (whether by some private Intelligence, or mere accident, I know not)
he discovered him hid between the Cieling and the Tyles of the House in a
Garret, Mr. Pouthnel himself being at that instant absent from home; nor indeed
had he been there for some considerable time past, leaving only a Housekeeper,
who in the nature of a Steward, managed his Estate; with an under Bailiff named
Dudley, and two Women, who were all noted Papists: especially one of the
Females, who is, or at least pretends to be, missioned from his Un-holiness.

A few days after Busby was taken, Dudley, and the two Women, were also
Apprehended, and brought before Justice Gilbert; who laying open the Law to
Dudley, told him, that he was not only liable to be imprisoned, but to be
Indicted also; and that the matter of Fact being so evident, he had certainly
forfeited his Life by entertaining and harboring the said Priest, which was
death by the Statute. This wrought so effectually upon Dudley, who had not as
yet entertained any thoughts of being Sainted, that he freely confessed to the
Justice, That his Master Pouthrel did, after an extraordinary manner, receive
and protect the Priests of Rome; telling him that at one time, and in one and
the same place, there met together no less than thirty of them, the greatest
part of whom he knew, as having seen them at several times at his Masters
house: Moreover, affirming that one of the women who were taken with him, was
in some kind of Orders, the nature whereof he could not tell, neither what she
was; only he had observed her to Baptize Children. Mr. Gilbert then further
encouraged him by all the mild and plausible persuasions imaginable, assuring
him of all the favor and friendship that could be expected from so ingenuous a
Confession. And now Sir, do but observe the damnable and wicked contrivance of
this accursed Crew: For Dudley gathering more assurance from the mild behavior
and hearty promises of the Justice, proceeds to declare: That they had
conspired amongst themselves, to Accuse Mr. Gilbert, the Justice of the Peace,
that when he searched the House, he had taken from thence a Bag of Eighty
Pounds in money, and that he carried it away with him; threatening withal to
Indict him upon a Robbery for the same. But it appearing that there was no such
money lost, although they did impudently charge it upon this worthy and active
Gentleman; Mr. Dudley, as a recompense for this great discovery, was discharged
and set at liberty, the rest were sent to the County-Gaol, where they remain to
be Tried at the next Assizes. Thus Sir, I have given you a true and impartial
Relation, and which I hope, has in some measure discharged that Obligation
incumbent upon me: I shall now leave you to make your own Remarks upon the
proceedings of this sort of people, who notwithstanding all the dangers and
difficulties they meet with from the Constitution of our Laws and Government,
shall yet be be so audacious, as even in the heart of the Kingdom to affront
them both, which makes me apt to believe there is some greater encouragement in
the bottom of their design, than as yet the world is either capable of knowing,
or willing to be undeceived in.

SIR, I am yours in all Hearty Affection.
From Halam in Derbyshire, June 4th. 1681.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Ally in Paternoster Row.
1681.


