Great News from Kensington,
Giving a Particular RELATION

Of the Late FIRE which happened in Their MAJESTY'S PALACE on Wednesday the 11
th. Instant, between the Hours of Two and Three in the Morning: With an Account
of the Several Lodgings Burnt, and the Particular Damage done, and manner how
it began.

Licensed according to Order.

YEsterday being Wednesday the 11 th of this Instant November between the Hours
of Two and Three in the Morning, there broke out of Their Majesty's Palace of
Kensington, an unhappy Fire, the Manner of which was a follows.

The Sentinel who stood at his Duty at the upper end of the Great Court, near
the Stone-Gallery, by the Guard-Chamber, about three quarters past Two,
perceived the appearance of Fire at the lower End of the Stone-Gallery, next
the Gate Leading to the Road side; upon which he immediately raised the Yeomen
of the Guard; who being come and finding the Fire Increasing, the Sentinels
were Ordered by their Officers, (having first given notice of the Accident to
Their Majesty's) to fire Round and Raise the whole Court, and then all the
Industry and Application Imaginable was used, as well by several Gentlemen and
Servants, as Guards of all sorts, in Order to conquer the Fire, which at first
Burnt very Firce for the space of an Hour, with a South-West Wind; But is
pleased the Providence of Almighty God, so to Favor Their Majesty's, that
about half an Hour past Thee, the Wind Veer'd about, and blew a fresh Gale at
North-East, which was the main Instrument of stopping the current of the Fire
is spreading to Their Majesty's Guard-Chamber, and chief Lodgings, And so
Extraordinary Industrious were the Guards, etc.. Not only in Endeavoring to
Quench the Fire, but in preserving all the Rich Goods, that possible they
could, even in those Lodgings that were Burnt down; the chief of which are the
Officers of the Lords Nottingham and Sidney, with several Officers of the
Household of the Chapel, Kings Surgeon, Housekeeper, etc. The Stock of
Buildings that is consumed is called the Stone-Gallery, with the Lodgings on
the back part of it, looking to the Garden, which contains in compass of
Ground, about fifty Yards in length, and Twenty over: All the main part of the
Palace is not the least Damnified; great Quantities of Rich Furniture, etc. was
saved by throwing them into the Garden; The Estimate of the loss sustained is
Generally computed not to be above Four thousand Ponds Sterling; The Exact
Account how it came to take Fire is not yet certainly known, further than that
it began near the Housekeepers Lodgings, by the Carelessness of an Ancient
Dutch Woman; His Majesty being got up, continued a Spectator of the Fire for
some time, giving several Necessary Orders; it was after Six before the Fire
was thoroughly conquered.


