Great News FROm Middle-RoW IN HOLBOURN: OR A TRUE RELATION OF A DREADFUL GHOST
WHICH Appeared in the Shape of one Mrs. Adkins, to several persons but
especially to a Maidservant at the Adam and Eve, all in a Flame of Fire on
Tuesday-night last, being the 16th of this instant March, 1679.
With the full account how she discovered to her the Murder of two Children,
and where they were Buried, where upon search the Bones were accordingly found,
with many other amazing and most dreadful Circumstances.
STrange and wonderful are all the discoveries of Omnipotent Providence, when
Crimes that blush with cruel Murders do pollute the world, restless Ghosts and
Airy forms from their dire Mansions, and compelled to rouse and discover their
vile deeds their vile hands have done as may in alls (the Fame of which has
reached the Ears of many Thousands) be more dreadful shown.

Mrs. Adkins late a Midwife dying in Scroop Court in Holbourn about half a year
since, after whose Decease as it is credibly reported by several of the
Neighbors of good Testimonies there has been at diverse times unusual
molestation, and as some affirm strange Apparitions resembling her shape and
form, so that affrighted with the ghastly Wonder, many have amazed fled to
shelter from the fleeting shade, but being timorous to divulge upon the not as
then perfect certainty, this weighty secret has been long concealed, but since
the great God has thought fit that such a Monstrous Crime as that Appearance
did portend, should be no longer hid or masked in Darkness be forever silent;
for the aforesaid Party late Deceased, formerly living in Middle Row, and there
professing the Dexterity of a Midwife had been for many years looked upon as a
Woman of an extraordinary subtilty and private policy, so that during her
lifetime she would often applaud her Wit, and say, her Headpiece had been still
her chiefest Friend, and had preserved her from all dangers yet, but these dark
Sillogisms being then not understood, were looked upon as vain and frivolous,
but since her Transmigration from the Regions of Mortality, a shape like hers,
if not her Wandering Spirit, has Alarmed the House in Middle Row where formerly
she lived, and noises have been heard, nocturnal Visions and Impetuous Groans
have sounded out the dismal Echoes of some strange Event, but the Spirit
finding none that would or dare reply, at last began to be more importunate,
and bursting from the long incloafing Grave, or from the dismal Regions of the
Dead, assumed a Mortal Shape, and would no longer keep concealed what was the
cause of its disturbance, but on Tuesday being the 16 of this Instant March
about 9 of the Clock in the Evening, a Servant Maid living in the House in
Middle row where it appeared, being by her Mistress sent up Stairs to fetch
down her Night Clothes, no sooner entered the Chamber, but a ^^eadfu^ Ghost in
the shape o^ her whom we before recited, presents it self unto her view,
seating it self sitting as she supposed upon the Cupboard head, and with ghastly
Countenance seemed to belch flames of Fire, at which amazed, all pale with
fear, she started back, but had not power to fly, yet with a faint Voice cried,
O Mistress, The Chamber is all on Fire; When the immortal Spirit bid her not to
fear, for its Commission was not to injure her, but charged her to tell Mary
(which is since supposed to be her Grandchild) that she should take up two
Tiles in the hearth, and under them should find a board and what she found
beneath, that she should bury, and so in a Flash of Lightning Vanished, this
the Maid after she had recovered, from the great Amazement she was in, imparted
to her Mistress and Master, who at first would give no credit to what she said,
but often affirming the Truth of the most wondrous Apparition, and there having
been a former Rumor of an Apparition, they condecended to dig in the place the
Mald had told them of, first taking up the Tiles, about four Inches deeper they
found a Board accordingly, and searching farther found the Bones of two
children, as it is supposed, but of one it is certain the said Bones being at
this time to be seen at the Cheshire Cheese in Middle row, but lying almost
underneath the Fireplace, are so dried, that they are reduced to a small
substance. It is conjectured that they had been Children Illegitimate, or
Bastards who to save their Mothers Credits had been Murdered, and buried
there, and in the Opinions of diverse Chirurgions might have lain there since
their first repose, a considerable quantity of years.

Therefore let all admire and fear that God who made the world, and views with
narrow searching Eyes whatever is done, though sable-night and veils of
darkness cover the most horrid Sceene, yet all lies open, and no secret can
overpass his boundless wisdom, nor escape his sight; nay Hell it self has not
a depth sufficient to obscond prodigious crimes from him, how often are the
Fiends of hell compelled to declare those Cruelties themselves have been the
Authors or the Promoters to; and blood of innocents cried loud for Vengeance
from the Earth and their Murders after Ages have revealed.

For know, that Murder bears a lasting stain and clogs the Conscience of the
Guilty Soul with the restless fears and jelosies which often make despairing
Mortals unaccused by Man, betray them selves, or if not so, at least when
Death, has closed their Eyes, and as the World imagines, they repose in a long
slumber, till the dreadful day of rendering Account, their restless Spirits
forced about the Earth, do wander up and down until they have made known those
Crimes the Party represented in those thin and Airy forms did in their
Lifetimes act, as the holy works of many learned Divines do testify, and some
places of Seripture hints upon; so that we may well conclude our strange
Relation with the Prophet David, Great and wonderful art thou O Lord, and
dreadful to be feared in Heaven and in Earth.

FINIS.

