THE Sound of a Voice uttered forth From the MOUNTAIN Of the LORD OF HOST,
(WHICH He has exalted and set on the top of all the Hills and Mountains that
have been exalted above it) to awaken the Inhabitants of the Earth out of the
deep sleep of security, which has by their rejecting the Light, fell upon them
in this dark night of Apostasy, wherein thick darkness has covered the earth
as the waters cover the Sea, and gross darkness the people, by the which they
have been kept in slavery and bondage by the power of darkness in their own
particulars, and by the yielding themselves servants thereunto are held in
Captivity. And also a Warning to them from the Lord for to repent, and speedily
to return, before his indignation, and the Vials of his fierce wrath break
forth, and there be no Remedy.

By one that is passed from death to life, from under the power of darkness,
which ruled over life, in the time of barrenness, and in the land of drought:
With a few words of his passage and travel in and through the work of
Regeneration; and also the falsity and deceit of the deceivers of this present
Age and Generation: with a Call unto them that are followers of them and their
abominations, to return and be separated from them, in words, ways and works:
For the Lords controversy is with them and all that take their part. By one
that the Lord has separated from them, and his companions that followed their
pernicious ways, and has viewed them over, and weighed them in the just
Balance, and measured them in an even measure, and they are all found too
light and wanting, and desolate of the Life of God; and now is satisfied with
the enjoyment of the presence of the Lord who through Judgment was redeemed,
and now has a sure habitation and a peaceable dwelling where none can make
afraid; Glory and praises be to the Lord my Redeemer, which lives and abides
for ever. William Greere.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1663.

The Sound of a Voice uttered forth from the Mountain of the Lord of Host, to
awaken the Inhabitants of the earth out of the deep sleep of security.
THe mighty God of power of Heaven and of Earth is risen and arising, yea he is
come and coming forth as a man of War, whose countenance is as the fierceness
of a Lion out of the thicket, uttering his Voice through the clouds, and
through the gross darkness that covers the face of the earth, yea he is come
forth as a Lion to his prey, to tear and to rend, to divide and to scatter his
enemies from the ends of the earth, to root out and utterly destroy, yea to
turn and to overturn and overwhelm the wicked and the ungodly, and those his
enemies that rise up against him as briars and thorns to the battle, the which
he will burn up and consume with the fire of his Jealousy, and with the breath
of his mouth, and the brightness of his Coming, and consound them in their
counsels, and in their plottings and contrivings, and destroy their likenesses
and images, and disperce them in their Imaginations; the East Wind shall blow
upon them and blast them in their budding forth, and in the opening of their
blossom.

And now hear and fear you that are striving with your Maker, and fighting
against his witness in you, Oh return and retire to that which is pure in you,
to that which makes manifest sin and iniquity, and shows unto every
individual man and woman the thoughts and intents of their hearts; and as there
is a waiting in it, and a giving up to the leadance and guidance of it, it will
make known the way of life, and the path of peace, and give power to walk
therein: For this I have known, and as in the presence of the Lord do testify,
That it was the Light that shone in my heart, that gave me the Light of the
knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, and made manifest
unto me the Will of my heavenly Father, and also gave me power to obey; and
this caused me to depart from iniquity, for the which I was hated and held in
derision by those that formerly was my companions in sporting and playing in
vanity; and when I could not for C^nscience sake join with them in those things
which before time I had done, but was constrained to forsake them and their
ungodly ways, and turned unto him that smote me and wounded me within
exceedingly, and brought my bad actions to my remembrance, and set my faults in
order before me, the which caused me often times bitterly to lament and to
bewail the day that I was born; his judgments fell so heavy upon me, that
oftentimes I wished that I had never been. For he made me to possess the sins
of my youth; but when I in measure came to depart from them as they was made
manifest, then I to my companions became a taunt and a byword, and was called
a Quaker, and at me they set their mouths away. And thus for departing from
iniquity I became a prey; and so the ministration of condemnation unto all that
in me which was contrary unto God in my own particular, I knew and witnessed,
the which condemned me for swearing, and for all vain words and idle
communication, and in a word, for all manner of evil: and this made me often
to refrain from all those things before mentioned; and this caused me to fit
solentary, and to mourn as a woman that was separated from her husband, for
enjoying of his presence outwardly, upon whom widowhood was come: And so I
being separated from all those things which I formerly was related to, and
stood as one naked before the Lord, freely given up into his will; and this was
my desire, that a clean separation might be made in me, between the precious
and the vile: And this was glorious in its time, and a voice oftentimes cried
through me, Give up, Give up, that which is for the Famine to the Famine, and
that which was for the Sword to the Sword and to yield up that to the death
which was to dye, that ^o that which was in me ordained of the Lord to eternal
life, might be preserved from the power of Death and Hell, which once reigned
and ruled over it, and had the Dominion, but now life eternal is known and
witnessed over Death, which once had the Dominion, and him that was dead is
alive, and lives for evermore. And thus through Judgment and condemnation unto
all that which was at enmity with God, and also the enemy of my souls peace, I
passed through great trials and tribulations and troubles for the space of
three or four years, at the last in this my passage from death to life, and
from under Satan's power to the power of God. And thus was I degenerated from
the first birth, and I was thoroughly searched, and the first born in me was
smitten and dyed, which bore the Image of the earthly; and I was regenerated,
and born again of the immortal word, that lives and abides for ever, and now
is born of the Image of the Heavenly, which is from above, and descended not;
and now has a sure habitation, and a peaceable dwelling, and the resting place
is known, and perfect peace in the Lord in measure, is witnessed, who is as a
cover in a tempest, and as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. Yea,
through a Sea of afflictions have I traveled, and the depth of Satan have I
known, and now into the promised Land is entered, that flows with Milk and
Honey, and the birth is born and felt, that is heir of the promise of an
inheritance therein that never fades away.

But in this long time of my travail in peril, and distress, the Lord was
exceeding good unto me, and by his mighty power, and by his outstretched arm
was I preserved in the midst of many temptations and assaults, in the heights,
and the depths of the enemy of my souls peace, which sometimes would exalt me
above my measure, and into things in the sight; and I being an unskilful
warrior, I thereby sustained loss, and my pain and anguish increased, and
became fresh again but then the place of refuge I knew, and that which led into
the transgression, I freely given it up to the righteous judgments of the
Lord; and to the stubborn and rebellious was plagues and vengeance; and then
into the will of the Lord my cause I did commit; and as I was waiting in the
pure fear of the Lord, and in the pure silence, and in the stillness of my
spirit, out of the thoughts and imaginations of my heart, and so not from words
only, the word from the Lord came unto me, saying, It is the willing and
obedient, that shall eat the good of the Land. And now the Lord has wholly
redeemed my mind out of the earth, and earthly things, and all that with the
visible eye may be seen, up unto himself, and him I have chosen to be my
portion, and to do his will is my delight. And this in the presence of the Lord
God, and in the truth I can say, as ever the Prophet Habakkuk could, in my
measure. Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in
the Vines, and the labor of the Olive should sail, and the Fields shall yield
no meat, and the Flocks shall be cut off from the (...), and there shall be no
Herd in the Stalls, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, and be glad and joy in the
God of my Salvation, for (...) is known unto the ends of the Earth. And now the
(...) brought me to bear a Testimony to his everlasting (...) in this present
Age and Generation; and this is thus far the words of my Testimony, not knowing
how soon it may be finished, and the night may come in the which no man can
work; and also of my travel out of Egypt into Canaan, and from under Pharaoh
and his Taskmasters, and the Egyptian bondage.

And now you hireling Priests, and you that have run and was never sent of the
Lord, you have coveted for the Fleece, and run greedily for gifts and rewards,
you have far exceeded the false Prophets in the days of old, you out-stripped
Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, and run greedily thereafter,
you have made a prey upon the widows and the Fatherless and have sued at the
Law for wages, and cast into prisons and holes, and dungeons, those that cannot
for Conscience sake put into your mouths, nor uphold you in your abominations,
you have kept people always learning, and never brought them to the knowledge
of the truth, the which to know is life eternal; you have kept them in
ignorance and blindness, and darkness has covered you and them, as the waters
cover the Sea; your barrenness and leanness, and your nakedness is seen, and
your barren womb appears; you are viewed, weighed, and found miserable, and
blind, wanting and desolate of the enjoyment of the presence of a pure God,
which you profess in words, but to order your Conversations aright in this your
present Age and Generation, you utterly deny; your fruits they are seen, the
day has made them manifest, the light is broken forth, the day is dawned, the
Sun is arisen, and light now shines out of the darkness, and with it you are
seen and comprehended, all your falsity and deceit, hypocrisy and wickedness,
and deceiveableness of unrighteousness. Oh your abominations, your
abominations are grown exceeding great, and your sins are almost ripe for
vengeance; you are like Sodom and Gomorrah, pride and haughtiness, idleness and
fullness of bread abounds amongst you. O repent and return, in this the latter
day, and in this moment of time; give over gainsaying the truth, and despising
and hating the Messengers of the Lord, least with Korah, Datha^, and Abiram,
you perish in your gainsaying; For the which, the ground clave asunder, and
the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up alive, and all that
appertained unto them. The sick by your means has not been healed, nor the
wounds of the wounded bound up, and mollified with oil; you healed the wounds
deceitfully; the hands that hang down you have not strengthened, nor the feeble
knees confirmed, but the lame and the halt by your means has been turned out
of the way. Oh you have deep to drink of the fierce wrath of the Allmighty, the
Cup is full, and the dregs thereof are ready to be poured forth unto you;
plagues and vengeance will be your portion undoubtedly, except you speedily
repent and return from your wickedness. Oh the Lords Spirit is grieved with
your abominations (and thus says the Lord) As they have held in captivity, so
shall they be led captives; you shall be driven away, and your places be no
more found, and vanish as the Smoke; you shall be broken down, and there shall
be none to build you up again, and plucked up by the roots, and never again be
planted. For in the determined counsel of the living God, this have I seen;
yea, the Lord has showed it unto me, that your standing is in the slippery
places, and your downfall, and ruin, and destruction is near at hand, for the
chief men you have been found in persecuting and cruelty, and thirsting after
blood, as manifestly it has appeared for the space of this several years
bypast; but this is the desire of him in whose heart the fear of the Lord is
placed, that you would not go on any further in these things before mentioned,
but that you might return and find mercy, that so you might escape his fierce
wrath, that is ready to be poured forth without mixture. This is a warning to
you before these things come to pass, that you may not say, We have not been
warned.

And now unto you who have been my Companions formerly, when I lived in
pleasure and wantonness, and sporting in the day time, who with you run'd from
mountain to hill, and from hill to mountain to cover me; but me the Lord has
sound out, and separated me from you, and has caused me to mourn like a Dove,
and to be like the Owl in the Desert, or as the Sparrow on the house top; yea,
he has separated me from those things which I called pleasure, and now they
are as Gall to my palate, and as Wormwood to my taste.

And now to you Professors and profane people of all sorts, now lay aside all
your professing of God, and Christ in words, and honoring him with your lips,
and your hearts are not set aright to seek him, and cease from man whose breath
is in his Nostrils, and return to the Lord and to his witness in you; for now
the time is come, that a profession of words will not avail, nor stand instead
in this the day of the Lord, for whosoever rests in a profession of God in
words only, and comes not to enjoy his presence in that which they professed,
they will miss of their aim, and come short of their expectations. To you this
is a call and a warning from the Lord to come from amongst the Hirelings and
Deceivers, and be separated from them in words, ways, and works; for the Lords
controversy is with them, and because of these things it cannot cease; and
also with all them that take their part; and no longer partake with them in
their sins, for if you do, you must partake of their plagues: Therefore now
return to the Lord, whilst it is called to day, and now you have time, prize
it, least night come upon you, and your time be no more, and slight not that
which judges, for sin and iniquity; neither count that which reproves you in
secret, when you do amiss any thing, of no value. For if ever you be redeemed
to the Lord, it must be through judgment unto all that is contrary unto him,
that so that which is at enmity with him, may be destroyed before true peace
can be witnessed.

From one that is a Lover of your souls, and your eternal good, and desires not
the destruction of any in their sins, but rather that they would repent, and
return to the Lord, and live; who am known unto them that knows that the Lord
is the same that ever he was in the days of old (but unto men known and
called) WILLIAM GREEN.

ANd now if my mouth should never more be opened, nor my lips utter forth a
word in faithfulness to the Lord, you have I warned, so choose whether you
will hear or forbear, for my peace is with the Lord. THE END.

