Numb. 1. Great News from the CAMP AT CHESTER; Being a true Account of what has
occurred there since the Arrival of His Grace the Duke of Scomberge at that
place. Together with a Relation of the Dismal posture the poor English are in
at Dublin.
Licensed,

July 30. 1689. J. F.

SIR,
I know the concern which the common cause of our poor Country gives you, will
make the following Account not uneasy to you, since hereby you may see how
speedy the Preparations are which we find here for the Relief of our Country.

On Saturday the Twentieth, the General his Grace the Duke of Schomberge was
received here with all the usual Formalities about Nine at Night, which being
so late, hindered the Guns which lay ready charged on the Castle Walls to
welcome him, from being fired, lest their noise might terrify the Adjacent
Country. He Lodges at Alderman Mannering's in Water gate-street. The place of
the General Encampment is a little above the South Side of the River Dee,
Eastward of the Bridge, where there were last Wednesday but two Regiments
Encampt, viz. A Battallion of the Kings Guards, and Count Carlsoom's Regiment,
and since then three more are Encampt, i. e. The Lord Lisborn's Regiment Blew
and Yellow, which came in the last Wednesday; The Lord Herbert's Blew and White
came in the day following, and then the Earl of Drogheda's which Quartered in
this Town, and was Superseded by Sir Henry Ingoldesby's, which is said here is
to be left as a Defense for this place; perhaps you will not think the
following Relation unworthy your notice.

On Wednesday last, a Soldier in the Lord Drogheda's Regiment was shot at the
head of the Camp for Deserting, and his Son, whom he had seduced along with
him, was to run the Gauntlet, a less punishment; seeing the commands of a
Father might be prevailing; but he was pardoned. The same day also the Lords
Generals had a most sumptuous Entertainment at Sir John Morgans, the Governor,
in the Castle, which was made more solemn by the shooting of many great Guns
from off the Walls. A great sight of Baggage and Artillery lies here in the
Roodee to be shipped out of hand for Ireland. There is likewise expected in here
this morning a Regiment of French Cadees, which all here expect to be a very
fine sight. The Conflux of People hither to see the Camp from all parts of the
Country, is so great, that this Town might be almost taken for England's
Metropolis; and yet there is no Distemper here so violent, as you write me was
the Report in London, considering what vast numbers are hereabouts. Two days
ago there came into Nessou a small Wherry, which put off from Arcloe, a Town in
the County of Wicklow, with several Passengers in her, that give but Dismal
Relations of the Posture the poor English are in at Dublin: Most of the Eminent
men of that City, they say, are Imprisoned, among whom, as I am informed (and I
made pretty strict Enquiry) are Sir Humphrey Jervis, Mr. Rose the Merchant in
Thomas Street, and Doctor King; in him you may see how little a Good man is
esteemed there.

I cannot forbear to add this Extraordinary Deliverance at Derry; for a Bomb
fell into a Garret in an upper Story, in which were forty men; the Bomb fell on
a beam, and bounced upward; so fired the House, without killing any one of the
men.

I forgot to tell you in its place that the Duke on Tuesday in the Evening, on
his return from Highlake, Accompanied by the Lord Brandon, and a numerous Train
of French and Dutch Officers and Gentlemen, viewed the Ground designed for the
Camp, and then those two Regiments which were Encamped, whom he past by (...)
headed, and received the Accustomary salutes from the Officers; the Victuallers
of the Town do daily encompass the Camp with their Attillery of Bread and
Cheese, which is as bravely taken from them to their Hearts desires. Several
Houses here are filled with Bread, Cheese, Bacon, Oats, Oatmeal, and other
Belly-provisions for both Horse and Man. I am,

SIR, your, etc.
Postscript.
YOU may expect a particular Weekly Account from me of all the Occurrences
which happen in the Camp during its stay here; my Business is little, and
therefore can the better satisfy your Curiosity as to what passes here.



LONDON. Published by Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1689.


