THE Great Robbery in the West: OR, THE INNKEEPER TURNED HIGHWAY-MAN.

A perfect NARRATIVE HOW An Innkeeper near EXETER, Drawing in two others into
his Confederacy, Lately Robbed the Exeter-Carrier of Six hundred pounds in
Money, and for the same were Executed at the said City the 13th of this instant
August, 1678.

With the remarkable Speech of the said Innkeeper on the Ladder.

To which is added, Sad News from Gloucestershire: Being a Relation how a Lion
at Winchcomb devoured its Keeper, and the manner of the said Lions being killed
for the same.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for L. C. 1678.

THE Great Robbery In the WEST, etc.
THe Assizes for the County of Devon were held at Exeter, the 5th, 6th, etc. of
this instant August, where among many Malefactors tried, there happened this
remarkable passage; One John Barnes, who lately kept the Black-horse Inn near
South-gate in the said City, who had lived there in good repute for many years,
increased by a formal Hypocrisy, he being a great pretender to Religion, and a
constant frequenter of Private Meetings, did about a year ago leave that place,
and took an Inn in Collumpton, a Town about ten Miles distant from Exeter, but
in the same County; where being more out of the sight of his former
Acquaintance, he began to drop that Religious Mask which before he had worn,
and now adventured to sin barefaced, by several extravagant courses running
himself behind hand as to his Estate, and particularly became pretty
considerably Indebted to a Smith in Collumpton aforesaid, to whom having often
promised payment, and as often failed him, at last, about three Months since,
being again importuned for his Money, this devout Innkeeper having observed
him to be a-stout fellow of good natural Courage, and at present mean and
necessitous, took upon him the Devils Office to tempt him to be a partner with
him in his wickedness, telling him, That if he would go with him such a day,
and be secret, he would not only pay him all his Money, but make him a Man for
ever. In short, the Devil furnished him with such plausible Arguments, (as
commonly a little Rhetoric serves to persuade us to be wicked) That he not
only prevailed with him, but also with a Neighboring Worsted-comber to join
with him in his evil design; and being all three Confederated, he knowing by
his old Acquaintance and observation, when the Exeter Carrier had a great
Charge of Money to convey up to London, they at a convenient place, called
Honiton-Hill, set upon his Men, and took from them no less than Six Hundred
pounds in ready Money. This lusty Booty encouraged our two fresh-men in the
Mystery of Padding, and they began extremely well to like their new Trade; but
sweet Meat must have sour Sauce; the Carryers Men knowing them by sight, though
so discreet not to take notice during the Robbery, which had been but to tempt
them to add Murder to Theft, they were all Three in short time after
apprehended, and committed to Goal, where by the Innkeepers Advice, and his
fellow Prisoners skill, they got off their Fetters, or so much of them, that
they broke the Prison by Night, and got abroad; nor has one of them been since
heard of: but the other two not being able absolutely to clear themselves of
their Irons, were re-taken the next Morning. He that was re-taken with the
Innkeeper, was always very pensive, bewailing his condition, being the first
time, as he protested, that he was ever concerned in such an unjust Action, and
blaming him, whose cursed persuasions and insinuations had, contrary to his own
inclinations, brought him to it; but the Innkeeper carried it very confidently
till his Trial, where they were both found Guilty, the Evidence being clear and
positive against them. There were many Women of Quality in Exeter, that made
great Intercession for the said Innkeeper to get him a Reprieve, not so much
for his sake, as out of Charity to his poor innocent Wife and Children, for the
was generally reputed a very good, Careful, Industrious, and Pious Woman, and
has no less than Nine very hopeful Children; but the nature of his Crime
excluded him from Mercy in this World, so that he and his Comrade were on
Tuesday the thirteenth of this instant August, conveyed to the usual place of
Execution, where there were two that presenly suffered; but the Innkeeper
desiring two hours time, the better to prepare himself, had it granted, which
he spent in Prayer and godly Conference with several Ministers; then coming
upon the Ladder, he made a large Speech, wherein first He confessed not only
the Crime for which at present he suffered, but likewise diverse other sins, and
particularly lamented that of Hypocrisy, earnestly begging the Spectators
Prayers, and exhorting them not to despair in any condition, but trust to the
providence of God, rather than to take any indirect courses to supply their
seeming necessities, acknowledging that his failing herein, had brought him to
this untimely end. And so with all the outward marks of a sincere Penitent,
submitted to his Sentence, and was Executed.

I think we may not improperly number Highway-men amongst Beasts of Prey, and
therefore conceive it will be no great absurdity, if we add here the Relation
of a sad Accident that happened in Gloucestershire. About the beginning of this
instant August, there came to the Burough of Winchcomb an Itinerant Family,
consisting of a Man and his Wife, a Boy about a dozen years old, a Lion, and an
Ape; which two last Creatures they daily exposed to the view of all such as had
the curiosity to spend their pence. But whilst they remained there, the Boy
whose office it was to tend them, going one day to feed them, passed by the
Lion, and went and gave the Ape his Commons first; which so far affronted the
Royal Animal, that in a rage he seized on the Youth with his paws, who
schreek'd out in a lamentable manner; but before any could come in to his
rescue, the Lion had got his head into his mouth, and bit and crushed him to
death; and also had sucked all the blood out of his body. Nor had the Ape, for
all their old familiarity, sped much better, if he had not got up by the wall
out of his reach. The Coroner having viewed the Lads Corpse, there was an order
for the Lion to be killed; which was accordingly executed with great solemnity,
being shot to death in the presence of many hundreds of people.

In this instance we may see the rage and fury of these Creatures, and that
though they seem never so tame and gentle, yet on the least disgust their
natural fierceness returns. So it is with men in a natural estate, they may
appear much Civilized by Education, but if Grace have not made a through Change
in the heart, the smallest occasion or temptation shall revive and discover
their lurking Corruptions. And this let us remember, it is from the sin of Man
that the strongest Beasts which before reverenced and obeyed him, do now
presume to seize upon and destroy him: it being but just, that he who proved a
Traitor to the King of Kings, should forfeit his Soverainty over the Creatures,
and that they should rebel against Him, as he has done against God.

FINIS.

