Great News from Ireland: Being a full and true Relation, of the several Great
and Successful Defeats, WHICH THE Danish and Inniskilling Forces Has lately
obtained over a Party of the Irish Rebels at Cliff and Emismack, etc. As also,
of the present Distractions betwixt the FRENCH and IRISH: With the Substance of
the Late King James's Letter. TO HIS Queen in France.
Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

BY some Persons who lately made their Escape hither from Dublin, we have the
following Account, viz, That the late King James, has been lately at Limrick,
Waterford, and places adjacent, to view the Garrisons and Stores, and see in
what condition they are in and likewise, the Forces Quartered there, that
lately came from France, with whom he is not well Pleased; the French being
very Insolent, having frequent Quarrels with the Irish, who often comes by the
worst on it: Those that are Switz and Germans, applaud the Conduct of King
Willam; which makes all Gentlemen question their Fidelity, as well as the late
K. James. The late King has sent a Letter to his Queen in France, desiring Her
to Intercede with the French King, That whatever Forces he sends to Ireland for
the Future, they may be all Thorough-paced Roman Catholics; For he finds a
great part of the 5000 he now has, (being Protestants) will, on that Account,
be little Serviceable to Him, in regard he can put no Confidence in them, that
they will be true to his Cause: For the first Day they came to Dublin, 500 of
them went to the Protestant Churches to the great dissatisfaction of the Irish.

According to the last Muster-Rolls, our Forces consist of 34000 Effective Men,
and all in very good Health and Condition: We expect two thousand Dutch Horse
and Dragoons from Kircubright in Scotland.

On the 26th Past, passed by this place Colonel Foulks, and Colonel Lloyds
Regiments; which Arrived lately from England; the first of these is Ordered to
Beturbet.

Two hundred and twenty Foot and Dragoons of the Inniskilling Forces,
(Commanded by their Lieutenant Colonel) marched to a small place called Cliff,
where the Enemy kept all their Cattle; they arrived there on Wednesday, about
an hour before Day, and seized and brought away about Seven hundred Cows,
Sheep, Goats, and Horses. The Enemy having taken the Alarm, pursued our Men
with two Troops of Horse and Dragoons, and three Companies of Foot, and
over-took our Men near Enismack, where they had a dispute, but bore away, after
having lost a Captain, and sixteen Soldiers, besides those that were Wounded;
they retired in disorder, and our Men returned home with their Booty, which was
very considerable; and the loss only of one Man. The late King James's Army is
marched to --

The Danes (since their Arrival) have behaved themselves in all Actions they
have been concerned in, with extraordinary Bravery.

Colonel Woolseley, in consideration of the many and great Services he has
performed, since his being in Ireland, has a Commission in the nature of
Lieutenant General of the Forces under his Command; and His Grace the Duke of
Schomberg, has sent him a Plenary Commission, to act with his Forces upon all
occasions, as he shall think fit, that Affairs may not be detrimented, by
having recourse to the Duke for Orders.

P. S. This Morning a Party of the Regiment of Cambon, Stormed an Out work on
the West side of the Castle of Charlemont, and put Eleven of the Irish, that
were in it to the Sword; which has mightily terrified the Garrison; And Two
Regiments more are sent to reinforce the Troops, in order to keep in those Men
that came with the Relief, which will streighten the Enemy; So that it is
expected, they will speedily Treat about Capitulation.

London, Printed for R. H. and W. Faulkner 1690.


