THE GALLANT HISTORY OF THE Life and Death Of that most Noble Knight, SIR,
BEVIS OF Southampton. Wherein is contained much Variety of pleasant and
delightful Reading.

depiction of two armed men riding horses, with two women standing in the
background

Printed by A. M. for J. Deacon at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street without
Newgate.

The Gallant HISTORY OF Bevis of Southampton.
CHAP. I. Of the Birth of Bevis, and of the Death of his Father.
IN the Reign of Edgar, King of England, there was a most Renowned Knight,
whose Name was Sir Guy, the Earl of Southampton, whose Deeds did exeed all the
Valiant Knights in this Kingdom; who thirsting after Fame betook himself to
Travel: And first he sailed into France, Flanders, Almain, Brabant, Sicily,
Denmark, Calice, Gascoine, Hungaria, Spain, Estland, Norway, Picardy, Scotland,
Lumbardy, Wales: All these Parts he traveled in his Youth, and Conquered all
his Opposers with his unmaster'd strength, and Victorious hand, fighting under
the Banner of Christ, against all Withstanders whatsoever they were. Thus
spending the best part of his strength for the Glory of Christ, and the honor
of his Country, he then returned into England again: King Edgar hearing that
Sir Guy was returned, sent a Messeger for him presently to do him honor for
the valiant Deeds that he had done: Sir Guy with all speed rode to the King, by
whom he was Royally entertained, and all his Nobles; and after great Feasting,
the King, according to Sir Guy's desert, made him High Steward of England: then
Sir Guy would betake him to a Wife, and the King of Scotland having a fair
Daughter, Sir Guy made suit unto her: but the Emperors brother of Almain was a
Suitor unto her likewise, and she loved Sir Murdure better then she loved Sir
Guy; but the King her Father knowing Sir Guy to be a most Noble Peer of
England, he gave his Daughter to him in Marriage: yet still she affected
Murdure best; but Guy not knowing her hatred to him, retured with great Pomp
into England, with his deceitful Lady. Not long after this he had a Son by her,
and they name him Bevis: At the Birth of his Child was exceeding Joy and
Triumph, with many Sanquectings; Then Sir Guy was confident his Ladies Heart
was firmly linked to his, with the never-breaking Bands of Love; but he good
Knight, was much deceived; for she (like Janus) bore a double face, one for Sir
Guy, which frowned, but the other, which was for Sir Murdure, smiled; for his
Wife perceiving he was old, betook her self to love Sir Murdure, and called a
Servant to her, whom she might well trust, and said; Thou must sail into Almain
with speed, and keep my secrets, and say unto Sir Murdure the Emperors Brother,
that I greet him kindly, and that I do desire him to provide a great company of
Knights and Gentlemen to come along with dim into England, with all speed, and
meet my Husband, which is hateful to me to look on, and tell him, that I will
send Sir Guy into my Forest, purposely to be slain by Sir Murdure; and then
tell him I am his: Bid him perform this and live with me; the time he shall
meet Sir Guy, shall be on the first of May. The Message being delivered, Sir
Murdure was resolved to perform what she commanded: so on the first of May she
feigned her self very sick and weak, and called for her Husband, and said unto
him, That she would desire him to go into the Forest, and slay a wild Beast
for her to eat. This worthy Knight not thinking of her Treachery, took a Steed,
girt a Sword about him, and with a Spear in his hand, rode to the Forest with
speed: By this time Sir Murdure and his Company was entered the Forest, who
meeting Sir Guy, said, Traitor, for the love I bear to thy Lady, thou shall
quickly lose thy life, and after this, i will slay thy Son; for why, thy Wife
belongs to me. With that Sir Guy set Spurs to his Horse, and rode with such
violence against this Murdure, that he threw him out of his Saddle: Then Sir
Murdure thinking he should have been slain, cried out to his followers, who
came presently and set upon Sir Guy, and swore he should lose his Life: Then
Sir Guy desired but to fight with Sir Murdure hand so hand, and then if he lost
his Life, he would forgive them all; but they would not grant his request, but
slew him presently, and cut off his head, and sent it to his Lady; who received
it joyfully, and gave the Messenger a great Reward: this Treachery being
accomplished, Sir Murdure made have unto the Castle of Sir Guy; and there was
Royally received of Sir Guy's Wife: where for a while I leave them to their
pleasures, and now come to speak of young Bevis.

CHAP. II. How Bevis kept Sheep; and how he went to his Fathers house, and slew
the Porter of the Gate, and many other things that happened.
BEvis hearing how basely his Father was killed, ran to his Mother, and vowed
if ever he came to Age, that he would be revenged on her, and on that base
Traitor, Sir Murdure. With that his Mother gave her Son a box on the ear, which
felled poor Bevis to the ground: Sir Sabere, being Brother to Sir Guy, was very
sorrowful for the death of his Brother: and seeing his Nephew so misused,
caught him up in his Arms, and carried him away: his Mother sent presently
after Sir Sabere, privately to murder her Son Bevis: Sir Sabere said he would,
and dressed Bevis in old Clothes, and sent to keep his Sheep: so Bevis went to
the top of a Hill near his Fathers Castle, where his Uncles Sheep were. In the
mean time Sir Sabere killed a Pig, and dipped the Garments of the Child in the
blood thereof; poor Bevis all this while sot weeping upon the Hill, but hearing
Trumpets sounding at his Fathers Castle, and much Melody, for joy that his
Mother had obtained her desire, Bevis cast off care of keeping Sheep, and ran
with his Shepherds Crook on his Shoulder to the Castle, and knocking at the
Gate, the Porter denied him entrance: With that young Bevis with his Crook,
gave him such a bang on the Crown, which felled the Porter to the earth; then
into the Hall he went, where Sir Murdure sat at Table with his Mother, and many
Knights and Ladies (though all in Rags, he showed them of what house he came
on) and with a violent blow struck Sir Murdure under the Table, and swore if it
had not been against Nature, he would send his Mother after his own Father.
With that all the Knights in the Hall sought to lay hands on him; but Bevis
forced his way through the midst of them, and got clear away: Sir Sabere
meeting Bevis running from the Castle, said, Where have thou been? Bevis
anwered, at my Fathers Castle, where I slew the Porter of the Gate and Knocked
my Father under the Table, and was about to kill my mother, but that Nature
taught me the contrary: Alas, said his Uncle, thou have betrayed us both, yet
once more will I save thee. The mother of Bevis (like a woman distracted of her
wits) came running to her Brother in great have, and said; What? have thou not
flain that young Villain? Madam, quoth he, he is dead: Villain, said she, thou
lie: If thou do not make him away the sooner, it shall cost thy life and
his both: Madam, said he, behold his Clothes dipped in blood: Bevis hearing her
speeches, stepped out of the Chamber, and was ready to tear her in pieces, but
she escaped out of his hands by the help of her Brother: then she entreated Sir
Sabere and another Knight to cast Bevis into the Sea, and drown him, which they
did consent unto, to pacify her wrath,

CHAP. III. How Bevis was sold unto the Panims, and carried over the Sea into
Armony, and presented to King Ermine.
AND going to the Seaside, they met with Merchants of Armony, Sir Sabere sold
Bevis to them: the Merchants soon arrived in Armony, and then presented Bevis
to the King; the King gave them many thanks, and swore by his God Mahound, he
never saw such a sweet faced Boy in all his life: Then the King asked him where
he was born? In England, said Bevis: Whose Son wast thou there? said the King:
Sir Guy's of Southampton quoth Bevis: I have heard much talk of thy Father
(said the King) and by Report he was a valiant Knight as ever yet drew Sword: I
have but one fair Daughter said the King) and if thou will forsake thy God, and
serve Apoline our god, thou shall have my Daughter to Wife, and enjoy my
Kingdom after me. Not so, my Lord, said Bevis, for all the Beauties in the
World I would not deny my Creator. Then said the King, will thou be my
Chamberlain? and when I find, thy desert, I Will dub thee a Knight, and thou
shall bear my Standard in the Field against my Foes: What you please to command
me, my Lord said he, save denying of my God, I will do. Bevis was so beloved of
the King, that none Durst speak against him; Nay, Josian the Kings Daughter was
in love with him. As it chanced on Christmas Day Bevis rode into the Field to
recreate himself, and meeting with threescore Sarazens, one of them asked him
what day it was? Bevis answered, I know not; for I was not seven years old when
I came out of my own Country: Then said the Sarazens, upon this day thy God was
born, and will thou not honor thy God on his Birthday. Yes, said Bevis, if I
was as well armed as my Father was, you should know that I would honor this
day better than ever you honored your god Apoline: With that they all run upon
him, thinking to kill him presently: but Bevis having no Weapon, got one of
their Swords away, and with the same made their Steeds to run home without
their Riders; for he slew and wounded all the Sarazens. The King hearing what
Bevis had done against his god Apoline, swore he should dye; then Josian down
on her knees, and desired her Father that Bevis might live, which the King
granted: then Josian went to Bevis and kissed him, and dressed his Wounds, and
then brought him to the King her Father; who, when he saw Bevis so wounded, the
Tears ran down his Cheeks, and then he prayed Josian to do the best she could
to cure his Wounds, which she per formed in a little space; so Bevis grew as
sound as ever he was.

CHAP. IV. How Bevis one morning slew a mighty wild Boar in the Forest.
Within that Country there was a great Forest, and within the same there was
a mighty wild Boar, that devoured Man, Woman, and Child; Bevis hearing of him,
one Morning early he saddled his Steed, and took a good Sword by his side, and
rode to the Forest, to try a Combat with his wild Boar; and riding to and fro,
it was his luck to find the Cave where this wild Boar was, and as he tied his
Steed to a Tree, out came the Boar, and so assailed Bevis, that he was fain to
shrink back: then Bevis recovering ground, made at him with a Spear, and burst
it all in pieces; then out he drew his Sword, and laid many a heavy blow upon
the Boars Bristles, but could not make any entrance into the flesh; and at last
by good fortune the Boar came at him with an open mouth, and Bevis having that
advantage, with one violent blow cut his upper Iaw asunder: at which the Boar
gave such a cry, as would have frighted a thousand men, had they been in the
hearing of it: then into his throat Bevis thrust his Sword and killed him
outright, and with much ado cut off his Head, and stuck it upon the Truncheon
of his spear, and so mounted himself upon his Steed, and as he was riding
homewards, twelve Forresters set upon him to take the Boars head away, that
they might get the Honor which Bevis had ventured his life for: And indeed
Bevis was unprovided; for he (with very joy that he had slain the Boar) left
his Sword behind him, but yet he made a pretty shift with them, for he killed
nine of them, and the other three ran away: and then Bevis had free way to ride
to the Court without any hindrance. There was many spectators to behold Bevis
with the Boars-head, among which company was fair Josian beholding Bevis with
great joy: and Bevis seeing Josian smile, began to ride Majestically toward
her, and entered the Court, fair Josian bad him welcome, and brought him to the
King; so when Bevis presented the Boars-head, the King received it, and gave
Bevis many thanks, and swore by Apoline, for slaying the Boar he would do him
great honor.

CHAP. V. How Bevis was made a Knight, and a General of Twenty Thousand Men, to
go against Brandmond.
ABout this time King Brandamond sent an Ambassador to King Ermine, to have
fair Josian to his wife or else he would beat him out of his Country: Then
Ermine assembled all his Lords and Barons together to advice what to do: some
said it was better to let Josian go, rather than to hazard the loss of his
Crown and Kingdom: Josian knowing their resolution spoke to her Father in this
manner: Father (said she) if you will be pleased to make Bevis General over an
Host of men, he would maintain your right and conquer your Foes. The King
hearing of his daughters words sent for Bevis and dubbed him a Knight, and
chose out twenty thousand men to go under Sir Bevis's Command: then Josian
fitted on his Armor, and gave him a Sword called Morglay; then she brought him
a Steed called Arundel; so Sir Bevis being mounted, Josian viewed him well, and
smiled at him, and Bevis smiled on her again; and then saluting her, away he
rode with all his Host against Brandmond and his Host: Brandmond seeing Bevis's
Army to be no more, laughed at them; Do thou laugh, said Bevis? I Will make
thee curse the time that ever thou came hither; then setting his Golden Spurs
to his Steed, he ran full drive at Brandmond, that Brandmond thought sure he
should have dyed at that hour, and seeing Radison was slain, his heart began to
faint: The Armies both did fight courageously, and many men were lost on both
slides: then Brandmond took two of Bevis's Knights Prisoners, but Bevis met
with them, and felled Brandmond to the ground, Horse and all, and took him
Prisoner: O sir, said Bevis, I Will have you to Josian: save my Life, cried
Brandmond, and have me whither thou will: so Bevis returned with great Victory,
and was Royally entertained of the King; and then Josian broke her mind to
Bevis; quoth she, by Mahound, I do desire to be thy Love; Not so Lady, said
Bevis, I Will wed no Heatheness; Which words she took very scornfully; Bevis,
perceiving her anger, said, Lady adieu, for I shall never see you again; and so
he left her, and went to his Chamber; then Josians heart began to throb, and
what to do she knew not; at last she sent two Knights unto him, to desire him
to come unto her, but Bevis would not? then she went her self, and said, My
Lord, I would entreat you not to leave me now, but grant me that I shall be thy
Wife, and I Will do whatsoever thou will have me to do; I Will forsake my Gods, and
turn a Christian for your sake, Sir Knight, or any thing else that will please
you. At these words Sir Bevis's heart began to melt, and being overjoyed, he
took her in his Arms and kissed her: The two Knights that Bevis redeemed from
Brandmond, hearing what words passed between Bevis and Josian, told to the
King, which made him mad with Bevis; so to bring Bevis to his end, the King
wrote Letters to Brandmond, to put Bevis to death, who was the bearer of the
Letters. Where I will leave him, and speak a little of Bevis's Uncle, Sir
Sabere, who was much grieved for Bevis, and sent his Son Terry in search for
him; who traveled many Heathen Lands yet could not find out Bevis; but he
swore never to see England again, if he sound him not.

CHAP. VI. How Bevis went on his Journey with Letters from King Ermine to King
Brandmond, which concerned his own life; and how he fought with the Sarazens in
Damas, and how he pulled down the Idols, and how they put him in Prison, and
what after befell.
THen took Bevis his Letters, and posted away toward the the Land of Pavy, and
has he rode, he saw a Palmer, to whom he said, What Countryman are you, good
Palmer? I am an Englishman, said the Palmer, and I seek for one I cannot find:
what is his Name, said Bevis? His name is Bevis said the Palmer, my Fathers
Brothers Son: I have heard of his Name, quoth. he, put I do not know him: I would
I could find him said the Palmer; He is about these Countries, said he; So
after some discourse, they parted; for Bevis, would not make himself known, but
away rode he to Damas City, where the King did live, which was a most stately
place: and entering into the streets, the He thens were sacrificing to their
Gods, which was odious for him to behold: What Devil do you serve here, said
Bevis? and ran to the God Mahound, and pulled him down from the Altar, and
threw him into the Channel: Then all the Sarazens sought with Bevis, but he
played his part so valiantly, that he made the streets to run down with blood:
for he laid about him so fast, that there was full two hundred Sarazens killed
that bout: then some went to the King and told him all that was befell to the
God Mahound, and how many were killed: the King all in a rage, swore by
Mahound, Apoline, and Terganant, he should dye for his bold attempt, and as the
King was going to see what he should be that had done this Outrage, Bevis met
him at the Gate of his Palace, and seeing the King, fell down on his knees,
and delivered his message: The King took the Letters, and did read them, and
they proved Treason against poor Bevis; to this effect they were; That King
Bradmond should put Bevis to death: Thus Ermine betrayed him that before had
kept him from destruction: Bevis seeing what he must trust to, with manly
courage began to make another great slaughter among them, four or five at every
blow he brought to the ground he struck such heavy strockes, that his Sword
broke, and after with his Fists brought to the ground sixty Sarazens more: at
last the multitude overcome him, and bound his hands that he could not stir:
Alas, said Bevis, let me not dye a Dogs death but give me an horse and armor,
and a good sword, and I will fight against an hundred thousand of you, so I dye
fairly in the field, I care not: but all cried out against him, and said, hang
him, others said burn him, some said starve him to death: then bespake the
King: he shall be devoured by the two Dragons in the Dungeon; with that they
were all contented So in the Dungeon was he cast, but they untyed his hands by
good fortune: in the Dungeon he found the Truncheon of a Spear: the Dragons
seeing a Prey, made at him very strongly, but he dispatched them both, and then
he was at rest a while.

CHAP. VII. How Josian demanded of her Father what was become of Bevis.
FAther, said Josian, where is Sir Bevis? he replied, he is gone to his
Country. At this time came King Jour, intending for to wed Josian, which he
obtained. And Ermine gave Jour Arundel and Morglay, which belonged to Bevis.
This Josian no way could avoid: Now all this time Bevis was in Prison, and the
Koepers would go down to see him, being he had been there the term of seven
years, and fed with nothing but Bran and Water, they thought he was wondrous
feeble, but he wos so strong, that he killed them both, being midnight, and so
get out clear, and took a Steed, and away he rode: now when he was gone, they
quickly followed, and Sir Grandere mounted on Trunchifise, overtook him: with
that Bevis turned about, and smote Grandere on the Head, which blow clove him
asounder down to the Girdle; then Bevis leayt off his Steed, and got upon
Trunchifise; then he rode forward again. By this time many thousands of
Sarazens were in pursuit after him, and followed him so close, that he was
forced on Trunchisise back to swim over the River; and when he was come to
Land, with very hunger he was ready to faint; and as he rid along, he saw a
Castle, where a great ugly Giant lived that was Sir Grandere's Brother; thither
he hyed and bounced at the Gate which rouzed the Giant out of a Dream, and
coming out, said, How now Fellow? what art thou weary of thy life? How came
thou by Trunchifise my Brothers Steed? Why, said Bevis, as I served thy
Brother, so sle serve thee presently: I come for Food, and that i will have before
I go: Will thou so, quoth the Giant? by Apoline I swear, thou shall win it
before thou have it; I, I, said Sir Bevis, i will Dine at thy Castle, and thou
shall sup with the Devil: shall I so, quoth he? and up with a mighty Bar of
Iron, and struck at him, which blow he wonderfully mist, but it beat out
Trunchifise's brains: Bevis seeing that, nimbly leapt out of Saddle, and laid
upon the Giant most stoutly: the Giant finding that he was very strong, with a
violent force he struck a Dart into his shoulder; then, in the heat of blood,
he made a full blow at the Giant, which parted his Head from his Body: then
into the Castle went Bevis, and forced the Giants Wife to taste both meat and
drink, and he fed after her: then into the Stable he went, and took a goodly
Horse, and rode away from thence to find out fair Josian, whom he dearly loved:
and it happened that he met with a poor Palmer, to whom he said, Who lives in
yonder Castle? Marry, quoth the Palmer, there dwells King John that married
the fair Lady Josian; and is the Queen living,, said he? Yes, sir Knight, said
the poor Palmer: I will give thee my Steed for thy Weed, said he, With all my
heart, replied the Palmer, and thank you too: then he leaped off his back, and
gave his Steed to the Palmer, and so put on the Palmers Weed, then he took his
way to the Castle, where he found abundance of joys more than he looked for but
at the first, Josian did not know him, yet still he and she talked, that he got
so far into Josians favor, that she gave him leave to see Arundel, and then
she knew Sir Bevis: for his Steed Arundel hearing him speak, broke seven Chains
asunder, and Neighed: then Josian took Bevis uside into her Garden, and there
they both concluded to be gone: Boniface her Chamberlain was a trusty friend
unto her, and vowed to further their Journey, he would do his best, then said
Josian to Bevis; My Lord, you shall stay about my Castle a while, and you
shall, say to the King that you came from Jury, and that King Bradwin is
besieged by the King of Syrack, and how he is like to lose his Kingdom: In the
mean time King Jour came home, and Bevis told him all that Josian bid him: Why
sent he not to me, said the King? he did send, replied he, but his Messengers
were taken by Syrack: then Jour swore by Mahound, he would revenge his Brothers
wrong: so with all speed he raised an Army, and went to help his Brother, and
left Sir Grassy to rule in his stead till his return; King Jour being gone,
they gave Sir Grassy a sleepy drink, which made him lie like one that was dead,
for four and forty hours: in the mean time, Bevis, Josian, and Boniface, got
great store of Moneys, and costly Jewels, and then away they came for England:
and as these three traveled, they were so hard pursued by Sir Grassy, that
they were forced to take for their succor a Cave for shelter; so there they
stayed all one night: Next morning Sir Bevis went out to kill some beast or
other to dress for Josian, for she was hungry: The while Bevis was abroad,
there came into the Cave two dreadful Lions, which slew poor Boniface and eat
him; whilst Josian trembling with fear, the Lions went to her, and laid their
heads in her Lap: By this time Bevis returned to the Cave, and seeing the blood
and bones of Boniface, wondered at it, and entering the Cave, Josian said, good
Bevis be careful, for here is two Lions in the Cave with me, and they have
slain Boniface and eaten him: Bevis answered, art thou alive? by this I know
thou art a pure Maid. Josian replied, I will hold the one whilst thou kill the
other; Nay, said he, let them both come together; then Josian set them at
liberty, and they came full drive at him, but he with his good Morglay, flew
them both presently, and so the quarrel was ended. Then Bevis and Josian
refresht themselves and rode onward on their Journey, and as they went, there
met them Ascapart, an ugly Giant, who was thirty foot in length, and a foot
between his Eyebrows, he was bristled like a Swine, and his blobber lips hung
a one side; and meeting, Ascapart said, stand, thee and thy Lady must along
with me; Not so, said Bevis, thou shall have but one of us, for I will try my
Manhood with thee first, and if you get the day, take it and welcome; Then
Josian held Arundel whilst he fought with Ascapart; the fight continued a long
time, yet Bevis avoiding his heavy blows, gave Ascapart many a wound, made him
roar extremely: and being mad, he laid at him with his cruel Bat, thinking for
to beat out his Brains, but with that stroke his foot slipped, and down he fell;
Bevis would have smote off his Head, but Josian being pitiful, said; Do not
so, let him go with us: Lady, said Bevis, he may betray us: By all my Gods,
said Ascapart, I swear if thou will save my life, I will be true to thee and
thy Lady, and do you what service I can? Then rise and live, said Bevis: So
Bevis and Josian mounted Arundel, and away they rode, with Ascapart by their
side, till they came to the Sea, where they found many Sarazens and a Ship
bound for Christendom, but the Sarazens would not ferry them to the Ship; then
Bevis and Ascapart made great slaughter among them, and killed a bundance of
them: then said Ascapart let me alone, I will carry you to the Ship, Horse and
all: so he took the Horse under his Arm, with Bevis and Josian and waded to the
Ship, where they had welcome, and so sailed into the Land of Colen, where dwelt
a Bishop that was Bevis's Kinsman, who bad them very Welcome; and after much
discourse, the Bishop said; What Country Lady is this? Bevis answered the King
of Almonies Daughter, and she would become a Christian for my sake. And what
ill-favored Lubber is this, said the Bishop? He is my Page, said he, and
Josian and he would fain be christened; this Lubber is too big to be carried by
a Midwife to the Font, said the Bishop; that is true quoth Sir Bevis. But in
the end Josian was christened by the Bishop, and Ascapart had a Font made on
purpose to be christened in that was very large; but when he came to be
christened, Out Devil, quoth Ascapart, thou will drench me, I am too big to be
christened by thee, and leapt over the Font, and away he went.

CHAP. VIII. How Bevis slew a dreadful Dragon, and what after chanced.
depiction of a knight in armor with a sword raised ready to strike a dragon
with a second head on its tail; in the background another knight and a castle

BEvis being in bed, heard a Knight cry, I Rot, I Rot, at which sad noise Bevis
wondered: and the next morning he asked what was the cause of that noise: He was
a Knight, said they, that coming through the street the Dragon met with and
cast her Venom upon him, whereof he rotted and dyed, Where is that Dragon?
said Bevis; Not far from this place, said they. Then Bevis called Ascapart to
go with him, and Ascapart was very willing. So together they went, and when
they came near the place where the Dragan was, they heard the dreadfullest Yell
that ever was: What Devil is that, quoth Ascapart, It is the Dragon, said
Bevis: we shall see him anon. I Will go no further, said Ascapart, if she roars
so loud before we come to her, what will she do when we fight with her? Fear
not, said Bevis, we will teach her how to hold her Tongue, Marry, teach her thy
self, said Ascapart, for I will go back again: then farewell, said Bevis, I will
go my self, so forward went Bevis, and backward went Ascapart, Bevis coming
near her Den, she made forth, but never was such a Dragon seen in the world as
this was, from her Head to Tail was full forty foot, her Scales glistered as
bright as Silver, and hard as Fliut; have-at thy Devils face, said Bevis and
out he drew his good Morglay, (on the Dragon laid, but her Scales was so hard,
his Sword cried twang, and never entered: then the Dragon struck Bevis to the
ground, and up he got again: but she came on so fiercely that Bevis went back,
and by chance fell into a Well, else the Dragon dad destroyed him; it seems the
Well was holy water, and no venom might come within seven foot of it: there
Bevis refreshed himself, and drank of the Water: and recovering his strength,
to the Dragon he went again to have the other hour; but the Dragon assailed him
so sore that Bevis was afraid he should have lost his life, yet with a valiant
heart he stood to her stoutly: the Dragon finding him so strong bulkt a Gallon
of her Venom upon him, which felled him dead to the ground, and his Armor
burst all to pieces: the Dragon seeing he lay so still, she turned him with her
tail, that he tumbled into the Well, and the water thereof expelled the Venom,
and made himself safe and sound again; then he was a joyful man, and set upon
the Dragon again: and when they had fought a long time, the Dragon would have
been gone, and thinking to raise her self, lifted up her wings: Have-at thee
now, said Bevis; and with one sound blow hitting her under the wing, pierced
her to the heart; with that she gave such a cry, which made the earth tremble;
she being dead, Bevis be headed her, and put it upon his spear, and so rode
home: and when the people saw him coming, they gave a great shout, as at a
Kings Coronation, and all the bells in the Town did ring, and all manner of
Music played before Bevis, as he rode through the Town, where with great Joy
his Uncle recieved him.

CHAP. IX. How Bevis raised an Army against Sir Murdure.
NOw Bevis was willing to give over Travel, and see to get his own Inheritance;
he therefore got an hundred Valiant Soldiers of his Uncle, and sailed into
England, and landed near unto Southampton, and sent a Knight unto Sir Murdure,
to tell him, that a Knight of Almain, hearing of his troubles, was come to aid
and assist him against Sir Sabere: the Knight having told his Message, Sir
Murdure desired to see him: Bevis knowing that, went to the Castle; Sir Murdure
and his wife bid him very welcome, and then desired to know his Name; my Name
is Gerrard, said Bevis, and I hearing of these Wars, have brought over a
hundred chosen men, to help to maintain your right: I give you thanks, said Sir
Murdure; but you must furnish us with Horse and Arms (quoth Bevis:) I, and of
the best I have too, for every man shall choose his own Steed and Arms, said Sir
Murdure: Then have at Sir Sabere, said Bevis: so to Supper they went, and after
Supper, Sir Murdure, to make his matter good, told Bevis, that the Castle was
once another Knights that was his Predecessor: and said he by misfortune was
slain: Had he never a Child by his Lady? Yes, said Sir Murdure: Is he dead or
living, said Bevis? I know not, quoth he, when he was, young he sold me his
Castle, and all his Inheritance, and spent the Money, and then went beyond Sea,
and what is become of him I cannot tell: If he were such a one, said Bevis, it
is no matter where he is. So after many several Discourses of Foreign
Countries, to bed they went, and then Bevis and his men were furnished with all
things fitting for service. Ships being prepared for that purpose, they took
their leaves of Sir Murdure and his Lady for that time, and sailed to the Isle
of Wight, where Sir Sabere dwelt.

CHAP. X. How a Knight Wedded fair Josian in Coler, against her Will, and what
after befell.
depiction of a man and woman with hands touching; in the background a woman or
shepherdess with a crook

Josian all this while was in Colen with Ascapart; In that Country lived a
Knight called the Earl of Milo, who loved Josian, but she would not yield unto
his will; to take her by force he durst not, for fear of Ascapart: Therefore he
wrote Letters in the Name of Sir Bevis, that Ascapart should come to him: when
he had done, he sent the Letters to Josian, and she received them as from Sir
Bevis: and then reading them, she was very glad to hear from her dearest
Friend: so she gave the Bearer a great reward and sent Ascapart with him, not
thinking how she was betrayed: when as they came to the Castle, Ascapart was
put in a Dungeon, instead of seeing his Master: then the lustful Earl went to
Josian, and told her how he had served her, and Ascapart was fast in the
Castle: Have thou served me so, said she think not hereby ever to have thy will
on me: Then the villian would have ravished her, but she (rather than suffer
Rape) yielded to marry him: Then he was very joyful, and sent for all the Kts.
and Gentlemen, and the next day was married to Josian: and after great feasting
at night to bed she went, and all his valiant Kts. was in the Chamber with him:
then Josian (to have opportunity) prayed him to send all the company away,
which was performed presently; the Curtains being close about the Bed, she made
a Noose, and as he sat by the bedside, she slipping it over his head strangled
him, and hung him over a beam: In the morning his Friends came to give him joy;
Josian said look where he hangs: then they were all amazed, yet they took
Josian and carried her to the stake to be burned. In the mean time Ascapart
broke out of tha Castle, and got into a Fisher-boat, then rowing himself to
Land, he met with Bevis, and told all that had happened: so they both went, and
found Josian at a stake to be burned; there they fought courageously, and
released Josian, and then they went all three to Sir Sabere, where they were
Royally entertained.

CHAP. VI. How Bevis and Sir Sabere raised Arms against Murdure, with other
things that happened.
THen Bevis sent word to Sir Murdure, That he thanked him for his Arms, and bad
him prepare for Battle: So Murdure and his Host came to the Isle of Wight,
where Bevis met with him, and betwten them was a bloody Battle: Sir Sabere,
Bevis, and Ascapart, made such havoc with them, that they slew all that came
near them; and Ascapart took Sir Murdure and carried him to the Castle, and put
him in a Cauldron of boiling Pitch and Brimstone; the Almain Army fled, and the
King of England with his Forces run away. Sir Murdure's Lady seeing this, threw
her self depiction of two armies arranged one above the other, with muskets,
pikes, a flag, a drum, and ensign-staffs down from the Castle and broke her
neck: then Bevis gave rich Gifts to the soldiers, and was placed in
Southampton: then he married Josian, and afterward went to do homage to King
Edgar, who was exceeding joyful to see Bevis, and made him Lord Marshal of
England: the King's son would have bought Arundel, but Bevis would not sell him
for gold nor silver: then the Prince would take him by force; but coming into
the Stable, Arundel beat out his Brains: The King hearing this, was in wrath
with Bevis, and swore he should dye: but at last it was concluded, he should
only be banished the Lynd: so Bevis surrendered up all his whole Estate to Sir
Sabere, and took Josian, Terry, and Ascapart along with him. And as they went,
Josian fell in labor; then were they in a Forest, and Josian bid them walk
away till she was delivered: so Terry and Bevis went together, and Ascaprrt
went another way; and when she was delivered, Ascapart came to Josian, and
carried her away: Bevis and Terry came and found two Children, but not the
mother, so Bevis took the Infants, naming the eldest Guy, and the younger
Miles, and went his way, and in his journey met accidentally with a Forrester
and a Fisherman, whom with good store of Gold he hired to take his Children to
Nurse, and engaged them at seven years and to bring them to one Bevis of
Hampton, and they should be rewarded to their desires: they took the Infants
and the Gold, promising to perform all things accordingly; and so Bevis and his
Sons parted: but Sabere, and twelve Knights with him, followed Ascapart, in
Palmers Weeds, and overtook him near the City of Mambrant, fought with him, and
slew him on the place: Thus he redeemed fair Josian, to her great joy, and
carrying her to his Inn, there he met with Sir Bevis and Terry; at which time,
to complete their happiness, the Forrester and the Fisherman brought Bevis's
two Sons, who thanking them both for their care, gave them great Riches, and
caused them for to be made Knights: soon after this, there began a fierce War
between Jour King of Mambrant, and Ermine King of Armony, for Josians sake;
Whereupon Bevis went to the aid of Ermine, and took King Jour Prisoner, for
whose Ransom he had Twenty Tun of Gold, and three Hundred white Steeds.

King Ermine was so highly affected with this Favor, that for Bevis his sake
he turned Christian, and a little before his decease Crowned Guy King of
Armony, and Miles he made a Knight, where they lived a space in great happiness
and felicity; but King Jour bearing an inward grudge, or inveterate malice
against Bevis he once more resolved to try the fortune of War with him; so he
raised a great Army of Heathenish Sarazens, who with undaunted Courage
assaulted Bevis in Armony, being led on by King Jour himself in person: these
charged not so gallantly, but they were repulsed as bravely, and in short time
totally routed by the unconquerable power of our English Knights. In this
skirmish Sir Bevis meeting King Jour, had a single combat with him, in which
fight after many bloody strokes on both sides, King Jour was slain, and his
Army was wholly vanquished: Bevis then putting on the Armor of R. Jour, rode
to the City of Mambrant, where he was received and welcomed home by the people,
instead of their King: He no sooner got possession of the place, but he made
them all become his Servants, and renounce their false Gods, and turn
Christians, and by this means his fair Lady Josian was the second time at
Mambrant.

CHAP. XII. Containing the Conclusion of the History.
WHilst Sabere continued thus with Bevis, tidings came unto him, that his wife
was disinherited by Edger King of England; whereupon he, with Bevis, Josian,
and his two Sons Guy and Miles, marched to London with a great Army, and fought
against King Edgar, slew two thousand of his Soldiers for the wrong he had done
unto him, and to Sabere, and then he returned to Southampton, where King Edgar
sent unto him for a parley and in the conclusion made a peace with him, and
agreed to marry his eldest Daughter unto Miles (Bevis his Son) whom at that
time also he made Earl of Cornwall; the Wedding being solemnized with great joy,
and variety of Courtly Recreations. Sir Bevis, with Josian and Guy his eldest
Son, returned to their several homes. After this, Bevis lived in Mambrant, and
then Josian sell sick, who was accompanied by her beloved Husband, both in
Sickness and in Death: They dyed both in one day, and were solemly Intered in
one Grave by Guy their Son, who raised a stately Tomb over them, to the
Everlasting Memory of so Galland a Knight, and his most Royal Constant Lady.

So I conclude his Famous Acts here Penned;
For Time and Death brings all thins to an
END.
depiction of two armed men riding horses, with two women standing in the
background

depiction of a knight in armor with a sword raised ready to strike a dragon
with a second head on its tail; in the background another knight and a castle

BOOKS Printed for and Sold by J. Deacon, at the Angel in Giltspurstreet
without Newgate. Where all Chapmen (may be furnished at Reasonable Rates) and
others.
1. THE most Famous History of Amadis of Greece, Surnamed the Knight of the
Burning-Sword, Price 1s. 4d.

2. Arcandam, that Famous and expert Astrologician, to find the fatal Destiny
Constellation, and natural inclination of every Man-Child, by his birth. Price
6d.

3. The Art of Legerdemain, with new Additions. Price 6d.

4. Sports and Pastimes for City and Country. Price 6d.

5. Markham's faithful Farrier, wherein the depth of his Skill is laid open in
all those Principal and Approved secrets of Horsemanship, in Octavo. Price 4d.

6. The Honor of the Cloth working Trade: or, the Pleasant and Famous History
of Thomas of Reading. Price 3d

7. The Merchant Tailors Renown: or, the Famous and Delightful History of Sir
John Hawkwood Knight. Price 3d.

8. The Famous History of the Learned Friar Bacon. p. 3 d.

9. The Famous Pleasant and Delightful History of Ornatus and Artesia Price 3 d.

10. The Noble Birth and Gallant Atchivements of that Remarkable out Law Robin
Hood, together with a true Account of the many Merry and Extravagant Exploits
he played, in Twelve several Stories. Price 3d.

11 The Renowned History of the Seven Champions of Christiandom. Price 3d.

12. Wisdom's Cabinet Opened: or, the Famous History of the Seven Wise Masters
of Rome. Price 3d.

13. The History of the Life and Death of that most Noble Knight Sir Bevis of
Southampton. Price 3d.

14. No Jest like a true Jest, being merry Pranks, and mad Exploits of Captain
James Hind Price 1d.

15. The Pleasant History of the Unfortunate son. Price 1d.

16. The History of Dr. Faustus. Price 1d.

17 The second Part of Mother Bunch of the West. Price 1d.

18. The History of Tom Tipler, the merry Tinker of Banbury. 1d.

19 The Birth, Life, and Death of John Frank. price p. 1d.

20. John and his Mistress. Price 1d.

21. The whole Art of Palmistry, showing the Hour of the Day, by the figure of
the Hand.

22. The Book of Riddles, with pictures to each Riddle. p. 1d.


