Great NEWS from IRELAND; An Account of the Kings Royal Camp, Before the City
of Limmerick, And of a Late Defeat of the Enemy There: With a particular
Relation of the C of Tyrconnel's Severity to the Bishop of Limmerick; And the
Actions of the French at Gallway.
SIR,
THis City has been filled for these several Days past, with great numbers of
our Countrymen, that are come from London in their way home, most of which are
bound for Dublin, and parts adjacent; where we understand all things are
brought into a fine way of Settlement, both in Matters Ecclesiastical, as well
as Civil; and His Majesty in the several Counties through which he has past,
has settled the Cities, Buroughs, and Corporations, upon their Old
Establishment, and likewise the High Sherriffs, and the Militia, or Trained
Bands. His Majesty has been Attended, and Addressed by the Reverend Bishops and
Clergy, of the several Diocesses He has past through, and also by several
Nonconforming Ministers. My good Old Bishop of Limerick has suffered a great
loss at his House at Limerick; for the Countess of Tyrconnel, just before her
going to France, procured some Armed Force of the Garrison, with whom she
entered the Bishops House, (which was very well Furnished with all sorts of
Houshold-Goods, etc.) and took from thence what she thought fit; telling my
Lord, That if he pleased he might replenish himself out of what she had left in
her House in Dublin; and so she rubbed off with her Son to Paris.

The great Failure of the Lough, or that part of the River that lies near the
City of Limerick, is very remarkable, and a thing which has not been known
before, I am sure, in my time, in the most dryest Summer, to become Fordable,
which we hear is now in two or three places; which gives us a great Instance to
show how Almighty God is pleased to say Amen to His Majesty's most Just and
Righteous Undertakings, by Faciliting the Reduction of the Rebels in this
Kingdom, with so little loss of Christian Blood: And in Order for the
continuance of the Blessing of Almighty God on His Majesty, Army, and good
Subjects of Ireland, there is a Solemn Fast kept very Religiously every Friday,
both in the Royal Camp, and in the several Cities and Towns in Ireland, that
are in Their Majesty's Possession.

It Is the Opinion of many Gentlemen here, That we shall have a Parliament,
called in Ireland, before we have any Term; the Wind being at present contrary,
we have nothing here very new from His Majesty's Gamp, tho we do not in the
least doubt, but that the first Packet that arrives will bring us the
Confirmation of the Surrender of Lymerick. Our last left the Royal Army,
Encamped very near Lymerick: The King's Head Quarters, being within half a Mile
of the City; that upon part of our Army's approach very near the City, the
Enemy made a Sally, with the chief Strength of the Garrison; but were soon
beaten in again, and in their Retreat to the Town, a great part of them were
cut off; that the Irish Army which not long since made a considerable Body of
Twenty Five Thousand Men, were now dwindled to a very inconsiderable Number,
and they retired (upon the Approach of Our Army) farther into the Country;
great Numbers of all sorts having quitted them some time before, who were
retired over the Bogs to the Mountains and Caves, their Old Lurking-holes.

You seem to wonder at the French quitting of the City of Lymerick; it is, as
you writ, the strongest place in Ireland, stronger than that of Gallway, but
the latter is situated far more Advantageous for the French, to get off to
their own Country (which doubtless, if they are not already, they will be
forced to it in a very little time.) The City of Lymerick is situated
Threescore long Miles from the Sen; now Gallway is but Nine Miles: The Haven of
the City of Gallway is the most considerable in the Province of Connaught,
being a very great Bay, some Mile broad, and many more long, having in the
Mouth Three Islands (called the Isles of Arr^n) the which lie North and South,
by the side of each other, there remaining the Channels for to come out of the
Sea into this Bay. One Channel runs betwixt the Land, and the Northern Isle,
and called therefore North-Sound. The Second, between the same Northern Isle,
and the Middlemost, which Channel being the most usual of the Three, is
commonly styled St. Gregory's Sound. And the Third, between the most
Southermost Island, and the Main, named South Sound; in the uppermost part of
the Ray, one may Anchor in Five or Six Fathoms of Water.

Printed for D. Smith in Cornhil, 1690.


