AN ACCOUNT Of the JESUITS LIFE AND DOCTRINE.

By M. G.

Printed in the Year. 1661.

bookplate

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
THough the Progress of affairs in our late revolutions might have made every
one plainly perceive whence the distempers of our times proceeded; yet many
will needs conceive, or pretend they conceive, that the Papists were occasion
of all our disorders, and the Jesuits the Boutefeu's in the ruin of both King
and Country, What misery the misinterpreting the Bible has brought upon our
Nation by a swarm of Sects, that Libels lay to Catholics, the only Religion
that constantly, none excepted, followed the Royal party? Priests and Jesuits
are said to be the cause of all those mischiefs, of which the whole World
know's, Sectaries were the true Source: their restless Spirits never being
content till having pryed on both Crown and Mitre, at length they worried one
another. Yet it is the style of our times to lay all to the Papists, and no Man
concludes with applause, but he that Perorat's against the Jesuits. Pamphlets
are the Vulgar Oracles, and Libels the guide of those that pretended to believe
nothing but Bible. It is a strange thing to see what Character is commonly
given the Jesuits. Every Jesuit, say our Pamphlets and Pulpits too, has a Pope
in his belly, a Macchiavel in his head, Mercuries wings on his feet, and the
Mysterious feather of Lucian's cocks tail in his hand. The Pope in his belly
makes him still big with malice, still giving birth to some new mischief.
Macchiavel in his head Orders all so dexterously as to make him out reach all
the World. Mercurie's wings on his feet carry him from place to place, from
Country to Country, and make him every where in a trice. The Cocks feather in
his hand, opens all closets and Cofers, and Secrets, and discovers to the
Jesuit, the Want and Wealth of every one, that he may know where to place his
labors with thrift. And if you ask, why the Jesuits are never discovered in
these pranks, the Libels tell you it is because the Jesuits have Proteus's
bodies, and transform themselves into all shapes; Now a Cobbler, now a
Preacher, now a Tinker, now a Courtier, now a Peasan, now a Statesman, and
what not? And this still with Gyges's ring on their finger, that they may never
be seen but when they list. By this means it comes to pass, that the Jesuits
can seldom or never be charged in particular with any misdemeanour; yet it is
certain, credit posteri; that they are the only contrivers of all the
mischiefs in the World. If the Covenant be in vogue none but Jesuits, and
Jesuited Papists, resist it. If the same covenant be condemned to deserved
flames, 'twas the Jesuits made it, no body else could have dreamt of so much
malice. If the King be cried down in Pulpits and Tubs, for leavying an
unnatural war against his dutiful Subjects, (as our late Sovereign of glorious
memory was) 'twas the Papists did all, and the Jesuits were the Incendiaries.
If three Kingdoms groan under the Tyranny of Cromwell, there were 500 Jesuits
in his Army. What more? Every crime is theirs. The Jesuits are to our Fabulous
heads, what the Evil- Genius's or Pestiferous Gods were to old time,, when
fictions made Deities. They are Presbyterians, and Episcopal Protestants, and
Levellers, and Quakers, and what you will, provided it be (for that time) a
name of disgrace. They have overthrown learning, destroyed Philosophy, poisoned
States, corrupted manners, betrayed Kingdoms, subverted the Church, coufounded
the Gospel, and as with the dregs of Pandora's box poured out more mischief on
the World then all the Devils in Hell could ever have wished. Thus say the
Libels: and why may not Libellers take the Liberty to speak as largely in
Prose, as Poets do in verse, specially when they are backed from the Pulpits,
and warmed with the zeal of the good old cause.

But fair and softly: Is any thing of all this true? it is printed. Where? there
be a thousand books in Paul's Churchyard that affirm all this, and more then
this. And is that enough? How many books where there sold in that place, and
all England over, in which his late Sacred Majesty was made the cause of all
our misfortunes? How many against the Bishops? How many against his Royal
Majesty that now reigns? Nay who is there of any merit in England living or
dead in our memory, whom Libels do not seek to defame? If it were enough to be
accused, no body would be innocent: it is a trade now a days to write slanders
for a livelihood, Many crimes are laid to the Jesuits, but the Jesuits deny
them all. And whosoever will judge right must hear both sides, and then give
his verdict. Till this be done an argument of the Jesuits innocence is, that
they challenge their Adversaries to appear, and speak to the particulars, and
profer, that they will be content to be cast if they be proved nocent. On the
contrary an argument of error in those that inveigh against the Jesuits is,
that they make it their first care to disguise themselves, they speak behind
the curtain, and rove in general propositions, crying out against all without
being able to instance in any.

I do not hope to stop the Torrent of Slandering tongues: the flood of a foul
mouth is too impetuous to be ever dammed up in this World; yet I hope that I
shall be able to vindicate the Society so far, as that, though fools still
babble, yet wise men shall see they have no reason; and though malicious men
still envy, yet all charitable Christians shall plainly perceive that the fault
lies on their side that reprehend Virtue and carp at learning, and impugn
that, which they do not, or will not understand.

The means which I intend to take for to do this, is nothing else then to give
a plain and true account of the Jesuits Life and Doctrine, and to set down
clearly what is objected against the Jesuits, and what they answer for
themselves.

This I hope will satisfy: for I conceive it very true which Henry the 4th.
King of France usually said; That to know the Jesuits, is enough for to make
any body love them. I hope it may happen to those protestants that read this
short treatise, as Adam Conizen relates that it happened to diverse Ministers in
Germany; who when they had bought the Constitutions and Rules of the Society at
Franckfurt fair, (which had been taken in some College) they read them over
with a great deal of eagerness, and after all pronounced this sentence of
them; That there was nothing there that could be reprehended, save only the
Roman Religion. And perhaps some will join with that great wit Sr. Francis
Bacon, once Chancellor of England, who in his Advancement of Learning speaks
thus of the Jesuits. When I consider their pains and diligence, as well in the
culture of learning as information of manners, the saying of Agesilaus touuhing
Pharnabarus comes into my mind. Talis cum sis utinam noster esses. But for the
judgment I leave it to the Reader, my part shall only be to give a candide
narration. And besides the love to truth which I have, I reflect that all those
who during their long exile abroad with his Majesty, had acquaintance with the
Jesuits, would disprove me if I should say any thing contrary to what they know
and have seen of the Society. I shall therefore say nothing of them, but what I
know to be true, and conceal nothing that I think may seem to give a full
knowledge of the Jesuits, as far as can be comprised in a short treatise.

I have not meddled with the English Jesuits, and scarce named them. The reason
is, because I do not see anything of moment objected to them particularly. They
have been always faithful at home, and dutiful abroad, as his Majesty has
been often graciously pleased to express. Though many have cried them down as
the public Incendiaries, yet it is most manifest that never any one of them
sided with the Kings Enemies, but as far as they could by themselves and their
friends they abbetted the Royal party. They were in his Majesty's Camp, where
some of them lost their lives, others being taken, endured imprisonment, and
other hardship. There is scarce one Jesuit in England who cannot reckon some of
his nearest Relations that dyed for his Majesty, and none whose kindred and
Friends were not ruined in their fortunes for the same quarrel. And all that
depended on the Jesuits sided with his Majesty. Among these were some signal
persons, as Sr. Henry Gage, Sr. John Smith, Sr. John Digby, who having been
formerly Scholars of the Society, were actually when they dyed Penitents of the
Jesuits. And Mr. Peter Wright, who was executed at Tyburn, was particularly
maligned because he was Sir Henry Gage's Priest. As for Persons of prime
Nobility, who lost great Estates, and endured much hardship for his Majesty,
The late Duchess of Buckingham, the late Marquess of Worcester, the late
Earl of Shrewsbury, were Penitents of the Society, to say nothing of others. On
the contrary the Rebels preached every where against the Jesuits, and
wheresoever they took any of them, they imprisoned and executed them; so that I
do not see any need to prove their Loyalty. Certainly if they had had any
principles of Rebellion in their heart, they would in these public revolutions
have showed them at one time or other. Yet though for loyalty I conceive them
blameless, I will not say, but that happily the indiscretion of some may have
deserved a censure: but I hope that the errors of a few, will not rise in
judgment, and countervail the merits of a long tried fidelity in many. I
confess I have heard some mutter something of the errors of some English
Jesuits abroad, for which they feared all might smart. Yet where sins of
blackest malice have found indulgence, I hope indiscretions will not be
remembered. That Royal clemency that could indemnifie Rebels, and bury in
oblivion, unparrelled injuries done to his Father and himself, by perfidious
and Sacrilegious Subjects, will doubtless be a Sanctuary to all that ask
pardon for those errors which have been incurred without malice. This I say,
on supposition that there may have been some errors which I know not of. We
are all men, and as men we may err; we are also Christians, and as such we
ought to pardon. It is with this mind that I desire the Reader to peruse this
little tract, consulting still with reason and charity, both which ought to
join in every Christian censure.

I have nothing more to add; but only that whereas my mind does give me, that
some (that malice the Jesuits and would have them alone excluded from the
privilege of free born Subjects, and barred from the public clemency) will
endeavor an answer to what I have here said; all that I desire of them, is
this, that they will be pleased to have a care to say nothing but what they can
make good, as I do undertake for all that I have here writ. I do not flatter my
weakness so, as to think I have said well, yet my conscience dictateth that I
have said true. And in that sense I shall be willing to justify every thing
that I have here said, and if perhaps (through humane frailty) I have erred in
any thing, I shall humbly acknowledge it, and thank him that shall show me my
error.

An Account of the JESUITS Life and Doctrine.
CAP. I. Of the Author and end of the Society of Jesus.
Ignatius of Loyola, Founder of the Society of Jesus, born of a good Family in
Biscay, being a Soldier in the Year 1521. received a dangerous Wound. Whilst
he was under the Surgeons hands in a long cure he chanced to read some good
books: if notwithstanding we may call that a chance, which was by a special
Providence of God ordained for his good, and the Salvation of many. For these
Books inflamed his heart so with thoughts of Eternity, with the horror of Sin,
with the example of Saints, with the love of God, that he was suddenly
Metamorphosed into another Man, and resolved on a new life. Being therefore at
length recovered, he set hand to work, and put in Execution what in his
Infirmity he had projected. Instantly stripping himself of all the goods that
formerly he enjoyed or hoped in this World; and quitting house and Home, in a
poor beggarly Weed, he went to Manresa, where he was unknown to all the World.
There in an Hospital, to which he had Voluntarily offered himself to tend the
sick, he lead a most strict life, and made it his study to subdue himself as
much as possibly he could. He went bare foot, and bare head, pitifully clad,
and lodged on the cold ground. He prayed seven hours a day on his knees, used
frequent mortifications of hair-shirts, chains, and disciplines. Except
Sundays, he fasted every day; though even on the Sundays too, his diet was as
bad as a fast, for he never eat any thing but what he begged of Alms, and of
that the best he gave to the poor, and himself lived on the refuse which seemed
not good enough to give to the beggars.

All this he did for to surmount himself, and learn perfectly that lesson which
Christ has made the first for all those that in his School will study
perfection, Si quis vult venire Post me abneget semetipsum, and tollat crucem
suam quotidie, Luc. 9.23. He that will follow me, let him renounce himself and
take up his Cross every day.

Whilst he thus sacrificed himself in the fire of divine love, God, who is
never behind hand with his servants, endowed his soul with many supernatural
gifts, and illuminated him with abundance of celestial lights. As fast as he
went out of himself, so fast he entered into the secret mysteries of God and
Christ, in which as in a most perfect prototypon he saw the Idea of the Society
which he was afterward to found. His first thought by which he steered all his
actions, and which seemed as a beacon for all the course of his life, was a
profound knowledge of his end. In that divine light which God streamed upon him
in his daily contemplations, he clearly saw how the infinite goodness of God
according to his everlasting Councels, in the beginning of time drew the whole
world out of nothing, and created man for no other end then to love and serve
his Lord and Creator in this life, and afterward to enjoy him in perpetual
eternities. From this thought he drew a resolution, to make this noble end of
his the measure of all his actions, the first and last of all his thoughts, and
the only aim of all his desires. To this his understanding, to this his
memory, to this his will, to this his whole soul was so totally applied, that
he was even absorpt in this thought of seeking his last end, that is his God.
And as the love of God, is of all things imaginable the most active and most
noble; he could not endure to bestow himself sparingly on God. His design
therefore was to do whatsoever he could imagine to be most advantageous to
forward him toward his end, and most to the increase of the honor and Glory
of God. Hence proceeded that motto of his which was the first rule that he ever
prefixed himself. Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam. To the greater Honor of God. By this
motto or devise he intended two things. The first was that whenever any thing
came into deliberation, he was to choose, not that which was most for his ease,
or profit, or honor, but that which consulting with reasons of Eternity, might
appear most for the Honor and Glory of God. The other thing intended by him in
this devise was, that he was to make account that he was never to rest in this
World, never to think he had done enough, but still to increase and go on, ad
majorem, to the greater and still greater glory of God, by every good action
enflaming his desires to do yet better, and more for Gods honor. So was this
first thought of his (the knowledge of his end) like the Primum Mobile in the
Heavens, the Superior Orb, which with his motion sets all the inferior Orbs
a going; it was like the spring to the Watch of his Life, which being once well
wound up, made all the Wheels of his several actions go well, and the Index of
his good intention point right every moment of his life: it was like the Sun
which gave Light, Vigor, and life, to all the Sphere of employments which he
ever undertook.

After then that he was well fixed and radicated in this first thought, and had
made such resolutions as did flow from it; his next solicitude was by what
means he should best compass this end in the perfectest manner that he could
imagine, which might tend most to the glory of God. Here he reflected, that
certainly the best way to find God, was to follow Christ, and the nearer he
came to Christ, the nearer he judged himself to be to the design he had laid of
consecrating all his life to Gods greater glory. This then was his second
thought, out of which he drew this resolution, to take Christ for his pattern,
and mould all his actions on the example which he should see in Christ, whose
Divinity and humanity were to be unto him the two Tables of the Law of the
highest perfection. Meditating therefore daily on the life of Christ, he
endeavored always to copy out in action something of that which he saw in
contemplation. The humility of Christ, the meekness, the modesty, the
temperance, the mercy, the obedience, the fortitude, were all as so many
lessons which he studied to get by heart. And in all he profited so well, that
he left to posterity admirable examples, so that he may justly say with the
Apostle, imitatores mei estote sicut ego Christi; Imitate you me as I have
imitated Christ. But above all he observed and admired the immense charity of
Christ, that could make him divest himself of his own glory, and undergo a
painful life and death, for no other boon but the good of Souls. This he no
sooner observed but that he resolved to join his labors with the labors of
his Redeemer, and as far as humane frailty would give him leave to cooperate
with Christ for the Salvation of Souls.

Here were then the two Fundamental thoughts, which were like the two poles on
which all the life of this great Saint was turned. The first he drew from the
consideration of his Creation, the second from looking on his Redemption: the
first inflamed him with a zeal of Gods greater glory, the second showed him
that this aim of Gods great glory must determine in the imitation of Christ,
and cooperating with him for the good of souls.

Having then resolved on these two thoughts, and set them down as rules for his
future life, there occurred to his mind two main difficulties. First he
observed how very unfit he was to think of setting on the conversion of souls.
He had been trained up from his Infancy in the Court, and the Camp, two schools
where the Gospel is little thought on. Yet without a good understanding of the
Gospel to be got with long study, he saw he could neither have authority with
others, nor security for himself. The mysteries of faith are obscure and hard,
and it were presumption to adventure to explicate those mysteries without
having first learnt them well; And he had not yet read his Accidents. What
should he do? Being above thirty years old he begins the first rudiments with
little children, and goes on to the end of Divinity. Labor and constancy
carried him through, that which no man would easily have ventured on, specially
in the circumstances he was in. For having already made a resolution of
voluntary poverty, he was forced to beg his bread from door to door, he
continued still his servent prayer, and fast, and other mortifications, and
oftentimes interrupted his studies with acts of Charity; yet at length with
above ten years labor he surmounted the difficulty, and got to such a pitch in
learning as might give him both security in handling Divine mysteries and
authority.

The other difficulty in the enterprise of the conversion of souls, was
greater, and not to be overcome by one Man. His zeal compassed all the
universe, he desired to cooperate with Christ for the Salvation of Souls in
all the quarters of the World, and if possible in all ages to come; but being
alone he could not do this, he was confined to one place, and one life of a
short and uncertain durance. Therefore he resolved to communicate his desires
with such as God should inspire to join with him, and to erect an Order of
Religious men, which should do that always, and every where, which alone, he
could do but in one place, and for the date of only one life. With this thought
he looked about for such as might be fit for his design, and whilst he was a
Student at Paris he won to himself nine others, all men of eminent virtue and
learning, among them one was Francis Xaverius. With these he laid the
foundation of a Religious order which he would have named the Society of Jesus.
The reason of this name was not any thing else, then that all his order should
ever remember, that as they were by the grace of Christ Jesus called to this
course of life, so they ought always to look on Jesus, and endeavor to
conform themselves, as much as possibly might be, to the life of Jesus: this
imitation being that which St. Ignatius had prefixed himself, as the best means
to attain to his sinal end of Gods greater Glory.

After therefore that he and his Companions had given many singular proofs of
their virtue, at length Pope Paul the third, in the year 1540 erected the
society into a Relgious order, which he and his successors the subsequent
Popes often confirmed and endowed with many privileges under the name of the
society of Jesus. The end of this society may sufficiently appear out of what I
have said, and it is se down by St. Ignatius in these words related in sum.
Constit. Finis hujus societatis est non solum saluti and perfectioni propriarum
animarum cum divina gratia vacare; sed cum eadem impense in salutem and
perfectionem proximorum incumbere. The end of this society is not only to
attend, with the divine grace, to the salvation and perfection of our own
souls, but also with the same divine grace to labor earnestly for the
salvation and perfection of our neighbor.

This is the end of the society, which I suppose no body can in reason except
against. For what more laudable then to endeavor Gods greater glory, and that
in the Salvation of souls? It was this that God aimed at in the creation of
this all, this Christ looked at in the whole course of his life, and in his
precious death; this is the end of the Gospel, this man's sole good, without
this nothing is good, and in this is all good. Sin and Damnation are the worst
of evils which the Devil and those that cooperate with him lead men unto; on
the contrary virtue and Salvation are the greatest Goods which Christ and those
that join their labors with his do lead unto: Certainly, he that will complain
of the Jesuits for consecrating their labors to the good and Salvation of
their neighbors, must confess that he knows not what the name of virtue
means; he must allow that he is an enemy of reason, and grant that he has
renounced his own nature, and under the shape of a Man is become a Wolf or
Tygre, or even an incarnate Devil; there being none but the Devil that hareth
the Salvation of mankind, and all those that endeavor to cooperate with
Christ to that end.

When I say, cooperate with Christ, no man must be scandalized as at an
insolent term. It is a word ordinarily used by those who would express the
nature and dignity of an Apostolical Vocation. So Richardus a S. Victore says,
Nescio an majus bonum possit homini a Deo conferri, quam ut per ejus obsequium
alii consequantur salutem, si tamen Deo co-operentur ex charitate. I know not
whether God bestow any thing greater on man, than that others by his means
obtain Salvation, if notwithstanding he cooperate with God out of Charity. So
also does St. Dionyse express himself cap. 3. Caelest. Hierarchiae, in these
words, Omnium Dominus est Dei co-operatorem fieri, it is the most divine work
that man can do to cooperate with God; he speaks of laboring for the good
of Souls, and cireth those words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3. Dei adjutores sumus. We
are the Co-adjutours of Almighty God. S. Paul meant not that God needs our
help, but that he is pleased to use the help of men, and make one the
instrument of the Salvation of others, which St. Dionyse calls the most
divine work that man can do; and Hugo de S. Victore, the greatest gift of God.

All this I conceive makes it clear, that no man can with reason reprehend the
aim and end of the Society. It remains therefore that we see whether the
Society uses convenient means to attain this end; for if the end be good, and
the means to attain that end be also good, it will follow that the whole
institute is good, and not only irreprehensible, but also laudable.

CAP. II. By what means the Society endeavors to make their own fit
Instruments for their end.
TWO things therefore are to be treated of, for to show what means the Society
uses for to compass her end. First how the subjects of the Society are trained
up to be made fit Instruments for the Glory of God in the conversion of Souls.
And secondly, when we have seen how they endeavor to perfect themselves, we are
farther to observe, what it is they do for the good of their neighbor. The
first of these two things we will do in this chapter, the second in the ensuing
chapter.

S. Ignatius then observed that all the miseries in which the Souls of men are
involved spring chiefly from two fountains, ignorance, and vice. Ignorance like
Ice freezeth up the Soul, and benummeth it into a dull stupidity. And as Ice
does easily thaw into water, of which it is made, and water again easily
freezeth into Ice; so ignorance easily dissolves into vice, and vice as easily
congeals into ignorance and insensibility, specially of spiritual and
supernatural things. It was ignorance therefore and vice, they were to war
against, who would endeavor the cure of Souls; and in consequence to this they
were to be armed with virtue and learning. Virtue was the chief; for without
true and solid virtue, they could never hope that God would make them
instruments of so high a work as the conversion of Souls: nor could they be fit
to move others to virtue, unless their words were seconded by their works, and
their exemplar life made good their Pulpit-discourses: it being most certain
which the Golden Orator said, that the best Syllogism is the Preachers life.
Yet though virtue were the chief agent, she was not to be engaged without
learning for her second. For virtue without learning would not have authority
enough to control malepert spirits, and might perhaps degenerate into zeal
without discretion, and so with a good meaning lead to destruction. Both virtue
therefore and learning were necessary for those who should make it their aim by
rooting out vice and ignorance, to work the desired good of Souls.

Now, how S. Ignatius did lay the foundations which might bring up all that
should follow Christ in the Society to virtue and learning, we may see by what
is set down in the Constitutions of the Society, and is daily practiced by the
Jesuits: As I shall now declare.

In the Constitutions then the first care is, that none be admitted into the
Society, who are not of such capacity and disposition that it may justly be
hoped, that in process of time they will by Gods grace arrive to such a
proportion of learning and virtue, as to become fit to deal with their
neighbor for the good of Souls. Upon this account diverse are excluded not
only for want of health or other abilities, but also for such impediments as
may give ground to fear the event. For example, those who have been in the
world notorious for heinous crimes or infamous lives are excluded the Society,
unless they first blot out their ignomy by long and serious penance. Because it
is not likely that they will have authority sufficient to handle the Gospel,
who cannot be seen in the Pulpit, without memory of their disgrace. Others
again are excluded, because of their violent and refractory natures, and
uncouth dispositions; because, though their abilities promise very much, yet it
cannot be hoped, that in the many and various actions in which the Society must
employ them, they will keep a constant tenor of virtue, and never lash out
into the exorbitances into which nature does seem to precipitate them. Again,
they who have deserted any religious Order of which they have once worn the
habit, though but in their novitiate, are excluded the Society: their former
inconstancy prognosticating a future danger.

Now if any that has no impediment demand to be admitted into the Society, he
is asked whether any of the Society ever persuaded him to this vocation; and if
it be found that any Jesuit persuaded him, then he is not admitted, but turned
back to a new deliberation. For though it be not an ill act to persuade
another, whom we judge fit, to any determinate good course of life, yet St.
Ignatius desired that the Vocation of all that should ever be admitted into the
Society, should proceed wholly from God, and not from man.

These cautions are used in the admission of any to the Society. When once they
are admitted they are, after a general confession of their passed life, trained
up to a subduing of their passions, renouncing themselves, union with God, and
a perfect indifference, that they may be ready to embrace any employment in any
place where it shall seem most for the good of Souls to employ them, to the
greater Glory of God. The time of their probation, which in other Orders is but
one year, in the Society is of two years before their Studies, and one year
more after their Studies are ended. In the first two years they are often told
all the hardship they are to expect, showed the Rule, and accustomed to the
mental and vocal player, examens, spiritual Lectures, and the mortifications
which they are daily to practice during their whole life, that if they find not
in themselves Strength and resolution to go on, they may go away in Peace, and
take what other course they think best. But if they continue their good
desires, and give satisfaction, then at the end of two years they are admitted
to the ordinary vows of Religious orders, which are perpetual Poverty,
Chastity and Obedience. The exercises in which the Novices are practiced in,
and tried by, are serving in Hospitals, tending the sick, waiting at Table,
helping the Cook and other menial Officers, going in Pilgrimage, begging alms
from door to door, and the like. All which, being humble actions, practice a
Man in the mystery of himself, subdue pride and self love, and acquaint the
Soul with the Cross of Christ. These actions St. Ignatius would have all tried
in from the very beginning, and these all must, and all do daily practice in
the Houses of the Society, none at all exempt, but such as sickness exempteth.
This difference only there is betwixt Novices and Ancient Fathers; that the
Novices have more time for humble exercises, as being to get good habits by
frequent practice. The Ancient Fathers (unless the necessity of their Neighbor
do otherwise require) are employed in these exercises only, so far as to keep
up the primitive Vigor of humility, and withal, not to take up too much time
from their studies or other employments. Yet all are practiced all their life
in humble actions, as sweeping the house, making their beds, serving at Table,
and the like mean employments.

I conceive that many when they read this will admire what it means. They have
conceived Idea's of Jesuits so distant from these actions, that they will stand
amazed, and either not believe that these things are true, or if they believe
that I say true, (as I am certain that I do) they will despise the Jesuits for
them; as deeming these actions far below them whom they conceive to be the
great Masters of the World. But to these I answer that they know not the Grand
secret of Christ's School. Perfection is an admirable Fabric, which reaches as
high as Heaven, but unless it be built on a profound Renunciation of ones self,
it is a Vanity, it is Hypocrisy, it is an empty shadow, a lie, not perfection. He
that will follow me says Christ, Mat. 16. must renounce himself. Easy words
in reading, but in action the hardest in the World, as which contain the whole
Enignia of Christian perfection, and all the wonders of Religion.

If you will know the great mystery of Jesuitisme, of which so much has been
falsely blazed in lying Pamphlets, I will tell it you in a word; The mystery of
Jesuitisme consists in making humble and able men. Here is the secret. These
small actions, these contemptible actions, these despicable actions practiced
by Men of good parts, for no other reason then for to renounce themselves in
imitation of Christ, are the great Engines which raise them to the height of
Perfection. We may reckon many great Men of the Society of Jesus, who have done
great things, and, carrying the Gospel to the bounds of the Earth, have
converted many Nations: but where did they lay the foundation of their
greatness? it was in exercising humility, in abnegation of themselves, in
embracing the Cross of Christ which is the science of Saints; If this seem
strange and unintelligible, I must confess that it is so indeed to those that
seek Vanity and Worldly Wisdom. Quia abscondisti haec a sapientibus and
prudentibus and revelasti ea Parvulis. Mat. 11.25. God has hid these things
from the wise, and sage of the World, revealed them to little ones.

This practice therefore of renouncing our selves, St. Ignatius would have the
continual exercise of all his. And least humility through want of a sure guide
might swarm from the true path of Charity, he ordained that all the exercises
done in the time of Probation, and all the employments afterward, should be
squared out by obedience. By this Obedience every one, renouncing his own will
and understanding, becomes capable of being employed, when, where, and how the
Society shall judge fittest for the greater Honor of God. Furthermore because
for the disposing of every one right, it is not enough that they be perfectly
obedient, but it is also required that the Society do know every one; therefore
does St. Ignatius further order, that every one should entirely open his
interior, and all the good and bad of his heart to his superior, that so
every one may be guided and disposed of in the best manner.

These are the chief means which the Society uses in order to attain Virtue.
For the rest, their life, as to diet, Lodging, Apparel, is such as beseems poor
Clergy Men: there being nothing of Superfluity allowed, and nothing denied that
is necessary.

As for fasts and other corporal austerities, there is nothing determined in
the rule; only this, that every one shall use such penance, as his superior or
Spiritual Father, considering his health and employments, shall judge most for
his advancement in Spirit. How this point is practiced in the Society we may
judge by reading the acts of those eminent men, whose lives are writ. As for
those that are living, this is true, that the number of those who by Labor and
Austerity do notably impair their Health is very great, which argues that they
rather need a Bridle then a Spur. All this then the Society does, in order to
bring up her Subjects to Solid Virtue. There are yet two things more which do
mainly conduce to conserve the whole body of the Society in Vigor.

The first is the power of dismission; a thing which many carp at, yet which is
extremely advantageous to conserve the society. St. Ignatius therefore
reflecting, that in a great number of Men, though chosen with all the care, and
educated with all the diligence that humane frailty can use, diverse would in
length of time, through weariness of labor, or want of fervor, or some of the
innumerable tentations to which man's life is continually exposed, become not
only useless to the Society, but also noxious, and perhaps scandalous too:
reflecting on all this, I say, St. Ignatius did institute his order so, that
the vows of Religion, which are made at the end of the two years probation,
should remain dispensable by the General of the Society. They therefore that in
process of time are found by their own fault to become unfit to live in the
Society, are dismissed and freed from their Vows, so that if they be not
Priests (which usually none are till nine or ten years experience had of them)
they may marry, or take what worldly course they please. This they who are
dismissed cannot complain of; for before they enter they are told of the
condition which they undertake, and every half year during their Novice-ship,
they are particularly asked, whether they understand this condition, and are
contented with it. So they cannot complain, since that maxim is manifest,
Scienti and volenti non fit injuria. On the other side it is extremely
necessary for conserving the whole society entire to root out those weeds,
which if they were let grow would over run the whole Garden of Religion: it is
necessary to open a Vein and let out the ill blood, before the disease master
the whole body; it is necessary to separate those whose contagion would like a
plague infect all. Domestic disorder is the intestine Enemy of Religous
Houses, and the bane that has ruined all those holy communities, which from
Fervent and Illustrious beginnings have at length ended in smoke and ashes.
This disorder came not in on a sudden, but by little and little, now one, then
another relaxed a little of their primitive fervor: Till at length the number
of disorderly Persons overtopping the Virtuous, Discipline was laid aside and
the rule neglected. This sad event the society endeavors to forestale, by
cutting off the rotten members, before their number and Example corrupt the
rest. I know many have objected against this Privilege of the society; but
they have always been answered, and the power of dismission, as often
confirmed, as it was questioned. In particular. Greg. 14. in his Bull of the
Year 1591. says, Eam (potestatem) ratam and intactam esse volumus, tanquam rem
magni momenti, ad societatis puritatem and conservationem retinendam. We will
have the power of dismission stand Valid, and untouched, as a thing of great
concern, for the coservation, and purity of the Society. Nor can the Clergy or
other Religious Orders complain of this: for in effect as many (not to say,
more) are dismissed out of other Orders, proportionably great, as out of the
society. As it was made appear in the seventh Congregation. This is the only
difference, that when other Orders dismiss those who are incorrigible, and
scandalous amongst them, they expel them with the burden of their Vows, and
so they remain Apostata's all their Life. The society on the contrary takes
away that burden of their Vows, from all that are dismissed, if they be not
professed. Now it very seldom happens that one who is professed in the
society does deserve expulsion. For none are professed in the society till many
years (ordinarily it is at least 17 or 18 years) experience had of them; all
which time if one both give and receive satisfaction, it is very extraordinary,
that after so long experience, he should behave himself so as to deserve
expulsion from a Religion, in which he has spent so great a part of his age
with content on all sides.

By this means therefore of expulsion or dismission, the society endeavors
to prevent the mischief which the imperfection of some might in time bring on
all; choosing rather to part with those, from whom she cannot hope any good,
than to use prisons or corporal chastisements. For such severities (though
laudably used by other Communities) rather restrain the body than the mind, and
oftener make men dissemble their malice, than change their manners.

The other thing which in the Society will by the grace of God conserve the
whole order in vigor, is, the great caution which is used to exclude all
manner of ambition of honor and preferments. For all that are professed in the
Society do make a vow, that they will never seek neither by direct or indirect
means any superiorities, prelacies or dignities, nor ever admit of them when
they are offered, unless they be commanded by those who can oblige them under
sin. Furthermore they promise to detect any of the society whom they shall know
to endeavor directly or indirectly to procure Honors or Dignities. And if any
be ever found to have prevaricated in this kind, then is he made ignominious,
and deprived of Voice Active and Passive.

This Vow has many Advantages for conserving of the true Spirit of the
Society. For whereas honor is the most specious snare of the World, that
enchants the mind with most powerful charms, and proves commonly the bane of
greatest Wits, and persons the best qualified; this Vow excludes all that
mischief, by putting such a distance, or (to use the Scripture Phrase) so great
a Chaos betwixt Men of the Society, and Honors, that they cannot arrive or aim
at them without wading through Hell it self. It is laudable in other Orders to
furnish the Church with so many worthy Prelates, as we see they daily do. Yet
the Society fears least by furnishing others, she should disfurnish her self;
she fears opening a Gate to honor, least by the same Gate she let in
ambition, to the dishonor of the whole Order: she fears least those whose
virtue and learning do chiefly uphold the credit of the Order, and rigor of
Discipline, might by this means be snatched from her: finally, she fears least
any when by humane frailty they should grow weary of labor, and relent in
fervor, should relinquish their vocation, and sallyes out by the fair Gate of
honor, and under pretense of doing the Church public service, serve their own
passion. On the contrary, she hops that those who really and heartily
renounce all those dignities to which their many gallant parts seem to make a
Bridge, may do the Church more service by continuing in the humility of their
own vocation, and by contemning honor, than by accepting it.

Thus then is honor bounded out of the Society with the strongest rampart that
can be, that is by vow. To this we may add two other things which both aim at
the exclusion of all ambition and conserving humility. The first is, that the
Government of the Society is not by chapter and plurality of voices, which
might cause factions, and foster ambition: But all Offices are given by the
General, or if they be inferior Offices, by the Provincial: who being informed
of the abilities of their several subjects, choose whom they think fittest,
without acquainting any body with their design till the Election be past. The
other is, that in the Society there is a perfect equality between all; no man
for birth, or learning, or antiquity, or any thing else has any advantage of
place, diet, clothing, lodging, or the like. But all share alike, and take
their turns in the meanest Offices, none being exempt. All this considered, I
do not know how it is possible practically speaking to exclude ambition out of
any Community, more than it is out of the Society.

These be the chief means by which the Society endeavors to educate her
subjects to virtue, and keep up the primitive vigor of the Order.

Now for learning, which as I said in the beginning of this Chapter, was the
second thing whereby men of the Society were to be made fit instruments for
their end. The esteem which St. Ignatius made of learning, is sufficiently
evidenced in the great labor he took himself in studies, as I have already
showed. And in the Society he desired to wedde Learning to Virtue, so strongly
as that they should never be divorced. For this reason he ordered that none
should be professed of four vows in the Society (which is the degree of those
that are the chief) who had not got to such a pitch in Sciences, as that they
were by sworn Examiners judged able to teach Philosophy and Divinity with
applause. Though notwithstanding, for avoiding of honors, he would not have
the fathers of the Society take the title of Doctor, but where it should be
necessary. For the studies of the Society this may be said in general, that
they embrace no study by which they may not hope to become more serviceable to
the Church for the good of their neighbor; and they refuse none, by which they
may hope to become more serviceable. In particular they all are taught, first
humanity, if they be not well entered before their admittance. Then they study
Philosophy and Mathematics for three years. Lastly for the space of four
years, they study their Divinity; and with that they hear a lesson of H.
Scripture, and another of Hebrew in order to the better understanding of holy
writ. These are their studies, wherein they continue at least seven years;
during which time they are often practiced in preaching, that they may get some
facility, and that every ones talent may be seen. And to secure the
exorbitance, which wits may easily fall into, the rule speaks plain, that
none must broach new opinions, or teach any thing which is not conformable to
what the Catholic Church holds, and approved Authors teach. And of this even
before their admittance they are warned, and not admitted unless they resolve
to observe it. Which I take notice of, to show how groundless their cavils are
who object Novell opinions and exotic Doctrine to the Society, whereas no such
Doctrine either is or can be tolerated among them. After their studies they go
to the third year of Probation where they endeavor by frequent Prayer and
Meditation to attend wholly to the study and practice of solid Virtue,
according to the end and institute of the Society, re-assuming for that purpose
the same experiments, wherewith they were tried in their first Probation or
Novice-ship. And this is what the Society does, for to make her own Subjects
fit for those functions which they are afterward to undertake for the good of
their Neighbors.

CAP. III. What they of the Society do in order to help their Neighbor, for
the good of Souls.
AFter that the Fathers of the Society have ended their studies and Probations,
and now are by Gods grace furnished with such Talents of learning and Virtue,
as every one has been able to arrive unto, the first thing that they are to
expect is, to be prefently set on work, and kept in perpetual employment, that
idleness which St. Ignatius calls the Origin and root of all evil, otium
malorum omnium origo, may have no place amongst them.

Now their employments, which they undertake for their Neighbor, are various.
The first (for I will begin from thence, according to the course of Man's age)
is teaching the Catechism or Christian Doctrine. This employment St. Ignatius
esteemed so much, that besides commending it with his own example even when he
was General of the Society, he would also command it, and exact, that all that
were professed of the Society should by a special Vow promise to God, to have a
peculiar care of teaching the Catechism. Further he ordered, that all that
were employed in the Government of the Society, should at the entrance of their
office, Catechize the children and ignorant people, for a good number of days.
As St. Ignatius in Europe, so St. Francis Xaverius in the East Indies,
commendded this holy exercise, both by example and precept, as the most
profitable, and which he used to call, His employment. He never let a day slip,
when possible he could, without catechizing: and he used to go about the
streets, to call all the children, and servants, and slaves together to hear
the Christian Doctrine. When he went to Japony, he left Gaspar Barraeus
Superior of the Society in his place, and gave him this instruction, that he
should himself personally Catechize, and not commit that charge to any else;
whereas in other things he left him free to use the help of others when he
should think fit. And in effect those Wonderful conversions of so many Nations
as he became Apostle of, are the fruits of Catechism. Nor is it to be wondered
that the Society sets so much by teaching the Catechism. It Is the Doctrine of
Christ, that which the Son of God taught with word, with example, with Signs
and Prodigies. It Is the way to eternal Life, and as they call it in the West
Indies, the science of Heaven, the only knowledge necessary to Salvation. It Is
the study which most imports the World; for those that now are children will
within a few years be masters of all the World; if therefore they be well
instructed now, you may hope of good plants good trees, and good fruit of good
seed: on the contrary neglect these Children now, and you shall soon have an
unruly, licentious and savage Nation.

For these reasons and many others the society says with Christ, Mark 10.14.
Sinite parvulos venire ad me, let little ones come to me; and makes this the
first of her cares to instruct little ones, and ignorant people in the
Christian Doctrine. With what success they perform this, I had rather you
should hear from an Extern, then from one of the society. Laurence Beyerlinke,
then a Canon of Antwerp, that died not very long since, a man of great
Learning, as his books testify, writes thus in Theat. vitae Humanae Tom. 2.
lib. C. In our age, among all that profess Religion, those of the society of
Jesus do with great diligence and great fruit apply themselves to catechizing
youth. If there were nothing else, this might make them commendable to all,
that with so great zeal, and so exact a method, they do a thing so advantageous
to the Church of God. It seems to be the proper function of the Jesuits to
which they all set themselves, endeavoring so to form the minds of little
ones, that they may suck Christian piety with their milk. By this means it
happens that in the Towns where the society resides, you shall see the
Children mannerly and devout, and able to discourse of those things, which in
other places the elder are ignorant of. Nor do the Jesuits take this pains with
the children of the rich only, but even with the poorest Tradesmen, even with
almesmen, and beggars. All these they instruct whenever on Festival days
they can get them together. Nor do they stop within the Walls of Cities, but
make excursions abroad to those Parishes where Pastors are wanting to their
duty. According to the Apostle, they become all to all, and accomodate
themselves to the manners of all, to teach all. In Antwerp alone you shall see
sometimes thirty Fathers and more employed in this pious work.

The next employment, following the course of man's age, is the teaching
Humanity, that is, the Latin and Greek tongues in several Classes or Schools
of Grammar, Syntax, Poetry, and Rhetoric. In these they endeavor to educate
Youth to learning so, as all along to instill piety. This is a thing which the
Society has always practiced from her first institution, and that (as Greg.
13. says in his Bull Aedificandi,) by divine vocation. In every College of
the Society, you have five or six Masters employed in teaching these lower
schools. What labor and toil these men must devour you may easily guess if
You reflect, what it is for a man that has otherwise good talents, to consume
his age with children. How many impertinencies must he strive with, that is
content to be confind to the company of little one. He must spur on one, bridle
another, bear with the rudeness of this, wink at the passion of that, control
the malepertnesse of the other, and study the humors of all, to win all to virtue
and learning. A great labor, and if it were not undertaken for Gods sake, I
should call it intolerable. But since it does advantage the good of Souls so
much, it is embraced by all the Society with a great deal of fervor, without
pretending any gain, or being capable of receiving any salary for their pains,
but only what God has laid up in the other World, for those that labor in his
Vineyard. Twenty two Years Turcelline taught these lower schools, Cerda 30. and
John Boniface 40 years together, and very many have and do spend all their
days in teaching little children. The Society has only the labor, others
reap the fruit. In these schools are formed those who afterward become
Religious in Cloisters, Preachers in Pulpits, Pastors in Churches, Captains in
Armies, Judges in Courts. All the Cities wherein the Society is see this so
well, that generally the chief motive why they desire Colleges is, that their
children may be taught that piety and learning which may make them fit to
manage greater affairs afterward. The number of their scholars as Contern
guesseth was in the year 1618 one hundred and fifty thousand; another since
has counted them to be above two hundred thousand. Another in his book de
Instit. Christ. pueritiae says, that if the Society had been from the
beginning founded for this alone, to teach youth, and did only this one thing,
yet would this alone give the Society credit and splendor enough, and
administer to them in teaching matter enough of of virtue, and to the whole
World of profit.

The third employment wherein the Society endeavors to help their neighbor
is, (to go on in Doctrinal matters) teaching the higher schools, as Philosophy,
Mathematics, and the several parts of Divinity, both positive and speculative.
These studies commend themselves enough by their name and nature. For
Mathematick besides the profit, is the pleasantest of all studies; Philosophy
serves for nothing else then to strengthen reason, and discuss nature;
Divinity is the bulwark of the Church and School of Faith. In these studies the
Society labors to perfect men in the best part of nature (that is reason)
and Christians in the knowledge of supernatural things; that they may be secure
in the ways both of time and eternity. I need not say any thing of the
success which the society has had in these, and in their other studies. I
will only use the words of Christ, John 10.38. Operibus credit, believe their
works. Look on their innumerable learned works; look on the several sciences
illustrated by them; look on the Catalogue of the books made by the Society in
the first hundred years, which Catalogue makes a complete Tome; and let their
works speak for them. I know some have carped at some of their works, but
withal I know the repute which the Society has got in all manner of learning
is such, that I appeal to the judgment of their adversaries, and desire no
commendation but what they do give them.

The fourth employment is preaching and explicating holy Scripture in the
Pulpit for the edification of the people. This is that function to which all
other sciences serve; the end and term of all. By this they labor to spread
the Gospel of Christ, and teach the way of perfection, not to little ones, and
ignorant people, but to those who are, or should be grown up to a manhood in
perfection. For the manner of preaching three things are set down in the first
Tome of the Hist. of the Society l. 2. which from the beginning the preachers
of the Society set themselves for inviolable precepts, according to which
afterward their rules were drawn. The first is that for the matter of their
Sermons they should, omitting obscure and curious questions, insist chiefly on
those things which contain Christian duty, to extirpate vice, and plant virtue.
The second that they should never affect an empty verbal eloquence, nor study
quaint terms, but solid truths and eternal verities, which they should
animate with a fervor expressed in their eyes, voice, countenance, and
gesture. Lastly that remembering that those preachers were most efficacious who
brought their own example for instance of what they said, they should live so,
that their whole life might continually preach all that they taught in the
pulpit. These are the rules of their Preachers, by observing which they have
and do daily through Gods grace work great effects.

The fifth employment enters farther into the interior of men's souls. It
consists in administering the Sacraments, specially of confession and
communion. The frequenting these two Sacraments was the exercise of the
primitive Church, as Coccius and diverse learned authors prove. And for
confession, besides those places wherein power is given to priests to absolve
sins, we have Act. 19. v. 18. that many of the believers did come (to Paul and
his companions) announcing their acts, or as the Syriack has it, offensas
suas, their offenses. For the holy communion we have the express text of Acts
2.42. They were persevering in the communion of breaking of bread; which all
antiquity ever understood, as likewise modern Authors do, of frequent
communion. This was their practice, and whilst this practice lasted their
fervor was such, as after ages have ever admired. But in success of time
impiety so perverted men's minds, that they grew to love their sins and hate
the remedies. Before the Society was instituted, as Florimond and diverse
authors tell, it was a disgrace to frequent the Sacraments; but St. Ignatius
and his restored this Primitive custom of the Church. For this reason the
Learned Cardinal Baronius, who had seen what was the practice of the World
sometime before, and a long time after the Society was erected, used to call
the Jesuits church at Rome, Anastasia, that is, Resurgens, Rising, because
that in that place he said he seemed to see the Catholic church rise out of
the Lethurgy of sin to a new vigor, by frequenting these two so wholesome
sacraments. Indeed it is wonderful to see what strange concourse there is now a
days in all catholic countries to these two Sacraments; churches are filled,
and the confessors are fain to fit all the day long in their seats; and that
not at Easter only, or once or twice a year, but upon all the great feasts. In
particular it is remarkable how those days usually consecrated to
debauchments, I mean Shrovetide, are now spent in Catholic countries. For
where there is a College of the Society, there is always at that time a
general communion, to which all are by precedent sermons invited. And they come
so fast, that in great Towns they reckon the communicants by thousands. In some
cities there have been counted twenty, in some thirty, in some forty thousand,
that in one Shrovetide have received the holy Eucharist in the church of the
society.

The sixth employment is the giving the spiritual Exercise; which because it is
almost unknown in England even to most catholics, I must explicate it. The
spiritual exercise then is a retirement in which the Excercitant withdrawes
himself for some number of days from all communication with others, in order
to attend to converse with God, and his own soul in prayer. In this retirement
diverse meditations are given and several instructions (accomodated by an
experienced ghostly Father to every one) whereby the soul is lead to a knowledge
of her self, a decestation of her sins, a love of God and imitation of Christ.
That wherein these spiritual Exercises do most specially help the soul is, to
make a good election, and settle well the future life of every one according to
his own vocation. These spiritual exercises were compounded by St. Ignatius,
and (which is wonderful) in the first year of his conversion. I may justly call
them the chief secret of the Society, the fountain from whence they suck the
Spirit of God, and the channel by which they derive the same Spirit into
others. Ludovicus Strado of the holy Order of St. Bernard, had tried the
spiritual exercises, and he called them Tyrocinium totius mundi, the Noviciate
of all the world; because in them every one may learn to steer the whole course
of his life to perfection, according to each ones several calling. And
Augustine Carnajal, of the Order of St. Augustine, after having labored in the
West Indies, after having undergone with commendation diverse Offices in Spain,
after having visited the Monasteries of his Order in Italy, by the authority of
his Holiness, at length in the Monastery of St. James in Bononia, made for the
space of a month the spiritual Exercises in the year 1601, and he gave this
testimony of them, That from the time he was first a Religious man he had
always wished to find out a way by which he might walk straight to perfection,
and that now at length in these spiritual Exercises he had found out that way.
Lastly that great Master of Spirit, great preacher, and great contemplative
Lewis of Granada, of the Order of St. Dominick, speaks of these spiritual
Exercises thus, So much spiritual Doctrine did I learn in those Exercises and
Documents, that my whole life can not suffice to write what there God showed
me. Thus do these great men speak: and this I may presume to add, that what
skill soever the Society has in helping souls, what dexterity soever they show
in discretion of spirits, what zeal soever they burn with for the good of their
neighbor, all that they owe to these Exercises, which form in them the true
Spirit of the Society, enlighten their minds, and inflame their hearts. It is
not therefore without great reason that they retire themselves every year to
make these Exercises, nor can they be condemned if they commend that to others
which they find so beneficial to themselves. Many do retire themselves to the
Colleges of the Society to make these spiritual exercises, and none ever
repented himself of his pains; but all ever acknowledged, that the fruit which
by this means redounds to their soul, is greater then they ever could expect,
or can express.

The seventh employment which the Society undertakes for the good of their
neighbor is, to help in Hospitals, comfort the sick, relieve the poor, and
imprisoned persons, first for their spiritual, then for their corporal
assistance also. Those that know the Society and are acquainted with their
Colleges and Houses, can tell you how assiduous the Jesuits are in these
kinds of charities. If there be an Hospital in any Town where the Jesuits
reside, they always depute some of their Colleges, to assist, the sick there;
for to catechize and instruct them; for to administer the sacraments to them,
for to beg alms if need require up and down the town for them; and when
servants are wanting, for to tend the sick, sweep the chambers, make their
beds, provide them necessaries. In like manner where there is a prison they go
very often to comfort those poor souls, to encourage and assist them (if they
be condemned) to a good christian death, or, if their crimes be not capital, to
aid them in what they can, so to win them to serious repentance, and amendment
of their life. As for other poor sick and distressed persons, they seek them up
and down in their streets and houses, counting it a fault if any suffer whom
they can relieve. This is yet more admirable, in the time of contagious
Diseases and Plagues. Whenever that happens in any place where the Society
is, presently a proportionable number of Fathers are exposed for the assistance
of the infected; these Fathers are chosen out of those who voluntarily offer
themselves a sacrifice to God for the Good of their Neighbor. For it is the
custom of the Society, that when there is any great occasion of a hard duty
for the good of Souls, the Rector or Superior calls all his Subjects
together, and acquainting them with the urgent necessity, desires them first
to commend the matter to God, and then that those who find in themselves a
desire to be exposed, and are ready to lay down their life for their Neighbor,
should after a convenient deliberation acquaint him with their resolution. Out
of those then that offer themselves the Superior chooses whom he thinks
fit; and these commonly are very able men, for the Superior cannot think it
fit to expose novices or imperfect persons to so great danger. This is what was
practiced in the beginning of the Society, and (thanks be to God) this practice
is as much in vigor at this day as ever it was. None even of the enemies of
the society can say, that in the towns where the Jesuits live, either prisons
or Hospitals, or poor, or infected persons are neglected by them. Though
notwithstanding this practice costs the Society the loss of many brave and
gallant Men. In Gant in the year 1633 the Dutch College lost in four months
ten, who successively exposed themselves to help the infected of the plague,
all of them very able Men. At Berges near Dunkerke they lost five on the same
account in three months. In the year 1649 in a contagious fever at Rome,
besides diverse others, the General of the Society F. Vincent Caraffa assisting
the sick, contracted the disease and died.

And to come home here in London, in the last great plague, three of the
Society were exposed to the assistance of those that were infected. One of them
was F. Henry Mors, who got the infection but recovered, and was afterward in
the time of the long Parliament executed at Tyburn for a Priest and Jesuit. So
God disposed that his charitable labors should at length be crowned with a
glorious death.

I conceive the Reader will be no little astonished at this Superlative
charity. A charity so great that none would dare to command it, did not very
Zealous Men Voluntarily offer it, and even beg to be admitted to it. To
adventure ones life for to assist poor Miscreants that can not render you
thanks, to run into loathsome prisons and stinking Hospitals, to attend
Ulcerous and nasty sicknesses, to embrace those that have the plague, and all
this for no other fee but only the conscience of doing a good work, pleasing to
God, and profitable to our Neighbor, is a charity so transcendent, that I
should fear that none would believe it, had I not all the Nations abroad for
witnesses of what I say, and every Town wherein there is a College of the
Society to attest the truth of it.

The eighth employment which the Society undertaketh for their neighbor, is
that which is called Mission. All that I have hitherto said is practiced within
the bosom of the Catholic church. This extends it self to the furthest
bounds of the Earth, to Pagans and Heathens, and seeking ways to dilate the
knowledge of Christ, undergoeth, besides all the labors already mentioned, a
perpetual banishment from friends, from country, from all the comforts of life.
These Missions were begun by S. Francis Xaverius, who, at the instance of John
the Third King of Portugal, was sent into the East Indies. And admirable man,
whose zeal surmounted the flames of the torrid zone, whose conquering mind
overcame the untamed Ocean, whose vast charity was of a larger circumference
then the whole universe. Danger was his delight, labor his solace, and death
his prize. If I should tell you what he has done for the church of of God I
must name all the chief countries and towns of the East, for all of them he
illustrated with the light of the Gospel. The Son does not make so great a
change in the World, when it draws it out of the shade wherein night had buried
it, as this gallant soul did in all the East, which he drew out of the Egyptian
darkness of infidelity to the admirable light of Christianity.

After this great Apostles example many thousand of the Society have gone, and
do daily go to spread the Gospel of Christ in all the Quarters of the World: To
East, and West, India, China, Japony, Brasile, Paraquaria, Canada, Peru,
Mexico, Chili, Abassia, Congo, Mauritania, Monomotapa, and in a word to the
known Nations of the unknown World. So that the Society may without vanity say
Quae regio in terris nostri non plena laboris?

If the Society hears of a way opened into any country of the World, where
Christ is not known, presently they offer themselves to go thither. They know
they are to pass through cruel and merciless seas, to more cruel and
merciless Nations. They know they are to travers vast woods and deserts full of
Lions and Tigers; to find out a people more savage then those Beasts. They know
they are to climb over Mountains of Snow and Ice, to find out men colder then
ice, all frozen in impiety; all this they know, and they weigh all the labor
and danger they must endure, yet nothing can stop them. Never was there yet
labor or danger found so great, but that the Society (through the assistance
of God) found greater minds to encounter and overcome those labors and
dangers, wheresoever the good of souls did require their help. This is a truth
manifest to all this habitable World; there being no country known to Men,
where the Society does not labor for Christ. But all this is done with
incredible pains. Weary journies by sea and Land, perpetual drudgery, tedious
sicknesses without comfort of Doctor or Physic, untimely, and many times
violent death, are daily and hourly to be expected by those that will labor to
instruct wild Men and Cannibals, and manure them to the Faith of Christ. And
all these troubles and dangers are redoubled by the want of those comforts
which Friends, and acquaintance, and kindred, and the civility and plenty of
Europe afford. So that whosoever goes into these Missions of the Society, must
make account, that he leapeth into a furnace of perpetual tribulation, where he
is never to cease laboring and enduring for Christ, till with his last breath
he is sacrificed to Divine love. Yet such is the mercy of God, that the Society
wants not men, who voluntarily embrace all this fatigue, and willingly offer
themselves, and beg these Missions.

These are then the employments of the Society, these their functions: for I
omit the Naval and Camp missions, wherein the Society endeavors to assist
seamen, and Soldiers; I omit their frequent endeavors to reconcile those that
are at Enmity: I omit their industry in promoting of Plety by sodalities and
other ways; all which may in some sort be guessed at, by what I have already
said. To conclude then this chapter, I desire the Reader to reflect on one
thing, which will much inhance the price of all these actions. It is that all
this is done gratis. The Jesuits do not expect any reward, nor can they receive
any stipend, or recompense for their pains in teaching, preaching, helping the
sick, administering Sacraments, or any of the charitable functions which they
embrace. But as they do frankly and freely, for the honor of God, whatsoever
they can do for the good of their Neighbor, so they rely on the Providence of
God who exciteth devout people to supply their necessity out of pure charity.
This they do not do as condemning the Clergy and Religious, who take Tithes and
Stipends for their spiritual functions justly, as the church allows them: but
they desire to imitate as near as they can their Blessed Savior, who though he
lived on the alms, which devout people gave him, yet did freely and without
thought of recompense, all that his eternal Father ordained him to do. By this
means on the one side they avoid all semblance of Avarice and simony, and on
the other side the people, whom lucre often times makes nigards to God, and
strangers to the sacraments, are sooner wone to do good, when they see it costs
them nothing, but a good will, to make use of the societies labor in schools,
in sermons, in sacraments, and the rest of their spiritual and charitable
functions.

CAP. IV. Whence it comes that the Society is still persecuted and calumnied by
many.
ONe would think that so many charitable actions, done purely for love, might
deserve a reciprocal love: and that men who harass themselves with continual
toil for the profit of others, should at least reap thanks for their pains,
and find compassion in their travail, not indignation; comfort, not
persecution. Yet on the contrary, of the society we may say as of the Primitive
church, notum est nobis quia ubique contradicitur ei, we know that every where
they are contradicted and persecuted. But this opposition is not so general as
it is noysed; if the adversaries of the Jesuits be many, their friends are also
many, and they of the abler and better sort of people: as evidently appears
by this, that though the Enemies of the society do all that they can possibly
to overthrow them, yet notwithstanding the Jesuits are still maintained, and
honored wheresoever Catholic Religion is allowed.

Three sorts of Men I observe in England to be adversaries of the society. The
first and worst of all are some Catholics, who have such a tooth against the
Jesuits that they cannot afford them one good word. These are unexcusable, for
since they know the Catholic Church has approved the institute of the
society, and they take that Church for their infallible guide, they can have no
color for condemning the society. They do the society great wrong, but
themselves far greater, (specially some of them whose quality is such that they
ought to be more exemplar) for in effect, whilst they endeavor to disgrace the
society they defame themselves. They must think their Auditors very ignorant
in Christian duty, if they suppose them such as cannot reflect what sin
detraction is. Some of these would seem Zealots, and they have something that
might give them vogue enough, if envy and this spirit of detraction did not
de-ingrate all the rest. These I would desire to meditate on that of St. John,
Epist. 1. c. v. 20. Si quis dixerit, quoniam diligo Deum, and fratrem suum
oderit, mendax est. If any body say, I love God, and yet hates his Brother, he
is a liar. Again I would desire them to reflect on the severe censures which
they incur by speaking against the Institute of the Society, which is no less
then Excommunication ipso facto; as appears by the Bull of Greg. 13.
beginning Ascendente Domino, Dated 1584. Where he has these words, Praecipimus
in virtute sanctae obedientiae ac sub poenis excommunicationis latae
sententiae, nec non inhabilitatis ad quaevis officia and beneficia saecularia,
and quorumvis ordinum regularia, eo ipso absque alia declaratione incurrendis
(quarum absolutionem nobis and successoribus nostris reservamus) ne quis
cujuscunque status, gradus, and praeeminentiae existat dictae societatis
institutum, aut constitutiones quovis disputandi vel etiam veritatis indagandae
quaesito color, direct vel indirecte impugnare vel eis contradicere audeat.
We command in virtue of Holy Obedience, and under pain of excommunication latae
sententiae, as also of inability to any office or benefice secular or regular,
to be incurred without further declaration, and from which they cannot be
absolved but by us or our successors, That no man of what state degree or
eminence soever he be dare to impugn or contradict the Institute of the
society or constitutions; either directly or indirectly under any color of
disputing or searching out of the truth.

Another sort of men there are who hate the Jesuits becauise they will, never
reflecting why; These are a malevolent sort of men, whose lavish tongues vent
nothing but censures, their zeal is fury, their devotion mischief, their
envious souls are never lodged at ease, but in the ruin of their Neighbors.
Root and Branch. was the word wherewith they designed all the Papists long
since to destruction. Cruel spirits, that could rejoice whilst they warmed
themselves at the fire which consumed their King and Country: as though their
Govenant had been made with death and destruction. Aristides was a gallant man,
as most that ever Athens saw, a great Orator, and great Commander, and so
upright in all his dealings that he was surnamed the Just. Yet no virtue could
give him security, nor screen him from envy. The people, instigated by certain
hotspurs, would needs have him banished. To their Ostracisme therefore they
went to vote Aristides out of their Republic. Aristides went along with them,
and whilst he was on the shoreside, looking on the fury of the people more
merciless then the waves of the sea, one comes to him with a shell (for in
shells they writ their sentence, which thence was called Ostracisme) and
desires him to write in it the word for banishing Aristides. Aristides smiling
at the man, asked him friendly whether he knew Aristides; not I, quoth the man;
And why then must he be banished! says Aristides, what have you against him?
He is just (says the fellow) he is called Just, that name I hate, we are
resolved, he shall be gone; pray write: So Aristides writ as the man desired,
and though not without indignation, yet was he glad to see that his crime was
Justice. This furious sot was a picture of many mis-shaped souls that we have
in England. They do not know what a Jesuit is, they cannot tell that ever they
saw a Jesuit, they cannot name any one true crime committed by any Jesuit, yet
they hate the very name, nor shall any persuade them to reason. I cannot hope
much of these spirits, yet because I conceive many of them were misled by those
incendiaries of our late intestine wars, who from the pulpits painted the King
a Papist, the Pope a Monster, and the Jesuits his horns, I will not despair,
but that now, when those Apostles of Hell are silenced, these men may be
brought so far, as to resolve not to be enemies to the Jesuits till they can
tell why, which is all I beg of them.

A third sort of men there are who are adversaries of the society of Jesus, not
out of malice, but prevented by a prejudicate opinion. These are, the rational
Protestants. They have heard much against the Jesuits, and nothing for them.
So they presume that the crimes objected, are by silence allowed. It is to
these particularly that I consecrate this Treatise. And as I have showed them
in the three precedent Chapters what is the end of the society, and what the
means they use to perfect themselves and help their neighbors; so now I intend
to show them whence it comes that the society is so much maligned; and in the
following chapters I will answer the Objections made against the Society.

The first and principal reason that occurreth to me is Gods eternal
disposition, who, fince all was (as the Apostle speaks) wrapped up in sin, has
resolved to make use of the perverseness of the wicked for the trial of the
good; and has fixed this irrevocable decree, 2 ad Tim. 3.12. Omnes qui volunt
pie vivere in Christo Jesu, persecutionem Patientur; all that will live piously
in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. So the Confessors, so the Martyrs, so
the Apostles, so Christ himself found it. We must not therefore expect, that
the Jesuits shall be more kindly used by the World then Christ and his Saints
were. Si mundus vosodit, Scitote quia me priorem vobis odio habuit. If the
world hate you, says Christ, Joh. 15.18. to those that follow him, know that
they bated me before you. They that carry the name of Jesus must not be ashamed
to carry also the cross of Jesus. Nor must they expect, that for them, either
God should change his Decrees, or the world its nature.

It Is the will of God, that the just should be persecuted, and it is the nature
of the World to hate Justice. The plurality of Votes in this World always goes
for pleasure and profit, against learning and virtue. It Is a wretchedness in
men to do so, but it is an unspeakable secret of Gods providence, to make use
of this wretchedness of men, for to perfect his saints. This God did do with
the primitive church, this he did with the Holy Orders of Saint Benedict, St.
Dominick, St. Francis, and the rest, and this he does with the society. And I
take it for an argument of Gods great goodwill to the society, that he is
pleased to try them by adversity. This I am further convinced of, when I
reflect, that all their persecutions have still ended to their advantage, which
shows the secret hand of God that directs all for their good, and makes it an
argument of the Jesuits perfection that they thrive by persecution, as^ did
the primitive Church, to the astonishment of all the World. Surely there has
been enough done to exterpate the Jesuits out of England, and out of all the
World, if God did not maintain them. But as long as God maintains them,
persecution shall only perfect, not overthrow them.

The second reason why the Jesuits have many adversaries I take from the
nature of their functions. To teach and instruct others, is a thing very
profitable, but not very pleasing. Reprehensions which masters must use are
necessary, but odious, and many times children remember more what they
suffered, then what they got in schools. In a hundred or two hundred thousand
scholars, some will be incapable of learning, others untoward and of no
application: Yet these many times are of great birth, and prove leading men in
towns, and cities, and armies. Now when it happens (as often it must do) that
any of these are checked, and corrected, and perhaps (when they are
incorrigible) expulsed the schools, there remains an adversary for the society,
as great as any of these may chance to be in birth or dignity. All this on the
Jesuits side is unavoydable, for if you will keep schools, you must keep order
and discipline, and correct those that transgress. Nor on the other side must
we wonder, that some without any offense prove ungrateful. Most men are so to
God and to Christ; what if some be so to the Jesuits? What I have said of
schools, is in proportion to be understood of the other employments of the
society. A preacher must reprehend vice, he must speak home to his auditour.
And how many are there so lewd, that they hate the commendation of chastity?
how many so riotous that they cannot endure an invective against drinking? how
many are netled when they hear excess in apparel condemned? I know where it
happened that a Bishop was ready to inform against a Jesuit, as having spoken
treason, when he had preached against vanity in apparel. And the complaint had
been carried to court, had not the chief Magistrates of the town, testified
that the good Father had said nothing which might any ways touch upon the
State, and further that they themselves had desired the Father to preach of
that matter, as not being able to bear the expense which their Wives and
Children put them to for their apparel. But reprehension is a touchy matter,
and no wariness is enough to prevent complaints. In like manner a Confessarius
must not flatter his penitent; he must urge restitution of goods and fame, he
must be satisfied that the purpose of amendment is real, he must see the
contrition be hearty and sincere. These are no pleasing actions, and many
finding the Society more rigorous then they could wish, fling off, and call the
Jesuits scrupulous, and Puritant-papists, though the Jesuits and the Puritans
be antipodes in all their life and maxims.

The third reason is the nature of humane frailty, considered as well in the
Jesuits, as in those that oppose and calumny them. On the the Jesuits part,
it is humane frailty that now and then some of them fall into errors and
perhaps scandals too. This is the condition of man, that none can live quite
blameless, and in a great number of never so perfect men, some will be
imperfect. In so many hundred masters as daily teach schools in the Society,
some will swerve from their rule, and either through indiscretion, or passion
commit faults which may justly be censured. The like is of the other
employments of preaching, catechizing, missions, and the rest which I have
numbered in the precedent chapter, all which being hard employments, and
requiring a solid renunciation of ones self, for to be constantly performed
well, it must be expected that some will falter, and having set their hand to
the plough look back.

Now whereas when any of these things happen, all prudent men, ought to
compassionate humane infirmity, and by good counsel and advice endeavor to
take away the fault, or at least the Scandal; for the most part it happens
quite contrary, through the frailty (to call it no otherwise) of those that
oppose the Society. If one Jesuit among a hundred have erred, presently they
magnify the fault, and multiply it too, and clap it on all Jesuits, as a
property of their vocation. For example if they see a Jesuit exceed in cholar,
presently these Calumniatours comment on that fault, and first conclude that
that man is haughty and proud, then that all Jesuits are arrogant and
insufferable men: and so they set the calumny about, which runs through the
whole nation, still growing by the way, till at length the multitude takes the
noise for an argument, and rests fully convinced, every one being well
contented to believe ill of others. This is what I have very often observed to
have happened to the Jesuits: a little fault of one man's frailty, paraphrased
by malevolent glossers, has often made a great noise, and when the matter has
been sifted, the source of all has been at most a peccadilio, an oversight, a
chance. Now if it happen that some Jesuit committ a great fault against the
precepts of God or leave his vocation, presently that is rung out in a full
peal, and all the Jesuits in the World, must be lashed by every man's tongue,
for the fault which one committed, though all the rest were against the
delinquent, and more sensible of his fault then they would be of any humane
loss, or even of death it self. God be thanked such scandals happen but very
seldom; and perhaps that is one reason why the faults of the Jesuits make so
much noise, because they happen seldom. Howsoever the Jesuits have reason to
relent this unjust proceeding of their adversaries, which is both unchristian
and unrational: Unchristian because it is against all the rules of charity:
unrational because very illogically these men draw a general conclusion out of
particular premises. All lewd Women must not be concluded Saints, because St.
Mary Magdalen was so, nor all the Apostles Traitors, because Judas was so. The
Jesuits for the most part are virtuous and able men, if some times they err,
they desire a charitable interpreter, not a sower Critic.

Veniam petimusque damusque vicissim. The fourth reason is the condition of the
Jesuits life which on the one side is public in the view of all the World; and
on the other side has not that exterior rigor, which may bespeak veneration
by a kind of looks of Virtue, or countenance of mortification, which takes the
multitude that is not able to see into the inside of Virtues. Other religious
orders are immured up in Cloisters, where if they commit any fault, it is
covered in silence and solitude. A rough rigid habit gets reverence to some:
perpetual fasts give fame to others: others are credited by great austerity.
Others by daily begging of alms make their poverty and contempt of the World
known and esteemed. All do laudably; nor do I cite their example to tax them,
but to commend them, whom the Society looks at as their elder brothers. All
that I say is, that the Society has none of those things which may serve for a
sconce to others if they fall. A Jesuit that is a Master, or Preacher, or
Missionant, cannot err, but that he must have as many Witnesses of his error
as there are men that he deals with. The life and habit of a Jesuit, has
nothing that speaks Rigor: it is a common life, such as may beseem poor Clergy
Men that are tied to continual labor: as it has nothing of superfluity, so it
wants nothing that is necessary. This the Vulgar understand not, but easily
interpret amiss. I believe if I should describe the rigid life of the
Charter House Moncks in perpetual silence, perpetual solitude, perpetual fast
and praer, there would be found many hairbrain'd men who would presently cry,
The Devil is in these men. And the same Men if they should be told all the
Jesuits life, would presently cry, that They had an easy life, a merry life,
always fall of Good cheer. These men may have the comfort that they are not
the first Fools of the World: there were as very fools as they a long time ago.
Christ our Savior tells us so. Mat. 11.18. Venit Joannes neque manducans neque
bibens and dicunt demonium habet; venit Filius hominis manducans and bibens,
and dicunt ecce homo vorax and potator vini. John came neither eating nor
drinking, that is, with extreme Rigor of fast, and they say of him he has the
Devil in him. On the other side. The Son of Man comes eating and drinking, that
is leading a common life, not refusing a necessary diet, and they say he is a
devourer and a Wine-bibber. So does the multitude usually misinterpret virtue,
and like ill Scholars always construe wrong. Nor is it only the multitude,
some (for that must be said too) some I say, even among Priests and Religious
men reprehend the life of the Society. They are startled to see the common life
of the Jesuits, and like St. John's Disciples they ask. Math. 9.14. Quare nos
and Pharisaei jejunamus frequenter, discipuli autem tui non jejundnt. Why do we
and the Pharisees fast often, but your Disciples fast not? They have set
themselves a method of life and a way of Rigor, which is laudable, but that
which is not laudable, is, that when they see the Society go another way to
perfection on different from theirs, they imagine they are out of the way. And
which is yet less laudable they fall sometimes into open complaints, when they
see that the Jesuits, (though there appear no extraordinary Rigor in their
life to commend them to the opinion of the World) are notwithstanding in a high
opinion for Virtue and Learning, and carry away the ball for conduct of Souls
in most countries of Christendom. This does easily gall those who are not
solidly Virtuous: it makes them repine, to see that esteem, which they judge
due to themselves, paid to others, in whom they acknowledge so little merit.

Yet this must be borne pationtly by the Jesuits: nor must they change their
institute because of wicked eyes that look on: they must not overload their
Subjects who are wearied with their daily employments, for the judgment of
other men. Wise Men see, (notwithstanding the murmr of some) that there are
very few Orders in the church of God more strict, and bound to greater hardship
then the society. Nor does it import much, whether the mortification be in the
brain, or on the back: the former is least seen, but most felt. And whosoever
will look on the employments of the Society will easily find, that they import
as much pain and mortification, as any rule can easily do. Besides, the rule of
the Society obliges, that every one shall use such mortifications, as, his
employment and health considered, his Superior or Ghostly Father shall think
fit to allow him. In consequence to which rule I conceive the voluntary
mortifications used in the Society may compare with most, and transcend many of
the exactest observance. But they do not appear, and so those who measure all
by the outside, easily judge wrong.

These are then, as far as I can conceive, the fountains and sources of the
animosity that diverse have against the society. Now let us proceed to see what
it is that is objected against the Society, and what is their answer.

CAP. V. The Objections made against the society of Jesus, which concern their
life and Institute.
TWO things I desire to advertise the Reader of, before I enter on the
particular Objections. The one is that I shall deal sincerely and plainly in
setting down the objections and answers (as far as I know them) without
dissembling, or publishing any thing; my intent being wholly bent on this to
declare the truth, of which every one may judge as they see reason. The second
thing is, that when in the answer to these objections, I do clear (as I
conceive I shall) the Society, my meaning is not to say that never any man of
the Society erred in those points, no, that is not my meaning, nor would it be
true: I have already showed in the former chapter that one of the causes which
gives rise to the calumnies made against the Society, is the frailty of
particular Jesuits, from which I never intend to exempt them. But to show that
the society is blameless, is to show that their Rule and Institute, which in
effect is vigorously looked into, forbids those faults, and fenceth them out,
and prevents them, and punishes them severely when they are found, which is
all that humane frailty can do. All this every judicious man will allow: and so
I come to the Objections, and first to those which are the most vulgar.

The first objection then, which table talk lays to the Jesuits is, that they
are crafty. I answer that if by craft it be meant that the Jesuits are not
fools, not imprudent men, not headlong zealots, I hope it is all very true. The
Jesuits have a very prudent Government, like to Monarchical mixed with
Aristocracy. All depend on one, but one that has his laws fixed, and is bound
to hear counsel in every occurrent of moment, and may be called to account.
Besides the Jesuits do not easily admit any amongst them but such as they hope
may in time prove virtuous and able men. Further they set the highest esteem,
after virtue, on learning. And to secure the actions of all, every office and
employment amongst them has set rules, made with long deliberation and
experience. Finally no Jesuit is allowed to follow his own dictamen, but all
are regulated by the advice of Superiors, Masters, and Ghostly Fathers. All
this gives the Jesuits much advantage and dexterity in action, and will
effect, that (with Gods blessing) their endeavors will succeed, which is that
which prudence aims at. But if by craft is meant as the word sounds
(specially in an objection) a practice of compassing their ends by wiles and
tricks, or an endeavor to overreach others by undue means, it is very false
and very far from the Jesuits. This may appear first by looking on the end of
the Society described in the first chapter. Did ever any man go about to cheat
another, for his good that was cheated? Yet the end of the Society is the good
of their neighbor. Next the means the Society uses to compass this end, are
teaching, preaching, catechizing, and the rest numbered in the third chapter;
All which are no actions of cheating or cozenage: and besides, they are done by
the Jesuits frankly and freely, without hoping or admitting any salary or
reward. Do men, think you, use to take great pains in tricks and double
dealing for no advantage of their own? Lastly all the Kings and Princes and
their Councels, all the Cities and Nations that hold the society in esteem,
confute this objection. For they all judge the Jesuits prudent men. Men of
solid Virtue and Learning: and on that account they trust the Jesuits with
their dearest pleadges, their children, and their consciences. Now if this
Objection were true, all those must be concluded to be of very weak judgment,
that have been so long gulled, taking that for prudence, which is but craft,
for virtue which is vice, for honesty which is a cheat. But the ignorant,
seeing that God usually blesses the endeavors of the Society, takes that for
craft, which is done by the rules of true prudence.

The second objection is, that the Jesuits are rich. This is another of those
Objections which in the tongues and ears of inconsiderate people makes a great
noise to cry down the Jesuits. I answer. Suppose this were true, and that the
Jesuits were indeed rich and very rich; yet it is no crime to be rich, but to
use riches ill is the fault. Bishops are Rich, Canons are rich, Monasteries of
Moncks are rich, and no body complains: nay all good men are glad to see wealth
in their hands who will use it well for the honor of God: it was for this
reason that the piety of our Ancestors was so bountiful to Churches and
Monasteries, because they thought their riches best placed where they might be
best used for the glory of God. And what then if the Jesuits were rich? Yet
it is not so: They are actually poor, and very poor: they are not so well
furnished as commonly the poorest of all the Clengy. The whole annual rent of a
College, which keeps about twenty Jesuits to teach and preach, is not
usually so great, as what oftentimes one Canon possesses. All the Colleges in
a Province ( Flanders for example) are not worth the Revenues of one Monastery.
I can assure you this, that there are but few Colleges so well rented in all
Europe, as to have yearly twenty pound a Man for every Religious person that
they maintain. Yet out of this twenty pound a Man, is to be defalked the
expenses of the Church, the expenses of the Fabrike, the expenses of Strangers;
either of the society, who come that way, or of secular Men, who upon occasions
retire themselves to the Colleges for to make the spiritual exercise. All
which expenses deducted, the remainder is not so great, but that in effect the
Fathers need daily alms for to buy their bread, almost in all the Colleges of
Europe.

But that which Malevolent men lay hold of to make ignorant people believe the
Jesuits are rich is, that they see the Jesuits Churches splendid, and richly
furnished, and their schools and halls for public exercises magnificently
built. This they take for riches, and they do not consider, that these works
argue the devotion and magnificence of the Founders, not the riches of the
Jesuits. Churches are great for the concurse of many that there serve God; and
schools are large to receive many Scholars. It Is the good of the Town that
good schools be built: it makes not the Master one penny the richer; nor is it
any comfort to him to pass out of a large school, through a fair Hall built for
public exercises of learning, to a poor garret, there to spend the rest of his
time in Solitude, Silence, Prayer, and Study. An avaritious man cannot center
here, though a religious Spirit finds more solace in the bare walls of a narrow
cell, then in the specious magnificence of stately buildings.

Another reason why the Jesuits are commonly thought rich is, because
generally every one of them is sufficiently provided of necessaries. Yet this
proceeds not from any other riches then the Treasure of charity. It is the
rule and practice of the Society, that amongst them every one must be equally
provided of necessaries, what is their's is common to all. They have no Abbots
who have their quota, a part for to keep State and public Hospitality, as some
other Religious very laudably do. Their Rectours eat and drink no better then
their Porters and Cooks do; all out of the same pot, and at the same Table.
This equal division makes that their Alms and Revenues being equally shared
amongst all, none abound, nor none want, or if they do? it is when all want.
Believe not me in this, believe those that have lived (as many Gentlemen in
England have done) in the seminaries and convicts of the Society, they can tell
you that all Jesuits fare and lodge alike, all are clad alike, all equally
attended in health and sickness. There is no difference, save only the respect
due to age and superiority.

The third objection is, that the Jesuits are ambitious: but what are they
ambitious of? If a hard mission be to be undergone, if Prisons and Hospitals be
to be visited, if any be to be exposed to contagions, or pestilences, then
(thanks be to God) the superiors find them all ambitious of such employments.
But for Titles and Honors, they are so far from aspiring to them, that I think
no community in the World can better plead Not guilty then they. All that are
professed in the Society make this vow. Promitto nunquamme acturum vel
praetensurum ne indirecte quidem, ut in aliquam praelationem, vel dignitatem
eligar vel promovear. I promise that I will never procure or pretend (not so
much as indirectly) to be chosen into any dignity or prelacy. This vow they
make to exclude all ambition of dignities or preferments within the society.
Now for other Titles out of the Society, as of Bishop or Cardinal and the like,
they Vow thus: Promitto praeterea nunquam me curaturum praetensutumve
extrasocietatem praelationem aliquam vel dignitatem, nec consensurum in mei
electionem quantum in me fuerit, nisi coactum obedientia ejus qui mibi
praecipere potest sub paena peccati. I promise besides that I will never
procure or pretend unto any dignity or Prelacy out of the Society, and that as
much as lies in me, I will not consent to my Election, unless I be forced by
obedience of him who can command me under pain of sin. If they who make this
vow, and keep it most exactly (as the society has ever done) must be called
ambitious, what shall we say of those that desire and procure Dignities and
Prelacies. I would fain see those that tax the society of ambition, lay their
hands on their breast, and make the same vows which the Jesuits do. If they
refuse that, and yet would not be judged ambitious, though they pretend (as
they say) to prefer themselves by Legal ways, let them change their sentence,
and give a milder censure of the society. Certainly the Jesuits have had many
able men, who have been Confessors and Preachers to Kings, Princes, and Popes;
and by that means they have had a fair door open to honor. Nay many times
honors have been thrust upon them; but their resolution, and only their
resolution to avoid all honors, has kept them off. Some few of the Society
have been raised to Ecclesiastical dignities, but it is known that they
accepted not those dignities but by force, and so kept the rigor of their vow.
All this makes it clear that this Objection is wholly groundless.

The fourth objection; that the Jesuits are nice and lead a lazy and delicate
life. This objection is answered in the end of the precedent chapter, and it
needs no further refutal, then the bare rehearsal of the employments wherein
the Jesuits are busied. How can any man judge them lazy who embrace so many
employments of such fatigue, for the public good? How can they be judged nice,
who spend a great part of their life in schools, and never refuse to go to
Hospitals and Prisons, and treat with beggars for the good of their souls? But
the Jesuits have a decent habit, and by their rule have a great care of
cleanliness, in their house, in their chamber, and Refectory, and above all in
their Church; this they who will nickname all virtue call nicety: as the order
they keep in their Schools, to avoid confusion, and ease their labor, they
call Laziness; and with their good leave I call their whole objection
sottishness.

The fist Objection; Jesuits are dangerous men, because they meddle in
intrigues of State, and thrust themselves into Court affairs. I answer that if
ever any Jesuit does do so, he transgresses his rule, and commits a
grievous sin against an express precept of obedience; which is set down in
these very words in their Constitutions, under the Title Censurae and
Praecepta. In virtute sanctae obedientiae praecipitur nostris omnibus, ne quis
publicis and saecularibus Principum negotiis, ulla ratione se immisceat, nec
quantumvis per quoscunque requisitus aut rogatus, ejusmodi politicas res
tractandas suscipiat. All ours are commanded in Virtue of Holy obedience, that
none do any wise intermeddle in public and secular businesses of Princes, nor
upon any entreaty or requiry do embrace such State affairs. Can there be more
caution used then to forbid this under the highest penalty that can be, that is
under mortal sin? for it is a mortal sin to transgress a precept. Truly when I
have some times reflected on this precept, I have been so far from siding with
the objection, that I have thought Sovereigns might justly except against this
rigor. For it seems to me that by this precept Princes are excluded from
making that use of their Subjects which otherwise they justly might. It may
happen that a Jesuit may be as fit to be entrusted with public affairs of
State, as other Church men are, whom we see often employed. Why may it not be
as lawful for a King, if he so please, to use a Jesuit, as a Friar, a Monck,
a Canon, a Bishop, (who is wedded to his Church) or a Cardinal? We have seen of
all these men that have very fortunately managed State affairs. I see no other,
solution, but that it is for the public good, that whilst some Churchmen
laudably serve their Princes in this kind, others should (as the Jesuits do)
avoid all actions of pomp and States matters. But happily this objection
proceeds from those that cannot distinguish betwixt Temporal and Spiritual.
They see that in most Courts there are some Jesuits near the persons of the
Princes and Sovereigns, and chief Courtiers: I mean those who are their
Confessors or Preachers. This makes many cry out of the Jesuits as meddlers
in State affairs. They might as well say, that the Physicians are States men,
because there is no Prince that has not his Physician as well as his Confessor
or Preacher. But the Physician, you will say, attends to his business; and I
answer that the Jesuit also attends to his. And if either of them hear any
thing of State matters, it is but what the Princes please to communicate, which
is no crime, nor does it make either of them States men.

The sixth objection. The Jesuits cannot be trusted, because they reveal all
secrets, even confessions, to their superiors. I answer first, that this
objection, if it were true, would prove the former objection to be null; for if
they reveal all, they are not fit to be Statesmen, whose first maxim ought to
be secrecy. But it is false, as all those know who usually entrust the Jesuits
with their conscience. England saw F. Garnet rather chose to dye then to reveal
a secret of confession. And besides this in all matters that require a natural
secret, the Jesuits know their obligation as well as others. Nor does their
rule, or can their superior oblige them to reveal any thing in this kind. True
it is, that the Jesuits among themselves, for the public good, give one
another leave to reveal to the Superior the faults which they see in them.
This is by public consent among themselves only for the good of all, and it
reaches not out of their own community, nor touches externes. And besides no
Jesuit can undertake an employment, or go a journey without acquainting his
superior, and having his leave. All this is for Domestic Order. But
wheresoever any one opens a secret to any Jesuit for counsel, or the good of
his conscience, there the Jesuits observe the same rules of secrecy which other
honest and religious men are bound unto.

But because in this objection I have mentioned F. Garnet, I must say a word or
two concerning him. The cause of his death, was that having in confession heard
of the wicked design of some of those who were contrivers of the Gunpowder
treason, he did not reveal it. Upon this he was condemned of treason. And truly
I do not wonder that Protestants, who know not the Sacramet and seal of
Confession, should cry out of him for it: but I wonder that some Catholics and
Priests should lay that treason on the Jesuits doctrine. And for a full
satisfaction I desire the judicious Protestant to consider three things. First
of all. Father Garnet did nothing in that concealment, which every Priest in
England and in all the World, will not say was the Duty of a Catholic Priest.
Every Catholic knows, that a Priest cannot reveal any secret imparted to him
in confession for any Good in the World. Christ has commanded that secret
should not be broke for any good imaginable. So Father Garnet did nothing but
what all Priests will profess to be their duty. It was his chance to be in the
case, but if any body else had been there, he would have done the same. I
intend not to dispute why this secret is such, or whence it is proved, but only
I say that all Catholics believe it to be such, and all Priests profess that
they do and will ever keep the secret of confession in all things whatsoever.
So that this cannot be laid to the Jesuits as their doctrine.

Secondly, I desire the Protestant to reflect, that this secrecy though it be
allowed, can bring no prejudice to any Sovereign or State, but may probably
bring some good. For if this secrecy be not allowed, no body will ever reveal
such wicked designs to any Ghostly Father. Whereas if upon confidence of
secrecy, they do reveal it, the Ghostly Father may likely diswade them, by
showing them the enormity of the fact. Good counsel is a great preservative
from sin: and nothing precipitates a man more headlong into desperate attempts
then want of counsel. When a man consults only with his own passion and
ruminates by himself his melancholy designs, the mischief takes still deeper
root, which had it been vented would often have been dissipated. That wicked
man who murdered King Henry the fourth of France, being asked why he did not
reveal his temptation to some good Ghostly Father, answered, that he thought
that if he had done so, the Ghostly Father must have revealed it. This error of
his, as he professed at his examination made him smother this sin in
confession. So he went on in his design, which very likely he had never done,
if he had spoken plain, and revealed his temptation in the beginning. It is true
F. Garnet did endeavor to dissuade those perfidious traitors, and could not
effect it. Yet others have often hindered sinners from their wicked designs, by
good counsel given in confession.

The third thing which I desire the Protestant to consider is, that God, to
clear F. Garnet from any treason, and show that he accepted his death as a
Martyrdom, did honor him, with the wonderful imprinting of his picture on
some of the strawes on which his blood fell. This is writ by diverse; the
strawes with the Picture in them were seen by many, and by K. James himself.
And among others, I know a person of note, who was present, and had formerly
known F. Garnet and saw the straws: He was a Protestant, and one who did not
easily believe any miracles, but (as many do) laughed at them. Yet when I asked
him whether he thought, that this could be natural? He answered that without
dout it was supernatural, and that it was impossible so plain a picture should
be made by any art in so little a compass. All this I have said not to dispute
the controversy concerning confession, or the fact of F. Garnet, but only to
evince, that the Jesuits have no doctrine in this point, but what all Catholic
Priests profess, and which, as I conceive, can prejudice no body. And
certainly those Protestants, who did sometime in England practice confession,
thought those that heard confessions amongst them to be obliged to keep secret
all the sins, and temptations which any should reveal unto them in confession.

The seventh objection, the Jesuits make a vow to the Pope, and therefore must
be supposed not to be so loyal as others, being already tied to a foreign
prince, and therefore but half Subjects. I answer that that vow is only in
order to the propogation of the Ghospel which can prejudice no body. So say the
Constitutions of the Society, part. 5. c. 3. Tota intentio quarti hujus voti
fuit and est circa Missiones, and sic intelligi oportet literas Apostolicas ubi
de hac obedientia loquuntur All the intention of this fourth vow, was and is
concerning Missions, and so the Apostolical letters are to be understoood where
they speak of this obedience. What the Missions are I explicated in the third
Chapter. And surely no prince has ever been prejudiced by this vow. Nor is it
specially to be objected to the Jesuits that they have an obligation of
obedience to the Pope; All Catholic Bishops take an oath to the Pope, nor does
any King or Prince suffer by that oath. And St. Francis the Seraphical Father
promised for himself and all his Friars Obedience to Pope Honorius the third
and his successors, as Cordova says, super. reg. c. 1. q. 3. circa finem. And
Saint Bonaventure in Expositione reg. c. 1. calls that promise a special vow,
in these words, Etsi totus clerus and religiosorum universitas teneatur
firmiter Apostolico domino obedire, tamen huic debito votum adjecit speciale.
Although all the Clergy and all religious orders be bound to obey the Pope, yet
St. Francis would add a special vow to this Obligation. For my part I think
that no man, who rightly considers what the Vow imports can be startled at
it: nor can a vow to go to the Indies for good of souls, if I be sent, more
offend my Sovereign, then a Vow of going on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, or any
other Vow. This shows how vain a thing it is to object to the Jesuits their
dependence of the Pope: whereas on the other side they depend of the Pope less
then any of the clergy or religious men; speaking of that dependence, which may
bias their affection or make them side with the Pope, since they cannot admit
of those Ecclesiastical dignities, by which the Pope may oblige those who can
accept them, and as we see daily do pursue them. What the Jesuits obligation is
in refusing dignities, I have said in the third objection in this chapter, and
I think no man can say that they ever infringed that vow.

CAP. VI. Objections made against the Jesuits Doctrine.
AS the Jesuits Lives and form of Institute have found many Adversaries, so
their Doctrine has heen opposed by many. Some as well Protestants as
Catholics have impugned them by opposing reason to reason. These the Jesuits
account their friends, and thank them for their pains. For to canvass doubtful
matters, by sifting one another's sentence, helps to whet the wits on both
sides. There is a friendly clashing in Schools, and a striking fire in dispute,
which serves only to give light to obscure questions. This opposition the
Jesuits use not only with others, but even among themselves, nor do they fear
any breach of charity in this amicable enmity, which is for the profit of both
parties.

Another sort of adversaries oppose their Doctrine not by reasoning, but by
railing, by clamours, by forging and falsying their books; as does the author
of the Provincial letters, who never had any care of speaking truth: and so his
work has been often condemned, and burnt by the hangman, as containing nothing
but slanders. Indeed such adversaries deserve such entertainment: for this is
not to impugn Authors, but to belly them. These, to say truth, deserve no
answer; they should be whipped out of Schools, if they had their desert. Yet to
satisfy others sometimes they must be answered who merit not so much as to be
heard.

From these adversaries not of learning but of truth proceed the objections
against the Jesuits Doctrine which I intend to take notice of in this chapter.
And their First objection is that the Jesuits teach the Doctrine of
Equivocation and mental reservation, and therefore they can not be trusted. I
answer that the Jesuits reach nothing in this matter which is not the common
Doctrine of all Schools, and Universities none excepted. Nor do I see how it
can be denied unless we will say that it is lawful to lie, as Statera morum
does for then we may infer as that book does, page 172 that it is clear they
are in an error who scorning the name of a ly, make use of Equivocation. But
that Author will not find any of his opinion, nor does he lessen but increase
the difficulty. The sum therefore of the Doctrine concerning Equivocation is
this: That it is always ill done to lie, but not always ill to conceal the
truth by ambiguous speech, that is by Equivocation or mental reservation. When
there is a just cause to conceal the truth, then it is lawful (say the
Divines) to use ambiguous speech; on the contrary when there is not a just
cause to conceal the truth then it is a sin to equivocate. Now when the cause
to conceal the truth is just, or not, depends on the particular circumstance
of every occurrence, for which there is no rule can be set. This is the
Doctrine of Equivocation wherein the Society has nothing particular, but
teaches that and only that in which both Catholic and Protestant Doctors
agree. Among the Catholic Doctors that teach this are St Augustine, S.
Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, St. Thomas, and after him a torrent of School Divines.
Among the Protestants are diverse mentioned in the Protestants Apology: as Peter
Martyr, Zuinglius, Willet, Melancton, Luther, Musculus, Wiclef, and diverse
others cited at length in the 7 section of the 3 Tract. under the Let. M.
number 76. and in the 703. page of the Impression An. Dom. 1608. Though of the
Authors there cited, some will not use the name of Equivocation or mental
reservation, but call these doubtful speeches officious lies; which
notwithstanding they say one is bound sometimes to use. So Luther there cited,
says of Rahab, and concludes that there is an officious lie, by which men
provide for the fame and safety of their Neighbor. Igitur honestum ac pium
mendacium est, ac potius officum charitatis appellandum. And Osiander there
cited, says of the Calvinists thus, Hanc maximam sou regulam habent
Calvinistae licere pro gloria Christi mentiri. The Calminists have this for a
ground or Principle, that it is lawful to lie for the glory of Christ. Yet
Catholics generally do not allow of lying, but (as many Protestants) of
concealing the truth by Equivocation.

Now that this Doctrine may, and must be sometimes allowed, examples will make
manifest. I will instance in one. When his Majesty after Worcester fight was
constrained to shelter himself in Boscobell, there was, as we all know, narrow
search made after him. Among the rest one of the Pendrils, (those loyal
Subjects, ever to be commended in all history) was asked where the King was. He
answered that he knew not: meaning that he knew not for to tell them. He
thought he might and ought in that case conceal the truth. And all the Jesuits
in the World are of his opinion. He was bound there under pain of high Treason
to Equivocate. And those that deny Equivocation to be lawful, let them say
what they would have done? Sure I am, that if they would not in that case have
used Equivocation or montal Reservation, they must have been either Liars or
Traitors. The doctrine therefore of Equivocation teaches only this, that when
there is a just necessity of concealing the truth, then you may equivocate: but
when there is not a just reason to conceal the truth, then it is a sin to
Equivocate, because such equivocation contains fraud and double dealing
contrary to Christian Charity, and that candor and sincerity which is
necessary for commerce among men. And in this the Jesuits are no ways
singular, they teach but what all teach.

The second Objection is that the Jesuits teach that horrid maxim. Fides non
est servanda haereticis. Faith is not to be kept to Heretics. I answer that,
that maxim is point blanck against the doctrine of the Jesuits. Layman was a
Jesuit: hear what he says, lib. 2. Tract. c. 12. de Charitate. Tam. Jesuitae
quam alii doctores Catholici aperte profitentur ac docent: fidom publicam
haereticis datam inviolabiliter and sine ullo dispensationis aut absolutionis
remedio servandam esse. As well Jesuits as all other Catholic Doctors openly
profess and teach that public faith given to Heretics is inviolably to be
kept without any remedy of dispensatirn or absolution. Coutzen was also a
Jesuit: and he in his book called Desceptatio de secretis Societatis Jesu,
makes this profession in his own name, and in the name of all the Jesuits page
86. Nos docemus Haeretico, Judaeo, Gentili, Turcae, Rebelli subdito, fidem
datam servandam esse, nec modo non aperte violandam sed nec ambigua fraud, nec
aequivocatione eludendam. We teach that faith is to be kept, to Heretics, to
Jews, to Gentiles, to Turks, to Rebellious Subjects: and this faith is not
only not be openly broken, but also not be eluded with fraud or equivocation
but strictly to be kept. This I hope will satisfy that that maxim is not the
Jesuits.

The third and main Objection against the Jesuits Doctrine is, that they
maintain the Popes authority in prejudice to Soveraignity, teaching that the
Pope has power to depose Kings. This is the Objection with which the Jesuits
are every where cried down. And because it is so much made of by the
adversaries of the society, I shall humbly entreat the Reader to give me leave
to be a little more large in my answer. I say therefore as to matter of fact,
for I mean not to meddle with the question otherwise, that the Jesuits never
did at any time teach in this matter otherwise then what was the common
doctrine of other Doctors in the Catholic Church, and for the present they
are less chargeable with this Doctrine then any others. The first part of this
assertion, I prove by the authority of Henry the great, our dear Sovereigns
Grandfather, who (when this doctrine of the Popes deposing Kings was objected
against the Jesuits, as an argument why they ought to continue banished out of
France) said to the Parliament these words, I am certain that in averring and
defending the Popes Authority they differ not from other Catholic Divines.
This the French Stories aver, this the speech of that great King makes appear
(as you may see in the speech it self which I have inserted in the next
chapter) this the actions of the same King (if his words were not exstant)
would make plain to all the world, for how can it be imagined that he who was
in the account of all, a very wise man, should admit into his Kingdom men that
held treasonable doctrine? How should he be possibly supposed so forgetful of
his own good, and the safety of his own posterity, as that he should plead for
men who were charged to hold doctrine prejudicial to Monarchy, without
examining whether their accusation were true? No, no, he was not so weak, as to
become the Orator, for his own ruin; He would never have made it his
business to plead for the Jesuits and command their admission, nay further to
take them into his familiar acquaintaince, make them his confessors and build
them Colleges, and bequeath his heart unto them, if he had not been fully
satisfied, that their doctrine contained nothing singular to the prejudice of
Sovereignty. I easily believe that those who have already calumnied the society
in this matter, will endeavor some sleevelesse answer to this authority of the
words and actions of so great a King. But withal I confide that his Majesty
will give more credit to the single assertion of his Grandfather, then to ten
thousand detractions; and all wise men will join in his Majesty's opinion.

But to go on and prove both first and second part of what I asserted. Nothing
else need be said to make all my assertion evidently clear, but only to give a
true historical account of what has been done in this matter, which I will do
sincerely and faithfully. The opinion then of the Popes authority in deposing
of princes was held by many religious and clergy men before any of the Society
writ of it. For example there were ordinarily cited for this opinion of the
renowned order of the Benedictines, Gregory the 7th. and other Abbots that
joined with him (as Desiderius Abbot of Mont Cassin, and Anselmus Lucensis did)
and Panormitanus etc. of the order of Saint Austiue, Aegidius Romanus,
Augustinus Triumphus, etc. of St. Dominicks order, St. Thomas, St. Anthoninus,
Cajetan, etc. of the Franciscans, St. Bonaventure, Johannes de Capistrano,
Pelagius Alvarius Alexander Ales, etc. of Carmelites, Waldensis and Bacon; of
the Clergy very many Priests and Bishops and Cardinals, as Gerson Doctor of
Paris, etc. Of Lawyers Bartolus and Baldus etc. These and many more were cited
in Shooles for this Doctrine, which Barclay rightly calls the common doctrine
of both Canonists and Divines, though notwithstanding it is to be observed that
none of these, nor no Catholic Divine ever gave the pope an Arbitrary power to
depose at his list, as now some though very falsely presume; Their opinions were
modifyed so that their books stood in esteem and were not thought to have
deserved so ill at princes hands as now some would make them seem. All which I
do not sry to defend their opinions as good, but only as declaring matter of
fact I say these and many more were cited in Schools for this doctrine; as a
common opinion before the Society was in the World: as besides what I have said
is manestly proved in the Oration which Cardinal Peron made to the 3. Estate in
France.

Whilst then this was the opinion of Schools, Beliarmine writ his
controversies and in the matter de summo pontifice he taught this doctrine, and
he took his arguments as he professes himself in great part out of Sanders, a
secular priest. After Bellarmine, partly to vindicate him, partly on oother
accounts four or five Jesuits more writ of the same matter, alleging
authors, who had writ before them, and taking for the most part their reason
out of former writers that stood in Libraries and were read without control in
Schools: And this is that which Henry the fourth said, that he wassure
Jesuits taught nothing in this matter which did differ from other Catholics.
But it was not enough for the society to be as wary as others.

Their doctrine therefore, after the death of Henry the fourth their great
Protector, was highly contradicted, specially in France, and much noise there
was. The Jesuits then seeing that this doctrine was Lapis offensionis, and bred
disgust because they taught it, to take away all complaint of the society,
resolved never to say more of that matter: so F. Claudius Aquavaria the fifth
General of the Society made a prohibition concerning this matter on the 5th. of
Jan. 1616. But because that prohibition seemed not efficacious enough, to
prevent all inconveniences and give the World full satisfaction, Father Mutius
Vitelleschi the sixth General of the society in the year 1626 on the thirteenth
of August made a precept of obedience, by which all Jesuits are obliged under
pain of damnation, never to write, dispute, teach or print, any thing
concerning that matter. The precept is extant in an Epistle of Father Mutius,
and from thence inserted as a perpetual precept into the 8th. Congregation in
fine, it runs thus, Ordinamus in virtute sanctae obedientiae ne quis in
posterum materiam de potestate summi pontifieis super principes, eos deponendi,
etc. tractet aut libris editis aut scriptis quibuscunque nec public disputet,
aut doceat in seholis, ut occasiones omnes offensionis and querelarum
praecidantur. This is the precept which has now stood this 35 years, and never
was infringed by any one; fince the year 26 nothing has been said of this
question in schools, or sermons, or public discourses nothing has been
printed of it in the society. This care the society has had to avoid all
offensive questions. And truly I conceive it were much to be desired that all
other Divines as well Protestants as Catholics were obliged in the same
manner, to perpetual silence in these matters.

But whilst the society has used this caution, others have not done so. They
taught it before the society was in the World, and some continue it still: All
this makes me reflect on the proceeding of those who love to revile the society
right or wrong, certainly if these men's zeal were for his Majesty's safety as
they pretend, they would never have picked out the Jesuits amongst all others
to blame for this doctrine: they would have endeavored to have rooted it out
where it is main tained, not where it is already silenced and banished the
schools. They might have found Doctrine more capable of their invectives which
concerns our times and our Nation nearer. For example the Author of the
Reflections on the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, tells us, page the
67th. that in Spain Schools are connived at still in teaching this doctrine of
the popes temporal power. If this be true why does he not cite these schools?
are they Monks? are they Friars? are they Clergy men? for I am sure they are
not Jesuits. But his resolution to make the Jesuits odious, will not give him
leave to name any body else. Again whilst these men would banish all the
Jesuits out of England, because some Jesuits did forty or fifty years ago
teach that doctrine, why do they not cry out of such English men as lately have
writ the same doctrine and more too.

I will not cite them as not willing to propagate any of this kind of Doctrine,
though it be but in a citation. But certainly they might have been taken notice
of by any that did really intend rather to root out such kind of Doctrine then
to impugn the Jesuits.

The fourth Objection against the Jesuits Doctrine is that they teach the
killing of Kings, though under the name of Tyrants. So Mariana a Spanish Jesuit
teaches, and therefore ha^ his books burnt at Paris. I answer, that Mariana
did in the year 1599. print a book entitled, De Rege et Regis institutione,
which he dedicated to Philip the second King of Spain. In this book he did
teach a doctrine, (after Dominicus Soto l. 5. de jure and Justicia q. 1. a. 3.)
contrary to the judgment of the society, of killing, not Kings, but of Tyrants:
which doctrine the society condemned and forbid, and the other Doctors of the
society all unanimously impugned it. That you may know the truth, I must do as
in the last Objection, that is, give you a narrative of the passage. When then
the General of the society, Claudius Aquaviva understood that Mariana had put
out an opinion of so dangerous consequence, he writ to the fathers of the
society in France, who had acquainted him with the whole matter, in these
words, as Father Coton sets them down in a Letter to the Queen Regent of
France. We have been very sorry that no body percieved the fault, until the
books were printed; the which notwithstanding we have presently commanded to be
corrected, and will use great care hereafter that such things happen no more.
This passed in the year 1606. four years before the Sorbon condemned Mariana's
book, which was Anno Domini 1610. July. 4. According to this the General of the
society did give order for the correcting that place, and suppressing the book
till it were corrected; but some copies being abroad (before the error was
known to the General) which the society would gladly have called in, the heirs
of one called Weebel a Protestant, or as some French Authors call him, a
Hugonot, printed it again at their own charges. And this for no other reason,
as it may be presumed, but either lucre or malice to the society: After this
the General sent a strict command to all of the society, as appears in Cong.
8. tit. Censurae, under pain of Excommunication, inability, and diverse other
penalties, prohibiting all of the society from writing, or teaching in private
or public, or advising that it is lawful to kill Kings or Princes, or machin
their death upon any pretense of Tyranny. And all the Authors of the society,
excepting only Mariana, both before and since him, perpetually taught and teach
the contrary; saying Anathema to all those that teach, or practice any such
doctrine, condemned long since by the Council of Constance. This is what the
society has done to stop that book, and root out the opinion, which I conceive
will clearly show, that this Doctrine is not reasonably laid to the society;
Nor can it be Objected but by them who will have it, that the fault of any one
of the society must like Original sin infect all for ever and unpardonably, to
whom I can give no other answer, but that I wish them more wit, and less
malice.

But now, lest what I have said in these two last Objections may give the
Reader occasion of Scandal, I have two things to Admonish him of.

The first is, that I have said nothing but what I conceived precisely
necessary to defend the innocence of the society, wrongfully impugned, and
slandered by diverse libells, and particularly by the Author of the Reflections
upon the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, in his 9. Sect. I would confute
the particulars, but I conceive on the one side, that which I have here writ is
enough to make any body able to confute them, and on the otherside, the
supposed Author of that work, having before those of his own Order, that could
and did call him to account, renounced the work and disowned it; I esteem him
not to deserve an answer. By what I have said it is clear that the society has
no particular Doctrine concerning the Popes authority over Princes, but that
they particularly are forbid the teaching of that opinion, which none else are
known to be. And this I conceive answer enough for all that Authors false and
malioious aspersions, of a party of temporal ends, and the rest of his
uncharitable censures, for which I pray God to forgive him.

The other thing that I would admenish particularly the Protestant Reader, in
all love and charity is, that before he condemn the Catholics for the
Doctrine which they have taught, he would turn his eyes a little toward his
Own Church, where he shall find as dangerous Doctrine, not so say more
dangerous. Luther, Zuinglius, Galvin, Beza, Knox, Goodman, and diverse others
have vented strange doctrine concerning Sovereignty. I will not cite their
sentences, lest I may seem to exprobate: But this I say, as I do not censure
any Protestant, because some have taught dangerous Doctrine, so I desire the
Protestant will be as favorable to me, and not lay the blame of other men's
actions or words on me. As for my part, I do sincerely make this Protestation
as in the sight of God; I do acknowledge his Majesty CHARLES the II. to be my
lawful Sovereign, and liege Lord, I believe that I am bound to respect, honor
and obey him, and that not only for fear but also for conscience sake, as the
Scriptures teach me. I do believe that whosoever resists him, resists God;
and whosoever rebelleth against him, rebelleth against God, and procures to
himself damnation. And accordingly I do promise to be a true and faithful
subject to his Majesty, and not only never to Act against him, or abett any
that shall act against him, but also to defend and maintain, according to the
best of my skill, his life, crown, dignities and prerogatives. If I refuse the
oath of Allegiance, as now it is couched, it is not because I refuse
Allegiance, but because I must not renounce my faith to God. That to take the
oath, as now it lies, is to renounce the Catholic faith, I am taught by the
example of all former Catholics in England, who though faithful to his
Majesty, yet chose to lose their fortunes, liberty and life, rather then to
take that Oath, for fear of violating their faith; I am taught so by the
public voice of the Catholics and Priests now living, who all generally
esteem, it cannot safely be taken; I am taught so by the general opinion of
Protestants, who judge those that take that oath to be conformists, and no more
Roman Catholics; Finally, I am taught so by the very title of the Act wherein
this Oath was inserted when it was first made. Which is, an act for the
discovering and repressing Popish. Recusants. All this makes me judge it not
safe in conscience to take the Oath as it lies, for fear of being perjured in
that Oath wherein I desire to be most strictly bound to my Sovereign: But if it
may so please his sacred Majesty, and the honorable houses of Parliament to
make such an oath of Allegiance as may without trenching on conscience, contain
all imaginable civil duty in the strongest expressions that can be conceived; I
shall be exceeding glad, and most ready to take it my self, and invite all
others to take it: Nor will I be my own Judge of the legality of any Oath;
whatsoever all other priests and religious shall agree to, that I shall most
willingly accept. This is my Protestation, to which I know all Jsuites in
England will most willingly subscribe, for though they be slandered as making a
party, and maintaining dangerous doctrine, yet they have no such doctrine, nor
party, nor interest at Rome, but do willingly profess to join in whatsoever
others shall agree.

CAP. VII. The last Objection made against the Jesuits, from the Example of
Venice and France.
THe last Objection neither impugneth the Jesuits Doctrine, nor their lives,
but argues from the example of Venice and France, that banished the Jesuits.
Truly if the argument of example may here take place, as I desire it should,
the Jesuits will be in a very good condition; for the verdict of the greatest
part of Christendom stands for them. They can fetch examples from all
quarters of the world; the Sun never sets nor rises, but upon some nation where
Jesuits are highly made of. So that their adversaries urging this argument is
but to give them the Que to dilate themselves in reciting the public
testimonies which Religious Orders, Universities, Cities, States, Kingdoms,
Popes, Emperors, Princes, Nobles, and Commons have every where given them. But
I will decline this, as having not undertaken to praise the Society, but to
give a true notion of their lives and Doctrine. True it is, their adversaries
are many, which gives them great occasion of practicing virtue, according as it
did to the Apostle, who said, 1 Cor. 16.9. Ostium mihi apertum est magnum and
adversarii multi, a great door is opened to me and many adversaries. But there
is main difference betwixt their Friends and their Adversaries. Their
adversaries excel in number, but their Friends in quality. Their adversaries
are for the most part enemies of either virtue or learning, or both, their
friends persons of the best repute. Their adversaries act in private by Libels,
in public by clamours and tumults. Their friends give them juridical
testimonies, in the face of the world and public courts. Their adversaries are
carried on by passion; their friends by reason. Their adversaries are moved by
private disgusts and self ends; their friends act for the general good and
common interest. All this I could prove by instancing in every particular
several praesidents in all the Nations of Europe, Africa, Asia, and both
Indies, as far as the name of Christ is known. But I will not commend the
society as not having undertaken that task: Only I say that there is no Nation
under the cope of Heaven, where Catholic religion is tolerated, but that the
Jesuits are also allowed, as well as other Priests.

I come therefore to the Objection, and say that the examples of Venice and
France, are no motives to make England banish the Jesuits, but rather
arguments of the contrary. It is good to be wise at other men's cost. Venice and
France have repented their acts; and surely he cannot be a good friend, and
good counselor, that advises England to do what other nations repent they
have done, that is, exhorts us to imitate other men's faults. The matter is
plain; yet because nothing is too plain for them that will not see, and do
besides endeavor to cast a mist before other men's eyes; Lets look at both the
passages. And first for Venice.

Spondanus then in the second Tome of his continuation of Annalls, an. 1606
relates how pope Paul the fifth, was offended with the Venetians. The cause of
the disgust was, that the Senate had made some laws whereby they took to
themselves power over the Clergy in punishing their crimes: as also they forbid
the giving of any immovable goods to pious uses, as to build any Churches or
Hospitals in their State, without having first obtein'd leave of the Senate.
Pope Paul admonished the Senate of this; they slighted his admonitions, and
maintained that they did nothing but what they had just authority for. After
several replies to and fro, the Venetians persisting in their opinion, the Pope
proceeded to censures. He sends a Breve with the sentence of Excommunication
and Inderdict to all the Bishops and Prelates of the state of Venice, with
command that if the Senate did not satisfy within 24 days, then they should
publish the Breve, whereby the Senators were to be Excommunicated, and the
State interdicted. The Senate on the contrary sends to all the same Bishops and
Prelates a countermand, not to publish the said Brief. Yet some Prelates
obeying the Popes authority, the brief waspublished when the time elapsed. And
so the Duke and Senators were Excommunicate, and an interdict laid on the
whole State. Many contemning the interdict celebrated divine offices; some
obeyed it. Among these were the Jesuits and the Capuchins, and some others,
for which they were at the instigation of one Friar Paul banished the state.
The next year matters were compounded, the Senate took off their laws, and the
pope his censures. All others were restored, but only the Jesuits whom Friar
Paul particularly maliced. So the Jesuits remained out of that State (pope
Paul and his successors for the public good, letting their cause fall) till
pope Alexander that now sits. For this pope together with the Ambassador of
the Emperor, Spain, France, and other princes, dealt with the Venetians to
readmit the Jesuits. The Senate then looking back on what they had done,
cancelled their own Act, declared it null, and invited the Society their
republique, restoring them all their houses and colleges with much honor.

This is the story, which I think no man will take for an argument that the
Jesuits are to be banished England. The occasion of their banishment was, the
obeying the Popes censure of Interdict and Excommunication, which King James
does not deny but that the Pope may inflict, as Patriarche of the West. The
event was, that the Venetian Senate retracted their sentence, and acknowledged
the Jesuits innocence.

Now for the story of France; it happened thus. In the year 1594 on the 27 of
December, one John Catel, a persidius miscreant attempted on the life of H^^ry
the Fourth, presently after his reception at Paris, in the closing of the long
Civil wars of France. But by the blessing of God the Felon missed of his
wicked design. For whereas the King was stooping to salute some of his Nobles,
the wound light on his upper lip, and only struck out one of his teeth with
much effusion of blood. Catell being presently taken was racked, to confess his
accomplices, and who had set him on. He never confessed any thing that might
concern any Jesuit, neither in nor out of the torture. Yet the Calvinists and
other enemies of the society would needs have it, that the mischief was of the
Jesuits plotting, grounded on this only argument, that Catell, though then a
Student at law, had formerly studied his philosophy under the Jesuits.
Presently therefore they runtimed to the College, seize on all the Jesuits,
search their house, and ransack their papers. Father Gueret was the Master
under whom Catell had heard his philosophy, him therefore they tortured, but
finding nothing by his Confession on the rack, or by any witness, they
banished him for ever out of France. And whereas among the papers belonging to
one Father Guignard, they found something which had been writ during the time
of the Ligue, and it seems might be interpreted treason, they presently took
him, condemned him, and hanged him. Then they made an act, says Monsieur de
Thou, Hist. lib. 132. without order of Judgment, without hearing the parties,
as in a public sedition. Non servato juris ordine, neque partibus auditis ut
in seditione and publica grassatione. They are the words of Harley the
President. In this Act Catel was condemned to death, and all the Jesuits of
France (as far as it then obeyed Henry the fourth) sentenced to perpetual
banishment, and their goods confiscated to pious uses; and further in the same
sentence, it was made high treason for any to send their children out of France
to study in th^^ Jesuits schools. And that they might not seem to be severe
only against the Jesuits, they banished for nine years the father of Catel a
Merchant of cloth: his fault was, that whereas his son had acquainted him with
his design of killing the King, he had not revealed it in time, nor used means
to prevent it, though he did dissuade it. Finally the Parliament of Paris, to
make the Jesuits eternally ignominious, erected a pillar in the place where
Catels house had stood, with an inscription that might carry to future ages the
infamy of Catels fact, attributed to the Jesuits. The pillar was erected, and
the sentence executed in all the Kings dominions, except only the Parliament of
Tolouse and Bourdeaux, and the places depending on that Parliament. For the
Parliament of Tolouse seeing the injustice of the proceeding commanded that no
town or place belonging to their judicature should obey the Act made at Paris.

All this is related by de Thou, Peter Mathien, Scipion Duepleix, Spondanus,
and others. King Henry sat not yet fast enough in the saddle to contest with
the Parliament of Paris. For though the Parliaments of France, be nothing like
our Parliaments of England (ours being a representative of the Nation, with
whom the King can make and unmake laws; theirs only a number of Lawyers in
several courts of Judicature to take cognizance of particular cases and crimes)
yet King Henry, thought not fit to scratch the wounds of France, not yet well
healed, by offending them who had so lately been reconciled, and had during the
Ligue droven a strong interest for the side they took. But as soon as the first
storm was over he began by little and little to show his inclinations to the
Society, hearing willingly those that spoke for them, and himself speaking
favorably of them; till at length when things were ripe for a good issue he
resolved to recall them. The Parliament of Paris, on the contrary, endeavored
might and main to oppose them, and to that end after many other endeavors, one
of the Presidents, by name Harley, toward the end of the year 1603. made in a
full assembly before the King a long and sharp invective against the Jesuits,
all tending to this, that for the good of the King and Kingdom the Jesuits
ought not to be recalled, but continue banished.

When K. Henry had patiently heard him out, he was pleased to speak himself,
and plead for the Society, retorting and answering all that Harley had said, so
dexterously that all admired his vivacity of memory and judgment, and his strong
nervous eloquence, which made him King not only of men, but of Eloquence also.
I mean to set down his speech as it was printed in Latin first, then in
English in the year 1611. I taking that to be an authentical copy. For whereas
in the year 1610. the calumnies against the society grew very rife, by occasion
of the untimely death of Henry the IV. the friends of the Society thought it
necessary to reprint the speech, (then fresh in the memory of many) and to
join it with a declaration wherein the Bishop of Paris declared the Society's
innocence and merits, and a Constitution of Lewis the XIII. by which the
Society was confirmed in all the privileges granted by his father Henry IV.
All these were put out together and translated into many languages to confute
(as in effect they did) and silence the calumny of Henry IV. death, of which
the adversaries of the society had made many stories run in most of the
languages of Europe. Out of this copy therefore I intend to take the speech.
But because I have mentioned the death of Henry IV. I will say something of
that story before I set down the speech.

On the 14. day of May 1610 this great King was murdered in his coach by a
perfidious villan named Francis Ravaillac, who being often examined and
tortured, always protested that he was never induced by any man living to this
fact; and further, that he had not communicated his design to any. Yet they who
by Catels fact had triumphed over the society, and procured their banishment,
(thinking now they had a good occasion to wreck their malice against the
Jesuits in the nonage of their new King whom they could not hurt whilst the
father lived) spreadmany libels against the Jesuits to make them seem guilty of
that horrid Parricide.

For this purpose they voiced that Ravaillac had learnt his mischief out of
Mariana, and some did not stick to say, that he had all Mariana without book:
But he being examined was found not to know so much as Mariana's name, and
besides he never understood latin. Howsoever that which might give some color
to the noise was, that the school of Sorbon renewed a decree which had been
made in the yean 1413. wherein the doctrine of Killing Kings was condemned
according to the Council of Constance. This decree was made the 4. of July
1610. And the Parliament of Paris soon after caused Mariana's book de Rege et
institutione Regis, to be burnt, which all reflected on the Jesuits. Further
the Parliament on the 26 of Novem. then following condemued the treatise of
Cardinal Bellarmine against Barklay, de potestate summi pontificis in
temporalibus, but the K. of France 4 days after issued a contrary decree, to
cashiere that Act of the Parliament, and publicly cleared the Jesuits of all
suspicion of his fathers death. The King being then in his minority was
assisted by the Qu. Regent his Mother, the P. of Conde, the Count of Soissons,
Princes of the blood, the D. of Mayenne, the L. Chancellor, the D. of
Espernon, of Lacerdeene, of Bois, Daulphin, Marshal of France, etc. this made
the fathers innocence so manifest that none durst any further condemn them.

All this I have mentioned for two reasons, the first is because I find that
some English books take up the French slanders, and make much of the decree for
condemning Bellarmine, whereas notwithstanding they might have taken notice
that that decree was recalled and annulled by the King, Princes, and Council,
and the Jesuits freed from the aspersion of the Kings death, which without any
the least appearance of probability was by mere calumny objected to them.

2ly. I take notice of this decree because it will show what Judgment the
reader make of some other decrees: he may guess by this whether that be not
true which Spondanus says ad annum 1626. numero secundo; where having taken
notice of the strife of Sorbon concerning Santareles book, and the censures of
it, he has these words. Haec doctorum Sorbonicorum dissidia non aliunde
procedebant, quam ex occultis schismatis seminibus, quae a multis fovebantur.
These dissentions of the Sorbon Doctors did not proceed from any thing else,
but from hidden seeds of Schism, which many did nourish. This he does not say
(nor do I) as though the book of Santarel were not justly condemned, since the
King, as Spondamus there says, signified to Sorbon that that book was already
suppressed at Rome by the Pope, and disowned by all learned men, and therefore
they needed not trouble themselves with giving their censures. But the violence
(...) ^hese Doctors proceeding (...) to inclinations bent to Schism. And he
adds how the Cardinal Rochefcault took occasion from these stirs of Sorbon
(which was for a good part of that year 26 busied in Centures) to write a book
which he dedicated to the King with this title Of conserving the unity of the
Church. This unity, says Spondanus, the Sorbons went about to tear in pieces,
quam isti discerpere studebant, all which well weighed shows that the
authorities which A. G. lays as a foundation in his questions concerning the
oath of Allegiance cannot be a guide for us. It is not safe to be lead by them
who endeavor to tear in pieces the unity of the church, qui unitatem Ecclesiae
discerpere student.

But I have made a long diression, Now then I will give you the speech of that
great King, and great Protector and Patron of the society. And with it I will
end, for I know not where I can end better, then with the Oracle of that wise
Monarchs judgment, which I hope for our dread Sovereigns sake, who is his
Grandchild, and heir of his eminent perfections, will be welcome to all, and I
am sure contains a sum of all that needs be said in defense of the society;
especially if we consider that his words were followed with such effects as the
cancelling the act, the recalling the Jesuits into France, the founding many
colleges (particularly that royal one of La Fleche) the giving his son to be
educated by the society, and finally the bequeathing his heart to them.

The Speech of Henry the IV. King of France in behalf of the Jesuits.
THe Nobility of the Court of Paris, and a great part of the Parliament being
come to the Kings palace, Harley one of the Presidents of the Parliament of
Paris addressing himself to his Majesty, pronounced a studied invective against
the Jesuits wherein he urged all that which the enemies of the society had
premeditated. All his speech closed in this, that the society of Jesus ought
not to be recalled into France, but continue banished. The King replied in this
manner, 1. THeicare you show of me and my Kingdom is grateful to me; albeit you
seem not to have thoroughly weighed the things you demand, nor are you, as yet,
so well acquainted with my thoughts, as I am with yours. 2. You deem the weal
of my Kingdom to consist in the proposition you have made; you tell me it is a
matter that deserves to be most carefully deliberated. And I tell you, you have
said nothing which I have not most carefully weighed, and most diligently
examined by my self these eight or nine years. 3. You take your selves for men
of great understandiag and experience in the Common wealth. Bat believe me I
know as well as You all that has been in controversy in this matter. 4. First
of all you object to the Fathers of the Society, the Assembly of Poissy; The
Clergy held an Assembly at Poissy an. 1561. in which the society was allowed
of, and admitted though not fully.
but without cause. For if there had been at that place others like many of
them, the Catholic cause would have had a more happy success. therefore that
which you turn to their dispraise, any just Vmpire will attribute to their
virtue. But that which I most wonder at your judgments for is, that so
preposterously you condemn the society of ambition, whereas the fathers of the
society with a constant submission, have ever refused all honor and
preferment, as well Ecclesiastical as Political: and which is more, they bind
themselves by vow not only not to aspire to honors, but even to refuse the
same when they are freely offered unto them. Consider their whole course of
life, and you shall find that all their ambition is to labor for to help all,
and that without any pretense of interest or gain. They value not the expenses
of their own pains, so they may profit many. 5. But you call into question the
very name of the society of Jesus, and for that you tax them. But see with what
reason. For if they must be blamed for that holy name, what shall we say for
those Religious persons who take their name from the most blessed Trinity? And
your daughters here at Paris; what will you think of them that call themselves
Daughters of God? Finally how will you censure my Knights, who are called of
the Holy Ghost? Truly I do not more dislike them that take their name from
Christ, then any other. 6. You object that the Divines of Sorbon condemned the
Jesuits. I do not deny it. But they condemned them being innocent, unknown,
and unheard. For this I call to witness, those very Divines themselves, who
now admit them, whom their predecessors banished, and honor them whom they
contemned; nay they praise now and extol those that were condemned, and stick
not to take them for their directors, and Masters, in all kind of learning. 7.
You tell me the Jesuits have hitherto remained in France only by connivance.
Here I acknowledge, and reverence the divine providence, that has reserved this
honor for me, not yet atchived by others, that I should establish in this
Realm the society of Jesus, which hitherto has had no settled abode in France.
My Predecessors have received the society, I will Patronize and preserve them.
8. Peradventure you will turn to the Jesuits discredit, that for which you
ought to praise and honor them: The University of Paris earnestly and openly
opposed them. And what, I pray, was the cause of this opposition? All was, that
the Fathers did not only equal others in learning and industry, but also went
far beyond them. A clear testimony of this is the great number of youth that
frequented the fathers schools, where together with learning they learnt
virtue. But to stop this opposition, I will make a Decree that the University
of Paris shall no more oppose them. And this you will be glad of. 9. But you
will tell me, that the ablest of your Parliament got not their learning of the
Jesuits. This I will not much gainsay. For the ablest of you, as they excel in
learning so they exceed in years. These got their learning in foreign nations,
before the society set foot in France. Others did not so, and so I am certain
they think and speak otherwise. And what need they speak? the matter it self
speaks. We our selves saw how at the departure of the society out of France,
all the muses seemed to depart. Our University was desert and mourned: those
came seldom at it, who before daily in great numbers frequented the Fathers.
Yea many departed the Realm, and forsook their country to study in the
societies schools; nor could your Decrees or Threats stop them. 10. You say the
Fathers joined themselves to the Ligue, that is not to be imputed to their
fault, but to the iniquity of the times. But this I persuade my self, upon the
assurance I have of the integrity of their Consciences, that they will become
such toward me, as it behooves them, who mindful of benefits, desire to show
themselves most grateful. 11. Now some of you impose on the Fathers a new
crime, and peradventure as yet unheard of, saying, that they draw to their
order young men of the most forwardness and best dispositions. An unpardonable
crime: yet I praise them and esteem them particularly for this that you
condemn. Do not we, though in a different matter, do the self same? A Captain
that is to raise Soldiers, does he not cull out the choicest, and leave the
meanest and lest hopeful? In your Parliament, when you choose a new Court, or
fill up an old, do you prefer the unlearnedst, and least apt for business? If
the Jesuits should put unlearned Masters in their schools, or in their
Churches ignorant Preachers, would you not with reason blame them? What offense
is it that the Jesuits should provide the fittest they can, both for Church and
Schools. 12. That slander which concerns the Jesuits treasure, is as false as
common. Go visit all the Colleges in France, search all their treasures, sum
all together, and you will scarce find twelve, or at most fifteen thousand
crowns. I know well how poor and slender furniture and provision was both at
Lions and Bourge. Nevertheless 30 or 40 persons were to be fed in each of
those colleges; whereas their yearly revenues was scarcely sufficient for
eight Masters. 13. The vow of obedience with which they tie themselves to the
Pope does not oblige them to be more faithful to externes, then to us. Neither
is there in that Vow any thing contrary to the oath which they will swear unto
me. They will attempt nothing (I am sure) against their Prince. That Vow to the
Pope, binds them to go to barbarous and savage Nations that they may reduce
them to the Catholic church. The whole world testifyeth that the remotest
regions of the Indies, together with infinite Heretics, have been by their
pains and learned endeavors, brought to Christ's fold. I remember I have often
said, that if the labor of Spanish Fathers be so profitable for Spain, why
should not France with reason expect the same? Is that Kingdom more fortunate
and flourishing then this? Spain is loved by the Spaniards, and why should the
French hate their Native soil? 14. But as you are wont to say, these men seek
to be admitted into Provinces and Kingdoms what way soever they can. Pray you
is this an offense? It Is the custom of all that follow the instinct of nature.
I my self, by what means I could, sought to get my Crown. Howsoever we cannot
but admire the Fathers constant patience whereby they go through so great and
hard matters, and bear so many and so heavy crosses. 15. Neither do I Esteem
them the worse, for that they be so observant of their Rules and Constitutions.
This is that whereby the society does increase, flourish and better it self
every day more and more. For this reason I thought not good to change any of
their Constitutions or Rules, though I have made some change in others, which
was not approved of all. But that is no matter. 16. The Fathers of the society
have many back friends, among some that seem Holy and Religious persons, who
speak ill of them. This no wise man will wonder at. Our age is not come to that
sanctity, that ignorance should cease to hate learning, or corruption of
manners leave to envy integrity of life. It was so in times past, and so it is
still. These moathes are always gnawing on learned works. No prosperity so
circumspect, that can escape the tooth of malice, hatred and envy, always
attend the highest things. I observed: when it was consulted about the
recalling of the Jesuits into France, that two sorts of men did specially
oppose themselves, Heretics, and loose living Churchmen: the one was moved
thereunto by their bad faith, the other by their bad life. But I am so far from
being hereby moved to alter my intended purpose, that I am more confirmed in my
resolution. 17. The Fathers of the society, speak and think honorably of the
Pope, so they should, and so do I; I join with them, since I am certain that in
averring and defending the Popes authority, they differ not from other
Catholic Divines. 18. Neither did their Doctrine ever give occasion to
Clergymen to deny me tribute. Nor is there any to be found whom these Fathers
words or books animated to killing of Kings. Whatsoever some have patcht
together to bring them to Discredit, is all a Fiction and mere Fable. Thirty
Years and more are passed since the Fathers began to instruct the Youth of
France both in Virtue and Learning. Of these some have gone through with all
their studies in their Schools. Others have broke off, and applied themselves
to Physic or Law. Tell me whether any of these ever learnt of their Masters to
lay hands upon Kings, and to kill them? I tell You the Fathers are so clear,
that they are content to appeal even to their enemies judgment. There are some
Pulpit-Men among the Heretics, who were trained up in Fathers Schools: ask
these Men their judgment concerning the Jesuits lives and Doctrine: But whose
cause is so good as to desire to be tried by Enemies? Yet I am sure in their
case this has been done, The Ministers have been asked their judgment of the
Jesuits: and they have given no other answer, but, That the Jesuits Lives
cannot be Reprehended, and for their Doctrine, that it is in too clear a Sun
for to be be questioned. Certes few can be found that will dare to stand to
their Enemies judgment, their security of conscience must needs be great, that
fears not any Adversaries Verdict 19. The Confession of Barriere, who attemted
something against my person, does not infringe that which I have said. For so
far was any Jesuit from that fact (which you nevertheless affirm) that one of
these Fathers of good credit advised me of it in time, and another of them
dehorted and deterred Barriere from his attempt, proposing to him Gods heavy
Judgments due to such Malefactors. 20. As for Catel, all imaginable torments,
were not able to wrest the least word against, Varadius or any one Father of
the Society. If this be not so why spared you the guilty? Why let you them go
when you had them fast? why punished you them not according to your Law and
Court? 21. But to grant you that that never was; suppose some one of the
society had attempted against my person. Will you condemn all the Apostles for
one Judas? shall the punishment light on my head, for whatsoever any of my
Soldiers shall trespass in military license? I acknowledge the hand of God,
whose will it was to have me pressed and humbled at that time; the same hand
raised me and set me safe again. Gods goodness and providence be thanked. I
have learnt to forget and forgive injuries for Gods sake, as I willingly do for
that King who is greater then my self. And now I will be so far from remembering
injuries done unto me, or revenging the same, that I will daily offer up
prayers to God for my enemies. All of us have need of Gods mercy, which is no
ways better to be obtained, then by promptly and readily pardoning those who
have offended Us.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 13 Dominus read Divinius, p. 19 mystery r. mastery, p. 22. World,
revealed r. World and revealed, ibidem swarm, r. swarve, p. 24 yea, r. yet, p.
55 to the known, r. to all the known p. 72 to relent r. resent, p. 76 and carry
away the ball; r. and seem to them to carry away the bell; p. 78 publishing, r.
palliating; p. 134. the reader make, the reader may make.

Some other faults there are of lesser note, and errors in the interpunctions
which the Juditious Reader will easily correct.


