A Thanksgiving-Sermon FOR THE PEACE PREACHED At the Parish Church of St.
Dunstan's in the West, Dec. IId. 1697.

By William Gallaway, A. M. Chaplain to the Officers, and others, of His
Majesty's TRAIN of ARTILLERY.

Printed at the particular Request of some of the Hearers.

LONDON. Printed for Hugh Newman, at the Grasshopper in the Poultrey. 1697.

Mr. GALLAWAY's Thanksgiving-Sermon FOR THE PEACE.

A Thanksgiving SERMON.
Isaiah XIVth. 16, 17, 18 Verses. They that see thee, shall narrowly look upon
thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the Man that made the Earth to
Tremble, that did shake Kingdoms? that made the World as a Wilderness, and
destroyed the Cities thereof, that opened not the House of his Prisoners? All
the Kings of the Nations, even all of them lie in Glory, every one in his own
House.
IN the Beginning of this Chapter, Isaiah, by his Prophetic Spirit, foretells
the Merciful Deliverance that God would bring to pass for the House of Israel;
that the Time was near at hand, That the Arrogance of the Proud was to cease,
and that the Haughtiness of the Terrible was to be laid low, as it is in the
13th Chapter, 11th Verse, that there would be an Unexpected Change in the Face
of Affairs, and that the Lord would not only give them Rest from their Sorrows,
and from their Fears, and from their Hard Bondage, wherein they were made to
serve, Verse the 3d, but also, as a Visible Mark of his Great Favor, and more
Abundant Kindness, He declares, They shall take them Captives, whose Captives
they were, and they shall Rule over their Oppressors: And as a full
confirmation of this Joyful Tidings, the Prophet further assures them, in the
24, 25, 26, 27 Verses. The Lord of Hosts has Sworn, saying, Surely as I have
thought, so shall it come to pass; and, as I have purposed, so shall it stand.
That I will break the Assyrian in my Land, and upon my Mountains tread him
underfoot: then shall his Yoke depart from off them, and his Burden depart from
off their Shoulders. This is the purpose that is purposed on the whole Earth:
and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the Nations. For the Lord
of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disanul it? and his hand is stretched
out, and who shall turn it back?

On the Infallible Assurance of this Extraordinary Event it was, that the
Prophet represents the Israelites, with their Neighboring Kings, who labored
under the same Tyrannical Oppressions, thus Insulting over the King of Babylon;
How has the Oppressor ceased? The Lord has broken the Staff of the Wicked,
and the Scepter of the Rulers. The whole Earth is at rest and is quiet, they
break forth into Singing. All they (the Kings of the Nations) shall speak and
say unto thee Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou become like unto us?
Thy Pomp is brought down to the Grave. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O
Lucifer, Son of the Morning! How art thou cut down to the ground which did
weaken the Nations? For thou have said in thine heart, I will ascend into
Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God, I will ascend above the
heights of the Clouds, I will be like the Most High; yet thou shall be brought
down to Hell, to the sides of the Pit. Thus the Context, which leads me to the
words of my Text, They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and
consider thee: They, who were formerly amazed with thy Glittering Outside, with
thy Vain and Ostentatious Boastings, shall View, and Reflect, with Surprise, on
thy Unforeseen and Unexpected Change; They, shall be Curious, and Inquisitive,
as if Amazed at the Unapprehended Causes of this thy Sudden Alteration; and the
more especially at their Wits end, considering their Ears were every day
filled with the Blasphemous, but empty Noises of those who had only flattered
Thee Invincible and Immortal. They shall consider, That the Lord of Hosts can,
and will punish the fruit of the stout Heart of the King of Assyria, and the
Glory of his High Looks, (whom he before Raised up, as the Rod of his Anger, to
Scourge the Hypocritical and Idolatrous Israelites) notwithstanding he has
said, Chapter the 10th, 13th Verse, By the strength of my hand I have done it,
and by my Wisdom, for I am Prudent: I have removed the Bounds of the People,
and have robbed their Treasures. I have put down the Inhabitants like a Valiant
Man. Though thou did foolishly ascribe all thy Success and Victories to the
Strength of thine Own Arm and Martial Conduct, yet now the Delivered
Insultingly despise thee, and say, Is this the Man that made the Earth to
Tremble, that did shake Kingdoms? That made the World as a Wilderness, and
destroyed the Cities thereof, that opened not the House of his Prisoners? Is
the Grand Monarch of Assyria Dwindled into this Contemptible State? Is the
Scourge of Mankind grown Feeble and Weak, unable to carry on his Terrible
Sieges, and All-destroying Devastations? Are all his Subtle and Powerful
Efforts and Contrivances to Enslave the World at an end? And are thy Prisons
open to all but those who will not fall down and Worship the Images of (New)
Babylon? And do all the Kings of the Nations, even all of them lie in Glory,
every one in his own House? Are thy Conquests ceased, and art thou now forced
to Dismantle, and Restore with Shame and Regret, the Dear, but Short-lived
Possession of what was Purchased, with so much Labor, so much Treasure, and so
much Blood? How art thou Mortified to behold thine Enemies, whom thou not long
since did trample on, and despise, Reinstated in their own Envied Cities and
Territories? to be thus Gratingly Lowr'd from thy High Slippery Station, and to
have thy Mistaken Greatness, and False Glory, go out like a Dazzling Meteor, or
Blazing Comet; What Admiration! What Wonder! shall not these Reflections fill
them with, who narrowly look on thee, and consider thee: Thus the Prophet
Elegantly and Insultingly describes the Mean Appearance, and little Figure, of
the not long before Mighty Monarch of Assyria; which indeed, if duly observed,
is a proper Instance for Mankind in General, to show the Instability of Humane
Greatness; and to Princes more particularly Instructive, to lay aside their
Ambitious Projects of Swelling their Power beyond its proper Limits, by Unjust
and Unnatural Means, at the Ruin and Misery of their Fellow Creatures;
Considering withal, that the true end of all Power, is only to capacitate us
to do the more Good in the World, to Relieve and Support the Oppressed, and not
to Crush and Oppress. Thus having taken a Transient View, as to the Occasion
and Design of the Words of my Text, I proceed to Deduce, and clear this General
Proposition or Observation from them.

First. The Visibility of Providence in the Great and Unexpected Revolutions of
Kingdoms and Empires.

Secondly. Reflect on, and Apply them, with Reference to the Solemnity of this
Day.

That there is a Supreme and Independent Being which Created and Governs all
things in Heaven and Earth, is a Truth which has been so Universally received,
that I presume I need not be at much pains to convince and confirm it: The
Light of Nature, and that of Reason, together with those visible Revelations
that God has made of himself to the Nation and People of the Jews, and as
above all the clear and undeniable manifestation of himself in, and by the
Gospel; are Evidences that carry so much conviction as hardly to be resisted,
and that which gives it a double force, it is only denied by those whose
dissolute Lives and disturbed Consciences falsely, but fatally, forces them to
deny that provoked Being they fear and tremble at; and it is hardly possible,
but that a Man must first be a Practical, before he can be so foolish as to own
himself a Speculative Atheist. Seneca the Roman Moralist tells us, There is no
Nation so Barbarous as not to believe some Gods; the most Savage own a Supreme
Power and Being, though they mistake in the true object of their Service and
Adoration. How can we account for the Original and continuance of this World,
and all things in it, unless we come to the Acknowledgement of some Independent
and Almighty Being, the first cause of it? For what is Created and finite must
necessarily be produced and subsist by some uncreated and infinite power; and
St. Paul tells the Romans, Chap. 1. v. 20. That the invisible things of him
from the Creation of the World are clearly seen being understood by the things
that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead; so that they are without
excuse. It Is as unreasonable to believe that the most exact Order and Harmony
of things should be the product and effect of Jumbl'd and Confused Atoms, as
that the curious motions of a Clock should have its perfection from the bare
Materials without the skillful hand and regular design of the Artist. God is
the great Artificer (if I may so speak) of the World, and all its various
Intricate and Admirable Motions are kept going true by his Irresistible Power
and Wise Providence. He has made the Sun to rule by day, and the Moon by
night, the Elements observe their distinct Order, and all things Obey the
Instinct and Tendency of their Natures, unless otherwise commanded to
demonstrate the Glory and Power of their Great Lord and Creator. I shall not
enlarge my discourse on this point, only I thought it necessary to premise the
acknowledgment of that Being, which must be admitted of in the prosecution of
that Subject I am Engaged in.

The Three Chief Attributes of God, are His Goodness, Wisdom, and Power; by
these He is Kind and Propitious, contrives and executes all those things which
are Beneficial to Mankind; upon which account it is one of the chiefest
Blessings we enjoy in this our Earthly Pillgrimage, that an Immense, Good,
All-Wise, and Allmighty God Governs the World, this is that peculiar Blessing
which raises our dejected Hopes, banishes our disturbing Fears, and only
affords us True and Solid comfort in our greatest Extremities and Distresses.
In Him we Live, Move, and have our Being, and the influences of his Providence
we enjoy without measure or intermission. Is there any Good has happened to us
of which he has not been the sole Author? Has there been any deliverance
which he with his own Right Hand has not wrought for us? And are we not at
this time delivered from our Open, and shellter'd under the shadow of his Wings
from our concealed Enemies? Therefore we are more especially obliged to confess
and own with thankfullness his Being and Care over us.

It Is to heighten the circumstances of our present Joy, to reflect and reveiw
our not long since Melancholy prospect of Affairs before our happy Revolution;
When the powers of darkness at home, with the united strength and Policy of our
late Enemy had contrived and resolved either our Perverssion or Destruction;
then our Souls were overspread with Black and Dreadful Clouds of Horror and
Darkness, Our Spirits grew low and fainting, our hearts dejected, our knees
trembling and beating against each other; then all our promising Hopes
vanished, and our dismal Fears increased, our Circumstances appeared on all
sides so desperate that our Reason and Faith were staggered and confounded to
propose or believe which way or by what means we were to be rescued from hose
imminent dangers we were surrounded with; When behold, on a sudden, and in the
midst of our Distresses, God commands a deliverer to come unto us to assert and
maintain our Rights, to preserve that Church against whose Faith founded on a
Rock (we have Christ's Promise) the gares of Hell shall not prevail. The time
would fail me to enumerate the many signal and remarkable Providence which
attended that surprising Revolution, of which barely to relate the Story is to
recount them; Providence as visible as the Sun at noon day, and like its rays
darted round about us, only denied and slighted by some who were infatuated and
blinded by their Interests and others who were ignorant of our Constitution,
and had deceived themselves into an opinion that Wolves and Foxes had a right
to Lord it over our English Pastures. Nor were these their devices only
defeated at this critical time, but as our professed Enemies still pursued and
carried on their Mischeivous Purposes, so we have advantagiously experimented
the continued effects of Guarding and Watchful Providence over the Person and
Affairs of our Undaunted deliverer. What Hazards has he not been exposed to
both abroad and at home? Yet God has still preserved him to Triumph over his
Ungrateful Enemies; and though his and our pretended Friends have been long
laboring to destroy and betray us by the most refined artifices of
Embarrassing and Entangling our Affairs, yet by his extraordinary Patience, and
Sagacious conduct, together with that Over-ruleing Power, that has brought
Good out of their intended Evil, and turned their designed Mischiefs on their
own Heads, we are hitherto Preserved and Enjoy this envied opportunity of
Praising and Adoring the Great Governor of the Universe, and of paying our
just Homage of Thanks and Allegiance to his Vicegerent here below.

Nothing is more evident to Observation, then that the thoughts of the
generality of Mankind are taken up for the most part with the outward
appearances of things, frighted and amazed with Humane Probabilities, and what
Humane Power is able to effect or bring to pass, the uttmost efforts and
strengths of which are blown away like a bubble, with the least blasting breath
of the Allmighty. He who has set bounds to the impetuous and Masterless Waves,
with a commanding Nod, can stop the progress of the most swelling Tyrant. An
Army of Frogs or Caterpillars can humble and destroy a proud Pharaoh, as well
as a powerful Host of well disciplined and Valiant Soldiers. The least insect
in Nature can execute what his Infinite Wisdom designs, and his Immense Power
commands; so that we must all confess and declare with the Prophet David, Happy
and Safe are the People (and they only so) who have the Lord for their God.

The Works of Providence are framed in the depth of God's Wisdom, and like as
the silent and unseen Waters, wandering in secret and distant Channels beneath
the Surface of the Earth, at last meet together, and gush into a Fountain. So
the diversity of Opinions the Humors of Men, the Intrests of Princes, the
Intreagues of States, the Differences in Families, with a Thousand little
accidents, conspire together to perfect and bring to light the designed Work.

What Alterations and Revolutions the Heathens of old, and our more Modern
Politicians attribute to blind Fate, or inconstant Fortune; by a more curious
inspection and enquiry will appear designed and wrought by an All-seeing Eye,
and steady Hand. For the concurrence of unforeseen and unobserved causes
perfected and manifested in their visible and wonderful Effects; strikes and
affects the Senses and understandings of Men with Surprise and Amazement; but
when they give themselves leave to reflect and deliberate on the whole
Transaction, it forces them to admire, as well as own the Powerful Finger of
God.

Babylon, the Praise of the whole Earth, confident in her formidable Army
instead of a Garrison, her Inexhaustible Stores as if provided for an Age, not
a Seige; Her Walls like Pyramids and so numerous as if in one you had attacked
many Cities. How soon were her mighty Men slain and all her boasted Strengths
and Glories levelled and laid in the dust? God's special Providence foretold by
the Prophet Jeremiah in the 50 Chap. and 45th. verse, Therefore hear ye the
Counsel of the Lord that he has taken against Babylon, and his Purposes that
he has Purposed against the Land of the Caldeans. In the 25th. verse it is
called, The Work of the Lord God of Hosts, and in the 27th. verse, Woe unto them
for their day is come, the time of their Visitation, and in the 51st. Chap.
11th. verse, The Lord has raised up the Spirit of the Kings of the Medes for
his Device is against Babylon to destray it.

From which instance this observation occurs, That the greatest Warlike
Preparations cannot secure an Empire, or City from Ruin, when the Counsel of
the Lord has otherwise determined it.

From the Ashes of the Babylonish or Assirian Empire, that of the Medes or
Persians took its rise or birth, nor is the short time of its duration to be
wondered at, if we consider 'twas wholly plunged and immersed in the abounding
Delicacies and Luxuries of the East (a certain Symtom of a Short-lived Empire)
nay her Men were arrived to that degree of Softness and Effeminacy that their
very Natures seemed to be changed, and as the Prophet Jeremiah expresses it of
the Babylonish Men, they were become as Women. When Destruction was coming upon
them like a Whirlewind then they seemed most secure, and fancied themselves
Victorious; and that Army, to quench whose Thirsts whole Rivers scarcely
sufficed, How soon was it defeated by a despised handful of Rugged Grecians,
supposed only the forerunners or Forlorn-Hope, but led on by a dareing and
Conquering Alexander; which plainly exemplifies, that the most unequal Numbers
cannot command Victory, and that Conduct and Courage being put in the Balance
with the few will make them Superior. Nor was Providence altogether
unconcerned in this great and extraordinary Overthrow, for the Prophet Daniel
was foretold the determined event in a Vision, as appears from the 10th. Chap.
20th. verse. Then said he, Know thou wherefore I am come unto thee? And now
will I return to fight with the Prince of Persia, and when I am gone forth so,
the Prince of Grecia shall come. God raised the Spirit of this great Prince, to
attempt and execute what, in Humane Probability, seemed unlikely, and little
less then impossible to be effected; for who can imagine that 30 or 40000 Men
should be able to give a total defeat to a Million? the truth of which is
confirmed by all Historys, and this fatal blow put an end to the Persian Empire.

The Grecian which succeeded expired in its Infancy, whose extensive Conquests
were shared amongst the Favorites and Officers of their Generous Master,
confirming what we read in the 11th. of Daniel, the 3d. and 4th. verses, And a
mighty King shall stand up, that shall rule with great Dominion and do
according to his Will, and when he shall stand up his Kingdom shall be broken,
and shall be divided toward the four Winds of Heaven, and not to his Posterity
nor according to his Dominion which he ruled, For his Kingdom shall be plucked
up even for others besides those.

The All-wise Providence of God pulls down one Empire and raises another, the
Causes and Reasons only known to himself; and for what end and purposes, the
short line of our finite reason, and weak understandings is altogether
incapable to reach and cannot fathom.

But, amongst all History, nothing seems more Incredible, then the Rise and
Growth of the Roman Empire, which, from a little Root, spread its Flourishing
Branches almost over every Quarter of the Earth. The Prophet Daniel speaks of
it at Large in the Two last Chapters of his Book, in which he plainly Foretells
the Dissolution of the Jewish Government, together with their Laws, Temple, and
their Beloved City of Jerusalem: Nor is it unknown, from diverse Proofs, that
those things came to pass, and that the Prophecies relating to it, were
Fullfill'd even to a Lettrr. 'Twere endless to Recount those many Providential
Occurrences which Related to, and Attended our Blessed Savior's Appearance,
and which caused such Variety of Events in the World; and we may Observe
amongst those many other Refined Doctrines in His First Sermon on the Mount, He
Acquaints his Disciples with, and Asserts the Nature of Providence; and that
it is concerned in the most Minute Things, How much more in Greater, in the more
Important Affairs of Public Communities and Kingdoms? Nay, our Blessed Savior
Reproves, and Corrects their Faithless and Mistrustful Thoughts relating to it.
But to Return.

What Alterations was not the Roman Government subject to, before it arrived to
its Feared and Admired Greatness? And what Convulsions did it not Labor under
afterward? But the Learned Dr. Howell, in the Second Part of his General
History, Judiciously Reflects on the Wisdom and Policy of their Laws, and
observes them more especially tending to Secure the Rights and Liberties of the
People. Yet notwithstanding the great Care, Conduct, Courage, and Experience in
all those things that were Necessary for its Support, we find this Tottering
Empire to have had the same Dissolution with those that went before, and which
those shall have at their Appointed time which succeed it.

I cannot pass by in Silence an Important and Pertinent Observation from Father
Paul's History of the Council of Trent, That, notwithstanding the Cunning
Intreagues managed by that Packed Caball of Bishops, many of them Titular, and
who were sent thither with Instructions, to Oppose and Hinder all Reformation
of Religion, and to Promote the Interests of Rome; that they were so far from
attaining their Intended Ends, that on the contrary the Reformation was very
much Advanced by it. The Doctrines and Articles there Decreed, being directly
Opposite and Contrary to those of Christ, and his Apostles; and notwithstanding
'twas designed, and in the Resolutions of the Empire and the French, to
Extirpate what they falsely called the Northern Heresy: Yet the Temporal
Interests of the Empire so far prevailed, as to oblige them to join with the
Protestant Princes, and to Protect and give Liberty to the Reformers; By which
means the Reformation was Established, and consequently Promoted and Propagated
by its Professed Enemies.

To Remark this Providential Dispensation, directs me to that Exclamatory
Admiration of St. Paul, in the 11th of the Romans, the 33d and 34th Verses. O
the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! For who has
known the Mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor?

I have so large a Field of Matter before me, that my time obliges me to stop
here, and pass to the Second Point Proposed to be Insisted on.

To Reflect on, and Apply the Words of my Text, with Reference to the Solemnity
of this Day; They that see thee, shall narrowly look upon, etc.

Though the Parallel between the great Monarch of Assyria and the present French
King, will not hold good in every particular Circumstance, inasmuch as the
former was hurled from a long enjoyed Assyrian Monarchy; and the other removed
from a part only of his Designed Western Monarchy; yet this Reflection is more
particularly Remarkable, That at the same time that his Armies were Victorious
in the Field, he was Imploring a Peace at the Treaty, and could not Procure a
Tolerable one, without Re-delivering his Conquests.

An Instance which is not to be found in any History; and which, by the way,
makes it Difficult to Reconcile the Archbishop of Paris's Te Deum's; He Thanks
God for his Masters Taking of Towns, at the Expense of almost Ten thousand Men;
and, in some short time, was Thanking God for the Peace which forced him to
Restre them for Nothing. But perhaps it was in his Intention to Thank God that
put it into his Masters Heart to make so Absolutely necessary, though in all
Outward Appearance, so Disadvantageous a Peace, least a Worse Thing had
befallen him.

Which Reflection upon the Whole, makes those, who were Deceived with Outward
Appearances, in stead of Substance and Realities, look narrowly on thee, and
consider thee; Nay, they are extremely Surpised to see thee Stripped, like the
Bird in the Fable, who, before every one had plucked their borrowed Feathers,
appeared Rich and Gay.

'Twill puzle the French Orators and Panegyrists, to find, or contrive a
Topic for their Flatteries; They may say indeed, Their Great Master has Given
Peace to Europe; tho, at the same time, we, and all Europe knows, He was
Begging it at Our Own Doors; and, it is odds, but the Heretic Critics will be
apt to suspect some difference, between the words, Giving, and Begging.

They may, perhaps, Ascribe that to His Generosity, which his Impotent
Ambition, and Exhausted Treasures (which Enervates all the Motion and Power of
Armies) could no longer maintain and secure. If to his Justice, Why does he not
Restore the Remaining part of the Cities and Territories now in his Possession,
to which he has no better Title than to the other? and which, perhaps, one
Day, may be the Occasion of a Greater Refunding.

If they Applaud his Good Nature, then their Flatteries will be Cruel indeed,
when they cannot but behold him still Ungratefully Persisting to Persecute his
own Prostestant Subjects to Death, against Humane Nature, Oaths and Edicts,
who formerly Freely Exposed their Lives to set the Crown of France on his Head.

And here I cannot but enlarge this Reflection, that nothing has contributed
so much to the lowering of France as this Persecution. And 'twas the Opinion of
a great General and Statesman, the Father of this present Elector of
Brandenburgh (who, in memory to his Honor be it spoken, gave the most kind and
Christian Reception to the poor miserable Protestant Refugees) I say 'twas his
Opinion, That the French King would not have received so great a loss in one of
his best Armies, as he did by that Unjust and Unchristian Persecution, which is
fully confirmed in the event and too late to be retreiv'd: for his most
Industrious Subjects being most impolitickly forced away from their Native
Soil, and Habitations, withdrew their Effects, carried away, and set up the
French Manufactures wherever they settled, which supplied those places and
others, all which were formerly made and sent from France; by which means
France is become at present both Impoverished and Uninhabited.

Which Reflection perhaps confirms the unobserved, but Just and Admirable
Method of Providence, that the Pride and Power of France which could not be
humbled and lessened by any Confederated foreign Force, should be laid low and
given up, occasioned by his own infatuated Counsels and Barbarously executed
commands: He may palliate and conceal for some time his skinned Wound, but in
the Body Politic as well as the Natural, where the Disease is Hectical, as
soon as it shows it self it becomes Mortal.

Thus they, who now see thee at Home in thy present State and Condition, shall
for the future only esteem thee Mortal, a Match but for a few, subject to the
Vicissitudes of Fortune, to Passions and Vices like other Men: and thy quondam
Admirers and Adorers amongst us, shall narrowly look on thee and consider thee
saying, Is this the Man in whom we put so much Confidence, whose Dragoons we
every day expected to restore our Rights, preserve our Laws, and to Establish
the Church of England in the Purity of its Doctrines? Is the noise of his
All-shakeing Artillery Ceased, and the Neighing of his Horses prepared for
Battle now heard no more? And are all the flattring Hopes, of the Honors and
Estates, we promised our selves for Betraying our own Country, thus Defeated?

These considerations fill us with Indignation and Amazement, nor can it, like
the Blessed Virgin in the Gospel, upon another miraculous occasion enter into
our Hearts How these things should be, or come to pass.

But thus it is; and this is the Day, the Happy Day, set apart to offer up our
humble and hearty thanks to God for it. A Day which we had little reason to
expect, when by our Causeless, but wicked, Murmurrings and Repinings, we had so
soon ungratefully forgotten the train of past Providence which laid a
foundation for it, and when our Provokeing Sins had so loudly called for
Destruction, instead of so great, and undeserved a Blessing. A Day which
surpised our distant Expectations, nay which some amongst us thought
Impossible, and indeed would have been so, if they had had but Power sufficient
to have Enslaved themselves and us, Men who were restless and uneasy in their
Tempers, Men who were unreasonable, and would, be satisfied with nothing but
Contradictions, Arbitrary Power, and Property, Father Peter's, and no Popery.
Nay they would have persuaded us that French Shoes and Fetters would have worn
and set easy on us.

These Men, I think, have most reason to be highly Thankful, since by this
Advantageous Peace, they are delivered from themselves, and made happy even
against their own Wills.

Our Neighboring Allies and Confederates, may now rejoice and sit in safety
and unmolested in their own restored Cities and Territories; they may
deservedly Triumph for this last Campaine, in that they have gained so much
without loss or hazard: And as they have always admired, and applauded; the
Courage and Conduct of their great General and Head in the Field, so they have
good reason to own him no less powerful in his Sagacious Management of this
Victorious Peace in his Closset.

It must be Divinely inspired Wisdom, that could Engage, Unite, and Cement, so
many thwarting and divided Interests, which in the end has procured this, it is
to be hoped for, lasting Peace; the chief Author of which does this day ascribe
and acknowledge the Glory of it to the Great God of Peace, and is well
contented with the self-satisfaction of having been the Instrument of so much
good to Mankind, his chiefest joy is to see his Friends and Allies lie in
Glory, every one in his own House, where they may securely gaze and reflect on
their Reduced Enemy and say.

Is there a Stop put to thy Devastations, and can we now quietly Replant, Sow,
and Rebuild our burnt Habitations, Ruined Fields, and destroyed Groves? And
shall our Country, which is become as a Willderness, once more Flourish and be
Inhabited? Are thy Destructions at an end, and shall our Cities once again rise
up more Glorious from their dreadful Flames? And shall our Subjects detained as
Prisoners, return to their Native Countries, like the Israelites from their
hard and Babylonish Bondage; these are Blessings which fill our Hearts with
Gladness, and which Summon all our grateful Thanks and acknowledgement. Whilst
thou, like the Eclipsed Sun, lookst Black, and Mourn, and have now leisure to
Murmur and Repine at thy unpitied Fall.

As we have been all surrounded with Fears and Dangers, so now we are amidst
the Joyful Acclamations of Peace, the Soldiers are glad, in that they have
outlived the pressing Miseries, and Dangers of Sieges and Camps, the Merchants
rejoice because they have no other Enemies to deal withal, but the Rolling
Billows and inconstant Winds. Instead of the shrill and rugged noise of Drums
and Trumpets, our Ears are now carress'd and gratified with the more smooth and
soft Instruments of Peace. There shall be no more Weeping Mothers, nor
Distressed Orphans, the Effects of Cruel and Deadly War. But Wine which make
glad the Heart of Man, and Oil to make him a Cheerful Countenance, and all
manner of Plenty shall now abound, the Effects of Peace.

For these Mercies, we will all, with our United Voices, say, with the Prophet
David, in the 103 Psalm, Bless the Lord, O my Soul: and all that is within me
bless his Holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his
Benefits. Who redeemeth thy Life from destruction, who Crowns thee with
loving kindness and tender Mercies. The Lord executes Righteousness and
Judgment for all that are Oppressed

It Is an Unspeakable Happiness, that God has so ordered our Religious Duties,
as to be our True Interest; Our Prayers serve to procure us present Blessings,
and our due Thanks and Praises for those Received, are as an Earnest for Future.

Yet there are some Unthankful Persons (which seems scarcely credible) whom
neither the Favors of God or Men can Oblige: There is an Inveterate Malignity
in their Tempers, like those Unhappy Constitutions, which turn the Wholsomest
Food into Crudities and Diseases; they are a Plague indeed to themselves, which
is their Punishment: their Malice preys on their Envenomed Spirits; and, like
the Angry Be, as Naturalists tells us, the slight Wound they give another,
proves fatal to themselves.

To Conclude the Whole. Let this, almost Universal, Peace, Persuade us to
Reconcile and Unite our Love and Affections toward each other. We have but one
Common Interest to Preserve, which comprehends what is most dear to us, our
Lives, Liberties, and Religion; which our Reconciled Enemy, in a late Article,
Openly strikes at.

Let us not be Amused, and Prepossessed with the Plausible Opinions of any
Private Persons; but leave all Matters, relating to our Future Welfare, to the
Wisdom of the Great Council of the Nation, now to be Assembled; whose
Transactions, I Pray God Direct, for the Public Good.

Let us be Cautious, and not flatter our selves too secure, when it is in our
Power to make our selves safe, least we become an easier Prey to those, who may
prove such Treacherous Friends, as King David Experienced, who Speak Peace with
their Mouths, whilst they have War in their Hearts, and make themselves Ready
for Battle.

God has given us a Prince, who has Courage to Speak the Truth from his
Heart, and who makes our Interest his own; He has Valor enough to Oppose all
his Enemies, whether Foreign or Domestic; and whose Glorious Actions
evidently demonstrate, it is not ours alone he pursues, but, like his Great
Protector, the more extensive Happiness of Mankind.

Wherefore laying aside all Differences and Prejudices, private Piques and
Animosities, let us Unanimously concur, with our Hearty Endeavors, to
Establish His Throne in Peace and Security, that our Lawful and Rightful
KING, who has Freely Exposed Himself to, and Conquered all Difficulties and
Dangers, for the Honor and Safety of the Nation, may, for the Future, Enjoy
the Dear-Bought Pleasures, (if any there be) who hitherto has only had the
Troubles and Fatigues, of a Crown.

FINIS.

