Great News from Dundalk Giving a Full and Particular Account of the late Great
and Famous Action Between His Majesty's Forces under the Command of Brigadier
STUART And a Party of the late King James's near the Town of Dundalk: With an
Account of the Numbers Slain and taken Prisoners.
In a Letter from Chester.

Printed according to Order.

A Vessel which departed from Belfast on Sunday the 25 th. of May, and Arrived
last Night at Highlake, gives us certain Intelligence of a late Action in
Ireland, which has proved very Successful to the English, the particulars are
as follows:

Captain Stuart, an Officer of Reputed Courage and equal Conduct, in his
Majesty's Forces in Ireland, was Commanded to lead out a Party of Horse and
Foot, consisting of Three Thousand, against Dundalk, which was made a Garrison
by the Irish, who had been a considerable time to fear of the English coming
down upon them; who having Notice of Captain Stuart's approach with a Party,
(though uninform'd of what number) expected them to be but of indifferent
strength, so that upon Notice of their coming, the Garrison was drawn out, and
appeared in a Body without the Town, as if they had an intention to Ataque
them: But their whole Body consisting of no more than two thousand and odd Men,
which were divided into three Companies, and seeing our Men exceed them in
number, and make an appearance of so considerable a strength they began to
Consult their own safety, and Retired began to Consult their own safety, and
Retired back into the Town, betaking them selves to their respective Houses,
Captain Stuart and his party making hot Pursuit after them, recovered the Gates
before they had time to make any Baracade against him; so that he entered the
Town: But the Irish Fired out of Windows upon them, and Killing several of our
party before they could firmly possess themselves of the place; who were forced
to put a great many to the Sword before they could Reduce them to a due
Subjection.

Our party, found but little Booty in the Town, the Inhabitants having removed
all their Goods of any value, under the Conduct of a small party of Dragoons,
which the late King James Commanded some short time before, to Retire to Kells,
to secure them from the Irish Soldiers, who were very Cruel to the Inhabitants
during the time of the Garrison.

There were found but two Fieldpieces at the entrance into the Town, that
being all the Artillery they had.

This Successful Action was performed on last Wednesday was Seven-night; the
Report of which immediately flying to Loath, brought the Inhabitants thereof
under a great Conflict; who beginning to have a due sense of the Misery they
were like very speedily to fall under, without an Early Submission, have sent
to Duke Schomberg, to the number of Ten Thousand, to desire his Protection.

There lies at Highlake, Three Hundred Sail of small Ships, and Eleven Men of
War, waiting for his Majesty, to Convoy Him, and His Retinue, to Ireland.

ADVERTISEMENT
AN Exact Description of the ROADS of IRELAND, according to the lost and best
Survey; Giving the True Distances of all the Cities, Towns, Castles, and other
Passes and Places of Strength (each from the other) in that Kingdom. And the
most Passable Roads for the Army to March to the Siege of any Place. With an
Account of the Number of Cities, Towns, etc. now in the Possesion of Their
Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. Very necessary for all Gentlemen and
others (during the War in Ireland) in reading the Gazette, or other
Intelligences, of the Monuments and Actions of Their Majesty's Armies. Printed
for R. Hayhurst in Little-Brittain. Price 2 d.

Printed for R. Hayburst in Little-Brittain. 1690.


