The Great TRAPPANER OF ENGLAND, DISCOVERED.

BEING A True NARRATIAE of many Dangerous and abominable practices of one
THOMAS VIOLET Goldsmith, To Trappan the Jews, and to ruin many Scores of
Families in and about LONDON.

Publshed, as a Caution, or, as a Beacon fired to warn all men to beware of
such an Enemy to Mankind, and to Arm themselves against him.

The chief Part hereof being svvorn before Justice Powell, and Justice Blomer.
And for the rest sufficient and plentiful Witnesses, are ready to be produced.

Printed, In Defense of those whom it concerns, in the year, 1660.

THE GREAT Trappanner of England DISCOVERED.
AS man was the Glory of the Creation, so is there no savage more pernicious to
Humane Society, or the wel-being of mankind as depraved and degenerating man,
which may appear in this ensuing discourse, Epitomizing some of the multitude
of the black and foul enormityes of Thomas Violet, a Name too sweet for so foul
a Carcass.

His Birth was at Sea, as though nature had ordained no Country should be
burdened to own his Nativity, being Engendered between a poor Dutch Fiddler, and
a Moorish Woman. How he came into England without the help of the Devil, or
ever got into the repute to be entrusted in any man's Service as an Apprentise,
and so become a Member of this famous City of London, I am altogether ignorant;
But shall trace him from his being to be a Goldsmith.

His first way of thriving was by Transportation of Gold, the Coin of this
Nation which he followed till defeated and then detected such Merchants as
dealt with him to some of their ruins and his gain. That trade sailing, and
being more apt to mischief then to follow his lawful Calling he procured under
specious pretenses of Service to the late King and Court in Nomine Dommine: and
the Nation a Pattent to set up an Office for Gold and Silver Wire and Thread,
which he so well managed to his own benefit and the ruin of the Artificers, as
the cries of those Hundreds of undone Families, their Wives and Orpheans
sufficiently and woefully testify.

Many, and as great were the informations against him, for diverse Monopolies he
had share in, which in the mannagement of, he so behaved himself, that he could
very hardly defend himself from Corporal punishment; But that he was forced to
disgorge most part of that ill-gotten Mammon, which was sucked from him by some
which were then Courtiers, leaving little to himself except Infamy and shame,
and the Curses of those so ruined by his Cheats and Oppressions.

Thus did he shift from Post to Pillar, living by that base way of Informing,
until the unhappy difference and civil War of these Nations began: when to
piece up his Crazy Fortune, fishing in these troubled Waters, He would then
turn Statesman and wish much pretended Allegiance to the King, and as much
zeal and duty to the Parliament, he shufled his Cards so foully, and played his
game so dishonestly, that had he been caught at Oxford he had been hanged
there, hardly escaping the like here by a long and tedious Imprisonment and
Sequestration of his Estate; for which he now says, the State is in his debt
20000 l. which he has often affirmed before Authority, and in Courts of
Justice, and therefore said, it is reason he should get it up again some way
or other.

How he has lived since his enlargement I appeal to all that know him, for
instead of returning thanks to God for his deliverance, and repenting of his
former wickedness, he continues still a Common and most Horrid Sweater, a
debauched Drunkard, especially upon Sabbath days, an Epicure and an abominable
Liar, and guilty of many other ennormous and Inhumane Crimes to the great
Scandal of our Christian Religion especially amongst the Jews, with whom he is
very conversant; For what he can invent by lying he can easily ratify by
swearing, and thereby hopes to possess himself of other men's Estates Honestly
gotten.

And now I have named the Jews, I thought it not amiss to give that people an
Item of his Treacherous intentions to ruin them also. Wearied with his former
Contrivances he has at length found out a new way to pay old debts. He
Petitions and follows hard the Parliament and Council of State to give him
Authority to search for and find out false Coyners, he having been more then
sufficiently suspected himself for such practices (to say no more till things
be brought to farther light, especially in Gold) under the specious pretense of
doing still the Commonwealth Service. And to ingratiate himself for that
service, brings in a Catalogue of many by him found out; The chief whereof as
he pleases to Name in his scandalous and lying Pamphlets are, Tobias Knowles,
who was forced to appear and receive a Trial at the Old Baily Sessions this
last 24th of February, 1659. wherein indeed after a fair hearing, the Jury
brought him in Innocent. The Residue of his Catalogue being Garrell, Carter,
Preston, Chitty, Pight, Hatford and others: Having to their great damage
attended three Sessions for a Trial, expecting and much desiring it with Mr.
Knowles his Trial, But this Violet (although Richard Pight was the Prosecutor
and not He) prevailed to remove their Indictments by Certiorary into the Upper
Bench with the Indictment against himself for the same offense The bill being
found against him. This he has done in policy on purpose to suspend their
Testimony, being all or most of them witness against him: Yet pretends he has
spent above 40 l. in prosecution, when it is only to deferr and put off Trials:
to save himself he having no good good Witness, but such who have been guilty
of the same facts. But he spending on other men's Purses need not care what he
spends: And as to these men last mentioned, I verily believe there is scarce
one line of truth in all his Printed Pamphlets corcerning them.

But to keep my word with the Jews, and to let the world see of what dangerous
consequence it may prove, to Arm such a desperate minded man with such
Authority, he fearing neither God nor man, nor to destroy the life of any man
though it were his own Father, so he could but obtain his own wicked ends;
This being the opinion of all that know him, and is generally said of him,
having as bad a name as ever I heard man have; Pray take this ensuing discovery
taken before some of the Justices of the Peace, which he so boldly Cites in
diverse his Printed Papers by the Oaths of Honest men, Verbatim; which may
sufficiently demonstrate the reasons of his desired Authority; And whether it
be the Common good or his own private Lucre he intends to promote by it, let
any Rational man judge.

The DISCOVERY.
This Deponent says, that in the beginning of last Spring, Tho. Violet
Goldsmiths came to this Deponent, and told him this Deponent, that the said
Thomas Violet knew of a way that might make him the said Deponent for ever, and
so desired the said Deponent to go along with him, the said Tho. Violet, into
Dukes-Place, whereupon the said Deponent went along with the said Tho. Violet
into the place before mentioned, and was by him the said Tho. Violet brought
into the Synagogue of the Jews, in the place aforesaid, and spoke with one Mr.
Moses their High Priest that year, and other Jews; and this Deponent says
further, that the said Tho. Violet told the Jews, this Deponent was a fit man
to do them service in the business which he the said Tho. Violet had treated
with them about; and that afterward, he the said Deponent and the said Tho.
Violet, went together into Fish-street, and that whilst they were there
together, the said Violet desired the said Deponent to procure some Patterns of
Foreign Coyns, and to bring them to the Jews aforesaid, to the end they might
make choice of such as they should think fitting; whereunto the said Deponent
answered, that he thought this action to be unlawful, but then the said Violet
told the said Deponent, that he should not need to fear any such thing, for he
the said Violet would acquaint the Parliament and Council of State concerning
the business, who would grant him the said Deponent, and all the he should
employ in this business an Act of Indemnity; then this Deponent procured
certain Patterns of Foreign Coyns, and brought them to the Jews aforesaid,
who when they saw them, made choice of them, and desired the said Deponent to
procure a great quantity of such Pieces as they had made choice of; Then this
Deponent came to the said Violet, and acquainted him what had passed betwixt
this Deponent and the Jews. upon his bringing the said Patterns; whereupon the
said Violet promised the said Deponent 200 li. to begin the said work, and
desired him the said Deponent, to acquaint Mr. Pight Clerk of the Irons in the
Tower with the business in hand, with this Caution, that he should not discover
to the said Pight, that the said Violet was any way concerned in it, and that
this Deponent did accordingly acquaint Mr. Pight aforesaid, that he the said
Deponent did intend to make some Pieces as Meddalls for the new Emperor of
Germany, if the said Pight thought it to be lawful, to which the said Pight
answered, that this Deponent needed not doubt to make them, but the said
Deponent might go on lawfully, so that he was careful he did not meddle with
the Coyns of this Commen-wealth; And this Deponent says further, that upon the
said Violets promising him protection as aforesaid, and the said Pight his
telling him the business was lawful, he the said Deponent cast about 400 Pieces
mixed metal of Copper and Brass, which when he had done, the said Violet came
to him, and told him, that his design in this business wherein he had employed
him the said Deponent, was to Trappan the Jews and to get half their Estates,
which he the said Violet said, the Council of State had promised him for the
discovery of the business when time should serve, and that the said Deponent
should share with him the said Violet in the Booty. And moreover this Deponent
says, that for the better carrying on of the said plot, the said Violet told
him the said Deponent, that he should carry the Pieces which he should make for
the Jews to some Tavern, and send for the Jews thither, and let them receive
the the said Pieces there; but withal he should give the said Violet notice of
it first, that the said Violet might come and apprehend them in the Intrim. And
this Deponent says, that when the said Violet had discovered this his intent
unto him the said Deponent, that the said Violet told the said Deponent, that
he the said Violet would stab the said Deponent the next time he met him, if
the said Deponent should by any means reveal or discover the said Violets
design in the business aforesaid. Again, this Deponent says, that when the
said Violet had discovered these his designs unto him the said Deponent, that
he the said Deponent did melt down again the pieces aforesaid, which were made
for the Jews aforesaid. And this Deponent says lastly, that the said Violet,
and the said Pight disagreed because the said Pight had not taken away the
Farthing presses, as he had promised the said Violet, that then the said Violet
did impeach the said Pight with confederacy with false Coyners, and for
allowance given to this Deponent to Coin the Pieces aforesaid; and that
thereupon the said Pight did Impeach the said Deponent for Coining the said
Pieces, which is the true ground of the prosecution against this Deponent.

These Affidavits are sworn, and others to the same purpose by other Witnesses
before diverse of those Justices of the Peace as aforesaid. And the said Violet
has produced before the said Justices and other Witnesses, an Order from under
Mr. Scots hand (as he affirmed) and others of the late Council of State, to
encourage him in this business here related.

And this Deponent with diverse others further say, that the said Violet did
offer this Deponent 100 li. to suborne him falsley to swear against a Justice
of the Peace of quality and worth, to destroy him in his Estate and reputation;
and afterward the said Violet did produce and show unto this Deponent, a paper
of above 30 names of Aldermen, Justices and other Gentlemen of worth and
quality, that the said Violet would have had this Deponent falsely to accuse,
and to be sworn against them; but he refusing so to do, the said Violet
threatened to stab him as aforesaid; and also the said Violet in further
pursuance of his evil and wicked practices, meeting with several honest
Artists, the said Violet showed them a paper, and after he had read it to them,
he told them in his discourse, that if they would work for him, he would get
them a Warrant from the Council of State to indempnifie them, if they would
join and assist him to ensnare and Trappan several Gentlemen, which said honest
men, as also the former Deponent with several others here, are ready to make
Oath of when thereunto required.

His Mask being now taken off, he begins to appear in his Colors; And truly I
wonder, he that has from his youth dealt so much in Silver and Gold, should
now have so much Brass in his Face, as so impudently and in Print to Patronize
his mischiefs under the names of such persons as the Lord Mayor of London, the
Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, the Lord Chief Justice of England, The
Attorney General, and several of the late Council of State named in his Papers,
as Mr. Scot and others, and many other persons of Honor, Worth and Quality;
for which presumption in all sober men's opinions, he deserves rather the whip
or worse punishment, then the least countenance or favor.

And in perusal of his printed papers, besides his tedious Tautalligies,
multitudes of printed sheets of the same things over and over again,
imperfection of Language, and multitudes of invented lies by him and his
Compliers. And if the Reader compare the design of his four poor Workmen for
which he seeks indemnity, with the foregoing discourse, which former
discoveries will be averted also, by some of those four to be true; any one
that runs may read the scope of his intentions.

There are but a few things more which I shall only glance at in this Epitome,
out of his printed papers; for I confess I have already troubled my self and
the Reader too much with so bad a subject.

All still under his former pretense of State Service, First, To strike at the
well-being of one Richard Pight Clerk of the Irons, a person well known by
persons of quality, who know him to be a faithful Servant to the State; Only
he designs thereby to get his place, though in his own false English, he says,
he would not accept of it; yet I know where he has told an intimate friend of
mine, it is that he aims at.

Another passage is, That notorious falsehood of his, affirming himself to be
the sole discoverer of the prize taken in Silver at Sea, 1652. whereas the
truth is, one Abraham Johnson and others had made it known ten days before
Violet heard of it, and were out in the prosecution several hundreds of pounds,
which by his Petitions to the Parliament, and other Records may appear; and
Violet was only entrusted as a Solicitor in the business. Besides, this Silver
was brought to the Tower by Cornet Day, who did it with the hazard of his
life, for which the Protector gave him for his good service 200 li. and
justified in Richard Pights Petition lately to the Parliament; yet this Violet
has the impudence to attribute this business to himself.

And one Lewellin whom he has affirmed in several of his Papers to be boyld in
Oil in Dunkirk for uttering false Coin is false, and testified by one now in
Town who lately came from thence, that he is alive; And one Walker who is
lately come from Dunkirk, whom he depends on as his chief Witness, and has
caused to swear, soon after his arrival was apprehended, and lies now in prison
for a high crime, acted before he went to Dunkirk, who also was in prison
there, suspected for uttering false Coin, and it is sed is come over but under
Bail. He and such others his Confederates, are the Witnesses he seeks for.

And further he says in his Papers, if himself and some of his Confederates
which stand indicted may but have an Act of Indemnity, he will discover a
whole Nest of false Coyners, (as he calls them) when as he himself is thought
verily to be the chief Actor for whom he would have indemnity, that so they
may be Free to swear, to destroy whom he pleases; Whose daily practice and
study it is to use all subtle Trappaning devices, leaving no action or means
unattempted to destroy others by his invented shameless lies, by large promises
of Rewards and Feasting; And getting Warrants unjustly to charge honest and
peaceable men with things they are ignorant of, and altogether guiltless in;
and are so far from acting as he desperately charges them, that they abhor the
very thoughts of any such intentions.

Many other odious and damnable practices might here be added, as well out of
his lying Pamphlets, as out of his Life and Conversation. To name but one
particular, his desperate and hellish swearing, If he had but paid according to
Law for all the profane Oaths he has sworn, I verily believe he has sworn
away a great part of the 20000 li. (he says) the State owes him; but in truth
I am weary of looking, both into his Papers and his Life, and should not have
troubled my self to have made this public, had he not been so impudent and
incorrigible, and like the deaf Adder to all admonition or repentance.

I shall now conclude, with my prayers to Almighty God, to turn him from his
evil ways, which I think is the discharge of my duty to him as a Christian,
wishing him no evil, but good; however I am sure this Narrative is the
discharge of a Christian duty to my Country, and to all I wish well unto, who I
verily think are causlesly great sufferers. Only before I end, let me tell you,
This Violet is now, and has been many years, one of desperate fortunes, and
lives by shifts, projects, enticing sums of money from Gentlemen and
Tradesmen, with large promises of Places or great Gains, with shuffling and
shifting from Lodging to Lodging, and running into peoples Debts, feasting and
drinking Wine immeasurably upon other men's purses; What if I should say 30
Bottles of Wine upon a Sabbath day, he and his Comrades and his accomplices to
Health and Carrouse (as I amt credibly informed.)

And by his own Confession (before several Witnesses) the chief Abettor and
Assistor of him with money at present or lately, to carry on these his
mischievous designs is, one Rammage Farthing-maker in the Tower, whose aim in
all this business is, To suppress all Tools for making Farthings but his own;
the said Rammage having proffered a large weekly Sum to be paid to one party,
if all the Presses for making Farthings may be but taken away about London but
only his, that so he may have the sole Trade in his hands.

Farewell till farther occasion.
Reader.
HEre you have briefly, the true Cause of this Viper VIOLET, His Violent Rage
and Prosecution, Who is more fit to live among the Draggons in the Wilderness,
then among men. Now let the world Judge, Whether this be a man any way fit to
be put in any Public trust, which he so much aims at,

FINIS.

