Great NEWS from the Duke of Schomberge's Army: Giving an Impartial Account of
the Late Bloody FIGHT and Engagement Between The Irish Papists and our English
Forces: With an Account of Men killed and wounded. Together with a Journal of
the whole Siege of Carrickfergus, and an Account of the Towns retaken since the
Generals Arrival.
Written in a Letter from Chester, directed to Mr. John Blackhall Citizen in
London.

Licensed September 4. J. F.

From on Board the Mary Galley at High-Lake, August 31. 1689.

Loving Brother,
I Writ to you from the Lough of Carrickfergus by a Frigot called the
Greyhound, who was bound for Deptford, yet am in the mind that this may come
first to your hand. In the other I gave you a full Account of our setting to
Sea from this place the 9th Instant, and of our Arrival in the Lough of
Londonderry, and the large Account of the Siege, and the stout Resistance of
the Besieged, and our sailing back to Port Rush, within three miles of
Coulrain, where was three Regiments of James's Men, but they left it upon the
hearing of Coll. Kirks marching from Londonderry toward them.

From thence we came to the Lough of Carrickfergus the 20th Instant, where
after we had come to Anchor, we had Orders to weigh again, and to lie as near
the Castle as possible we could, and to fire at it; which Orders came from Duke
Schomberge, that left Belfast the same day to lay Siege to Carrickfergus, that
by our firing he might with the less danger bring his Men nigh the Town to
Encamp, and we with the Deptford Frigot, and five more fired so fast for three
or four hours time, that they in the Town durst not come nigh a Gun that lay
against us; and in all that time they only fired one shot from the Castle,
which neither touched Ship nor Boat.

By this time the Army was Encamped nigh the Town, and plied their business so
well, that that night they Entrenched themselves within 30 yards of the Wall;
so they kept firing small shot all that night, and some Bombs our Men sent in
which did considerable damage.

Next day the Besieged hung out a White Flag for Parley, and desired 14 days
time to send to Dublin to King James, to know whether they must deliver it or
no; but the General made answer, That he should have business in Dublin within
14 days. Then at it again pelmel, our Armies great Guns played, but could do no
hurt to the Castle; for you know it is a very strong place; and so continued
firing in the day time, and sometimes throwing of Fireballs, which set some
houses in the Town on fire, we losing but very few Men all this while.

The 27th. Instant they beat a parley again, which they had done the day before,
but was not heard, the parley held for four hours, and it was granted them to
March out with their Arms and Cnapsacks on their Backs, which was supposed this
gentle agreement was made by reason of the many poor Protestants that they had
Prisoners in the Town and Castle.

The next day being the 28th, there marched out a Regiment of Dutch before
them, and Captain Thomas Provo with thirty Horse behind them to convey them
past Lisburn, but in spite of him and his Horse, the Country people begun to
fall upon them, and took several of their Arms from them.

Before they were a Mile from the Town, the Women likewise falling upon their
Trulls unrigg'd them of every thing they had on. I was just going ashore when
they were marching away, where I saw one of the Towns Women come up to one
Eveling, crying out, You Whore, this is my Gown, off with it, another cried,
This is my Petticoat, off with it, a third with open Mouth swore the Smock was
hers, and a little Girl cried the Hoods upon her Head was hers, they fell to it
who should get off their own first, that to tearing they went, that Gown,
Petticoat, Smock, Hoods, and all were not worth Two Pence by that time they had
got them off, though they were good Clothes before, so that Eveling run about
crying, O ye, O ye, up tage Mr. Dearmond. This I saw, and was very well pleased
to see them in some part revenged of them for the great injury they had done
them before; besides, we did suppose that by that time they past Lisburn, which
you know is seven Miles from Belfast, they would have nothing left but their
lives.

So that now there is Derry ours, Coulrain ours, Carrickfergus ours, Belfast
ours, Lisburn, Hillsborough and Dromore ours, and all about Lurgan and Antrim
ours, Eniskilling and Donagall ours; it is supposed we are bound for King-sail
next, from whence you may expect a true account of whatever happens of moment.


Postscript.
YEsterday Morning Major General Scravenmore went off for Ireland in the Navy
Yatch, Captain Pet Commander, and this day are coming thence about 60 small
Vessels into High-Lake, where the Duke of Bolton's Regiment of Foot, (one
Soldier whereof was this Week shot to death for mutining) and some Horse are
already Embarkt in order to Transportation.

We hear the French Fleet are gone into Bell Isle, and the English to Torbay or
Plymouth Sound.

In the Siege of Carrickfergus, we had on our side about 80 wounded, and some
few killed.

Advertisements.
There is just now reprinted Poetical Fragments: Heart employment with God and
it Self. The concordant-discord of a Broken healed Heart. Sorrowing-rejoycing,
fearing-hoping, dying-living. Written partly for himself, and partly for near
friends in Sickness and other deep Affliction by Rich. Baxter. Published for the
use of the afflicted. The second Edition, to which is now added the additional
Poems, that were formerly Printed by themselves. The price of both parts was
formerly Eighteen pence, but now both are sold for One Shilling bound.

The Tragedies of Sin contemplated in the ruin of the Angels etc. [by Stephen
Jay Rector of Chinner] in the County of Oxon.

There is also now published (in a large octavo) The Bloody Affizes or A
complete History of the Lives, Actions, Trials, Sufferings, Speeches, Deaths
and Characters of all those Excellent persons who fell in the West of England
and elsewhere, from the Death of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey to this present time;
with the Pictures of several of the chief of them in Copper Plates. To which is
added the Life, Death and Character of George Lord Jefferies [Written by a
person of great learning and piety. Printed by the order of several of their
Relations.

Reformed Religion or right Christianity, described in its Excellency and
Usefulness in the life of man, giving an impartial account of a right Christian
in general, of a right Christian Minister, of a right Christian Magistrate, of
a right Christian Subject, of a right Christian Worship, of a right Christian
Parliament, of a right Christian Soldier. Written by Mr. Barker Minister of the
Gospel in London. Price bound 1. s.

Early Piety exemplified in the Life and Death of Mr. Nathaniel Mather, who
having become at the age of Nineteen an instance of more than common Learning
and Virtue changed Earth for Heaven. Oct. 17. 1688. whereto are added some
discourses on the true nature, the great reward and the best reason of such a
walk with God, as he left a Pattern of the second Edition with a Prefatory
Epistle by Mr. Matthew Mead Price bound One Shilling.

The Saints readiness for their Lords coming, a Funeral Sermon Preached upon
the Death of that faithful and laborious Servant, Mr. John Oaks, by Samuel
Slater Minister of the Gospel, price bound 1. s.

Mr. Slaters Sermon preached to young men at their desire, December. 25. 1688.
And published at their request price 6. d.

The Joy of Faith or a Treatise opening the true nature of faith it is lowest
Stature and Distinction from assurance with a Preliminary tract evidencing the
divinity of the Sacred Scriptures by Samuel Lee. M. A.

A History of the Irish Wars or an impartial account of the Life and Military
actions of Richard Earl of Tyrconnel wherein (among other things) is related
the Skirmishes Battles, Seiges and Remarkable Transactions which have happened
in Ireland both before and since the late Kings landing there; Dedicated to the
Officers in his Majesty's Army price 1 s. All Nine sold by John Dunton.

London, Printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey. 1689.


