A Great Plot DISCOVERED, OR The notorious and wicked Design upon the River of
Thames, put in execution on Monday last,

With a Hu-and-Cry after the Condemned Prisoners that made their escape upon
their removing from Newgate to be transported for Jamaica; And the manner how
they made their escape, and got ashore in Essex, the killing of the Steer-man,
the pursuing of them by Soldiers, and the Names and Number of those since
re-taken, which are now to be executed upon several Gibbets.

Likewise the apprehending of the wicked Villains ill-affected to his Gracious
Majesty, and his Royal Highness the Duke of York.

London, Printed for G. Horton, 1661.

A Great PLOT DISCOVERED, etc.
TO do justly is the duty of every Christian, Mich. 6.8. but especially of
Magistrates, and such as are in Authority, and then People may sit under their
own Vines, and Figge-trees, safely; When Justice runs down like a Raver, and
Righteousness as a mighty stream in the street; And that we may be the more
enamoured with the beauty of Justice, cousider that just and legal Order of our
Gracious Sovereign, and the Magistracy, for the transporting of diverse
Condemned Prisoners to Jamaica, which Order was intentionally put in execution
on Monday the 26. of this instant August, and a Gibbet erected for the hanging
of those that should refuse to obey it, but thus had these Villains plotted and
conspired together, generally to submit thereunto, and to endeavor their
escape before they were put a shipboard, which accordingly on Monday last,
being embarked in a Barge, waiting their opportunity below Black mall, they
most insolently seized the Steers-man and the rest of his Fellows, and
resolutely steered a long till they came to the Essex Coast, which the
Soldiery that were their Guard, perceiving, let fly several musket shot, which
unfortunately killed the Steers-man, and made up to them as fast as they could;
but before they could make their timely approach, the Prisoners had got ashore,
some running one way, some another, dispersing of themselves to several places
and corners; but being pursued, some of them are since taken, amongst whom,
Digby, Wood, and fifteen others; and a Hu-and-Cry is gone after the rest, so
that we may expect very suddenly the hand of justice to overtake them.

In the mean time, for a better discovery of these Offenders, we shall here
present you with a perfect List of their Names, a true Copy take as follows.

A LIST Of all the Condemned Prisoners Sent from NEW GATE The twenty sixth of
August, 1661. to JAMACA, and never to return into ENGLAND, Unless they be
willing to be hanged.
London Side.
EDward Beek ford. James Harris. Samuel Netherlaw. Susan Sillham. Richard Sims.
Sarah Wiltshire. Benjamin Childerston. Hugh Brown. Ellen Thorp. William
Peacock. Margery Martin. Elizabeth Smith. Thomas Balden. Edward Guch. William
Elder. William Hudson. Nathan Hubert. Susan James. Susan Almon. Elizabeth
Smith. John Riggs. Judith Thomas. Robert Newman. Gabriel Reynolds. Robert Wood.
John Harris, alias Robinson. John Digbie.
Middlesex.
THomas Edwards. Arthur Garton. William Fuller. John Johnson, alias Lacey. John
Hobbs. Bartholmew Shore. William Reemes. John Phips, alias Phipie. Thomas
Bullock. Thomas Cook. Francis Corbit. Amy Mason. Alice Scalley. Thomas Alen.
William Gun. Elizabeth Green George Green, Henry Jackson. Margery Evans. Henry
Pretty. Thomas Nash. Thomas Har, alias Parre. William Keitley. Thomas Asten.
Robert Stonbery. Elizabeth Gosgrow. John Bowden. Thomas Gad. George Meake. John
Meake. John Hilland. Thomas Watson. George Wooler. George Jacobs. John Hebes.
Richard Hickman. John Thomas. James Smith. Elizabeth Atkins Mary Snirl.
Elizabeth Lemond. Richard Caper. William Hawkins. John Leech. Hum. Keerre.
Elizabeth Freeman. The number in all 72.


Since the removal of these from Newgate, diverse other notorious Offenders,
have been apprehended and committed to the said Goal amongst the rest, those
audacious Villains, that durst presume or dare to attempt, to rob his Highness
the Duke of York: As also those wicked Watermen, that lately played their
pranks on the River of Thames.

FINIS.

