The great Loss and Damage to ENGLAND, by the Transportation of WOOL to
Foreign Parts.
THere is no King nor Prince in the World, known by experience or upon Record,
that has such means to support their Splendor and Greatness as his Majesty of
Great Britain; nor has any Country on Nation such variety of Staple-Commodities
within it self, and in such abundance; as has the Kingdom of England: So that
if those Advantages were duly improved, England might be a general Mart for the
whole World; and then by consequence be the Glory thereof. That those
Advantages are not improved is too too obvious to all that look into it; By the
fore Complaints that are frequently made of the great Poverty, and decay
thereof; And indeed (which is worst of all) by that general desperation of
Spirit, which will not put forth a hand to help, support, or prevent the Total
desolation of our Country, upon a prepossest Opinion, that all Endeavors will
be rendered Fruitless and Abortive.

The Consideration whereof, has greatly prompted me (who must confess my self
the meanest of thousands, more concerned) to use the utmost of my little skill
and unwearied diligence (though but as the Woman's Mite) to the right
management of so great an Undertaking, that the threatened Ruin of all may be
prevented, and (if possible) some good part of that which is Lost may be
recovered. I shall confine my self to those things only whereof I have had not
only credible Information, but a considerable (though a sad) experimental
knowledge; and in a more particular and especial manner, that of the
Manufacture of Wool in England, which, amongst Many, is the Richest Treasure
in his Majesty's Dominions, the flower, strength, and sinews of this Nation; a
Band uniting the People into Societies for their own Utility: It is the Milk
and Honey to the Grazier and Country Farmer; the Gold and Spices of the East
and West Indies, to the Merchant, and Citizens; the continued supply of Bread
to the Poor; and, in a word, the Exchequer of Wealth, and Staple of Protection
to the whole, both abroad and at home; and therefore of full merit to be had in
perpetual remembrance, defense, and encouragement, for the most advantageous
Improvements thereof.

The Wool of England (before it was manufactured within it self) was always of
great account and esteem abroad; sufficiently testified unto, by the great
amity which it begat, and for many hundred years (unviolably) maintained,
between the Kings of England, and Dukes of Burgundy, only from the great
benefit that (from that Commodity) did accrue to that People: insomuch, that
the English Wools, they received at 6 d. per Pound, they returned again
(through their Industrious Manufacture thereof) in Cloth at 10 s. per Yard, to
the great enriching of that State, both in the advancement of the Revenues of
their Sovereign, and in a full employment (thereby) continued among the People;
whereby the Merchants of this Nation were occasioned, (as a People unwilling to
be wholly dispriviledged of so great a benefit) to transport themselves (with
their Families, in great numbers) into Flanders; from whence they held a
constant Commerce with most parts of the World. This continued without
Intermission, between England and Burgundy, until King Edward the 3 d. made his
mighty Conquest over France and Scotland; and as a suitable improvement of so
great a mercy, did wisely project, and also accomplish, the manufacture of
Wools within the Bowels of this Kingdom, to the great enriching of his own
People, and also to the peopling of his new Conquered Dominions. The memory of
whose wisdom and care for his People, is worthy to be had in Remembrance by
English Men, unto the Worlds end.

The said King having thus settled the manufacture of Wools within the Kingdom
of England, confined it by a penal State, which (at first) reached not only to
Goods, Chattels, and Lands, but also to Members, and Life it self; but, in a
short time, repealed the two latter thereof, continuing the other in its full
force to remain to future Generations: Which exceeding great advantage to the
propriety of the English Trade, has now continued this Three Hundred years, by
the vigilance of the Kingdoms Monarchs, and the protection of its Laws, in the
continued careful execution thereof upon Offenders, with more than a little
diligence, to provide against the thirsting desires of Foreiners to wrest this
Nations Privilege (of so great a moment) out of English hands; which by the
providence of God (through the care of our Ancestors) has been (for many Ages)
enjoyed by the Nation, as it is indeed its proper right. But so it is, that
(for some years past) the diligence of Foreiners to enrich themselves upon us,
has so much exceeded our care to preserve our selves, that it is now come to, if
not beyond, a question, Who have the greatest benefit of the manufacture of
English Wools, They who have no Right unto it, or, They to whom of Right it
does belong?

That this is indeed so, will appear, by considering that not only Holland,
Flanders, and Zealand have long sucked the sweetness of the Sinews of our
Trade; but France is likewise learning to be too hard for us, as is manifest by
the great quantities of Wools, that (of late years) have been Transported from
England and Ireland thither. How injurious it must be to us is also
unquestionable, if we consider the consequence thereof, which was (without
question) much in the eye of our Ancestors, as appears by what is above hinted
in Edward the 3ds. time, and in several Kings Reigns since.

Every Pack of Wool sent to France, does prevent us (not only) of the benefit
of the manufacture thereof, but of two Packs more besides it self, viz. Thus;
It being Combing, and Combed Wool (for the most part) exported thither. The
French (having no Wools of their own, but such as are very coarse) are not able
to make Cloth, or fine Stuffs, without the conjunction of ours therewithal;
there being none (to my best information) in all the World fit for that purpose
(but ours only) except in North- Holland, and that a small quantity of fine
Worsted Wool; all other being likewise coarse, but Spanish Wool; and that
much too fine, especially for worsted Stuffs, and not in any wise fit for
Combing; so that without English or Irish Wools, there can be no quantity of
fine worsted Stuffs, nor a middle sort of Cloth made in the whole World.
Neither will any Wools be all mixed together, but English and Spanish (for Cloth
only), because the Spanish is with the English of one nature; being formerly
English Sheep, though now much finer for the alteration of the Climate, and the
nature of the Land whereon it is fed, as by good Experience appears here in
England, both near and at a further distance.

Wherefore the Exportation of English Wools into France, must of necessity be
greatly prejudicial to this Nation; not only in the quantity sent over, but
also in the advantage which is thereby given to them to manufacture a double
portion of their Wool, (which (formerly) was little worth) into such
commodities as spoils us of the advantages of our proper Trades, not only
thither, but also into other parts, viz. in these three Respects.

First, The Combed of the English Wool makes Wooff for the Warps of the French
Wool (or rather of the Turkey Sheep) and so takes up (it may be) as much as
the quantity above specified, to every Pack of English Wool, without which
they can (only) with their Wool, make Ruggs, and at the best, Cloth for
Seamen, and the like.

2dly. Their Combings or Pinnions, viz. the short Wool that is combed out of
the Worsted, serves for their Linen warp to make some of their Druggets,
because their Linen being sine spun, and colored, is not discernable to all
persons, to be that we call Linsie-Wolsie.

3dly. The finest short English Wool is mixed with the lowest of Spanish
Wool, called short Wool, for some of their best Druggets, that is wove upon
worsted Chanies; and also for a middle sort of Broad-cloth about 10 s. or 12 s.
per Yard. This is the cause, I judge, that short Spanish Wool is so scarce
here in England.

Now if we consider these things together, the damage of exporting of one Pack
from England to France at about 10 l. or 12 l. Sterling, preventing the
manufacturing of two Packs more in England, which would be worth 100 l.
Englands loss (in the whole) by the exportation of one Pack of Wool can be
little less than 60 l. It being generally combing- Wool (as before binted) that
is exported to France, which makes Worsted, Stuffs, and Stockins: and besides
the advantage given them (as above asserted) by one Pack of rough Wool; it is
obvious to all Manufacturers, that a Pack of Worsted (or Cumbed) Wool, worth
20 l. at 12 score to the Pack, which is 20 d. per Pound, and to make it more
easy to every ordinary capacity; that in Stockins (to speak within compass) A
Pound of fine Wool would make at least two pair of Hose, worth 5 s. a pair,
that is 10 s. per Pound of Wool; or reckon thus, to ordinary Hose, three pair
to a Pound of Wool at 3 s. 4 d. per pair, come to the same sum, and 12 score
Pound of Wool making a Pack, so many pence for the Pound of Wool, so many
Pounds for the Pack, and a Pack of Wool making 480 pair of Hose: which 12
score Angels, being cast up, is 123 l. without any respect given to the
advantage given them in rough Wool, as before asserted.

This, an instance for all, moreover, In it is first exportation, considering
the Custom when it is imported; the product of all these Charges augmenting
the 100 l. when sold there, laid out in another Commodity beyond Sea, the
Custom thereof being paid there, with Frait and Custom (when imported) in
England, it is much if it do not more than double the first principal.

Now if so be, that the exportation of one Pack of English Wool, exported at 10
l. or 12 l. be near 200 l. damage to the King and Kingdom in general, by the
consequence; What will be the loss of exporting 10. or 15 Thousand Packs into
France, besides many to other parts (in two years time) is easily accounted (by
such) as are concerned in these Affairs: and although this Evil is almost
incredible to many, yet it is too manifest, to such as have made it (something)
their business to enquire into it; and not only so, but these further
Inconveniences must (by this means) arise upon us.

First, The spoiling of our Trade with France in all our Woollen manufacture, as
does already appear by the Impost put upon the same there, from 20 to 40 per
cent. since the great quantity of our Wools is exported thither, whereunto
woeful experience may be a sufficient witness.

And secondly, In time it will capacitate the French as well as the Dutch, (if
not much better) to under-sell our English Merchants in Foreign Parts, nay
(possibly) in our own Country. To this, I shall only mention the words of a
Merchant in Flanders, by Letters to another here, treating of this matter thus:
We English have our Throats cut, with our own Weapons; wondering at the
stupidity of the English here, that they should omit, to possess the King's
Majesty with this deplorable and dangerous Case, in respect to the present and
future Inconveniences thereof. By reason whereof, as in time the French will
not only prevent our English manufactures to be sold in France, but also bring
theirs into England, and sell them for four times the value here, to the great
Enriching of themselves, and the Impoverishing the English, only by new
fantastic Fopperies; for which the English pay not less than some Hundred
Thousands in a Year, to get themselves into the French Mode.

So much indeed, have we been deceived (in this matter) to our shame, as well
as to our apparent loss; that, whereas in time of the Late War with the Dutch
and French, those French Druggets were thereby much prevented, many English
Striped broad Cloths rent through into three parts (about 10 s. per yard,
price) being put into the form of French Druggets, were sold in each part at 8
s. per yard, and so in the whole came to 1 l. 4 s. per yard: So likewise it is
certainly true, that many of those Druggets made in England, do go for French,
and in order thereunto, directed to French Men in some of our Southern parts
(from thence been conveyed into London, and there sold for French Goods) to
have colored the business with the Custom-house Officers, to save the Custom
of French Druggets: And this might have continued long, before the Cheat had
been discovered; but being once found out by the Clothier (who could not (to
his own private advantage) conceal such an apparent injury to his Country) it
was soon prevented: This I had an Experimental knowledge of, for the merchant
bespoke the same Goods of me. When I understood his end, I did refuse to make
the said Druggets that he desired me to make; whereby we may come to see (with
clearness) the advantage that that people makes upon our English fancies, by
over-selling us in the same kind of Commodities that they make out of our
English Wools, joined (as before-minded) with their own; having also an
advantage thereunto, by the cheapness of the Manufactors thereof, beyond what
we can do; the French being very populous, and living harder than we can in
England; as is evident by their Linnens, that, paying Frait and Custom, with
profit to the Merchant, yet can be afforded cheaper than can be made in England.

But so it is, that the advantage we give them, besides in the mixtures of our
Wools with theirs, is such, that, whereas their Wool of it self is not worth 4
l. per Pack; being mixed with ours, becomes so fit for Worsted Stuffs, as that
it comes to be worth no less than 12 l. per Pack. So that, all these things
considered, it becomes obvious to every Eye, (that does not (wilfully) close it
self) that the exportation of Wools from England and Ireland is of a dangerous
and destructive Nature to the very being of the Trade of this Kingdom. What
ever Objections have been made thereunto (with respect to the Graziers present
advantage) whose loss may possibly be supposed (by prohibiting exportation) to
be about 20 s. in every Pack of Wool that is so exported: In answer whereunto,
I have this to say; That, though it may be granted, it will be so for a time in
this particular Commodity; yet such will (thereby) be the spoil of the General
Trade of the Nation, that what is gotten in one, will be lost in every other
Commodity, as Corn, Beefs, and Muttons; on each of which with the Wools, the
Graziers and Farmers advantage does much more than equally depend; besides the
inevitable danger of the ruin of our Trade, and so consequently, the starving
of our Poor, without some extraordinary means for their support; who while the
privilege of our Trade is kept inviolate with other Nations, we have Money
plentifully to expend for the advancement of the Farmers and the Graziers; for
that is that which chiefly advances the Farmer and the Grazier, which is Flesh
and Corn, and not the quantity of Wool, as will afterward more fully appear.

And it has always been observed (informer times) hitherto, that when the
Clothiers have had the best Trade at London, the Farmer did not lose his share
in the advantage thereof in the Country; according to the dispose of
Providence, Who has ordered Nations, but more especially, the People of every
Nation (in matters of this kind) to depend upon each other, and so to rise and
fall together, as they are designed, either to Mercy or to Judgment, by the
hand of God.

These things considered, with a little deliberation, it will manifestly
appear, that the exporting of our English-Wooll, will not only prove the spoil
of our Merchants and Clothiers Trade, and so consequently expose the Poor to
desperate straits for subsistence, but in short time must of necessity make the
Country men's employment (of every kind) to come to little, and so make them
incapable of paying Rent.

For if it be so, that, while we have a little Trade, we can hardly live one by
another; What may be expected, if our Trade should be taken away? Which is now
in more danger by the French, than it has been this 300 years past. And then
we may consider, what the price of Wool may be in England, when we by our
remisness have lost our Trade, by the skill and circumventing practices of
Foreiners, and we helping forwards for a supposed profit; For there was not
more art and skill in our Ancestors, to bring home the work at first to the
Wool, and prohibiting the exportation thereof, and settling the manufacturing
in England, than is now to export the Materials manufactured. The necessary
consequence thereof, will be to bring the Price of Wool (as it was 300 years
agon, when most was exported) to be 6 d. a Pound, as appears in a little Piece,
called, The Golden Fleece, (written by W.S. Gent.) in the Year, -- 56. Although
the Cloth then made in Flanders of our Wool at 6 d. per Pound, was sold here
in England at 10 s. per Yard; when at this day Cloth made in England of Wool
at 12 d. per Pound, will hardly yield 7 s. per Yard, which is above 30 per
Cent. worse to the English Trade now, than it was to the Flemmings formerly.

And though for the present, the price of Wool be risen by its exportation,
yet if the quantity lately exported (being no less than 20 Thousand Packs) had
been kept in England, the quantity if not Ten thousand Packs more would in
time, have been exported in the particular manufactures. For if the Woolls was
not exported to those places beyond the Seas, there to be manufactured, they
must of necessity have our Woollen manufacture, and then could not have those
advantages (as before hinted) by our Wools, to improve the French Wool, and
short Spanish Wool, and their fine-spun Linnens.

By all which, it is so obvious, that in time to come, the Wool in England
would be much cheaper, because by the aforesaid means, less Wool would be used
in England, and besides that which would be used, the manufacture would be so
low, that it could not bear up any price (as is begun already in France, and
will suddenly follow here in England) for it is generally reported, that Wool
is as cheap in France at this Day, as it is in some parts where it is used in
England. And if it be so now, what in reason can be expected, as the effects of
these two things? viz. The first, when the great quantity that is lately
exported to France, with those three Additions before hinted, that the Twenty
thousand Packs helps to work out, and especially most making Worsted Stuffs,
which goes as far by that means as forty Thousand Packs of Wool would if used
in England, because it would be made more into substantial Clothes, which
consums more Wool, than those light and thin Stuffs do: which is a sufficient
Answer to that Objection, that the great quantity of any Commodity, that is
exported, makes a scarcity, and so consequently raise its price: the which I
must confess, if it was a consumptive Commodity, but it is quite contrary in
this. For as our experience is, when the Wool was all used in England, (or
very little exported) the Wool was then at 18 d. per Pound, and when all or
the greatest part was exported, it was at 6 d. per Pound.

The wise Man says, What is, has been; and, what has been, may be again; and
so no new thing.

I shall make a short Review of the Graziers and Farmers present loss: In the
greatest Commodity, which pays his Rent, as was formerly hinted. Suppose
(through want of Trade) Mutton be sold at 6 d. per Quarter the less, (which is
but little) being 2 s. per Sheep, and there being some Sheep that 100. will
produce a Pack of Wool (though some less) that comes to 10 l. which is the
worth of the Pack of Wool, (and so proportionably as to the Beefs) which is
wholly lost to the Grazier.

And for the Corn (as I suppose) there may be about 50 ls. worth, (as far as I
can judge in my Travels, to One Hundred Sheep throughout the Nation, which for
want of a Trade, it may not (at some seasons) come to Thirty or Forty at most,
and if a good Trade, it may be worth Sixty or Seventy, by which means, it may
easily be demonstrated, how the Farmers come to be impoverished.

For the advantage of the Tenant consists in the advance of the greatest
Commodity that pays his Rent, which is not in Wool, but in Corn, Mutton and
Beefs, and it is a necessary consequence. That there being so many thousand
Families depending upon the Clothing Trade (as was before hinted) that was
instrumental to advance the price of the Corn, etc. That wherever Trade is,
there People are most populous, and when those persons are deprived of their
Trade, depending wholly upon it, they must unavoidably come to the Parishes,
which is in many places begun already, and Daily increased and feared in time,
will so increase, that the Poor will be expecting more than there will be to
contribute to them. Although it be a Degression, yet suffer an instance of one
Parish; that when there was but some obstruction to their Trade, by the Late
Sickness, and Dutch War, the rate came for their Poor to Eight Hundred Pound
Sterling in one Year, and I have been credibly informed, the Land to the said
Town, is not worth one Thousand Pound per annum, and hapily one fifth part the
dearer, because of the Trade, as it is in all Cities, or Towns of Trade; than
what can reasonably be judged, when the Trade from such a Town is wholly lost,
as is already in some parts in this Nation.

To return to the Farmer, as being the emediate Person in this business, from
hence may be concluded, that the Farmers Loss for want of Trade, is fourfold
greater then can be the advantage of the sale to the transporter of Wool, by
(the exportation thereof unmanufactured.)

I shall now endeavor to give some particular account how all are concerned;
And before I do this, give me leave to insert the Observation of a worthy
Author Sir Walter Rawleigh, who says, That, then which was in King James 's
Reign, about fourscore thousand undrest and undyed Clothes yearly were
Transported: whereby it was evident, that the Kingdom has been yearly deprived
of about four Hundred Thousand Pounds, which in fifty five years is near Twenty
Millions, that would have been gained by the Labor of Poor Workmen in that
time, which the Merchants gains for bringing in dying Stuffs, and returns of
Clothes dressed and dyed, with other benefits to the Realm, besides exceeding
enlarging of Treffick, and increase of Ships and Mariners.

There would have been gained in that time, about three Millions by increase of
Customs upon Commodities returned for Clothes dressed and dyed, and for dying
Stuffs which would have been more plentifully brought in and used for the same.

There has been also transported in that time yearly, by Bays, Northern and
Devonshire Kerzyes White, about Fifty Thousand Clothes, counting three Kerzyes
to a Cloth, whereby has been lost above Five Millions by those sorts of
Clothes, in that time which would have come to Poor Workmen for their Labor,
with Customs for dying Stuffs, and the Peoples profit for bringing them in with
returns of other Commodities and Fraights for Shipping.

Bays are Transported white into Amsterdam, and being there dyed and dressed,
are shipped into Spain, Portugal, and other Kingdoms, where they are sold in
the name of Flemish Bays, setting their own Town Seals upon them; so that we
lose the very name of our Homebred Commodities, and other Countries get the
Reputation and Credit thereof. Lamentable it is, that this Land should be
deprived of so many abovementioned Millions, as that our Native Commodities of
Cloth, ordained of God for the natural Subjects, being so Royal and Rich in it
self, should be driven to so small advantage of Reputation and Profit to your
Majesty and People, and so much improved and intercepted by Strangers;
considering that God has enabled and given your Majesty power to advance
dressing and dying, and Transporting all your Clothes within a year or two: I
speak it knowingly, to show how it may be done laudibly, lawfully, and approved
to be honorable, feaseable, and profitable.

He observes also the increase of his Majesty's Customs, by bringing in and
spending of dying Stuffs, as also strength in Shipping, and setting so many
thousands of Poor on work; also noting, that in the Low Countries, where these
Clothes are dressed and dyed, they stretch them to such unreasonable length,
contrary to our Law, that they prevent and forestale our Markets, and cross the
just prohibition of our State and Realm, by their Agents, and Factors, lying in
diverse places with our own Clothes, to the great decay of this Kingdom in
general, and discredit to our Clothes in particular. Again, he adds, that if
the accounts were truly known, it would be found that they make not clear
profit only by Cloth Transported rough, undrest, and undyed, Sixty Thousand
Pounds a Year; but it is most apparent your Majesty, in your Customs, your
Merchants in their Sales and Prizes,; your Subjects in their Labors, for lack
of dressing and dying; your Ships and Mariners in not bringing in of dying
Stuffs, spending of Alum ( if not Copperas) are hindered yearly near a Million
of Pounds: So that Trade is driven to that great hinderance of your Majesty and
People, by permitting your Native Commodities to pass rough, undrest and
undyed. Thus Sir Walter Rawleigh.

Now if it was thus with England so long ago, when the Wool was spun and made
here into substantial Cloth; and that for want only of dressing and dying, many
Millions were lost to the King and Kingdom: What then has been the loss by so
many thousand Packs of Wool exported (without any improvement,) especially
that to France, the consequence of which, is more prejudicial (as has been
demonstrated) than can be imagined (accounting but one Hundred Pounds damage
by one Pack of Wool,) of which there are not less than ten thousand yearly, if
not much more exported, by which there is damage a Million of pounds sterling,
yearly to this Kingdom, (besides the suffering of the Poor for want of
Employment) out of which his Majesty's damage cannot be less than one Hundred
thousand Pound yearly: The lessening of Shipping, and discouragement of
Mariners; the Walls of this Kingdom hereby deserve also to be considered.

Next then to his Majesty's loss, is that of the Merchant and Cloathier; after
which must follow detriment to all other persons depending on Trade, there
being such a Connection of Trades one to another, and the whole of Trade being
enlarged by the abounding of Laborious People. Those supply the Farmers and
Graziers with money, for to supply the Gentry. They again scatter it amongst
the Tradesmen, as may be witnessed by the building of the City of London, how
Provision and all Consumptive goods are advanced by it: by which circulation
all degrees are either employed, enriched, or both; and hence naturally comes
Content, Harmony, and Pleasure, one in another; the Poor being by Employment
delivered from fear of want, the Gentry, Merchant, and Tradesmen, by the
establishment of Trade therein. This rationally is the strength of any People,
Poverty and Idleness bring their Shame and Ruin, which would unavoidably
follow want of Trade. And so much the more where the greatest Trade has been;
if it fails, the greater Poverty is and will be. And to instance, as here, in
London, the Trade in Provision is the more, so by Consequence it must be dear,
and so best for all; so of the other hand, if the City should be forced to keep
so many thousands, when all their work is done, as is now in the Building, it
would be a great burden: so the case is in England in this particular, where
great Trade have been formerly kept, and drawn several Families thither, and
have raised Commodities there; but when it fails, it is a miserable state and
condition those places are in. To return, in short there is such Connextion and
Dependancy one upon another in England, that if one fail, all the rest more or
less, either more near, or remotely are concerned; as in the natural body, when
any Member fails, the whole suffers thereby; and as all Trades and Degrees of
men may suffer by one failing in Trades, and in none more probably. I will say
then this of Wool, as Merchant Articificers, Farmers, Seamen, Fishermen,
being the people, which by their study and labor do principaly, if not only
bring in, or give occasion to the bringing in of Wealth to the Nation, and
other kind of people (viz.) Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers, Physicians, Scholars of
all sorts; Shopkeepers are they that receive from these, and distribute it
again, and all are consequently concerned in this rich Treasure of Wool,
because this being a Manufacture at home, sets more hands at work than half the
Nation.

May I not with modesty and within Compass, say three parts of Laborious and
Industrious People? Considering that most of the Shipping is employed in this
Affair, and also so many Trades that depend immediately upon this of Clothing,
that most of other Trades are but for Provision, either in Food or
Conveniences for Clothing: and so from his Majesty to the meanest, all are
more or less concerned, The King mostly; not only in that his People are by
that most employed and provided for, (nor in that such a Staple Trade, the like
whereunto the World has not maintained with so good Advantage;) but because so
great a Revenue comes directly into him upon the Trade, occasioned thereby:
Thus as the King gains, or suffers most, so the persons that have the greatest
Estates or Trades, and so all proportionable to the Beggar. And also
considering that an accustomary thing begets such an habit that is hard to
reduce; as in our rough and undrest Cloth to Holland, so it will be with all
our Manufactures in France; nay I am informed that the French has not only
imposed a great Tax upon our Woollen Manufactures, from twenty to forty per
cent, but have also (as is affirmed, besides that their Imposition) absolutely
prohibited our Clothes coming there. I am the more large in the Demonstration
of this affair, not only because this has cost me many years labor and study
to consult all sorts of concerned persons, besides mine own experience about
it; nor because it is so hard to convince people of the meanest capacity, but
some of the wiser sort, how to cure this dismal malady: which some despairing
of, have rather thoughts of setting up some other Manufacture (in Lieu of
endeavors to prevent the exportation of Wool and Manufacturing of that at
home, looking thereon as a thing not to be overcome,) as that of Linnens in
some capable parts of England, and a better improvement in the product of
Foreign Plantations, which may also be set upon together herewith as an
Addition; so as several sorts of Persons maybe set better on work, not capable
of this employment, and yet no prejudice to this of Clothing: For all other
Countries have the Advantage of England, or are equal to us in other
Manufactures proper to their Countries, but not in this of Clothing: and it
will be found that all Trades in England, wholly distinct from this of
Clothing, bring not the tithe of Advantage that this does.

Since men cannot rationally believe the effects to be greater than the cause,
the most of other Manufactures either is in being, or brought to use, by the
Manufactures of Wool; even from the Farmer to the Merchant, all are concerned
in this of Wool; as may hereafter more appear. It now remains that we sum up
Englands Loss by the Exportation of our Wool to Foreign Parts; not only in
the Advantage we might have by the Manufacturing thereof, here in England, as
formerly noted; but also in the importing of Dutch Cloth, and more in French
Manufactures, because England improves not their own Wools; and of the humor
of English people, in putting such a value upon French Fancies, when themselves
are in a better capacity, if improved, to produce the like, or better, and save
the following Sums.

1. One Million of Pounds Sterling yearly, in the Exportation of our Wool. 2.
Five Hundred Thousand Pounds in Rough Cloth, which is but half what Sir Walter
Rawleigh observes in his time. 3. Many Thousands of Pounds by the Importing of
Dutch and French Woollen Manufacturies.
And lastly, the evil consequences thereof in loosing our Shipping, which would
be encouraged thereby, and are the strength or Walls of our Kingdom, as more
particularly does appear hereafter.

Having now discovered the Damage it is to England, in the transportation of
Wool from the King to the meanest, I shall endeavor also to discover the
methods how it is done; before I shall prescribe a Remedy (for it is not enough
to know Distempers, especially such that are so Consumptive,) it is requisite
to know the Cause of these Distempers; or else the supposed Remedies will in
time come to be a disease, as it is too much in this case at this day in
England: Where the Causes are mistaken, the Remedies are consequently
misapplyed, whereby a disease in supposition becomes one in Fact; the methods
or ways of this evils are -- First, in Rumny-Marsh in Kent, where the greatest
part of rough Wool is exported from England, put aboard French Shallops by
night, ten or twenty men well Armed to guard it; some other parts there are, as
in Sussex, Hampshire, and Essex, the same methods may be used, but not so
conveniently. The same for Combed Wool from Canterbury, they will carry it ten
or fifteen miles at Night toward the Sea, with the like Guard as before; but
for other parts it must be done partly by the Remisness of the Officers of his
Majesty's Customs, and easy Composition for the Forfeitures of the Bonds, as
more shall appear anon.

And then for Combed Wool in other Parts, some is Shipped off from London for
Bales of Drapery; nay some at Lime, and also at Exon, where there is ten
thousand Pounds Sterling weekly laid out in the woollen Manufactury, which is
most for Workmens Wages: I know no place clear; and then another reason, why
persons are not detected, is, because all the Wools that have been taken in
those Parts, where most has been exported, have been suffered to go off at the
same place after Judgments past, and by the Officers, to the same Persons at a
low rate, being under rated to those very men that intended to Ship it at
first: so that the evil is never like to be avoided that way; only that which
is taken, happily may be a little the dearer, to keep the Trade going; for I
have enquired, and cannot understand, but of two parcels of Wool that have
been seized on in Kent, that have been used in England, but all sent away, and
so his Majesty's providence is cheated, who keeps Servants at great Wages to
prevent such abuses.

And then another Cheat is under a pretense of Wool from Hampton, to the
Islands of Jersey and Gernsey, and sometimes from other Parts which is against
the Law; for there is no Wool to be exported to those Islands, but only from
Hampton, and that by Law should be by weight: but now it goes by gross, by the
Pack when it should be weighed, but I believe not one Pack in Ten is weighed,
for three Packs is put into one. Then from Ireland, which is the greatest
mischief of all to England, and much increased since the Act was in force
against Cattle, the Irish Wool can be sold as cheap in France, Holland, and
Flanders, as it is in those Places where Wool is used in England, which is a
great augumentation to us of prejudice for Foreiners to have our Wool so cheap
as we in England, having other Conveniences to underwork us, as formerly
hinted. The ways there must be by the carelessness of the Officers, in not
taking solvant security and exactness in the weight of Wool, and true
examination of the returns of their Certificates, and partly by easy
Compositions, if not before Bonds are forfeited, and happily much Combed Wool
there packt up as before, as Bales of Cloth, or Barrels of Beef, and Shiped as
Irish Cloth; and in all points so cunningly carried, as they are seldom
discovered, and never Sealed, as the Statutes in that case made and provided,
do strictly require.

Here see what W. S. faith: Now to show you more particularly these abuses, how
the Laws are crossed and daily obstructed to such as endeavor to serve their
Country, by such as ought to encourage the Persecutors; sure there will be very
many practices of evil consequents discovered; for first in the Custom-House,
where Bonds are taken, to the intent that these prohibited Commodities pass not
by means of Mariners out of the Nation, but only from Port to Port for
accommodation of such Parts as want such Commodities; they are very Remise and
careless in taking of the Sea-mens discharge of their Obligatory Conditions;
where also it is usual with the Seamen to bring fraudulent Certificates, and
so to cheat the Kings Providence, who keeps Servants at great wages purposely
to prevent such abuses; or if there be a regular return of their Bonds, yet
there is commonly a fraudulency in giving them, for the Masters of Ships will
so continue their design, as he who is Master at giving the Bonds, and is
legally bound, shall immediately pass his Interest to another man, who taking
charge of the Vessel and Voyage, is notwithstanding not engaged in the Poart
Bond; and therefore, neither is he accountable for breach of their condition;
Again, when the Port-Bonds are justly taken, and as justly returned; yet to
prevent the true and real detection of the Offender, and to dishearten the
legal Prosecutor, some Friends of the Offender will clap an Information against
him, purposely to hinder and divert others, and soon after will let the
Prosecution fall at his pleasure; nay, it has been said, and peradventure not
unjustly, that such preventing Informations have been antidated to the
overthrow of the real Information; but when all is granted, and a full and
formal hearing, and decree passed to the just condemnation of the Offender: Yet
when judgments and inquiries are granted, and do without Errors of the Clarks
(which is not always,) empower the Sheriffs and their Baliffs to see Execution
thereof made; it is familiar with those Officers to return a Non est inventus,
or a Mortuus est, viz. Not to be found, or dead, even then when the Offenders
and the Officers have been known to have been drinking together, at that very
time when the Writ should have been executed.

After all this, one step farther will show how Charity it self abaseth
Justice; for let all the former Proceedings be granted, and be candid, and
clear, and that the Law be indeed justly and legally executed; the Offender in
custody, and nothing remaining; but that he honestly discharge himself with
money, seeing Bail will not be admitted; nevertheless upon a lamentable
Petition, and urging a great charge of Children to the Bench, the Offender is
usually admitted to compound for Ten in the Hundred, or less, when by his
offense he has gained a Hundred for Ten, or more, and peradventure has undone
a hundred Families or more in so doing: Yet all this while the honest
Prosecutor, the only man that appears for the good of his Country, who ought by
the Law to have the full benefit and advantage of the Law gratis, it being
enough that he spend his time for the promotion of the public Wealth, after it
has cost him several great sums of money, and large expense of time, to bring
the Offender to Trial and Conviction, is dismissed with little or no
satisfaction, unless he be rewarded with the brand of an Informing Knave:
Surely they who made these Laws for the benefit of themselves and their own
Country, did intend a more current and just passage toward them, than thus to
be obstructed and baffeled. Such abuses as these made Theodosius say, as it is
Recorded, that a wise man did himself Injustice by hazarding his Wisdom and
Estate for the benefit of his Nation; And therefore some have not spared to
urge, that Customs and Impost, and Toles and Taxes might be taken away from
honest laborious hazardous Trades and Adventurers, and be put upon litigious
Suits at Law, and such as make benefit of their corrupt breath, that is to say,
upon such Lawyers as abuse their Clyants, and such malicious Clyants as abuse
the name of a just innocent Defendent. Nor is the Loss in these by their
Transportation all the injury, but when honest men well affected to the good of
their Country, do detect these Caterpellars of the Commonwealth, who make so
vast gain, as has been denoted upon the materials so carefully prohibited,
when they do endeavor by due course of Law to make stoppage thereof, and to
have the Offender's punished; so many are the evasions, such combinations and
interest in the Officers, who ought to punish the Offenders; such favor have
they in Courts of Justice, and deceptions in the Return of Writs, and in
general such affronts and discouragements as the dearest Lover of his Country,
or most entrusted in Trade, dares not attempt to prevent that mischief which
his eyes behold to fall upon his Nation, or which his own person feels to pick
his Pocket. Thus far Mr. W. Smith. not to mention the very same things above
asserted that I have met withal.

From hence its to be lamented, to see what the consequence of those things
are, I did think to have propounded some things for Remedy, but time not
permitting, must beg the Readers excuse, only this by the way, that if there
was never such effectual ways propounded, yet if those ways and means was
never made use of, it is but beating the Air. For the Life of the Law lies in
the practick part; For if there was more care in this business when less Law,
then has been since more, are extant; the Fault then cannot be for want of
Law, but only the want of Faithfulness in impartiality, in the Execution of
those Laws: And this in short is the principal Cause of the continuance of this
evil practice of Transportation of Wool, and was very engenuously confessed to
me by some of the Transporters of Wool within this few Days in these very
words, viz. That if we had been prosecuted at first according to Law, we should
not have acted the second time: For if the Transportors did but rightly
consider the danger they are in, they would desist; for I dare say, although
some may escape for a time, you may be met withal first or last, and then are
exposed to ruin.


