THE GREAT ROBBERY IN Hatton-Garden.

A True Account how about Twenty Thieves on Sunday the 29th of December. 1678, in
the Evening, entered a Gentleman's House there, under pretense of a Search, and
putting the Family in fear of their Lives, Robbed them of about 400 Ounces of
Plate, Two Diamond Rings of very great value, near Twenty pounds in Money, etc.

With a Relation how they were Discovered, and Five of them Apprehended in
Shooe-Lane on the Tuesday night following: Their Commitment to Newgate, where
now they remain, etc.

Licensed Jan. the 1st, 1678/9.

LONDON: Printed for L. C. in the Year 1679.

The Great Robbery in Hatton-Garden, etc.
FOR some time (considering the season of the year) the Town has been pretty
free from Attempts of Burglary and Robbery, which may in great measure be
ascribed to the numerous Guards and diligent Watch kept in all places, thereby
preventing them of any opportunities to put their mischievous Villainies in
practice; yet still their intentions (no doubt) were as bad as ever, and a
considerable Gang had it seems been Clubbing their Pates for some new
Stratagems to carry on their Trade; (for so those Vermin call Stealing and
Robbing innocent and more industrious people) as appears by the following
Attempt, of which the notable Circumstances oblige us to give a true Account
for public satisfaction, though not in the least intending to prejudge the
Criminal before their lawful Trial, nor forestal the Evidence as to
particulars, but only to relate matter of Fact in general, being thus:

On Sunday the 29th of December, about Eight of the Clock in the Evening,
several persons Armed came to the House of a Gentleman of considerable Fortune
and Ovality in Hatton-Garden, and knocking, pretended they had an Order from
Authority to search the House for dangerous persons, making use of the public
Distempers of the Times to color their wicked design, and had by some means
obtained the knowledge of some Circumstances that at first rendered what they
said a little plausible to belief: But being desired to produce their Warrant,
etc. they in an Hectoring manner refused, only alleged themselves to be
Soldiers, and one took upon himself the quality of a Lieutenant, and commanded
the rest, setting Sentinels at the door, etc. In short, after some discourse,
they letting in more of their Crew, declared, That it was money they wanted,
and money they must have, setting Pistols to the peoples breasts, and so locked
up all or the greatest part of the Family in a private Room (as they supposed),
and so fell to ransack the House.

Taking away two large Silver Candlesticks, one great Salt, two Caudle-cups,
one Basin and Ewer of Silver, two other Silver Cups, a Salver, one great
Tankard, one Silver Plate, a Silver Sugar-dish, a small Salt, several parcels
of Silver Spoons, two Cruses (all which are since taken again); two Diamond
Rings of very great value, and between fifteen and twenty pound in Money, with
several other things here omitted. And it is probable had stolen many more, but
that by good luck some of the Family so shut up as aforesaid, got out at a
passage unknown to them, backwards, and crying out Thieves, startled them so,
as they thought fit to go off with what they had got, rather than hazard
staying for a further booty. Their flight was so managed, that none of them
were taken, it being a pretty while before Neighbors could get round, and
gather together, and the people of the House get out to pursue them.

However Bills being loft at all probable places, as Goldsmiths, Brokers, etc.
and a reward proposed for discovery; On Tuesday following a Woman came to a
certain Broker, asking him if he would buy a quantity of Plate; to which he
seeming willing, she told him the place, being the Horse-shooe Tavern in
Shooe-Lane, which it seems was the Thieves Rendezvous; but the Broker having
one of the beforementioned Bills, and upon the Circumstances suspecting this
might be the same Plate, like an honest man resolves to apprehend them if he
could; the better to effect this, he seemed very willing to accept of the
bargain, and sends in a full bag to the said place, as money to pay for it,
though in truth it was only a bag filled with farthings to amuse them. In the
mean time he acquaints the person robbed, what was offered to be sold him, and
where he was to meet them; who procuring a Justices Warrant, Lieutenant Salter
a Constable living by Fleet-Bridge, went to seize them, who had with him two
Files of Musketeers, and several of his own Watchmen that he sent for to
assist him on that occasion. Having beset the House, and placed necessary
Sentinels abroad, they entered, there being at that time six of the Thieves
there, each or whom had a Pistol and a Sword; but guilt makes Cowards; they
made some show of resistance, for they perceived themselves discovered before
the Constable came at them, and endeavored every one to shift for himself; one
leaped out of a Window into a Court backward, where being stopped by a Sentinel,
he run him into the body, but it is hoped the wound may not prove mortal; and
the Thief though he had done the mischief, was taken, as was another that got
out at the Balcony, and so on the Sign-post, and three more about the top of
the House; but one escaped, whether over the Houses, or what other way is not
known. Besides the Five Men, the beforementioned Woman that went to the Broker
was taken, who acknowledges that on Monday night they sent for her, and desired
her to wish them to a Customer, which she did as aforesaid, and that the same
is all she knows of the matter.

The Plate before recited was found in the Cellar of the said Tavern; the Five
Men being examined before a Justice, were Committed to Newgate, and the Woman
to the Counter.

FINIS.

