THE GREAT GRIEVANCE OF SCOTLAND, THE Mother and Nurse of many Evils TO CHURCH
and STATE. TOGETHER With a Rational Proposal, a Suitable Expedient, and the
Proper Remedy.

EDINBURGH: Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

THE GREAT GRIEVANCE OF SCOTLAND, etc.
I. THE Prelate being, 1. A Monster in the State; 2. A Mischief in the Church;
and 3. The great Obstruction of the Happiness of both.

II The Prelate being both the Joy and Mocking-Stock, 1. of Rome and
Antichrist, 2. of Atheists and Profane Ruffians, and 3. of Lazy Carnal
Idol-Shepherds.

III. The Prelate being the Idol of Jealousy, 1. between King and Nobles, 2.
between King and Gospel Ministers, 3. between King and People, and that which
provokes God to Wrath against Church and State.

IV. The Prelate being a Burden. 1. to the Crown, on whose Revenues he
feeds, 2. to the Kingdom, which first and last for his sake has been put to
so much needless Expenses, 3. to Church, Schools, and Colleges, whom he has
Robbed of their Allowance and Maintenance.

V. The Prelate being the occasion of so much Trouble, Danger and Mischief, of
so many Storms and Shakings, 1. to the Crown, 2. to the Kingdom, 3. to the
Church and Ministry.

VI. The Prelate being, 1. a Reproach and Vexation to the Nobility, 2. the
great Offense and Scandal of the People, and 3. a woeful Plague and Scourge of
Faithful Ministers.

VII. The Prelate being both the Mother and Nurse, 1. of all Looseness and
Prophanity, 2. of Rebellion and Sedition, and 3. of Schism, Oppression and
Persecution.

VIII. The Prelate being, 1: a Bastard and Tyrannical Lord, 2. a Selfish and
Unjust Judge, and 3. a Woolfish Shepherd to devour the Flock.

IX. The Prelate being, 1. one whom Men mock when they Praise and Applaud, 2.
Fret and Chafe when they Follow and Attend, and 3. Hate and Curse in their
Heart, when they must open their Purses to maintain a Standing Army to hold him
up in his Grandeur, and strengthen his Hands in Tyrannizing over the Faithful.

X. The Prelate being, 1. a Time-Server, and Self-seeker, 2. a Cheater and
Deceiver whom none can trust, and 3. Infamous and Self-condemned, for whom his
greatest Favorites without Blushing cannot Plead.

XI. The Prelate being Unhappy. 1. to his Authors and Supporters, 2. Ungrateful
to his Friends and Benefactors, and 3. Oppressing and Rigorous to his Vassals
and Vicars, whom though he suffer to Live as they list, yet allows to them as
little to live upon as he can.

XII. The Prelate being an infamous The British Prelate having his Original and
Pedigree, 1. from Pagan Priests, amongst whom were their Flamines and
Arch-flamines, after which Pattern and Model (O Prelates, be ashamed of your
Nativity) and proportionally to whose number, and in whose Sees and Cathedrals
the Archbishops and Bishops at their Erection, were placed, as their own
Polyd. Virgil, in his Account of the Invention and Inventors of things, with
many others, clearly demonstrate; and albeit in times of Persecution, when
Presbyteries and Synods could not meet, a delegation to some one or more was
necessary; yet the British Prelate (whatever claim may be alleged to Antiqu^
by such as enjoy, or are gaping after a fat Benefice) can truly produce no
Pattern, but from Rome or Pagan Idolators; and no Warrant (whatever some mutter
concerning a Jus Divinum) but what was granted by Kings and Emperors, either
Abused, 1. by their Hypocrisy and subtle Insinuation, or 2. against their
Hearts forced to yield to what Prelates desired; or 3. after they had
Entoxicate the People with a fond Persuasion, that the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven was put in their Hands; and that they could admit or hold out at their
discretion; they were put in a Capacity to require whatever their Ambition and
Avarice did prompt them to.
Bastard; 1. begotten without the Consent of the Ravished Mother ( viz. the
Church) yea (which is rare) whom she will not acknowledge to be her Son, 2. who
being ashamed of his extraction, disowneth his Father, the King, while he
pretends to a Jus Divinum, like some Heroic Pagans, who to Cloak their
Spurious Original, pretended they were descended of the Gods; And 3. thus is a
Robber, in catching and possessing the Fathers Goods, whom he disclaimeth, and
the Mothers Revenues, who denies him, and protests he is not her Son.

XIII. The Prelate being, 1. brought forth in an Evil time, a time of Distress,
Anguish, and Persecution, 2. having begotten and brought forth such a Cursed
Son, the Pope and great Antichrist, who cast and held his Father under Foot,
and Ruled all at his pleasure; And 3. since the Reformation in Britain, having
been always employed in such a wicked Work, viz. to advance Superstition and
Will Worship, to obstruct the Purity of the Gospel, and the Power of Godliness,
and to Oppress and Persecute Christ's Faithful Ministers, to rob the Church of
its Liberty, to obtrude Idol Shepherds on Christ's Flock, and to hold out and
cast out Faithful Pastors, who would make it their work to feed the Flock, and
not themselves.

XIV. The Prelate being, 1. a Cruel and Implacable Enemy, 2. an Unfaithful and
Treacherous Friend, and 3. a sixth Finger in the Hand, a Superfluous Member, as
Useless and Unprofitable, so hurtful and pernicious both to Church and State.

Were it, not then, 1. for the Kings (...) Honor and Emolument, 2. for the
Kingdoms Welfare and Tranquillity, and 3. for the Churches Happiness and Unity,
to have this burden removed, this Idol of Jealousy cast down, and this
Stumbling Block taken out of the way? And may we not apply what was said in
reference to the proper Babylon and her little Ones, to those Blats of the
mystical Babylon? O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed, happy shall
be he that rewards thee as thou have served us, Psalm. 137. v. 8.

Could any King have lived in greater Honor, Plenty, Prosperity, and
Tranquillity, then King Charles the I. or any King so boast of the Affection of
his Subjects as King Charles the II. might have done, had not the Prelate stood
in the way? The sense of our Misery in the time of our late Confusion, our
Sympathy then with his Majesty and the Royal Family, under their Sufferings;
together with the sense of the Ingratitude and Miscarriages of many, the
Insolency, Rebellion, and Treachery of others in these Lands, would have so
knit the Hearts of all to His Majesty, and made His Government so sweet and
refreshing, that he could not have asked what they would not have cheerfully
given, nor commanded them to do what willingly they would not have done: And, O
how would the Man (whosoever he had been) who durst have spoken any thing to
His Majesty's Prejudice, have been Abominated! Nay, all the Contest then would
have been, who should have most Cheerfully expressed their Affectionate
Loyalty, their High Esteem and Reverence of His most Excellent Majesty, their
great Joy for His Highness Safety, Preservation and Restoration, their care
and desire of his Happiness and long Reign, and their satisfaction with his
Government, and to live under his shadow. Let Court Parasites suggest what they
please, the Love of the People is the best Pillar of the Throne. Hence His
Majesty in his first Speech to the English Parliament, immediately after his
return, Anno. 1660. wisely said, That He valued the Love of his People more
then many Crowns. And after enquiry, the Satisfaction and Affection of the
Subjects will be found the strongest Bull-work, and most concludent Argument
against Defensive Arms. For let men dispute as they will, a People once
provoked, finding themselves in a capacity to right themselves, will (I do not
now enquire whether or when they should) make the Sword cut the Cords of all
Bonds that would bind their Hands and bear them down; nay, the more strong and
pinching these be, they will be accounted the more Intolerable, and being cast
off, will render the dissatisfied the more implacable. Who knows what a loss
His Majesty was at upon the account of the dissatisfaction of good People, and
most Loyal Subjects, because of the Hierarchical Corruptions, and Prelacy it
self, the Mother of these Abuses, and Nursery of Popery and Prophanity, which
never did, nor is likely to do any good Office to the Throne; but if the Prelat
were Popular, and had Moyen with the People, and thus once were in a Capacity,
would (as formerly he has) be Ready to improve his Honor against the Throne,
to stir up to Sedition and Sound a Trumpet to Rebellion, as Mr. Pryn has fully
Antypathy of the English-Prelacy to Regal Monarchy, and Civil Unity.
demonstrated in a large Volume, containing an History of the Conspiracies,
Rebellions and Treachery of the Prelates, both Popish and Protestant, and from
thence concludes, that the English Prelates in all Ages have been the greatest
Rebels, Traitors, Conspirators and Opposites to their Kings, the Chiefest
Incendiaries and Firebrands which have Infested the Realm, and the Archest
Tyrants and Oppressors of the People, and Invaders of the Laws and Liberties
of all other Callings and Professions of Men, severally or jointly considered.
And what the Carriage of most of them, and the Inferior Clergy has been, and
is to this present King, is too well known.

But, some will say, If the Prelates Wings were Clipped, he needed not be much
feared: Answer, Though Moderation in Evil be more tolerable then the Excess; yet,
who can say it is good and Eligible? Virtue is placed between two Extremes, but
does not partake and borrow more or less from either: and O what a Monster
would a Moderate Prelate be, and how few his Days? How would that Implacable
and Furious Creature Rage, till either he burst asunder, or did break all the
Bonds wherewith he were bound and kept under? 2. What a Ridiculous Empty Shadow
and Non-significant Cipher would he be, and for what would he serve? He would
not then be a Curb and Terror to the Nobility, nor so misrepresent Affairs and
Persons to his Majesty as to make Men fawn on him, nor so Oppress the Saints,
etc. and he has Mettle for no other Work: Hence, 3. He would turn despicable,
for if once he lost his Sting none would Fear, as none do Love him; yea his own
Creatures and Vicars, with the first would be ready to Hiss at him, and Curse
the Day they first saw his Face. 4. As this Mongrel Prelate, would neither be
for Work nor Pleasure, so neither for Meat nor Medicine; such an Impoysoned
Morsel, and Venomous Plaster, would rather breed new Distempers then Cure
former Diseases, such a Hotch Potch could not stop the Mouths of them who now
Complain, nor satisfy the desires of Loyal Subjects and sober Christians, who
are waiting and Praying for better things, nor remove the occasion of Schism
and Confusion, which threaten such sad things both to Church and State; Ah, may
we not then say of that poor Creature, Cui bono Regi and cui usui Ecclesiae vel
Reipublicae?

O! but if the Bastard Prelate were once cast out, and Presbyterian Government
settled according to the excellent Pattern held forth in other Reformed
Churches, and agreed upon by both Houses of the English Parliament, and Ordered
to be observed in the Church of England and Ireland [ Die Martis 19. August.
1648.] What Acclamations of Joy? What expressions of Satisfaction and returns
of thanks to his Majesty, and to such as had been Instrumental in that good
Work from all Ranks of People? And how quickly would all disloyal and Seditious
Persons be Discovered, how easily their Mouth stopped, and their Hands bound and
such become a Reproach to all, but a Terror to none but themselves? And they
who now lurk under the honest Mantle of Nonconformity and Presbytery, would
appear in their own Colors; sad experience may Teach how little the
Hierarchical Lords can do for holding out or removing Schisms, Heresy and
Sedition, notwithstanding all their Power and Violence; and how from time to
time they have been the Seed and occasion of these woeful Evils: But
Presbyterian Government, in it is due Exercise, would (as King James told the
English Prelates, speaking to this very Point, and showing the Cause why then
there were no Sectaries in the Church of Scotland, while they abounded in
England) Kill the Cocatrice in the Egg, and though it were Hatched, quickly find
it out and Kill it, as it were with a Look, (but not of Hierarchical Fury, but
of Meekness, and by drawing with the Cords of Love, and the Methods held forth
in Mr. Burrough's Golden Irenicum) while all means Essayed for preventing
Sedition in the State, and Confusion in the Church are to no purpose Essayed;
And when neither the Prelatical Persecution, nor any State Policy or Expedient
can do the turn, what we now plead for would prove effectual, and a Wedge of
the same Timber will Cleave the Knotty Tree, that would not yield to what
seemed to be more forcible and irresistible.

If such as say, No Bishop, no King, would seriously consider, they might
acknowledge, that with as good Reason it might be said, There could be no King,
if there were none to Undermine and Ruin the Throne; and, O what a Reproach is
it to the Throne to imagine, that it can be better supported by the Rotten
Pillar of Prelacy, then by the Divine Cords of Presbytery, which is so well
Founded on the Scriptures.

But, now waving all Extrinsical Considerations, and abstracting from Effects
and Consequences, yea, and from all Moral and Religious Respects, let me Tender
a Proposal that may cut off all the pretended Politicians poor Pleas; and it is
this [If his Majesty's Royal Prerogatives, the Liberties and Privileges of
Civil Courts, and the Honor of Nobles, be not better secured from
Ecclesiastical Encroachments by Presbytery then Prelacy, let King and Nobles
Reject this Motion;] The Scottish Prelates in their seasonable Case, and
frequently in their Discourses, pretended they were but the Kings Commissioners
(and thus must stand only in a Civil Capacity) as formerly they said, they were
but the Church Commissioners for Sitting in Parliament to see that nothing
there was concluded to the prejudice of the Church; away with such unfaithful
Trustees, who neither regard a Commission from Church or State, as not minding
the good of either, but would Cloak a Bastard Office with whatsoever pretense
might best serve their turn; but if his Majesty as our Kings formerly used to
send a Commissioner to genera Assembles, would be pleased to entrust and
appoint some Noblemen or Worthy Gentlemen to be present at all Provincial, and
(if it were thought needful) Classical Meetings, to see that Ministers kept
themselves within their own Sphere, and did not meddle with Civil and State
Affairs; and for Maintaining a good understanding between Church and State, the
sweet effects and Fruits thereof might from Day to Day appear; this course as
it would prove to all intents and purposes more effectual for the Magistrates
Security then Prelacy; so it would be, 1. An easy, 2. A Cheap, 3. A Safe, and
4. A Lawful, and 5. Laudable Expedient: For, 1. No difficulty appears in the
thing. 2. One Prelates Rent might Defray the Expense of all these
Commissioners, for who would refuse that Employment though they had but a small
or no Allowance, which would be rather an Honor then Onus? And why should any
Complain more then Elders formerly, who had no Sallary, notwithstanding their
Attendance at Synods and Presbyteries, and as Commissioners would not refuse to
Attend these Meetings; so faithful Ministers would heartily Welcome them, being
glad to have such Witnesses of their Integrity. 3. Herein appears no hazard.
And, 4. What can be Objected against such an overture, which is not only so
Plausible, Seasonable and Rational; But also, 5. Complyeth with the constant
Practice of the Church, since the Magistrate became Christian (except where
Pope or Domineering Prelates have Exploded the Magistrates Inspection) and Care
of Ecclesiastical Matters and Persons; and is no other then what was offered by
the Waldenses to prevent the Calumnies of their Adversaries, and was lately
renewed by the French Protestants; who in a Treatise with their King, desired,
Mr. Clerk from Mr. Mamard's Golden Apples, page 90.
that some one or other might be Deputed by him to be present at their
Assemblies, for preventing of State Jealousies and Vulgar Calumnies, for which
my Author Cites John the 3.21. and much commends the Prudence and Candor of
these Holy Men for making such a Proposal, which to this Day has place there,
and De Polit. Eccles. cap. 10.
Banosius commends it, as being no less expedient and profitable, for the
Church, then desirable by the Magistrate, and needful for Establishing a good
Order, Maintaining a good understanding, and for preventing dangerous
Jealousies and mistakes on either Hand

If any Object the Eccentrical Motions of Churchmen during the late Intestine
War, that does not Quadrate with the present Case, and does not plead against,
but for this overture, which then could have no place; but since not a few
Object the over-reachings and miscarriages of that time against the Government
on which we find a Divine Impress; such would consider that one Swallow makes
not the Summer, and for that one instance in Presbyters, Mr. Pryn will furnish
you with Hundreds in the Prelates; to speak nothing of the great Prelate the
Pope, his Treading under Foot his Father the Emperor, and making him not only
hold his Stirrup, but bow the Back, and become a Footstool for his Holiness,
while he Mounted up on his Horse. 2. Who knows not that the Prelates then were
the bane of Contention; and whoever were Instruments, they were the Cause and
Occasion of these Tumults; and being in the Chair did not, could not prevent,
but their Place and Power brought on those Evils. 3. Were not Parliaments and
Civil Courts as deeply Involved in these as any Church Judicatory; yet, how
Ridiculous were it from thence to Infer there should be no Parliament, nor
Civil Judicatories? It is (said his late Majesty Charles I.) a gross Vulgar
Error to impute to or revenge upon the Function the faults of times or
persons; which Seditions and Popular Principle and Practice all Wise Men abhor;
whatever may be said against Persons and Administrators, who abuse their Power
and Trust, yet that makes not against the Office and Ordinance, whether Civil
or Sacred if good, and in it self Lawful; but if the Abuses be as it were
inseparable, and the Office it self were Apocryphal (both which as to Prelacy
hold) the Plea is Concludent: I have Read of a Contingens raro plerumque vel ad
utrumlibet, but a Contingens semper, seems to be a Repugnancy, for what is
semper, must be necessarium and per se, and not contingent and by accident: and
that there the fault is in the Bone may easily be made appear, for a Minister
of the Gospel cannot have a Stomach to digest a Lordly Prelacy with its
Concomitants, till his temperature be so vitiate, that it incline and dispose
to all the foresaid Distempers. 4. These things did appear while the
differences continued between the King and his Subjects. O but to see
Presbyterian Government in exercise under his Majesty's Eye and Protection, how
good and pleasant were it? How Beautiful then would Ordinances be? How orderly
Church Meetings? How would Love and Concord abound, when thus the occasion of
Jealousies and Animosities were cut off? Such as know any thing in History, or
what is now done in those places where the Prelates domineer, know how the
Mitre always does encroach on the Magistrate and Civil Powers, which begets
such distraction, that often it breaks forth into Tumults and Civil Wars: But
where is there such Order, Beauty and Concord, as in the Presbyterian Churches?
How exactly do they walk? How tender are they of the Magistrates Authority, not
in the least encroaching on his Power and Privileges? Who can give but one
Instance of any such Miscarriage in Presbyteries or Synods in France, Holland,
and other Reformed Churches? And wo's me, that we only among the Nations, who
disown the great Prelate should be made to graon under the Hierarchical Yoke;
for though in some other Churches there be Super-Intendents, yet they have no
Civil Power, Title, or Place; nay, they have no Ecclesiastical Pre-eminence
over their Brethren, no power to censure them, no Negative Voice in
Judicatories, etc. yea, and are nothing but mere Presidents in Synods; and
during the intervalls of these, they in nothing differ from other Ministers: So
that the Government there may be called Presbyterian, and in Swedland, where
they did sit in Parliament (but otherwise differed not from other
Superintendents) Now as I am Informed, they are cast off the State, and are not
permitted to Sit or Vote in any Civil Court: Where ever the Prelate has any
Power or Civil Function, that place will soon be made sensible of his
unfitness, and that he was not Created for such a work.

What is alleged concerning the suitableness of Prelacy to Monarchy, rather
than any other form of Civil Government, is a suitable plea for such a cause:
For 1. Who can imagine what that Service can be which the Prelate can do to a
Kingdom, and not to a Commonwealth, or what the Prince could require of him,
which the States could not? 2. How clearly is this confuted by the Experiences
of all the Reformed Churches, living under Monarchical or Princely Government?
And to speak nothing of the State of the Church of Scotland, after the
Reformation from Popery, the Christian Religion was for many years settled
before his Lordship got Footing here, which was not till the fifth Century,
when Pope Celestine sent hither Palladius to create that New Order, and with
what difficulty that Church was brought to submit to the Prelate, Historians
show; so that first and last his Lordship has met with a cold welcome there;
and hpapy that Church bad been, if it had never Couched under that Burden. 3.
The pretended Similitude and suitableness, which is alleged for the Foundation
of that Institution is Ridiculous, since our Prelates Confess their Government
to be Aristocratical, and not Monarchical, Condemning in their Disputes with
Rome, the Pope his Aspiring to Monarchy, and the Papal Government as
Antichristian, because Monarchical; so that if suitableness with the State
must be the Foundation of Church Government, Prelacy according to their own
Hypothesis, must suit better with Aristocracy then Monarchy, and better with
Holland then Britain.

But, you may ask what Course shall be taken, for Discovering what is the Right
Government of the Church, and for its Establishment?

Answer, The saying is not more Common then True; Artifici in sua art
Credendum, a Man is to be Trusted in his own Art; if Rulers were deliberating
how an Army should be Ordered, how a Fleet Provided, a House Builded, etc.
would they not consult expert Soldiers, Mariners, Masons? etc. And should not
the Pious, Judicious, and most Unbyassed Pastors of the Church be Consulted
concerning its Government? And where was it ever settled, and how can it be
supposed, that it can be done aright without their Advice? Accordingly the
English Parliament Anno 1643. when so many Grievances (though not so many as now
may be) against the Prelates were Presented to them, Wisely called an Assembly
of the most Judicious Divines (assisted with some sent from Scotland) that ever
met in that Church; and thus a Beautiful Assembly Consisting of Persons of
diverse Persuasions, of Presbyterians, Prelatical Doctors, Independents, etc.
That all might be heard, and the Truth, the more clearly Discovered, and the
right Government Established upon the most solid Foundation; yet so, that as to
the Number, a Difference was made between the Grieved, and those who had done
the Injury and given the Offense; but, O if such a free and full Debate were
now allowed, and such a Meeting Called by King and Parliament; this Proposal is
so Rational, that King Charles II. being Convinced how acceptable it would be,
to the then Church of England, shortly after his Restoration, Anno 1660.
Reflecting on his First Missive to the English Parliament from Breda, wherein
he promised, to Call with their Advice an Assembly of Divines for Settling of
the Affairs of the Church, Protests, That the then Establishment of Prelacy
should be no prejudice to that promise, he being then as resolute to perform it
as when he made it: But, that after that they had gotten some Trial of
Episcopacy, as lately they had of Presbytery, he would Call an Assembly of
Divines, who might without prejudice, and by Experience, Judge what Government
was best and most convenient for the Church; and now the Lord having set on the
Throne that Illustrious Prince, who did so Sympathize with Sufferers, and was
so Touched with our Grievances, as to undertake an Expedition accompanied with
so much hazard by Sea and Land, and which required such great Preparations, and
vast Expense, as may be matter of Astonishment to us, and of Praise to God, who
stirred him up for such a Noble Work, and followed his Pious and Magnanimous
Enterprise with such admirable Success; When (I pray) and by whom, could we
expect such a Redress of Grievances, such a Reformation of Religion and
Manners, and such Order both in Church and State, as while his Majesty now
Sways the Scepter? And by whom could we look for the Performance of the Solemn
promise made by King Charles II. if not now by his Royal Nephew Set on the
Throne?

Object. 1. The Meeting Houses are but few in Comparison of the Churches, to
which the Multitude, as well as the Great Ones, Resort, and thus there may be
more dificulty in getting the right Government of the Church Established, then
some apprehend. Answer, It is well known, that the English stand so much upon
the Formalities of Law and Order, (what ever those Laws be, or the pretended
Order) that great and small pay such a deference to those as is scarce Credible
in such a Judicious and Excellent People, but once take away those
Constitutions, and let but an equal Liberty by Law be Allowed to Dissenters and
Conformists, and then it will appear, who do Cordially own and will stand for
Prelacy, and who not. But Secondly, If once Presbyterian Government were
Established by Law, and Prelacy sent a Packing, as Anno 1643. and if there were
such a Nomination of Worthy Persons, for Overseeing the setting up of Synods,
Presbyteries, Classical and Congregational, together with the Constitution and
way of Election of Members to a National Synod, as was See, the Form of Church
Government to be used in the Church of England and Ireland agreed upon by the
Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, after Advice had with the Assembly
of Divines, Die Mart. 29. August, 1648.
Appointed by both Houses of Parliament, Anno 1648. Then it would appear what
Esteem the Conforming Clergy as such (although otherwise there be not a few
amongst those, who for their Learning, Piety and Zeal against Popery, deserve
to be had in Reverence) would have in England, and that the Church would not be
troubled with their Meeting Houses, nor many concern themselves in providing a
Maintenance for them; Nay nay, for when there was such Liberty for Petitions,
Remonstrances, Complaints, there was not so much as one Petion (according to
what I can learn) offered in their behalf, nor any Complaint made for
Abolishing the Prelacy, Service Book and Rabble of Popish Ceremonies; And then
Secondly, It would be considered what a disadvantage all this while the
Presbyterians have been at, because the Legal Stipends and Provision were
settled on, and secured to Conformists, and that they were put to provide
Meeting Houses and Maintenance for Nonconforming Ministers.

But, Secondly, Some may yet Object, That the Sense of the Nation can hardly be
known, but by their Representatives in Parliament.

Answ. 1. Thus not the Sense of the Nation, but of those who had Vote in the
Elections, and that so many of those who were Elected do own the Hierarchy, may
be matter of Astonishment. But Secondly, No not of those, if it be considered,
that in the late Election of Members to the Parliament, respect was had to the
Protestant Religion, to which such sad things were designed by former
Governors, and since many of the Church of England (as it is Denominat from
its worst part, not its Orthodox Faith, but it Romish Government) having
Zealously appeared against Popery, not a few of those were Chosen merely upon
that Account, without any regard had to their Sentiments concerning Church
Government. And Secondly, As to many of the Electors, there might have been
something of Policy in that Choice (which although I do not Commend, yet I cannot
Conceal) while they did consider how that the Prelates and Clergy had
Strengthened the Hands of our Kings in Establishing an Arbitrary and Illegal
Power by their Votes in Parliament, and Preaching to the People the
Unaccountableness of Kings for their Actings, and that it was the Duty of
Subjects to Obey their Commands, not once Mentioning any Limitation; and crying
out against Defensive Arms, as an Invention of the Devil, for Involving all who
durst own the same in the greatest Guilt of Treason and Damnation; and thus
has put the late King in a Capacity to do all the mischief we Groaned under
and feared, thought fit to choose such to destroy and demolish all those Pillars
of Tyranny and Popery, which their Party had Erected, and thus might see what
Teachers they had hearkened to, and might be Convinced (I will not say
self-Condemned) if they any more owned such Teachers and Guides; and hence
there may be yet some ground of hope, that those Generous Gentlemen who have
not yet appeared against the Hierarchy, will in due time consider what
Conscience, Religion, and their Honor, calls for at their Hands. But whatever
has been, or may be their Carriage, another Parliament may offer a better, and
more true Account of the Sense of the Nation; Piscator ictus sapit; Men will
know whom they may and should Trust.

Object. 3. Tush (may the Prelates say) we need not (although we do) fear, having
so many Acts of Parliaments, Engagements, Promises (although none from the
Scripture) for our Security. Answer, But we hope the Acts of British
Parliaments are not like the Laws of Medes and Persians, which could not be
altered, although to the better, and for the Emolument of Church and State; we
know who said we have a Law, and by that Law Christ must die: But, Secondly,
What if many of those Laws and Promises were Founded upon a very Casual
supposition, and were no Engagements to Continue Prelacy in the Church; but to
Continue Benefices and Liberties with Prelates, until their Office be found to
be a Grievance, and a great Obstruction of the Welfare and Happiness of Church
and Kingdom. 3. Thirdly, But what do they Prattle, what a Reproach is it to the
King and Parliament to allege (and yet not strange to find Prelates do so) that
it is not in their Power to Redress Greivances, or to hearken to the sad
Complaints of the Oppressed? Reason, Justice, Conscience, will say, let Equity
get a hearing before an Impartial Judge not Biased by Constitutions, Acts,
Deeds, Custom, Practices, which can never (say Lawyers) prescribe against
Piety, Justice, Truth, or the Public Good. Fourthly, All Promises and
Engagements Founded on a Legal Establishment, if the Law be justly altered and
Cancelled, fall to the Ground with those Laws, and no more oblige; and whatever
the Legal Provision be, no Promise nor Engagement ought to be Vinculum iniquit
atis, nor can by any moved with the fear of God be alleged for obliging to do
Evil, or to obstruct the good and happiness of Church and Kingdom.

4. Obj. But should there be no regard had of these Prelates, who being
sensible of the Evil of their way, in complying with the late Kings in all
their Methods, for Establishing their Arbitrary Government, and for Introducing
of Popery, at length, Zealously appeared against Popery?

Ans. 1. The Zeal of the Scottish Prelates against Popery appeared in their
Address to the late King, wherein they Proclaimed Him the Darling of Heaven,
and wished the Necks of his Enemies (of the Prince of Orange and all his Army)
to be given to him; and that he might find that success he had met with against
Monmouth and Argyle.

But 2. As to the English Prelates, as I abhor all Methods of Cruelty,
Severity, Malice, Revenge, as being a reproach to the Gospel of Christ, so I am
far from desiring that any good Work should want a suitable Reward.

But 3. It may seem strange to hear any Sober Man boast of their Zeal against
Popery; Ah who since the Reformation from Popery, have been the Patrons of
Papists in Britain, but Prelates, by setting so many Weak, Ignorant, Debauched,
Scandalous Parsons and Curats, over Congregations? And thus disposing the
People, 1. to Atheism, 2. to Popery, and whatever Religion the Court would
represent to them, 3. By being a Tool in the Kings Hand, for bearing down of
those who stood in the Gap, and were Zealous against all Popish Innovations, 4.
by Instilling in the People the Doctrine of Non-resistance and Absolute
Obedience; yea, they came that length, that one of them ( viz. Prelate H.) in a
Sermon, told his Hearers, That the Distinction between Active and Passive
Obedience was founded upon Disloyalty, and sounded an Alarm to Rebellion; that
if the Pope could lay as good a claim to Infallability, as our King, the World
would hear of it. And do not these Gentlemen well deserve to be accounted the
Pillars of the Protestant Religion?

But Thirdly, As to those few, who did lately appear, it would be considered
upon what occasion they turned Sail. 1. Did any of them once mutter till their
Hands were bound, that they could no more Persecute the Innocent? 2. Then their
Indignation at the Liberty granted to Dissenters, rather than their Zeal
against Popery, set them to work; to which 3. add their Selfish Zeal for their
Carnal Interest, when they perceived their Court to decline; and that Popish
Priests had the Kings Ear, and lay nearest his Heart, and began to enter and
posses their charges; they supposed it to be high time to break off their
Silence, and Espouse the honest Plea of the Reformed Religion, for securing
their Places and Dignities; and now to testify their Zeal for for the True
Religion, they must interpose for an Exemption from the Oath of Allegiance, to
a King, Zealous for the Reformed Religion, whom His Majesty must defend in all
their pretended Rights, though they will not acknowledge his Just Right and
deserved Dignity.

But for Conclusion, Those are times of great hopes and Expectation, and our
Grievances have made such a noise in Europe, that all are waiting for such a
Redress and Reformation as may Answer the Desires and Prayers of the Grieved
and Oppressed. But if this be all the Fruit, that our Springs are again sent to
Run in their former Muddy Channel; and if as one lately complained, Those who
would destroy us, be suffered to be our Instructors; and our Common Enemies to
Teach us our Politics, what will the World say of us? And Ah! how may Rome
Insult over us and Rejoice? If Hope defered makes the Heart Sick, Hope
frustrated (especially in such a promising Season) must break the Heart. But, O
what an Honor and Name of Renown will it be to such as God will make
Instrumental in Reforming his Church, and what Rich reward may they expect from
their Master, when all their Earthly Excellency will be laid in the Dust? Now
let us wait, looking up to him who can put it in the Hearts of King and Rulers
to do this thing, which would be so wel-pleasing to God, and so acceptable to
his People.

FINIS.

