A SERMON Preached before the GENERAL AND OFFICERS, In the KING's Chapel at
Portsmouth; On SUNDAY, July 24. 1692. Being the Day before they Embarked for
the Descent upon FRANCE.

By WILLIAM GALLAWAY, A. M. Chaplain to Their Majesty's Sea-Train of Artillery.

Printed at the Request of the OFFICERS.

LONDON: Printed for Rich. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
MDCXCII.

Mr. GALLAWAY's SERMON Before the GENERAL AND OFFICERS At Portsmouth, July 24.
1692.
DEUTERONOMY. XX. 3, 4. Let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble,
neither be ye terrified because of them. For the Lord your God is he that goes
with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you.
WHEN I considered the Circumstances of the approaching time, in which some
Grand Enterprise was to be put in execution, and the Persons to whom this
Discourse was to be more particularly Addressed, who are to share no
inconsiderable part in it; I could not think of any more proper or seasonable,
than that which I have chosen as the subject of my present Discourse: A Subject
of that Importance, that it requires both your devout Attention, and serious
Consideration; especially of those who are more immediately concerned in it;
and a Subject too, which from Moses's Precept to the Priests, appears in some
measure a Duty incumbent on me to treat on: Thus the Exhortation begins, verse
1. When thou go out to battle against thine* enemies, and see horses, and
charets, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of them: For the Lord thy
God is with thee, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. And then it is
added in the next verse, And it shall be when ye are come nigh unto the battle,
that the Priest shall approach and speak unto the people, and shall say unto
them, Hear, O Israel, you approach this day unto battle against your enemies,

Let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble; neither be ye
terrified because of them. For the Lord your God is he that goes with you, to
fight for you against your enemies, to save you.

The Prophet Moses foreseeing the great Consternation the Israelites would be
subject to, by reason of the dreadful apprehensions that should possess them,
occasioned by the mighty Power, and boasting Insults of their Enemies, directs
the Priests to animate and encourage them against these terrors in the day of
battle; and for this end and purpose prescribes such a method in the words of
my Text, as in all probability might raise their spirits above those threatening
dangers; which Words are a Dehortation from Fear or Pusilanimity, described in
all its kinds and degrees: Let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not
tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them: Which Dehortation is founded
on this infallible Antidote against Fear, or the most convincing Reason to
expel it, in the Words immediately following: For the Lord your God is he that
goes with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you. Tho the
Enemies of Israel appeared in all respects terrible, and in a manner
invincible, by reason of their Strength and Numbers, yet allowing there was one
mightier than they, so long as the Lord of Hosts was their God, since they
might assure themselves, that he would not only accompany and assist them
against their Enemies, but protect and shelter them under the shield of his
Power, they were to behave themselves like men, and in the most extreme dangers
banish all Fear, in a full assurance of Victory and Success.

The Promises made by God to Abraham and his Seed, That they should be a
Numerous People; that they should be rescued and delivered from their Egyptian
Bondage; that they should discomfit and destroy the mighty Hosts of their
Enemies, and enjoy a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, that is, full of all
manner of Plenty, was in every Circumstance fulfilled and completed. The
Miracles that were wrought for the people of Israel at sundry times, and diverse
places, sufficiently testify, that they were under the peculiar Care and
Protection of the Almighty; as the Judgments that fell on their Adversaries,
declared them to be under his Displeasure. Whilst they were journeying in the
Wilderness toward the Land of Promise, they had a Cloud that led them by day,
and a Pillar of Fire to direct them in their way by night: They had Manna, the
Food of Angels, showered on them for Bread; and Quails for Flesh, to satisfy
their Hunger; and the Rocks gushed forth Water to quench their Thirsts: As to
the Success that always attended their Arms, Joshua declares (when he cautions
them neither to serve nor bow down to the false Gods of their Enemies) this as
a reason, Joshua 23. 9, 10. For the Lord has driven out from before you great
nations and strong; but as for you, no man has been able to stand before you
unto this day. One man of you shall chase a thousand; for the Lord your God, he
it is that fights for you, as he has promised you. But on the other side, as
for their Enemies, when they had imagined craftily, taken secret counsel, and
said, Come, and let us root them out, that they be no more a people, and that
the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance: when they were grown so
insolent as to boast their own strength, and despise their Adversaries as weak;
when they spoke disdainfully, and blasphemed the Name of the Holy One of
Israel; then it was that the mightiest of them were slain; then it was that the
destroying Plagues were inflicted on them. Thus Moses represents Pharaoh
proudly boasting in the 15th Chapter of Exodus, and the 9th Verse, I will
pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust shall be satisfied
upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them. The Children of
Israel at the sight of Pharaoh and his Host marching after them, were sore
afraid, and began to expostulate with Moses, saying, Because there were no
graves in Egypt, have thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? Wherefore
have thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of Egypt? And Moses said
unto the People, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord,
which he will show to you to day: For the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day,
ye shall see them again no more for ever. All which was soon verified in the
event. For the children of Israel went into the midst of the Sea upon the dry
ground, and the waters were a wall unto them on the right hand, and on the
left. But when their Enemies pursued them, the waters returned, and covered the
charets, and the horsemen, and all the hosts of Pharaoh that came into the Sea
after them: there remained not so much as one of them.

Having thus far briefly showed how the words of my Text have been fulfilled in
relation to the Israelites, in those visible Assistances and signal
Deliverances wrought for them by the Arm of the Almighty; and reflecting of
what force the successful Consequences were, to embolden and inspirit them
against their Enemies, upon the undoubted Consideration, that God was on their
side. I shall now proceed to apply this Dehortation to you all; Vigor and
Cheerfulness being as necessary in the Promoters of any Design, as well as in
those who are to put it in execution. Every man who loves his Country, his
Religion, his Liberty, and who does not espouse a French Interest; that is,
every honest Englishman, and those engaged in our Interests, being like to
share either in the Miscarriages or Success. And now would to God I could
address my self to you with the same assurance of prevailing (as the Priests of
Levi did to the Israelites;) and tho it would look like too much presumption in
me to declare any thing absolutely and positively; yet I will endeavor, and I
am sure I may adventure to offer such Reasons to your Consideration, as may
raise your Hopes, expel all Fears, and strengthen your Faith, that ye may
steadfastly believe that the Almighty goes with you, to fight for you, and to
save you. Therefore, Let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble,
neitheir be ye terrified because of them --

Fear is properly distinguished into two sorts or kinds, Fear, and fearfulness;
the former, The Affection or Passion of Fear, as it is opposed to Hope. It Is a
Diffidence or Despondency, tamely yielding to, or timorously flying from an
approaching evil; it has its different symptoms and degrees according to the
Object or Subject Matter it is concerned in. The latter, which I call
fearfulness, is a Vice, as it is a defect, or want of Fortitude; It renders men
either unwilling to undergo any hardships, or to expose themselves to Hazards
and Danger, and causes them to shrink from, and avoid what is the duty of a
valiant man to perform; this, as well as the other, has its effects and
degrees, both kinds being comprehended in the sense of my Text, expressed by
Faintheartedness, visible by its external or outward Symptoms, such as a
palpitation or beating of Heart, trembling of the Joints, paleness of the Face,
and hesitation of the Tongue, arising by degrees to a Pannick or Punick Fear,
when men are over and above terrified by some approaching Danger.

For as the Israelites were to contend with the mighty Hosts of the dreadful
Enemies, the Race of Anak, Gigantick men, armed with the most formidable
Weapons; so Moses directed the Priests to encourage and animate them against
those frightful Apprehensions they had entertained of them: And though they
were unequal, both in respect of their numbers, stature and strength, yet this
one convincing Motive or Reason, that the Lord would be on their side, was
sufficient to support their fainting Hearts, and raise them to such a degree of
assurance, as was of force to inspirit their benumbed Bodies, and expel all the
damping Fears and Terrors they might be possessed with. But to return.

As there is a Vicious, so there is a Virtuous and Religious Fear too;
mentioned by Solomon in these words, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom, that is, an awful dread of God, when we have a reverence for his Name
and Word. And here I cannot but reflect on those who are guilty of blaspheming
the Holy and tremendous Name of God in their common Discourse; if any such
there should be here, to them, I am sure, I might have spared this Dehortation
from fear, for certainly those who do not fear, who dare provoke the Anger and
Detestation of the Almighty by their Imprecations, and foolish Oaths, cannot
fear the weak weak Efforts of mortal men; can any man be more daring than he
who calls upon God for Damnation? Certainly Death in all its frightful Shapes
cannot be terrible to him, who slights and despises the imminent Danger of
Eternal Flames and Everlasting Torments: And as the fear to offend God, by
disobeying his Commands, is the beginning of Wisdom (that Wisdom which, as the
Apostle says, will make us wise unto salvation); so also the fear of God is
the beginning of Fortitude; it is that which lays the sure foundation of
Courage; For it is almost impossible, that he that does not fear God, should be
fearless of Man: There may be other Motives indeed which may oblige a man not
to misbehave himself, or play the Coward, such as Honor, Duty, and Interest,
but these are accidental, and from without: But on the other side, if he fears
God, his Courage is raised from a nobler Principle, Dangers become
insignificant, Death has lost its Terrors, because his passage out of this
Life is but to a better, and he has a hopeful prospect of future Rewards: So
that if we take care to secure an Interest in the next World, I presume the way
thither will prove far easier, by a Sword, or Bullet, than by the lingering
Deaths of the Gout; or Stone, or by the acute Disease of a burning and raging
Fever.

And now give me leave to enquire into the nature and causes of Fearfulness,
and show how little reason any man has to fear, who is engaged in this
Honorable undertaking. It Is an infirmity incident to the nature of Man, to
fear, so long as we are clothed with corruptible flesh, we are and shall be
subject to passions (the Stoics indeed with insensibility enough maintained
the contrary, but their Opinions have been sufficiently derided and exploded)
yet the strength of natural courage in some men, has made the same
difficulties easily superable by them, which others have trembled at. Use and
Custom (which is a second and more powerful nature) makes men gain so full a
mastery over fear, that they willingly undertake and easily perform the most
dangerous enterprises. So that when I reflect, that many of you here have been
well acquainted, and long accustomed to hazards, and have conquered them with
bravery and resolution, I may easily affirm, that no danger can shake that
rooted habit of courage you are masters of: And I dare also be confident, that
those who have had little or no experience, animated by your examples, will
attempt to equal, if not out do, the pattern you shall set them. It may not
perhaps be an unjust or improbable conjecture to think, that there are some
degenerated, false-hearted as well as fainthearted men, among us, who call
themselves Englishmen and Protestants (as there were Israelites of old, who
frighted their Companions with the stature and strength of the Anakims) there
are I fear too many bribed and unthinking men, who industriously make it their
business to discourage us. by lessening our actions, magnifying and
aggrandizing the conduct and courage of our enemies. It must be confessed, that
we have to do with powerful and subtle Enemies, and 'twould be imprudent as
well as unsafe to undervalue and despise them, yet at the same time, it is true,
that we are upon equal terms with them in every respect, and 'twill be no great
concession to allow them preference, in unworthy corruptions and ignoble
treacheries. Besides, we will grant them to be men of Courage, because mean
Adversaries give no Honor to the success of their Competitors, and those
Atcheivments are most glorious, when the enterprises meet with opposition and
difficulties. But we are not altogether strangers to their methods, when they
would pass treachery upon us for bravery, and it is not long since they have
undeceived us as to their bribed Character, and have visibly verified, what
Historians have always recorded of them, That at their first onset they were
more than Men, at the second less then Women. We have less reason, I hope, to
fear them, and they more to fear us, and I question not, but they will find
that we are not wholly degenerated, and though all methods have been formerly
used to make us dissolute, and so consequently effeminate, yet still the same
Seeds of Virtue and Courage remain in us undestroyed, and the present example
of an Heroic and Gallant King will make them shoot up and flourish, and excite
us to imitate what even our Forefathers acted in the Reigns of Edward the 3d.
and Henry the 5th. that the French may experimentally find, that we have
neither forgot to attempt and perhaps succeed too. Besides, it is Liberry and
Freedom that for the most part makes men valiant and courageous, when on the
contrary, cowardice is the natural Product and Offspring of Slavery. Those who
are kept under and trampled on, can hardly aspire to noble and brave attempts.
For which reason in an Air and Government, so well tempered as ours, where
neither extreme heat or cold is predominant, where neither arbitrary Power nor
an ungovernable Liberty prevails, we may reasonably suppose the Hearts and
Spirits of those Subjects will be sprightly and bold, agreeable to their
Constitution and Climate. Nor is this consideration improper to encourage you,
since your enemies are absolute Slaves. Nor is it probable, they will fight
heartily, who have nothing to defend they can properly call their own, and I
presume 'twill appear evident upon Trial, that when men are Slaves to a
barbarous Tyrant, they will be so too, to fear and baseness of Spirit. Again,
The design it self, barely considered, is enough to raise the most dejected
spirit into courage; but when reflected on in all its glorious Circumstances
and advantageous Consequences, then it has force enough to transport us beyond
the bounds, even of prudential Fortitude, to attack an insulting enemy at his
own door, to endeavor something extraordinary to resettle our Friends and
Allies into their own possessions unjustly seized and detained from them, to be
the generous instruments of so great and so much good to all Mankind, at least
all Europe, in attempting to lower the grandeur of that Pharaoh-like and
swelling Tyrant, to redeem and retreive the Interest and Honor of our own
Nation, which is in a manner lost, to be the Arbitrators of the Peace of
Europe, and to have it in our power to hold the Balance so equal, that none
shall overrun or oppress his Neighbor, which is in effect, to give Laws to
all other Princes, certainly this must give such an edge to the attempt as must
make those who are actors in it even out do themselves. It was bravely said of
Caesar to the affrighted Mariners who almost despaired of safety in a violent
Storm, Be of good cheer, ye carry Caesar with his Fortune; thus ye go with
Caesar's Fortune too, ye fight under his Banner who was always a stranger to
fear, yet well acquainted with never avoided dangers. His commands are weighed
with Judgment, and his Counsels with caution and circumspection, his designs
because laid with wisdom and prosecuted with resolution, have seldom proved
abortive or failed of success. If he has been disappointed at one time, he
has succeeded at another with interest, and made amends for the loss, with a
double advantage. He never imprudently trusted in the uncertain arm of flesh,
or vainly and proudly boasted his Victories as owing to his own strength or
conduct, but always with a religious deference, gave the whole Honor and Glory
to the Lord of Hosts, strong and mighty in Battle; therefore I cannot, for my
own part, but believe, that God, will, in his own due time, Crown his
Endeavors and Designs with Glory and Success, and cloth his enemies, whether
Foreign or Domestic, with shame and confusion of face. I could not but offer
this weighty Consideration as a forcible Motive, amongst many others, to
persuade you to Embarque in this Expedition (whatsoever it is or wheresoever
intended) with vigor and courage, since it is in his service, and in obedience
to his commands, who hitherto has been, and I trust in God, will still
continue, a Favorite of Heaven.

It Is hardly possible to enumerate or foresee the invaluable advantages we may
reap, by an undaunted prosecution of the Expedition; how far 'twill tend to
procure an uninterrupted tranquillity at home, under the happy Government we now
enjoy, how much 'twill secure and enlarge our Trade and Commerce abroad, and
make us both a terror to our enemies, and the admiration and envy even of our
Confederates and Allies. Reflect but on these Considerations, for they speak an
Exhortation. For my part, I must declare, I am so fully persuaded of your
forwardness, that could I be guilty of a thought, that looked like a mistrust
of any man's zeal amongst you to promote and pursue this noble enterprise, the
next words should be an Apology for it. Having thus far observed, and laid
before you these obvious reasons to expel all the least degrees of fear. I
proceed now to offer some few Considerations to persuade you, that in all
probability God will go with you, to fight for you and to save you. The works
of Providence are framed in the depth of God's Wisdom. His Counsels are steady
and immutable. He who shall look slightly on the different position of the
Wheels of a Clock, at the first sight perhaps they will appear confusedly mixed
among each other, yet by the skill and judgment of the Artificer, every the
least part is so ordered, that the motion is both just and regular, and answers
the end for which it was at first designed. So let a man cast his eyes round,
view, and reflect on the affairs of this World, what a confusion of interests
there seems to be amongst men? what alterations in Kingdoms? what Revolutions
of things? one Country destroyed and lost, another regained? one interest
prevailing, another sinking; to our shallow apprehensions, the whole Scene of
Affairs appears full of giddy and unsteady Chance; yet notwithstanding in this
seeming discord of jarring of things, the All-wise God makes them all
Harmonious, and composed, and serve the purposes and designs he intended to
bring to pass. He beholds at once, things past, present, and to come, they must
obey his unbounded Will, because his Power is Almighty. Through the past
favors and influences of his Providence we have already experimented,
abundantly testify, that God has taken our Cause into his own hand and
management; He has visibly espoused our interest and will support it, if our
ingratitude and sins do not force him from it. He who has commanded the Winds
and the Waves to conduct our Joshua (as great a Deliver to us as the former to
the Children of Israel) through the perils and dangers of the roaring and
foaming Waves, to rescue us from Popery and Slavery, (a Bondage, which would
have equaled that of Egypt) He who has wonderfully preserved the Person of our
King, exposed to the most apparent dangers both by Sea and Land, that God who
has raised the Spirits and Courage of our Officers and Soldiers to attempt
the greatest and almost insuperable difficulties, and has given them success
and victory in the total reduction of Ireland. He who has united the divided
interests of the Confederates, that their Counsels and Armies are cemented into
one common Obligation to secure and assist each other, notwithstanding all the
powerful and tempting Artifices that have been cunningly devised to break it.
At the same time, that we do not own these providential Dispensations and
Deliverances, we must commence Atheists. What shall I say more, that God, who
has discovered and defeated the late unnatural and ungrateful designs of
those, who would have exposed us to the power of the most barbarous and
mercyless enemy, who would have betrayed us to irrecoverable misery and
slavery, to have been dragoon'd out of our Estates and Religion, who would have
subjected us to all the insolences and indignities that could have been
inflicted on us, though at the same time, the encouragers and promoters of the
exquisite mischeifs, notwithstanding their conceited, but deluded fancies,
would have been liable to this unavoidable dilemma, if they had succeeded, they
must have been Slaves to France, or if they miscarried, marked with the
disgrace and infamy of being betrayers of their native Country. But as a Crown
to all, they, who will not wilfully shut their eyes, against those visible
Providence which attended and procured success to our Fleet, must own and must
confess, that God was on our side and fought for us, to have winds continue
contrary when our enemies had a prospect of compassing their designs against
us, which at the same time favored us, by giving a timely and seasonable
opportunity to join our divided Fleets, and then to have another wind to drive
them upon us, when the advantage was on our side, to destroy so many of our
enemies Ships and not suffer the loss of one, seems strange even to us now, and
will hardly be believed by future ages. If all that I have proposed to your
considerations, all this train of past Providence are not sufficient to
establish and confirm a relying Faith in you, to believe that God will
accompany you with his guiding assistance and mighty power, all other
Demonstrations will prove ineffectual, and nothing will provoke his displeasure
more then this in considerate sin of infidelity and distrust.

Again, God is just and righteous in all his dealings toward the Children of
Men, he will deliver the oppressed and punish the Oppressor, but we must wait
his appointed, because the most seasonable time; therefore let us not be
impatient and think it long when we have all the most cogent reasons to believe
it sure and certain. God has chained and limited the power of the Devil: He
has set bounds to the wide and masterless Ocean, and when his infinite Wisdom
shall judge it best, he can humble the Pride, and will stop the Progress of the
most insolent and threatening Tyrant: And as all Empires and Kingdoms have had
their growth and decay by steps and degrees, so the common enemy has lately
received a wound in his vital part, which I hope, and I believe, will be a
certain forerunner of his unpitied Fall. It Is usual for men who unjustly grasp
at all to lose all: And God many times suffers Tyrants to raise themselves to
the highest pitch of grandeur, that their fall may be greater and more
remarkable. And now, I cannot but mention the design of the Spanish Invasion
against our Country and Religion, with their vainly boasted invincible Armado,
which by the blessing of the Almighty upon our Forces at that time, not only
came to nothing, and proved an infatuated bravado, but that defeat gave so deep
a wound to that Kingdom, that all the healing Gold and Silver of the Indies
since that time has proved insufficient for its recovery or cure: so that
they, who at that time aspired to a Western Monarchy, have ever since, (caused
by that fatal overthrow,) been utterly unable to secure their own Territories:
Nor is it in the least improbable, but that the designs of the second Western
Monarch may be blasted, and that he may share the same fate with his aspiring
Predecessor, having already received a wound too, in his most sensible and
mortifying part. For which reason amongst those many others I have enumerated,
let not your hearts faint, fear not and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified
because of them; For the Lord your God is that goes with you, to fight for you
against your enemies, to save you.

To Conclude the whole,

As it is our indispensible duty to reflect, and gratefully own all those
undeserved Mercies and Blessings we have from time to time received from the
inexhaustible Fountain of Love and Bounty, so let us return our best Thanks to
God, which cannot be better acknowledged and performed, than by a true and
sincere obedience to his Commands, let us adorn the Religion we profess, (and
which God alone has preserved,) with our unspotted Conversations and Lives
visibly Reformed and Christian; let us be Zealous to carry on and pursue with
our utmost vigor the great Work, which by a train of Providence God Almighty
seems to have designed, that so in some measure we may engage his particular
protection and favor, and say with David in the 9th Psalm, God is our
strength, in whom we will put our trust. How often have we been surrounded with
fears and dangers? How often have we almost despaired of those Blessings which
we now enjoy? God has most undeniably manifested himself our Protector,
Rescuer and Preserver. If past Mercies and Deliverances will not be of force to
persuade you to an hearty and sincere repentance and amendment of your Lives,
'twill be in vain for me to offer any reasons or arguments to shake off and lay
aside your provoking Sins. When men unfeignedly repent, God will repent him of
the Judgments he has purposed to bring upon them, and avert them. So that if
we still continue obstinate and unreform'd in our Lives the fault only lies at
our own doors, and we justly suffer what we have foolishly and wilfully
deserved. Repentance is ingeniously called by one of the Fathers, Vltima tabula
post naufragium, the last Plank, after a Shipwreck, if we do not lay hold and
make use of it to save our selves, we must sink into the bottomless Pit. It Is
now offered to you, it is now in your choice to lay hold on the long-suffering
of God; he will speak Peace and Pardon, if you will quit your Sins. I will only
add, that we implore the Divine, Protection in all our dangers, and assistance
in all our endeavors, let our Prayers be made to God with the qualifications
necessary to make them prevalent, which are, by a true repentance of our sins,
a settled and relying Faith, an humble resignation to the disposal of his
Divine Will. Let us readily concur, and vigorously cooperate with his
Providence in order to our Temporal Preservation, as with his Grace for our
Eternal Salvation. And last of all, let us give God all the Glory for his past
invaluable mercies, and pray that he will preserve the Persons, and prosper the
Attempts of our gracious Sovereigns, who seem to be the Instrument chosen to
accomplish and perfect his Will against the common Enemy and Oppressor, and
whose past successes give a promising earnest (if not prevented by our
ungrateful sins) of future and more considerable Atcheivments.

And now O Lord God of Hosts do thou go out with our Armies, do thou protect
and defend us, and though we cannot but acknowledge our selves unworthy and
undeserving of those mercies thou have from time to time heaped on a wicked and
ungrateful Generation, yet O Lord let not thy hand be shortened toward us; but
let all the World see and know that thou alone art our Savior and mighty
Deliverer, and give us once more, by our success, in this enterprise, an
opportunity of praising and magnifying thy holy and great Name, not only with
our lips but in our lives, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and
the Holy Ghost be all Honor and Glory both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane.
STate Tracts: Being a farther Collection of several Choice Treatises relating
to the Government. From the Year 1660. to 1689. Now Published in a Body, to
show the Necessity, and clear the Legality of the Late Revolution, and our
present Happy Settlement, under the Auspicious Reign of Their Majesty's King
William and Queen Mary.

A True Relation of the Cruelties and Barbarities of the French upon the
English Prisoners of War; being a Journal of their Travels from Dinant in
Britany, to Thoulon in Provence, and back again. With a Description of the
Situation and Fortifications of all the Eminent Towns upon the Road, and their
Distance. Of their Prisons and Hospitals, and the number of Men that died under
their Cruelty: With the Names of many of them, and the Places of their Death
and Burial, etc.

The Speech of the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Stamford, Lord Gray of
Grooby, etc. at the General Quarter Sessions held for the County of Leicester,
at Michaelmas 1691. His Lordship being made Custos Ro^^lorum for the said
County by the late Lord Commissioners of the Great Seal.

A Project of a Descent upon France. By a Person of Quality.

A New, Plain, Short, and Complete French and English Grammar; whereby the
Learner may attain in few Months to Speak and Write French Correctly, as they
do now in the Court of France, and wherein all that is Dark, Superfluous, and
Deficient in other Grammars, is Plain, Short, and Methodically supplied. Also
very useful to Strangers, that are desirous to learn the English Tongue; For
whose sake is added a Short, but very exact English Grammar. The Second
Edition. By Peter Berault.

Truth brought to Light: Or, The History of the First 14 Years of King James
the I. In Four Parts.

I. The Happy State of England at His Majesty's Entrance; The Corruption of it
afterward. With the Rise of particular Favorites, and the Divisions between
This and other States abroad.

II. The Divorce betwixt the Lady Frances Howard and Robert Earl of Essex,
before the King's Delegates, authorized under the King's Broad Seal. As also
the Arraignment of Sir Jervis Yelvis, Lieutenant of the Tower, etc. about the
murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, with all Proceedings thereupon, and the King's
gracious Pardon and Favor to the Countess.

III. A Declaration of His Majesty's Revenue since he came to the Crown of
England; with the Annual Issues, Gifts, Pensions, and Extraordinary
Disbursments.

IV. The Commissions and Warrants for the burning of two Heretics, newly
revived, with two Pardons, one for Theophilus Higgons, the other for Sir
Eustace Heart.

A Faithful Account of the Renewed Persecution of the Churches of Lower
Aquitain in France, in the Year 1692. To which is prefixed, A Parallel between
the Ancient and New Persecutors; or the Protraiture of Lewis XIV. in some of
his Cruelties and Barbarities. With some Reflections upon the unreasonable
Fondness of a certain Party amongst us, for the French King.

Europe' s Chains Broke; Or, A Sure and Speedy Project to Rescue Her from the
present Usurpations of the Tyrant of France.

Bibliotheca Politica: Or a Discourse by way of Dialogue; Whether Absolute Non
Resistances of the Supreme Powers be enjoined by the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and was the Ancient Practice of the Primitive Church, and the constant Doctrine
of our Reformed Church of England. Collected out of the most Approved Authors*
both Ancient and Modern. Dialogue the Fourth. Printed for R. Baldwin in
Warwick Lane, near the Oxford Arms; where also may be had the First, Second and
Third Dialogues.

Vtrum Horum: Or, God's Ways of disposing Kingdoms: And Some Clergy Men's Ways
of disposing of Them.

The Devout Christian's Preparation for holy Dying. Consisting of Ejaculations,
Prayers, Meditations and Hymns, adapted to the several States and Conditions of
this Life, and on the four last Things, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell.

The Memoirs of Monsieur Deagant: Containing the most Secret Transactions and
Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV. till the beginning of the
Ministry of the Cardinal de Richlieu. To which is added, a particular Relation
to the Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for
the advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the Duke of
Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop about the Progress of that Affair:
Which happened the last Years of King James I. his Reign. Faithfully translated
out of the French Original.

The Gentleman's Journal: Or, the Monthly Miscellany. By Way of Letter to a
Gentlemen in the Country Consisting of News, History, Philosophy, Poetry,
Music, Translations, etc. July 1692. Printed for Rich. Parker; and are to be
Sold by R. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. Where are also to be
had Journals for January, February, March, April, May and June.


