GREAT NEWS FROM THE Barbados. OR, A True and Faithful ACCOUNT OF THE Grand
Conspiracy OF The Negroes against the English. AND The Happy Discovery of the
same. WITH The number of those that were burned alive, Beheaded, and otherwise
Executed for their Horrid Crimes. With a short Description of that PLANTATION.

With Allowance.

London, Printed for L. Curtis in Goat-Court upon Ludgate Hill, 1676

A DESCRIPTION OF Barbados.
BEfore we proceed to the Particulars of that Conspiracy, which had like in one
Moment to have defaced the most Flourishing Colony the English have in the
World, it will not be amiss a little to consider the Nature, Situation, and
Commodities of the Place; not that we shall trouble the Reader with a History
of the Island, that being needless, Especially to such as have ever read
Ingenious Mr. Ligon on that subject; whose flourishes in Rhetoric, though in
some things Poetical, yet in the main do keep such a Chain of truth, that the
Romantic part rather guilds then dislincks the History. My own Experience of
Barbados, in a time when it had Received the most Improvement it was Capable
of, (which was not long before the discovery of this Almost Fatal Plot; will
not however suffer me to go further in my Praises of it than he did (as I may
almost say by Prophecy): for Mr. Ligon happened to be there in a time when all
or most upon the Island did not more sweat by occasion of the heat, than they
did for the bare necessities of life; few of those many great Estates, that are
now there, being then in any other Essence then in Prospect: Nor was there then
any Houses which could boast a Grandeur much more considerable than those, most
of our Villages are composed of: So that indeed he saw little more to praise
then that much Celebrated perpetual Verdure that Adorns the several Native
Trees of that warm World.

Nor can indeed too much Commendation be given to that Pleasant Prospect, which
salutes a Stranger's Eye as he sails along the Shore to Carlisie Bay, the
Chief Road for Ships in the Island, secured from Foreign Invasion by a
Fort-Royal strongly built of Stone, and situated in the Eastermost Point of
Land that Compasses that Bay, in which there is constantly mounted 40 Guns,
whose warm Mouths spoke Terror to De Ruyter in his Attempt on that Island in
the Year 1664. At the Bottom of this Bay stands the Bridge-Town, which has
twice since its first building been reduced almost to nothing by Fire; yet
thereby has not so warned the Inhabitants, but that for have and want of
Consideration it has again been rebuilt without that Exact Order in the Houses
and Streets that might secure it from having that dangerous Element so totally
prevail the third time. And should it do so, (which God forbid) it would level
many Costly and Stately Houses which Compose amongst many other little ones,
that Popular though something Confused Town; which was it but contrived for
proper Receipts of the Breese through its Streets for letting in through
Venteducts the Wind into their houses, would be much more pleasant to live in
the heat; As it is now built, being to Strangers at their first coming there
scarce tolerable. For this Island which lies betwixt 13 and 14 degrees of North
Latitude, must needs have the Sun twice a year in its Zenith, the Inhabitants
seeing him against their will make his Progress over their heads as he goes and
returns in his Visit to the Tropic of Cancer; so that for some Months being
on the North side of them; And when furthest off, not so far as to vary the
length of their days and Nights one hour, the Country must of necessity be
exceeding hot: Nor would it be more habitable then the Ancients believe the
Torrid Zone to be (within in which Circle this Island stands) were it not for
the Refreshing Gales that for ever from some Quarter of the East Fans Cool, and
consequently refresh the Inhabitants of this Flourishing Island. Nor is the
Convenience from the Wind only this, but perhaps the Inhabitants owe to it All
or the greatest (...) and the Wind work. And no doubt, let others guess what
they please to be the Occasion of the Conspiracy I am treating of, It could
have its hopes of Success in the general from nothing but their desire of being
Eased from that Continual Work, which by being Slaves, they and their Posterity
are liable to: for let some say what they please, I am of the Opinion, That no
man labors but by necessity; Or hopes at last to gain that to live on which
may give him rest. Or whether it be my own Lazy Temper that prejudices me in
the Point or no, I cannot tell: But I am sure in my Conversing with them, or
Inquiring into the Natures and Desires of that People, I could never find they
desired any thing so much as to have time for Play.

But not to trouble our selves to guess, what should Occasion that, which no
doubt besides the former has many Complicated Causes working in the different
Persons Engaged in it, we will without losing more time in Commendation either
of the Hospitality, or Number of the splendid Planters, who for Sumptuous
Houses, Clothes and Liberal Entertainment cannot be Exceeded by this their
Mother Kingdom it self. Or in Reciting the Excellency of their Fruits,
especially the Pine so much Celebrated by more learned Pens: Or of the
Prodigious Success they have found in the Improvement of several newly
introduced Fruits, especially of that called China Oranges, the goodness of
which exceeds any we have ever had from Portugal. But to leave those, the
Musk-Melons, Grapes, Figs, Prickle Pears, Guavers, Pomegranets, Citrons, Sour
Sops, and sweet Lemmons of a vast bigness, and delicate pleasant taste. And all
Kitching Garden-Herbs, and Fruits (are much better and more fragrant then in
England) that are there at almost all times of the year to be had in their
Excellency. Besides, there are Medicinal Plants, as Galingal, Colliquintida,
Balsom natural, Balsom with Balsamic, Tar, Gumastick, Gumallemna, Alloes,
Guiacum, and several other Medicinal Herbs, and all other things of this kind.

I will now proceed to the Particular of my Story, wherein, if I have not so
much Art as another might have done it with, yet shall you have no untruth mixed
with the short story of it.

THE RELATION of a CONSPIRACY in the BARBADOS.
THis Conspiracy first broke out and was hatched by the Cormantee or Gold-Cost
Negro's about Three years since, and afterward Cuningly and Clandestinely
carried, and kept secret, even from the knowledge of their own Wifes.

Their grand design was to choose them a King, one Coffee an Ancient Gold-Cost
Negro, who should have been Crowned the 12th of June last past in a Chair of
State exquisitely wrought and Carved after their Mode; with Bows and Arrows
to be likewise carried in State before his Majesty their intended King:
Trumpets to be made of Elephants Teeth and Gourdes to be sounded on several
Hills, to give Notice of their general Rising, with a full intention to fire
the Sugarcanes, and so run in and Cut their Masters the Planters Throats in
their respective Plantations whereunto they did belong.

Some affirm, they intended to spare the lives of the Fairest and Handsomest
Women (their Mistresses and their Daughters) to be Converted to their own use.
But some others affirm the contrary; and I am induced to believe they intended
to Murder all the White People there, as well Men as Women: for Anna a house
Negro Woman belonging to Justice Hall, over-hearing a Young Cormantee Negro
about 18 years of age, and also belonging to Justice Hall, as he was working
near the Garden, and discoursing with another Cormantee Negro working with him,
told him boldly and plainly, He would have no hand in killing the Baccararoes
or White Folks; And that he would tell his Master. All which the aforesaid
Negro Woman (being then accidentally in the Garden) overheard, and called to
him the aforesaid Young Negro Man over the Pales, and enquired and asked of him
What it was they so earnestly were talking about? He answered and told her
freely; That it was a general Design amongst them the Cormantee Negro's, to
kill all the Baccararoes or White People in the Island within a fortnight.
Which she no sooner understood, but went immediately to her Master and Mistress,
and discovered the whole truth of what she heard, saying withal, That it was
great Pity so good people as her Master and Mistress were, should be destroyed.
Which was the first discovery that I can learn came to the knowledge of the
worthy Inhabitants of that Noble and most flourishing Island.

Afterward the Discreet and Prudent Justice sent presently for the young Negro
Man, who discovered and impeached several, as well his own Master's Negro's as
others belonging to the adjacent Plantations who hand a hand in this Plot.

Of all which the said Justice sending the true Information to that Noble
Person (now Governor there) Sir Jonathan Atkins, he with his Lifeguard
presently came to the house of the aforesaid Justice Hall, and granted him and
others Commissions to apprehend the guilty and impeached Negroes, with the
Ringleaders of this fatal Conspiracy; which in pursuance was put in Execution
with much Celerity and Secrecy, that the Heads and Chief of these ungrateful
wretches (who I have often heard confess to live better in Servitude there,
then at Libertty in their own Native Country) were apprehended and brought to
Trial at a Court of Oyer and Terminer granted by the aforesaid Governor to a
Dozen or more of the Colonels and Field-Officers as Judges of that Island; Who
after strict and due Examination of the matter of Fact of their Conspiracy, at
first Seventeen were found guilty and Executed, (viz.) Six burnt alive, and
Eleven beheaded, their dead bodies being dragged through the Streets, at Spikes
a pleasant Port-Town in that Island, and were afterward burnt with those that
were burned alive.

One of those that were burned alive being chained at the stake, was persuaded
by that honest Gentleman Mr. George Hannow, the Deputy Provost-Marshall, That
since he was going to suffer death, Ingeniously to Confess the depth of their
design. The Negro calling for water to drink (which is a Custom they use
before they tell or discover any thing) he just then going to speak and confess
the truth of what he knew in this Matter; The next Negro Man chained to him
(one Tony, a sturdy Rogue, a Jew's Negro) jogged him, and was heard to Chide
him in these words, Thou Fool, are there not enough of our Countrymen killed
already? Art thou minded to kill them all? Then the aforesaid Negro that was a
going to make Confession, would not speak one word more.

Which the spectators observing, cried out to Tony, Sirrah, we shall see you
fry bravely by and by. Who answered undauntedly, If you Roast me to day, you
cannot Roast me to morrow: (all those Negro's having an opinion that after
their death they go into their own Country) Five and Twenty more have been
since Executed. The particulars of whose due Punishment are not yet come to my
hands.

Five impeached Hanged themselves, because they would not stand Trial.

Threescore and odd more are in Custody at the Hole, a fine Haven and small
Town in the said Island, and are not as yet brought to Trial.

Thus escaped from Eminent dangers, this flourishing and Fertile Island, or to
say more properly Spacious and profitable Garden, one of the chiefest of his
Majesty's Nurseries for Seamen.

This little Spot employing every year above 100 good Merchants Ships, to carry
off its product; viz. Sugar, Ginger, Cotton, and Indigo; of which I have heard
it affirmed, That that Earth and Rich soil being so thinly placed on most part
of the said Island, as not exceeding above half a foot in depth, the said
product since its first manuring carried off in several years, much exceeds in
bulk and weight the surface of the Island, it being only a Rock. So leaving to
others the giving an account of the great plenty of fresh Fish there, though of
different shapes and names from ours, which it exceeds in pleasantness and
nourishment, especially the Turtles there caught; their admirable Pork, Poultry
etc. Their Wood Pigeons, Turtle-Doves of several kinds, wild Fowls, Plovers,
Thrushes, Crabs, Lobsters, Prawns, and all other necessary and pleasant
Provisions in abundance, both Fish and Flesh. But above all, admirable
(considering it is so small an Island) is the Populousness thereof; for I have
seen at a General Rendezvous in Hethersals Pasture 12000 well Armed fighting
men, Horse and Foot, of the Train-Bands, besides Negro's that waited on their
Masters: And I have lately seen a list taken by Authority that amounts to above
80000 Souls. It Is fortified (besides the stone Wall all a long the places of
most danger for Landing, near the Seaside) with several strong uniform Forts
Alla-Modern, well mounted with store of great Guns; so as considering the
strength, Riches, Pleasant situation, Populousness and good Hospitality of
those Noble Gentlemen there now inhabiting, I conclude it to be the finest and
worthiest Island in the World.

FINIS.

