Unto all that wait in Sion, for the Consolation of Christ Jesus, is the Word
of Peace and Comfort declared and sent in this trying day; that all may be
comforted, and in God may rejoice, and be glad, who lives for ever and ever.
Containing Three Letters, Written at three sundry times unto the gathered of
God, into the Covenant of endless life, etc. By William Green.

OH ye chosen of God, and gathered of him out of the world into the Covenant of
Life, and endless Peace! This is the day wherein God has brought, and is
bringing the Faith of his children to Trial: Wherefore now let us lift up our
heads in God, and stand in his Almighty Power, that by him we may be preserved
in faithful Obedience unto the end, that every one may have cause, in
themselves, to say, This is the good and blessed day of God; and that all our
trials we meet with here, may be a Cause to drive us nearer and nearer unto the
Lord, from whom we receive Life, Comfort, and daily Refreshings, who is a
present Helper in time of great Need, and as a Rock to flee unto for relief,
succor and shelter: Yea, he is the fountain and wellspring of Life, and in him
is our Hope, for preservation and deliverance from and out of the hands of our
Enemies; therefore blessed are those that put their trust and confidence in
him, ye shall have cause of great Comfort in the midst of Afflictions,
remaining in each particular: Wherefore now arise, and shake off all fear,
distrust, and unbelief, and look up unto the Lord, who has begun the good work
in our hearts; and although he suffers many to be tried, and deeply afflicted
on every hand, yet has he regard unto the upright in heart, and is not slack
in his promises that he made unto us in the days that we cried, and earnestly
breathed to feel of that Life, and to be made heirs or partakers of that
durable substance that never will fade away; for largely have we tasted, and
abundantly felt of the great love of God unto our immortal Souls; in the
feeling whereof, we have been made oftentimes to say, Surely, good is the Lord,
and greatly to be feared, and had in esteem for his manifold mercies that have
been extended unto us; so that we can read back again, and take a full view of
what God has done for us since the day we knew him; for he has rebuked the
raging Sea, and caused the swelling waters thereof, with the Billows that have
mounted very high, to sink and to fall; and he has made our way plain, and the
path smooth in which he has set our feet to walk; so this is that which
remains as the Duty of every particular to do, even to wait upon the Lord, and
to walk before him in the beauty of holiness, in the Land of the Living. O
verily Friends, the very consideration of what God has done, and is doing, and
will do for the upright in heart, has been as a great weight upon me for the
space of several days, which has often times filled me with spiritual comfort,
and inward refreshings; and this has oftentimes been the cry, or the voice
that has sounded through me, saying, Lord, thou art our strength, and we have
none but thee to put confidence or trust in, in all states and conditions
whatsoever, that we are brought into, for the trial of our Faith, and the
exercise of our Patience: For this is a certain Truth, and will stand for a
Truth for ever, that God will never fail them that wholly depend upon him,
although deeply tried, yet he will preserve all, who look with the eye of Faith
unto him, even as he preserved and delivered his Servants and People in the
days of old; yea, when the flood came Noah entered into the Ark, and the rest
that were with him, and they were preserved from the Deluge of water that
drowned the wicked world, who despised the servants of the Lord, and derided
him for doing the thing that he was commanded of God to do. Yea, him that
brought Lot out of Sodom, and delivered Mordecai, Hester, and the Jews, and
David out of his many troubles, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, he upheld in
the midst of the flames, and brought forth Daniel out of the Lions Den; who
also preserved Paul in his dangerous Voyages at Sea; who also made known unto
John, when he was become as an Exile in the Isle called Patmos, for the Word of
God, and for the Testimony of Christ Jesus, the things that should come to pass
in the last days: he is still the same that ever he was, and never changes,
therefore are we alive at this day; for ye know right-well, that many in the
days that are past, sought to work our overthrough, and to bring ruin and
desolation upon us, yet never could do it, because God was on our side; but
they themselves by so doing, were overthrown, ruinated and made desolate,
because they regarded not God, his Truth and People, but set themselves in the
bitterness of their spirits, against him and his people; and although the
wicked do, and may flourish for a time, as the green Bay Tree, yet they shall
wither and pine away, and their memorial shall rot and perish for ever; and no
more shall they do unto the least that put their trust in the Lord, then shall
make for their good, for the furtherance of his Work unto which he has called
us, and for the glory of his Name for ever: and although the proud are called
happy, and those that work wickedness are set up, and them that tempt the Lord,
and oppress you his People, are yet unrewarded for the evil of their doing,
which they shall be sure to have when they have done their work; Yet let us
wait upon the Lord, in the measure of his life, communicated unto us in the
everlasting riches of his love; always watching unto Prayer, pouring forth our
Supplications, that by him we may be preserved, and kept unto the end of these
trying days: for although the Devil is let loose, and rages exceedingly,
because the followers of the Lamb will not give their Power, or be subjected
unto him, Oh! of this be ye assured, the Lamb and his followers shall have the
Victory, and God who hears the cry of the poor, and the sighs of the needy, who
make their redress unto him, yea, he that takes an account of the injuries and
wrongs done unto his People, whereby their hearts are made sad, and they weep
in secret before him, having none else to cry unto, Yea, he I say will bind
Satan hand and foot, and chain Leviathon at his pleasure: So be not
discouraged, nor in the least dismayed, because of the hard sentences of
unreasonable men, pronounced upon those whom God has acquitted, and their
innocence will clear for ever: and if many of us should seal our Testimonies,
by laying down our lives, in this our native Land, in Prison, upon the Seas, or
in other Nations, for the holy blessed Testimony, by Gods Eternal Spirit given
unto us, to bear forth amongst this peevish and perverse Generation of People,
O it will gain more to the Lord, then if we should live the days of Methuselah
to bear forth our Testimony in words. Therefore all my dear Friends, unto the
Word of Gods Power, that lives and will abide and endure the hottest trial,
with patience and content, that ever may or shall come, do I commit my self,
you, and all that love his appearance, who cannot deny the many refreshings
that we have received by him, although we suffer deeply for the same; assuring
you that all is and will be well unto the sincere and upright before God. So
live in the light, and dwell in the Power that was before wicked men, and
unjust Laws, Statutes or Decrees, and will remain when they and the Actors by
them shall come to naught.

And thus having signified the love in my heart that is unto you, who retain
your integrity, and keep your first love; testifying unto you, that a day of
pain, sorrow and anguish, shall come upon the Deceitful and Hypocrites, and
Sinners in Sion shall be afraid, I take my leave of you, being now something
eased, having let forth the streams of my love unto you, who truly love, fear,
obey and serve the living God, in whom, my Brethren, my Sisters, and near
related Friends, whether at Liberty or in Bonds, for the unchangeable Truth, I
wish comfort and consolation, and bid you all Farewell.

Who am a Companion unto all that wait in Sion for the daily refreshing and
shouring down of that life that lasts for ever, Your Friend and Brother, W. G.
London, the 26 of the 12 month, 1664.

DEar and well-beloved Friends, and Gathered of God into the Covenant of
endless life and mercy, which endures for ever in the holy blessed Seed which
God has raised up to bear witness for him amongst this crooked and untoward
Generation, and seed of evil doers: Unto you do I send the Salutation and
Greeting of my Life, in the bowels of love and mercy. You have I often
remembered, and the uprightness of your hearts toward the Lord and his Truth,
am I deeply affected with; and this is the cry of my Life, or the Spirit's
Voice within me: Be Noble, Bold, and Valiant; and in the Dominion of the Life
of God, Reign over the world, and the worldly Spirit, both within and without,
and dwell in the holy Seed that God has raised up within you, and is
comforting and will comfort you for ever, unto all eternity; and bless all
those wbo stand wholly and freely resigned up into the will of God; committing
of your cause unto him alone who will plead it to the uttermost, and preserve
the single-hearted, who rest in his heavenly Will. O this I say unto you, Keep
single unto the Lord; that as the heart of one man, that feels of the
goodness of him that is living and eternal, which makes it to rejoice and be
glad, ye may rejoice and be glad, and magnify his holy Name: So dwell, as a
City compact together, whose Builder and Founder is the Lord, and the Gates of
Hell shall never prevail against you. And although the Wicked do rejoice, and
the Ungodly boast themselves, as if some great Prize was befallen to them; yea,
although the Sea rages, and the winds blow strongly, it is but for the blowing
away of the Chaff; the weighty Seed shall remain, and into the Garner will the
Lord gather and preserve it for ever. So look up unto the Lord, and trust in
the mighty Cod, and the Lord will daily appear amongst you in his life and
heavenly power, to the comforting your Souls, and astonishment of the Heathen
that neither know you nor the Lord, nor what is your life, nor by what you are
supported: Therefore be of good courage, and be not affrighted in the least,
because of the noise of the many waters, and many various cries that are at
this day against God, and you his people; but be you strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might; Quit your selves like men for ever; and as for your
enemies, after they have done their work which they are come up to do, even as
a Millstone into the Sea shall they sink into confusion, and perpetual sorrow
shall their present rejoicing (which is but for a time) be turned into:
Therefore in that which lives for ever do ye abide and dwell; and ye that are
strong, strengthen the weak; and say unto them that are ready to faint, Be of
good courage; for he that has begun the good work in us, by whom we have been
preserved to this very moment, will perfect it to his everlasting praise:
although it is confessed these are trying times, and perilous, yet is the Lord
the same unto us as he was in the beginning, and daily renews his mercies, and
continues his wonted favors, and bows down his ear unto the cry of the
oppressed, and the sighs of the sufferers, and the groans of the prisoners, for
his Name and Truth, he hears and has regard unto, and he never can forget, nor
never will cast off those that make their moan unto him. So, my Friends, in the
holy blessed Seed, and Covenant of endless Life, feel the stream of my love,
which runs freely unto you, in the openness of my heart, for the prosperity
of Sions Seed: and be ye fruitful, ye lively Plants, who are grafted into the
stock of Salvation, and abide in the Vine, and keep to the Fountain, that Life
may break forth in you, and through you, to the Glory of God for ever, in whom
I heartily wish the increase of all spiritual comforts, and inward refreshings,
which flow from the presence of the Father; and in this holy blessed Life, do I
reach unto you, and dearly salute you in the Covenant of Life, and endless
Peace, and so remain,

Your Friend and Brother in the Truth, as it is in Jesus, William Green.
Noylesworth in Gloucestershire, the 5 of the 12 month, 1664.

DEar and well-beloved Friends, and Heirs of Life and Immortality, and of the
Kingdom that never fades away:

Lift up your Heads in the Life of God, that by him alone ye may be preserved,
and in him live and dwell, who lives and abides for evermore. O ye beloved of
the Father, and ye comforted by him day after day, O dwell, dwell, and abide in
the Tents of Jacob, that the beauty and comeliness therein ye may behold, and
daily drink at the Well of Salvation: For now is the stone rolled away, and the
Fountain is opened for all the thirsty ones. O Drink, drink your fill, and keep
unto the Fountain and Wellspring of Life continually; so will the blessings of
God rest upon you, and his living Presence, Power and Arm, compass you about,
and be a Shield unto you for ever, in the midst of all trials, streights and
afflictions whatsoever; Therefore rejoice in God, and give all glory and honor
to him who is become our life and support in this the day of our trial, in
which God does manifest himself in a miraculous manner, unto the consolations
of his little ones, whose trust and confidence is in him: such he will never
fail in the time of great need, but will be as he has been, and now is, a
Tower of Defense, and a Rock of Refuge to flee unto, in this the day of Battle.
So, my Friends, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might live and
reign for ever; so will peace be in your habitations, and comfort in your
dwelling-places unto all eternity; and your borders God will enlarge, and your
strength daily renew: therefore be vigilant and faithful to him in all things.
Peace be with you all. Amen.

My Love Salutes you all in the Truth. W. G.
Newgate-prison, London, the 1 of the 1 month, 1664/5. where I am a Prisoner
for the Truth, as it is in Jesus, for the first offense, (so called.)

Let these be sent abroad, to be read in the Assemblies of the People of the
true and living God, when they are met together in Gods holy fear.

The End.

