A Short Discourse, OR, Serious REFLECTIONS AND MEDITATIONS On some particular
Texts of Scripture. Being the substance of several Sermons preached in a
Country Congregation. Wherein is showed, First, The Blessedness of those that
keep Gods Commandments. And Secondly, the Happiness of such as mind their
Creator betimes, very briefly and succinctly handled.


Written by F. G. Master of Arts, and Chaplain to the Right Honorable Robert
Earl of Scarsdale.

ECCLES. XII. 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, fear God and
keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man.

LONDON, Printed for Hen. Hammond Bookseller at Bath, and at the Devizes, 1694.

To the Reverend Dr. Tho. Burnet, Master of the Charter House, and Clerk of the
Closet to His Majesty.
Reverend Sir,
WHere I owe a true Deference and Respect I would willingly declare it, for I
less dread the censure of Ostentation than Ingratitude. I am sensible that the
Age wherein we live is quick and critical, sharp and censorious, in her descant
of those that appear in Print: However, I will rather hazard the imputation of
a dull melancholy Man, than of an unthankful; he that does but tacitly confess
the Kindnesses of a Friend, in a manner interrs them; when he that publishes
them has in part requited, tho not fully compensated.

To whom should I commend the Patronage of this Discourse, better than to him
who is a Favorite and Lover of Truth, and of such as favor and love the
Truth? Besides I have tasted of your Kindness toward me, which I ever esteemed
as a Debt lying upon me, and am therefore desirous so far to discharge it, as
to leave some small Memoir to others of a kind Resentment.

My earnest Prayer to God, even the Father of all Mercies, is, and ever shall
be, to protract your Days, and to preserve You unto his heavenly Kingdom, which
is the sincere Desire, and unfeigned Vote of,

Worthy Sir, Your most obliged, and humble Servant, Fr. Gallimore.

PART. I. Showing the Blessedness of those that keep his Commandments.
REVEL. XXII. 14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have
right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City.


BLessedness is the mark we all aim at, if that be once named, there needs no
other Rhetoric to make us all attentive; most properly therefore it is placed
the first word, seeing the first words are the proper place to persuade
attention. But who are they that are blessed, (...), they that do his
commandments: Keep my commandments and live, says wisdom, Prove. 7.2. Live
indeed, live cheerfully with the comforts of this life, which makes life to be
life, and live happily in the life of glory hereafter. Now the benefit being so
great, of keeping Gods Commandments, our care must not be little for the
keeping of them, that so we may have right to the tree of life, even that tree
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. and may enter in through
the Gates into the City.

To these last words of the verse I have bounded and limited my discourse;
wherein I find these three particulars readily offering themselves to be
considered.

First, The motion, what, an entrance. Secondly, The manner how, through the
Gates: and Thirdly, The place whither, into the City. Of these in their order;
and first of the motion, enter in.

They are blessed that enter in, perseverance only makes happy; we know who
has taught us, that only continuers to the end shall be saved. It is
observable, that in the holy Spirits letters sent to those seven Churches in
the second and third Chapters of this Book, all promises run to perseverers;
(...), to him that overcomes; nec paranti ad praelium nec pugnanti ad
sanguinem, sed vincenti ad victoriam, not to him that draws the Sword, nor to
him that spends his blood, but to him that overcomes to Conquest.

To him that overcomes pleasure, and abstains from sinful delights, I will
give hidden Manna; to him that overcomes covetousness, and esteems not of
worldly trash and earthly treasure, I will give a white Stone; to him that
overcomes ambition, and seeks not for a name upon earth, I will give a new
name written in heaven: For tho all virtues run in the race of a Christian
lise, yet perseverance alone obtains the Garland: Suppose a Ship fraught with
rich Merchandise to have held a prosperous course all the way, and escaped both
Rocks and Pirates, yet if it be cast away in the Haven, the owner is nothing the
better for it, but loses both his goods and hope: So all our voyage is lost
through the perilous Sea of this world, if we suffer shipwreck in the Haven,
and lose our reward there, where we should land to receive it.

Cicero tells us of one Lepidus, lying all along upon the grass cried out,
utinam hoc esset laborare, O that this were to labor and get the mastery: So,
many stretching themselves upon their Ivory Beds, and living at ease in Sion,
say within themselves, Oh that this were to go in warfare and fight under the
Cross, but let them not deceive themselves, Heaven is not got with a wish, nor
victory with a breath, it will cost us many a sore blow, and wound too before
we overcome; wherefore the Apostles exhortation, Ephesians. 6.11. comes seasonably in
here, (...), put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the assaults of the world, the flesh and the devil, strenuously,
valiantly, constantly, never putting off your armor, till you put off your
bodies; nor quitting the field, till you enter into the celestial Canaan; Saint
Paul sought out this combat, even to victory, tho he bore in his body the marks
of the Lord Jesus, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith, (...), etc. Therefore now there is laid up for me a Crown
of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me, etc.

There is a last enemy to be destroyed, Death, we must hold out to the conquest
even of this last adversary, which if it conquer us by the sting of our sin,
shall send us to the doors of hell; if we conquer it by our faith, it shall
send us to the Gates of this City Heaven, my second particular. And now awaits
your observation, the manner how through the gates; not singularly a gate, but
gates, for Chap. 21.12. the City is said to have twelve gates, on the East
three gates, on the North three, on the South three, and on the West three; to
declare, that men shall come from the East and from the West, from the North
and from the South, and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God: these gates are
not literally, but mystically to be understood, pro modo intrandi, for the
manner of entrance.

These gates are those passages whereby we must enter this City, Heaven is
often said to have a gate, Mat. 7.13 strive to enter in at the strait gate,
says Christ. Solomon made two doors for the entering the Oracle, they were
made of Olive Trees, and wrought upon with the Carvings of Cherubims, 1 King
6.32. the Olives promising fatness and plenty of blessings, the Cherubims
holiness and eternity, these are holy gates.

Let every one pray with the Royal Prophet, Open to me the gates of
righteousness, I will go into them, and I will praise the Lord; this is the
gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter. In brief, we may
distinguish the gates leading to this City into two, Adoption and
Sanctification, both these meet in Christ, who is the only gate or door whereby
we enter heaven. I am the door, says our Savior, Jo. 10.9. Janua vitae, the
gate of life, by me if any enter in he shall be saved. Adoption, is the first
gate, the inheritance of glory cannot be given to the Children of Disobedience;
they must first be converted, and adopted Heirs in Christ: Adoption, says
Seneca, is a most sacred thing, containing in it an imitation of Nature civilly
giving them Sons, whom Nature has left childless; or as the Jurist define it,
a legal supply of a natural defect, whereby they that can beget no Children,
yet make Heirs to propagate their names to posterity: But spiritual Adoption
differs far from it, for it is a lawful act, not imitating, but transcending
nature, found out by the Lord himself; not for the comfort of a Father that
wants Children, but for the comfort of Children that wants a Father; we being
by nature miserable Orphans, having no Father to provide for us, it pleased the
Lord our God to become our Father in Christ, and to make us by Adoption his
Sons and Daughters, not for any benefit he receives of us, for nothing can
accress by means of any creature, to that most high and all sufficient Majesty;
sed ut haberet, in quem sua beneficia collicaret; but that he might have some
upon whom he may bestow his benefits for the declaration of the glory of his
mercy.

If by the grace of adoption, God make us his Sons, by the grace of
regeneration, he shall make us new creatures; all the Sons of God are partakers
of the divine nature; take heed therefore unto your lives and conversations.

For if ye go on to spend the remainder of your days after the inordinate lusts
of the flesh, and walk on in gluttony and drunkenness, in chambering and
wantonness, in adultery, covetousness, and such other works of uncleanness; we
must say unto you, that ye have not God for your Father, but ye are of your
Father the Devil, because you do his works; except we see in you the image and
superscription of God, and that you have insculpt and graven in your
conversation, as Aaron had upon his frontlet, holiness unto the Lord, Exodus
28.36. we cannot bless you in the name of the Lord, nor acknowledge you for
such as are his by Adoption. Again, Sanctification is the second gate, except a
man be born again he cannot see God, Jo. 3.3. holiness is the way to happiness,
grace is the gate of glory; without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb.
12.14. and what is man before he is new born but a deformed creature, conceived
of an unclean seed, wormed in a sinful womb, and in his birth no less stained
and polluted with sin than in his blood; how needful now is a new birth to man
in this case.

Can he enter into heaven that savors all of earth, will those precious gates
of Gold and Pearls open to a sinner; a vile, obdurate, obstinate sinner? No, he
must first be new molded, and modeled, and sanctified, or he is excepted,
except a man be new born, and this man is every man, and every part of man.

Sanctification (if saving) must be perfect and entire, tho not in respect of
degrees, yet in respect of parts, every part and power both of body and soul
must have its part of sanctification, tho no part his full perfection, until
the dissolution of our earthly tabernacles.

And as the School distinguishes, it must be communiter in toto, and
universaliter in singulis partibus, but not totaliter and perfect, this
sanctification must be communicated to the whole man, and universally
propagated to every part, tho it has in no place of man a total perfection
Hence (say Divines) there is sanctification inchoate and consummate, begun here
in this life of grace, and perfected in the life of glory hereafter.

No sin is to be cherished in hope of mercy, but we must strive for every grace
we have not, and for the increase of every grace we have, let us make much
therefore of that we possess, and still seek for more, striving to the mark,
Phil. 3.14. and yet when all is done, think nor that thou may catch the
Crown of Life by rightful desert.

That thou art not able to perform, were thou as righteous as Noah, as obedient
as Abraham, as holy as Job, as faithful as David, as clear as the Sun, as pure
as the Stars in Heaven; yet thou must sigh with a better soul than thine own,
who said, and sighed for the impurity of all flesh, Lord be merciful to me a
sinner, and enter not into judgment with us.

Now since this gate stands in our own heart, I shall thus describe it, and
that briefly by its properties and parts.

The properties are two, it is low, and it is little, and therefore we must
contract our large extensions if we will fit our selves for that narrow way and
little gate; they must stoop that will enter in here.

He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty
away: the rich in their own conceits, and proud of their own worth, shall be
sent empty from this gate.

The first praecipice or downfall to hell, both in Angel and Man, was by Pride;
therefore humility must needs be the first step to heaven.

He that means to build high, must lay his Foundation low: all those precious
and resplendent stones reckoned up in the Apocalypse, cap. 21.19. were placed in
the foundation of the heavenly city; to teach us, that all christian virtues
are grounded in humility.

If a Vessel be full it will receive no more liquor be it never so sovereign
and precious; the proud and high minded man is full of his of his grown gifts
and perfections, and therefore lets not into his soul the wholesome dew of
Gods grace. Holy Austin confesses with tears, that his swelling greatness and
tumor of pride, would not suffer him for a long time, to enter in at the narrow
gate that leads unto life; in whose tears many of our gallant Sparks and high
Spirits may read the cause, why they are so usually poor and naked, and blind
in the inward man; and tho oft-times nearest to the Court of Princes, yet
farthest off from the Kingdom of God.

The advice then of St. Peter comes seasonably in here, 1 Pet. 5.6. Humble your
selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time; the
words are not without their strength of Emphasis, here is an humili animi,
crowned with an ut exaltet, humble your selves that he may exalt, as if
humility was so necessary a disposition to preserment, that without it God
might not exalt.

There is no virtue drawn by the Pencil of God in more lively colors, with
brighter beams of his favor shining on them than humility. Jesus Christ, the
mirror of all perfection, sets it out as his chiefest jewel, Learn of me,
says he, for I am meek and humble in heart, Matt 11.29. they must be little
that enter these gates, little in their own eyes, slender in the opinion of
themselves; whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child,
he shall not enter therein; and so much of the properties.

The parts are now to be considered, and these are four; the foundation is
Faith, one of the sides Patience, the other Innocence, the roof Charity: Faith
is the foundation, by it we have (...) access unto God, and that with boldness,
by this we lay hold on the Throne of Grace, by this we adhere and close unto
God, and prostrate our selves at his feet; by this we live in Christ, and
Christ in us; by this our hearts are purified, our consciences washed with the
Blood of Christ, and fitted to see God, and to enter into the Holy of Holies,
unto which no unclean thing can be admitted: He that has faith shall enter,
and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life

Again, Patience is one of the Pillars, Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of patience
that when ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise. Justin
Martyr being asked, which, was the greatest miracle that our Savior Christ
wrought answered, Patientia ejus tanta in laboribus tantis, his so great
patience in so great troubles.

Many are the infirmities and troubles to which every man is subject; in his
body he is subject to diseases, in his estate to losses, in his name to
slanders and false reports; but these reach not his Spirit, unless himself do
lend his hand unto them; therefore if sickness do afflict thy body, let not
this make thy spirit sick and afflicted with impatient sorrow; what tho thy
estate be diminished by losses, let not this through impatiency diminish thy
cheerfulness, or breed any loss of comfort to thy spirit; what tho thy name be
wronged by heavy slanders or false reports, wrong not thy spirit through
impatiency by heaviness and grief, but rather follow our Saviors exhortation,
Luke 21.19. In your patience possess your souls, i. e. live joyfully, blessedly
even under the cross, that when ye have suffered before the gates, ye may enter
into the City.

Innocence is the other Pillar, but who can say he has innocent hands, and a
simple heart; indeed none perfectly in Gods sight, yet some had, and may have
this in part, by the witnesses of their own consciences. Samuel could challenge
the Israelites to accuse him, Whose Ox have I taken, whom have I defrauded, 1 Samuel 12.3. and Job sweetly, my heart shall not condemn me for my days, if I
have lift up my hands against the fatherless let it be broken; if I rejoiced at
the destruction of him that hated me, then let mine arm fall from my shoulder
blade, and my arm be broken from the bone, Job 31.21.

Triumphus innocentiae est non peccare ubi potest, it is the triumph of
innocence not to offend when it may; for it is true innocence, says Austin,
quae nec inimico nocet, that hurts not our very enemy; if my land cry against
me, or the farrows thereof complain, let thistles grow instead of wheat, and
cockles instead of barley, Job 31.38, 40. How few among us dare thus plead? So
David, O Lord, thou know mine innocence.

In malis sperare bonum nisi innocens nemo potest, faith the moral Heathen; to
hope for good in the midst of evils, no man can but the innocent. Innocence,
says Chrysostom, is free in servitude, safe in danger, joyful in bonds.

But alas, where shall robbers and workers of violence appear? What shall
become of the cruel, griping, bowel-less extortioner? No creature in heaven or
earth shall testify his innocence; but the sighs and cries of many which he
has undone, shall witness the contrary.

Where shall fraud, cozenage, injury, perjury, mischief appear? You may conceal
your craft from the eyes of men, defraud your Minister, beguile your Neighbor
unperceived, unpunished, but know that the Lord will not hold you guiltless. I
will wash my hands in innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord, says
the Royal Prophet, Psalm. 26.6. if innocence must lead us to the Altar on earth,
sure that must be our gate to the glory of heaven.

Charity is the roof, diligendo perficitur, love makes up the building; man
indeed is naturally a loving creature, but does not always place his love
aright; his love then is best placed, when it is placed upon the best object,
and that is God: If he place it upon Beauty that fades; if upon Riches they
perish; if upon Honor that vanishes; if upon Life that wastes; but all these
are in God, not only in eminency, but continuance.

In him Beauty that never fades; in him Riches that never perish; in him Honor
that never vanishes; in him Life that never wastes; and therefore, as he is
the truest object of love, so he should be the dearest object of our Love.
Quanta est Charitas? Austin, quaesi desit frustra habentur caetera, si adsit
recte habentur omnia. How great is love? for if it be wanting, all other graces
lose their grace; but if present, all are profitable.

And Theodoret asking, wherein consisted the image of God in man, answers in
a charitable bounty, wherein he imitateth God. Yea Tully says, Homines ad Deum
nulla re proprius accedunt quam dando, men in nothing come nearer to God than
in giving.

It was the folly of the rich Glutton, that he wanted Barns to lay his Corn in,
whereas there was so many empty Bellies of the poor, into which he might have
put it, and where it would have been laid up for ever for him; for he that
gives to the poor shall not lack, shall not lack that which he has given,
shall not lack any thing that is good.

Perhaps, says Cyprian, if thou give much, thou may be afraid, lest thy
self should come to want, sed esto hac in part intrepidus, esto securus, etc.
but in this point be without fear, be secure, that cannot be ended, which is
expended for the use of Christ.

He that is a liberal soul indeed, and plentifully waters the dry and thirsty
souls of Christ, shall himself be watered with the precious blood of Christ,
and drinking of that spring of life shall never thirst again.

The Prophet Isay has a comparison to the same purpose, cap. 58.10. If thou
draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, the Lord shall
satisfy thy soul continually in drought, and withal make fat thy bones, and
thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water whose waters
fail not.

Love therefore thy Neighbor as thy self, and love the poor for Gods sake, and
love God above all; we are to love God above all.

1. Appretiative, setting a higher price upon his glory and command, than upon
any other thing besides. 2. Intensive, with the greatest efforts and intention
of our spirits, setting no bounds and measure to our love of him. 3. Adequate,
as the complete, perfect, and adequate object of all our love, in whom it must
begin, and in whom it must end.

But there is a sort of love, or lust rather, which is condemned, and that is
(...), the passion of concupiscence, whereby many lascivious men do wholly
devote and dedicate themselves to some vain creature, pleasing their fancies,
to the displeasing of God, and to the piercing of their souls one day for it;
and except it do, to the utter ruin both of body and soul.

Who admires not the wisdom of Demosthenes, in the answer he returned to
Corinthian Lais (Paenitere tanti non emo) I will not buy repentance at so dear
a rate: Certainly had he not known it from a self-experience, it is not possible
an Heathen should have spoken so divinely, for all our dishonest actions are
but earnests laid down for grief; sin on the best condition brings repentance,
but for sin without repentance is provided hell: Yea, it is not folly but
madness, even the highest, that makes a man buy his vexation. O let us force
our selves to want that willingly, which we cannot enjoy without future
disgust; so that the sum is this, there is no entrance to the city but by the
gates, no passage to glory but by grace; to those spirits of just men made
perfect must be admitted none, save they that are justified; none are
entertained, but such as are washed white in the blood of Christ, and keep
white their own Innocence. The Adulterer for a while may flatter Beauty, the
Swearer grace his words with Oaths, the Drunkard kiss his Cups, and drink his
bodies health, till he bring his soul to ruin; but do they think to enter this
city? No, the gate is kept as the gate of Paradise, with a Flaming Sword of
Justice to keep them out.

The Adulterer shall satisfy his lust when he lies on a Bed of Fire, all
embraced with those Flames; the Swearer shall have enough of Wounds and Blood,
when Devils torture his body and wrack his soul in Hell; the Drunkard shall
have a plenty of his Cups, when scalding Lead shall be poured down his throat,
and his breath draw Flames of Fire instead of Air; as is thy sin, so is the
nature of thy punishment; the just Judge shall give just measure, and the
balance of his wrath poise in a just proportion; so that those that will not
pass through the gates of holiness in this life, shall not enter the city of
happiness in the life to come; thus have we passed the gates, and are now come
to the city.

Now if I had been wrapped up to the third heaven, or had the Angels Reed
wherewith he measured the Wall, Rev. 21.17. I might say something to the
description of this City; but it is not for us, says Bernard, in these earthly
bodies to mount into the Clouds, and pierce this fullness of light; to break
into this bottomless depth of glory, this is reserved to the last day.

And yet, because God in his word has given us a taste of heaven, by comparing
it to the most precious things on earth, let us consider in this City three
things; the Immensity, Society, Glory.

And first we may guess at the immeasurable magnitude of this City, by those
many Mansions spoken of by Christ, Jo. 14.2. In my Fathers house are many
mansions. How many? So many, says one, as would suffice a thousand worlds of
men; and tho all men in this world attain not to it, it is not for want of
room, but of will; they believe not in him who has prepared these gates for
them.

Secondly, If such be the immensity, what think you is the glory? Is it not a
most glorious City whose Walls are of Jasper, whose Building is of Gold, whose
Gates are of Pearls, whose Foundation is of precious Stones? Yea, when I behold
the Pavement of Heaven stuck with Stars, as so many sparkling Diamonds, how
despicable is the stateliest Palace of the greatest Monarch, and if the
Pavement be so glorious, what shall we think of those better parts yet unseen?
great and glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God; a glorious City
indeed, where there is Holiness immaculate, Peace inviolate, Joy ineffable,
Pleasure inexpressible, no Time but Eternity, no Place but immensity. But
because no tongue can so well express it as his whose eyes did clearly behold
it, be pleased to hear it in St. John's own words, Rev. 21.4. and may we not be
well contented to serve an Apprenticeship here, so we may come to be free of
this City hereafter: God shall wipe away all tears from all eyes, there shall
be no more sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, neither any more death: The dying life
we live here, it is a lamp that must out, a shadow that will vanish, a grass
that will wither; in Heaven it is protracted into Eternity, beyond the threats
of mortality or corruption.

PART. II. Showing the Happiness of those that mind their Creator betimes.
ECCLES. XII. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, before the
evil days come, etc.


THey are the words of the wisest Preacher next our blessed Savior, who
vouchsased the honor not to be (...), but (...), Gods own Secretary to pen
this holy Tract, this heavenly Treatise, who spoke not quicquid in buccam, etc.
as his own fancy carried him or ideated to him; but as the Holy Ghost directed
him, his tongue being but the pen, the blessed spirit the ready writer, which
therefore ought to be read with reverence, felt with passion, followed with
perseverance; and this for the Preacher, to wit Solomon: Remember therefore thy
Creator.

The Memory of man is indeed a most excellent faculty, being that thing whereby
we preserve those things which time has spent and wasted, whereby the things
that are absent are still present, and the things that are gone from us do
abide with us.

Indeed it is that without which the life of man would be most wretched and
miserable: Seneca therefore says well, he that keeps not in memory the things
that are past, has little better than lost his life given him in this world.

Now if our memory be so excellent a faculty, how great reason have we to
remember our Creator, by whom it has been bestowed upon us; should not God
remember us in his providence and protection over us? should not he remember us
in troubles and distresses, and when we have cast away our selves in our Sins,
what would become of us? but tho God be most graciously mindful of us, how
little mind have we of him.

We say of one, that he has a good memory, because he keeps firmly and a
long time that which he has received: we say of another that he has an
excellent memory, because he can repeat many things as soon as they are
proposed unto him.

But he has a good memory indeed that remembers good things carefully; he
has an excellent memory that remembers God who is good above all things:
Remember therefore thy Creator in the days of thy Youth. A chief reason that
makes young people not to remember God their Creator is this, because they
think that they have a long time to live in the world, and tho they forget him
now, yet they will remember him hereafter: but to remove this, the Preacher
says, not in the time but in the days of thy youth, to show both to young and
old that our life is but for a few days.

And Seneca says well, that tho death be before the old man's face, yet he may
be as near to the young man's back; let him therefore while he has day,
remember his Creator in the day of his youth; indeed the Creator must always he
remembered, not only in youth but in old age, not only in the days of youth, but
all the days of our Life.

For as Zachary says, he redeemed us that we might serve him in righteousness
and holiness all the days of our life. Luke 1.73. So he has created us, that
we might remember him all the days of our life: Remember therefore thy Creator,
etc. Now a duty and a date, will divide the Preachers Text; the duty, what?
Remember thy Creator: the date, when? In the days of thy youth. In the former
you have a truth approved, verily your Creator is to be remembered; in the
latter a time appointed, in the days of thy youth. But not to make the
Preachers Text like a Mathematical line infinitely divisible; in the first,
observe a word of exhortation, tending to a holy life and a godly conversation;
in the latter, a wise prevention of an erroneous conceit of our corrupt nature,
parallel to him that said, da mihi castitatem sed noli modo; So here we all
intend to remember our Creator, but when? not yet, but hereafter, when the
Evening of old age comes, or the night of death approaches; no such delay, no
such delusion, observe your season in the days of your youth.

Oh remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, because it is uncertain
whether ever thou shall be old; there are many old which have been young, but
many are young which shall never be old: Time and Age, God as a wise dispencer
has kept in his own hands, to the intent and purpose, that we might suspect a
shorter thread of life, but yet not despair of a longer. Now to enter the
treaty of the duty, our Saviors question, John 16.18. falls fitly in here,
Remember thy Creator; we know not what he says, remember him, why? who forgets
him? Not the good man. For Have I not remembered thee in my bed, and thought
upon thee when I was waking. You know whose spech it was, Psalm. 63.6. No, nor
the wicked neither; for no sooner has a distempered passion heated their
blood, but the very first breath of their Lips, is either a Curse or an Oath,
as if they would swear away sad disasters, which every ungracious speech brings
on nearer, binds on faster; so the Psalmist has sealed their doom. As he loved
Cursing so let it come unto him, and as he delighted not in Blessing, so let it
be far from him. But let us not with our ignorance cast aspersion upon the
Preachers knowledge; and therefore to give you the sense, and cause you to
understand the reading, observe the Chaldee Pataphrast, and esto memor
Creatoris tui ut glorifices eum: let the stream of thy meditations so run upon
him, that thou may glorify him.

The which we do, when we derive all our actions and intentions from his sacred
truth, which give rules not only to live well, and to speak well, but even ad
been cogitandum, to think well.

Oh, let no purpose pass current from thine heart, till God has set his seal
on it, and stamp of approbation; let his word give it a fiat; whatsoever you
do, yea or intend to do, let both action of hand, and thought of heart be all
to Gods glory.

2. Again, let his will be thy law, his word thy rule, his Sons life thy
example, his Spirit rather than thine own Soul, the guide of thine actions, the
steer and Cynosure of thine affections.

3. To study brevity, the faithful are called, 1 Pet. 2.9. Kings and Priests;
the remembrance whereof should work a Kingly and Priestly mind in every one of
us, to rule over our affections, as Leo excellently teaches, nil tam Regium,
etc. nothing is so kingly, as when a mind subject to God rules the body;
nothing so Priestly, as to vow unto God a pure conscience, and to offer up the
immaculate sacrifice of piety upon the Altar of the Heart: But I shall pursue
this no further here, because I shall meet it again in the next branch,
expressing the time when we ought to reduce this meditation into practice, this
doctrine to doing, to wit, in the days of our Youth. As one says of Psalm
41.1. blessed is he that considers the poor, etc. that it is scriptura
pauperum, the poor man's Scripture; so of this it may be rightly said, that it
is scriptura juvenum, the young man's theme; which given by divine inspiration,
is profitable to teach him the Apostles lesson, consisting of two
counter-points, a suge and a fac, a disswasive caution, fly youthful lusts; a
persuasive Canon, and follow after righteousness, faith, love and peace, which
have the promises both of this life, and of that which is to come, both of
blessings temporal, and bliss eternal.

Which observation we may crown with this corrollary, or doctrinal proposition,
that the best time, and fittest season to sow the seeds of virtue, that it may
bring forth fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting happiness, is the first
and flourishing part of our age, the strength and vigor of our years; or to
retain the words of the text, the days of our youth.

For elucidation whereof, David's question is here to take place, Psalm. 119.9.
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way, by taking heed thereto according
to thy word? Again, it was Gods ordinance, that in their Meat Offerings of
first fruits, they should offer up, Levit. 2.14. green ears of corn, or corn
beaten out of green ears; and what was this, but alterius rei aenigma, one
thing mentioned, and another meant; to wit, that God loves that we should
consecrate and dedicate our young and tender years to his service, and not put
it off as too many do, to the very Autumn and fall of their lives.

Optima quaeque dies, etc. our best days first run, and our worst at the last,
and shall we offer that indignity to the divine Majesty, as to give him the
Devils leavings; Florem aetatis Diabolo consecrare, faecem Deo reservare; to
consecrate the flower of our age to the Devil, the World and the Flesh, and to
reserve the Lees and bitter Dregs for God; and what is this then to offer up,
Malachi 1.8, 13. the blind and the lame for sacrifice, which God abhors, and
to break that golden rule laid down by our Savior, (...), seek first, etc.
Mat. 6.33. seek his face always, not when, but when not; so with these few to
shut up therest that run in the same current; Hear ye now my reasonings, to
speak in Job's language, Job 13.6. and hearken ye unto the arguments of my
Lips, thereby to give it an edge, that so it may make the better expression to
you, the speedier, the deeper impression upon you.

The first reason may be drawn from the infinite mercy of God, which is as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm 100.5. From everlasting to everlasting; from everlasting
election unto everlasting glorification, a fit theme for Angels to descant on;
for what man of art, or art of man, can describe or decipher it? for if God
remembered man, before he, or the world was, cannot the simplest Intellect
extract the inference, shall we not remember him in time, betimes?

Secondly, If all examples have an influence on the practice of the beholders,
then especially the deeds of good men, registered in Scripture (the Calendar of
eternity) are most attractive of imitation: Pray then cast your eye upon
Joseph, who withstood the impure and impudent solicitations of his wanton
Mistress in the Flower of his Youth, Genesis 39.9. the most slippery time of his
age, an age as most prone to many others, so especially to this sin Josiah the
King sought the Lord while he was yet young, 2 Chronicles. 34.2. Obadiah seared the
Lord from his youth; but to bring my best wine at the last, and to trace the
Apostle in his own Rhetoric, if these prevail not, Look to Jesus the author
and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2. not only the author to call us to it, and
set us in it, but the finisher also to help us through it, and reward us for it;
look to him, who at the age of twelve years went about his fathers business.

Thirdly, We ought, and it is our duty, to spend the prime of our days in the
service of God, who being our Creator, and exceeding great Rewarder, is most
worthy of it, and that is, whilst our senses are sharp, our memories quick, our
wits ripe, our capacities ready, our understandings deep, not knowing how soon
these may fail us, and how suddenly death may find us.

(...), etc. such is the generation of men, as of leaves, says the Heathen
Poet Homer, for as many leaves are nipped off in the bud, so many young men are
cut off in their youth; for are we not poor mortal creatures, brothers to the
worms, and sisters to the dust? do we not carry about with us souls full of
corruption, and skins full of diseases? is not our breath in our nostrils,
where there is room enough for it to go out, and possibility never to come in
again? Each of these by it self, all these laid together, will make a weighty
argument, bearing down, and forcing our assent to this assertion; that the
Spring of Youth is that age, which God has most enabled us to do him best
service.

Now to make some improvement of this doctrine, First, The word of God has two
edges, Heb. 4.12. and if it go one way thus, pro primis unquiculis, for the
timely beginnings of grace and goodness; it cuts as deep on the contrary, even
beyond admiration of many imperious and impetuous youth, who have built the
frame of their lives upon the foundation of long practiced wantonness, guiding
their lives by pleasure, and their reason by lust; and being reproved, What,
say they? Are we not young and strong? As if God had given them their strength
to rise up against him, and to run with others into all manner of excess of
riot, or as tho they had learned that language of the unwise Tutor in the
Comic, non est mihi creed vitium, etc. it is nothing for a young man to let
loose the reins to all licentiousness, to drink wine in bowls, and to take
their fill of pleasure here, as if they were resolved with Dives, that they
should not get a drop of water in Hell: If this be no sin, why does David
lament him of the sins of his youth? why does Job threaten them with the sins
of their youth, that shall lie down with them in the grave, Job. 36.14. he who
for one sin punished a world of men, how will he plague one man, tho a young
man, for a world of sin.

Secondly, Since our Creator is to be remembered in the days of our youth, here
is a use for Parents to bring up their Children in the fear of the Lord, to
catechize, initiate and enter them, properly to dedicate them, as they did
their new houses unto the Lord. St. Paul requires the performance of the same
duty saying, (...), etc. bring up your children, or as the word in the original
insinuates, nurse up your children in the fear of the Lord; he would have them
to suck in religion, if not with their Mothers milk, yet shortly after, as soon
as they are capable of it.

It Is storied of Alexander, that he had children born and brought up in
military discipline and exercise, which made them so victorious and valiant in
battle; even so let all Parents bring up their children in the fear of the
Lord, that they may prove constant and courageous Soldiers under their King and
Captain Jesus Christ, to kill, overcome and subdue all the enemies of God, and
their own souls salvation, sin and their corrupt affections.

Hence it is, that David styles children the Inheritance of the Lord, to
denote unto us, that they should be brought up with such care and sedulity, as
tho they were not the children of men, but of God; indeed there is a great
necessity of this duty, that Parents instruct their children betimes, for by
nature we are born blind and ignorant of heavenly things, therefore Parents
should take pains to bring their children to knowledge.

The Bears, as the Naturalist observes, when they bring forth their young ones,
they are an ill favored lump, and a mass without shape, but by continual
licking of them they bring to some shape and form.

So thy child, who is by nature the child of wrath, by continual instruction
and godly education, may be brought to some good form and fashion, that he may
understand and imbibe the Principles of Religion. And as the Midwise when the
child is born, sets the joints of the child right, and swaddleth him that he
be not vatius, therefore they are called Gnclele tippuchim, Lam. 2.20. Infantes
palmarum, not because they are but a span long, but because the Midwise when
they are new born, sets the joints with the palms of her hands, that they
may be the more streigh and strenuous afterward. So should Parents teach their
children, when they are young, and frame and fix their minds aright.

The Lord accounts highly of this, when the Parents begin to teach their
children in their tender years: children are the seed-corn of the Church and
Commonweal, and if they be corrupted or distained in the Family, what hope is
there of them, when they come to the Church or Polity?

The Physician says, that vitium primae concoctionis non corrigitur in
secunda, the faults of the first digestion are not helped in the second; so
errors committed in youth can hardly be helped in old age.

When the Prophet Esaias speaks of Christ, he calls him, Pater futuri
saeculi, the everlasting Father, cap. 9.6. Adam was the Father of all the
Children of this life, and Christ the second Adam, is the Father of the life to
come; when they beget children, they beget them only for this life, but when
they instruct them they may be called, Patres futuri saeculi, Fathers of the
life to come.

Remember therefore thy Creator betimes, for the youngest years are the fittest
to teach children, Prove. 20.11. A child is known by his doings, whether his
works be pure or right.

The boys that mocked Elias were devoured by the Bears, 2 Kings 2.24. and the
Hebrews say, that there be sculls of all sizes in Golgotha.

The Tree which the Lord made choice of, Jer. 1.11. was the Almond Tree, and
why made he choice of that Tree, but because it blossometh first.

So the Lord made choice of Jeremiah from his Infancy; the Lord likes children
when they begin to flourish in their young years; he likes not of these
autumnales arbores, Jud. 13. which begin to bud about the latter end of Harvest.

The Church says, Cant. 7.13. Omnes fructus servavi tibi, etc. it is a happy
thing when both the first and the latter fruits are reserved for the Lord.

Crates the Philosopher said, that he would go up to the highest place of the
City, and cry in the Audience of the People, O men whither go ye! Why take ye
such pains, and toil to scrape riches together for your children, and have
little or no care at all to train them up who should enjoy them. And Plutarch
said, he would add but this one word, that such men as these are like to them
who are very careful for the Shoe, but have no regard at all for the Foot.

As Parents should have a care to teach their children, so they should make
choice of good Masters, of able, orthodox, unbiased men to instruct them, that
may infuse and instill good principles in them.

Pharoah's Daughter caused Moses to be brought up in all the Sciences of Egypt,
Acts 7.22. Jehoash had Jehojeda for his Master, 2 King. 12.2. And we see what
care Theodosius had to make choice of good Masters for his Sons Arcadius and
Honorius; and what care had Constantine of a Tutor for his Son Crispus.

Amongst the causes of Julian's Apostasy, the History shows us, that this was
one, if not the greatest, that he had two Heathenish Masters who taught him,
Libanius and Jamblicus, from whom he drank in to great Prosaneness and Impiety,
Atheism and Debauchery.

Thirdly, As Tully spoke of Poetry, that it was a profession for all times,
prosperity and adversity; for all places, at home and abroad; for all ages,
youth and old age; so is this a lesson for all times, all places, all ages; for
however the center, upon whom the lines and prejections of this doctrine do
meet, are the days of our youth, and therefore may savor of impertinence; yet
strength of consequence will induce, that old men, and they especially, should
grow in grace, as they do in years, and increase in heavenly things, as they
multiply their days, that so they may be like Vespasian in the Poet, melior
pejore aevo, better in their worser age; or like the Trees planted in the House
of the Lord, that still brought forth fruit in their years, Psalm 92.14. and
herein the supernatural motions of the Spirit resemble the natural, which are
as the Philosopher spoke, velociores in fine quam in principio, swifter in the
end than in the beginning.

Here the Poet, as if his breast had been divinely influenced, could make this
connection, nec pietas morum rugis, etc. where withered old age, and inexorable
death do follow each the other, as the conclusion does the premises, to speak
with the Logician.

But hear it if you please from a tongue divinely touched, and that from a true
Cherubim, (...), etc. behold I am old, and I know not the day of my death. It Is
storied of the Linx that he never looks back, but Homer contrarily describes
a wise man, (...), looking forward and backward, forward to things to come, and
backward to things past, for by remembering what is past, and forecasting things
future, he orders things present; let us conclude therefore with the advice
of the Apostle, redeem the time by our double diligence, which we have lost by
our careless negligence, and be sure to Remember our Creator in the days of our
youth, before the evil days come, etc.

Consider in time, if thou will have God to pity and help thee in thy evil
days, thou must serve him in thy good days; the days of old Age are called evil
days, aetas mala in Plautus, because they bring many pains and troubles along
with them, vitae hyems, the Winter of our Life, as Solon called it. As the days
of youth are called aetas bona in Cicero, and aetas optima in Seneca, because
then nature is strong and vigorous, and does most fully exert and enjoy it self.

Lastly, Consider that thine old age will bring evils enough of its own, do not
thou therefore bring upon it the bitterness and burden of all thy youthful
follies.

Consider once more, that Repentance is a hard work, when thy sins are fewer,
and thy strength greater; when infirmities bend thy back, do not keep thine
iniquities to break it.

Since the days of old age will be evil days, lay up as many Graces as thou
can to sweeten it, as many comforts as thou can to strengthen thy heart
against the evils of it; gather in Summer against such a Winter as this, Prove.
10.5. that old age may not be to thee an evil age, but as it was to faithful
Abraham, a good old age, Genesis 25.8.

Be faithful therefore unto the death, and you shall receive the Crown of Life;
continue unto the end so shall you be safe. The Preacher teaches, that the
days will come, when we shall say, we have no pleasure in them; when the
Keepers of the House shall tremble, that is, the hands which safeguard the body
from injuries, shall shake as in a Palsy; the strong men shall bow themselves,
that is, the Legs, which bare up the weight of the body, shall begin to fail
and wax feeble.

The Grinders shall cease; that is, the Teeth appointed to chew the meat,
either wax loose, or else are lost. They wax dark that look out of the windows;
that is, the Eyes of the body (which are as the windows of the house to give
light) shall decay, and grow weaker and weaker, that they cannot behold the
brightness of the Sun.

The doors shall be shut without by the base sound of the Grinders; that is,
the Lips which are as two doors or gates, shall scarce be able to open
themselves, being become stiff. He shall rise up at the voice of the Bird; that
is, the least noise shall be able to awake him; he that while he was young
slept soundly and sweetly, so that the sound of the Trumpet could hardly move
or alarm him, is now by the Crowing of the Cock, or the Chirping of a Bird
raised and disquieted.

All the Daughters of Singing shall be abased; that is the Ears, and other
instruments of Music, shall be so weakened and dulled, that they shall take no
pleasure nor delight therein, as Barzillai confessed unto David, 2 Samuel 19.36.
Also they shall be afraid of the high thing; that is, when once they grow
crooked with age, every plain way will seem rough, and every stone a mountain
unto them.

And the Almond Tree shall flourish; that is, their head shall be renowned with
the comely ornament of white hairs, as the beautiful blossoms of an Almond
Tree, etc.

Thus does the Preacher describe the discommodities and difficulties of old
age, which approaches unto us all, and will in the end overtake us, to the end
we should learn to remember our Creator in the days of our youth.

Now unto God the Father Almighty, who is the ancient of days, to God the Son,
and God the Holy Ghost, three Persons but one God, be made all Prayers, rendered
all Thanks, yielded all Honor, Adoration, and New Obedience, henceforth and for
ever, Amen.

FINIS.

