THE GREAT SALE OF Original Paintings, That were designed to be Exposed on
Tuesday next, IN EASTER Week, AT THE New AUCTION-ROOM, NEXT THE Earl of
Bedfords Gate, Charles-street, Covent Garden, Will not be Sold till Friday, in
the same Week, BECAUSE They may be seen by the People of Quality, That come to
the Weekly Consort of Music on Thursday.

And may be seen at all times till then. The Sale will begin at Two a Clock
precisely.

Catalogues are distributed Gratis, at Mr. Manships at the Black-Bull in
Cornhil; Mr. Richard Parker 's at the Piazza under the Royal Exchange: Mr.
Bullord 's at the Old Black Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard; Mr. Hargraves at the
King's Head in Holborn; Mr. Ropers next to the Devil-Tavern at Temple Bar; Mr.
Not 's in ihe Pall Mall, Booksellers; and at the Place of Sale.

Conditions of SALE.
THat he who bids most is the Buyer, and if any Difference arise which the
Company cannot Decide, then the Paintings, etc shall be Exposed to Sale again.

II. That the Money for the Paintings etc. so bought is to be paid at the place
of Sale within three Days after the Sale is ended, but for the Convenience of
such as desire them sooner, constant Attendance for delivery will be given
every Day at the said Place.

III. That all Gentlemen, Ladies, etc. after the buying any Painting, will be
pleased to give in their Names and Lodgings, at the Sale; otherwise to pay the
third part of the Price, or the whole Money presently for them, where upon
payment of the remainder within the time limited, the Paintings, Limnings, etc.
shall be delivered to them or their Order.

IV. That no Person is to bid less than sixpence a time, for any Lot exposed
to Sale.

V. That the Paintings, etc. may be viewed by any Persons that please to repair
to the place of Sale; Where Catalogues are given to those that require them.

Paintings, Limnings, etc.
1 A Philosophers head 2 a piece of Boors 3 a small sea-piece neatly done 4 a
little Landscape by a Dutch hand 5 a House of Entertainment, by old Haemskirk 6
Londonderry by Sailmaker 7 a Ruin with a Landscape, Original 8 a winter-piece
ditto well painted 9 a fruit-piece by a Disciple of Bogdan 10 a Duck after the
life well done 11 a good sea-piece, Original 12 a Friars head of old Haemskirk
13 Another ditto 14 a small fruit-piece 15 a small flower-piece 16 a prospect
after Griffiere 17 a Bunch of Grapes 18 a Ruin and Landscape well done 19 an
East India Tulip with the seed, of Bogdan 20 Angelica and Madona, by a good
hand 21 a winter-piece well painted 22 a piece of flowers by a Disciple of
Bogdan 23 a ruin original, by a good master 24 a little Landscape neatly done
25 a winter-piece, Original, well done 26 an old man's head 27 a Thistle by De
Keyser 28 a head by the life 29 a Cupid by Stephenson 30 a head of Botts 31 a
fruit-piece 32 a prospect of the sea Coast 33 Erasmus head in small 34 a
waterfal in small 35 an original Landscape 36 a head supposed by Lilly 37 a
sea-piece by a Disciple of Peter's 38 General Monks head of Greenhil 39 a good
flower-piece by an Italian 40 Archimedes and the Soldiers 41 The Lady Lemmon
finely painted 42 a pigeon finely painted by Roscone 43 a woman's picture well
done 44 an Italian Landscape, with Diana hunting 45 Mars overcome by Venus by a
Flandrian 46 Bacchus, Venus and Cupid by an Italian 47 a secular Nun on board,
by Dobson 48 a musical Conversation well done 49 Diana and Acteon 50 a boys
picture in a black frame 51 a curious sea-piece 52 another ditto 53 a fine
Nudity by Sevana, by the life 54 another ditto 55 a head of Anthony More 56 an
Oyster-piece by Van Hatten 57 a Boor-piece an original of old Boon 58 Vulcan
and Venus, orig. of Cor. Van Harlem 59 a Vanity of Van Hatton 60 Madona by an
Italian 61 Henry VIII. finely painted 62 Queen Elizabeth finely done on board
63 a Woman flogging a Cully 64 Chastity, an Original, by an Italian 65 Books on
a Carpet well done 66 Oysters well finished by Adama. 67 a Flower-piece by
Moralis 68 David with Goliahs Headby a good hand 69 Still-life well done by
Vanderweck 70 a Banquet of fruit with a Parrot well painted 71 Justice betwixt
Virtue and Vice well painted 72 Narcissus by Scot 73 an old man's head very fine
in small 74 a Landscape of Sun setting by Sutterman 75 a lively head in small 76
a very fine sketch of Rubens 77 a Madona a fine original 78 a Nudity by Leroon
79 another ditto 80 a Landscape supposed of Manby 81 a Boar-piece of Veldemore
82 a sea-piece of Bonaventure Peter's 83 a skull and bone very fine 84 a Hawking
piece by Steleb 85 One of the Banditties on board 86 an Ital. orig. of an old
woman's head 87 a man at Confession by Haemskirk 88 a piece of Wild fowl on
board by Straton 89 a curious orig. Magdalen in small, on board 90 a very
curious orig. of Banditty 91 a curious original sea-piece 92 a Gold George,
etc. of Van Hatton 93 a flower-pot well painted 94 Jupiter and Calista, after
Van Dyck 95 Elias and the Angel in the Wilder on board by an Italian 96 a
sea-piece 97 a Dog and Hare by Hondius 98 a Fellow with the small pox by the
life 99 a piece of Ruins 100 a Landscape of Castile 101 a Head of old Haemskirk
102 a flower-piece of Moralis 103 a skull curiously done 104 a crying-piece of
Strutten 105 an old man's head 106 a sea-piece by Knife 107 a Landscape by Lenard
108 another ditto 106 a fruit-piece of Vandemeer 110 a Madonas head of Vilberd
111 The wom. of Samaria by the Well, by De Voss 112 a pheasant by a Dutch
master 113 a head of the Emperor Charles V. 114 a piece by a Dutch master
finely done 115 a Landscape by Vanderveneen 116 Venus with Mars in a Grotto,
orig. of De Ryck 117 a Battle of Wyck 118 Two small Landskips by a German
master 119 a Festoon of fruit neatly done 120 St. Peter and St. Paul 2 pieces
121 a small piece of Adama 122 a prospect of Dover by a good hand 123 a
prospect of Mimikin 124 a sea-piece by a Dutch master 125 a small Landscape 126
Edward VI. by a good hand on board 127 The Virgins going to the Temple 128
Carrickfergus with the Kings ships by Sailmaker 129 Plymouth with the Kings
Ships ditto 130 Two pieces by old Haemskirk 131 a House of Entertainment ditto
132 a sea fight 'twixt the French and Eng. by Sailmaker 133 a sea-storm ditto
134 a Ballad singer by old Haemskirk 135 a smoaker ditto 136 Windsor-Castle by
Sailmaker 137 a Hermit at Prayers by a good hand 138 Our Savior and the V.
Mary well done 139 K. W. and Queen Mary 140 Mary Magdalen in the Garden after
Van Herp 141 The flight into Egypt 142 The old man's Temptation 143 Posture
Clerk acting the Quaker 144 St. Katherine meditating 145 The Chyrurgion 146 an
Old woman in Love with her self 147 Two small Landskips by a German mr. 148 a
small sea-piece neatly done 149 a piece of fruit, neatly done on board 150 a
piece of Flowers neatly done 151 a winter-piece an original 152 a sea triumph
well done by Ray 153 some Peaches after Bogdan 154 a Ruin with a Landscape 155 a
winter-piece ditto 156 Old Simmon's head after the Life 157 a window, etc. well
done 158 Fruit by Guilman 159 a 3 quarter Landscape well done 160 Cocks and Hens
by an Italian, in a gold frame 161 a stag-hunting 162 a Landscape of Brevil 163
a Landscape of Lenard 164 a man cutting his Pen by Van Hale 165 an old woman
Usurer 166 a hunting-piece by Verhover 167 a Venus on copper by Spranger 168 a
fine flower-piece of an Italian 169 St. Anthony original of Ostade 170 a
prospective-piece very fine by Denees 171 a curious piece of still-life 172 a
very fine Madona of Teniers 173 a fine original head of Rembrant 174 a Lucrece
very finely painted 175 a Horses head by Van Dyck 176 a Dutch convers. with
Card-play. orig. of De Ryck 177 a Malencholly original ditto 178 Our Savior in
the Temple by young Frank 179 a curious sea-piece of Persellus 180 The birth of
Christ painted at Florence 181 A Pope an original of Rembrant 182 Christian IV.
King of Denmark 183 Lucretia by Francis Floras 184 a flower-pot finely done by
Montingo 185 V. Mary with Christ, in an oval, orig. of De Ryck 186 Fruit of
Vandemeer 187 St. Paul after his Shipwreck by Schorel 188 The Turks seaport by
Lo 189 a piece of Fruit by Crise 190 a man's head by Vilberd 191 an original
sea-piece supposed by Backhousen 192 a very fine orig. on board, 193 a Nobleman
whole length of Lazulier 194 a whole length Girl of Dobson 195 Hagar and
Ishmael, of Streeter 196 Adonis and Venus well painted 197 Diana and her
Nymphs, ditto 198 Susannah and the two Elders 199 a Nobleman supposed of Moor
200 a Boy very fine of Streeter 201 Two Landskips by a German master 202 a
piece of Lobster etc. well done by Adama 203 a Partridge and Dog 204 a fruit
piece well painted 205 Two small Landskips by a German master 206 Two more
ditto 207 a Bunch of Grapes 208 a Lady and her Girl well done 209 Twelve
Caesar's heads well done 210 Moses found, a large piece 211 Dogs and Oxes heads
well painted 212 St. Sebastian after Titian, by Dixson 213 a Landsk. on board
finely done by Blomert 214 The Idolatry of Solomon by DuPorter 215 Two Bunches
of Grapes after Bougdan 216 a head of old Haemskirk 217 a fire piece neatly
painted 218 a Winter piece 219 Fruit 220 a Landscape of Mompert 221 a Landscape
of Leinard 222 a piece of still Life with a Ham by Dubra 223 a piece with
figures by Hates 224 a Woman's head by young Mearns 225 a very fine piece of
Still life by Van Streep 226 Christ's last Supper on board finely painted 227 a
Sketch of a Wom. milk. a Goat by Jordans 228 a Usurer by Teniers 229 a Magdalen
by Menena 230 Sir Anthony Van Dykes Head 231 a neat Landscape with Ruins by
Griffith 232 a head to the Life very fine 233 Pan and Syrinx 234 a Collect. of
J. Brine and Aldergave fig. 120 235 Sir Kenelm Digbys head very neat 236 a
Magdelen by De Goong 237 Lot and his 2 Daught. an orig. well designed 238 N.
Barkew, original by Hales 239 a plece of still life supposed of Roustrate 240 a
Sea piece well painted 241 a man and woman Spinning an original 242 a Basket of
fruit by Austearn 243 Prince Morris of Nassau by Sootman 244 a Landscape of
Vouterson 245 another ditto 246 a fruit piece by Vandermeer 247 Horses and Dogs
on board by Stoop 248 Venus and Cupid by a Disciple of Vario 249 a Woman
shifting her self by the fire 250 a Vanity with a Boy 251 The fire of London of
old Knife 252 Parnassus hill well done 253 a Galatea after Raphael 254 a
curious piece of still life by Robinson 255 a very fine Landsk. with fig. and
beasts by Colone 256 a Landscape of Moseroon 257 another ditto 258 a very fine
Sea pc. of Algiers by old V. Velder 259 Two Fools of Spranger 260 Dead Fowl by
a good master 261 St. Anthony's Temptation of Hellish Brugele 262 Three Cupids
with an Emblem of Love 263 a Landscape three quarter well done 264 a Ruin and
Landscape 265 Apricocks and Grapes after Bugdane 266 a Landscape with a Calm Sea
well done 267 a Landscape with a Bridge well done 268 a Landscape and figures 269
a Winter piece 270 a piece of Cattle by Lorentius 271 a Sea piece of Percellus
272 Bacchus and Ariadne of Molen 273 a curious Hunting piece 274 Constantinople
by a Dutch master 275 a piece of Flowers in a Gold frame 276 another ditto 277
a flower-piece of Varelst 278 a Fruit-piece ditto 279 a Landscape by Devernet
280 a Landscape by a good hand 281 an Original Landscape with Figures 282 a
smoking finely done 283 Venus and Cupid in a fine frame 284 a naked woman,
ditto 285 a Little boy in a fine frame 286 Lucretiae by a good master 287 an
original Landscape 288 a piece of Flowers of Lazulier 289 another ditto 290 a
fine piece in imitation of stone 291 a sea-piece of Old Wyck 292 The birth of
Venus by Fuller 293 a dead Child by a Dutch master 294 a small Sea-storm by a
good hand 295 a small Landscape 296 a piece of Ruins 297 a piece of Fruit 268 a
prospect after Griffier 299 Two Bunches of Grapes 300 Christ taken from the
Cross, by Mocatero of Rome 301 a small head 302 an original prospect of
Stone-Hing on the South Side 303 a Luree very finely painted 304 a sea piece by
Persellus 305 Jobs Trial very fine by an Italian 306 King David by Rembrant 307
a very fine still life by Van Hatten 308 a Monkey and Fruit by Snyder 309 a
battle of Muliner 310 a sea storm of Peter's 311 Ruins by old Wyck 312 a Rummer
with Oranges by Vandermeer 313 Two Cupits of Fuller 314 St. Philip Baptizing
the Enuch by Rembresh 315 a very fine fruit piece by Verelst 316 a Robbery of
Wyck 317 a sea storm by Van Deest 318 a Horses head after Van Dyck 319 a Dog
and Hare very neat in small 320 a Landscape by Streeter 321 Lot and his two
Daughters a large piece 322 a large piece of the Woman of Samaria 323 a very
fine original Hunting of Wyck 324 a Noble man a whole length 325 Fruit by
Vander Mere 326 Five of old Lord of New-Castles Horses finely painted 327 The
desent of the Holy Ghost curiously done 328 a Mugletonian meeting by Leroon 329
a Loving piece by a great master 330 King James the the first and Royal Family
very fine by Van summer 331 Fruit by Vander Mere 332 a large landscape 333 a
head by old Haemskirk 334 Londonderry by Salemaker 335 a head of old Haemskirk
336 Carrickfergus by Salemaker 337 Plymouth with the ships ditto 338 a House of
good Fellowship by old Haemskirk 339 a Madona in Limning 340 St. Katherine in
Limning 341 a small head in Limning 342 an original head in Crions by Burginion
343 a small landscape in Limning 344 another ditto 345 a Flower piece well done
346 another ditto 347 a head of the Duke of Buckinham Killed by Felton by
Cornelius Johnson 348 Noah's Ark very fine by Hondius 349 Orpheus amongst the
beasts very fine ditto 350 St. Katharine by an Italian 351 Ruins of Vandeest
352 a sea storm of Vandeest 353 a Lady weeping over her dead Husband, by
Lasuleer 354 a Madona supposed of Voet 355 a sea picce of Salemaker 356 a
Nudity of Leveroon 357 a Boor piece an original of old Boon 358 a curious Fruit
pc. in a rich burnish gold frame 359 Ruins by a good master 360 Landscape after
Vandeest 361 Ruins by a good master 362 The 3 Kings worship well painted 363
Prometheus an Original of an Italian 364 Still-life 365 a large sea port by
Waggoner 366 The Lady Kilmore very fine by Housman 367 a very fine battle of
Wyck 368 St. John in a Pearl-shell by Italian 369 Two commical heads of
Haemskirk 370 Flowers by a Disciple of Montingo 371 an original Head well done
372 a Landscape well done. 373 Apricocks etc. original of Bougdan 374 a small
Landscape 375 a Philosopher well done 376 Ruins after Griffiere 377 Brass and
Copper Vessels, incomparably well done 378 a vanity very fine of Easbreck 379
an original 3 quarter very fine of Wyck 380 a Mother making pap for her
Children an original of De Ryck 381 a loving piece by a great master 382
Charles the 5th after Tintoret 383 a Dutch Droll of Brower 384 a curious sea
piece of Peter's 385 Dutch Wassellers of Moternear 386 a curious Landsk. of
Gasper de Roma 387 St. Peter and the Angel well painted 388 a commical head of
old Boon 389 another ditto 390 a curious sea storm 391 a curious original
supposed of old Perse 392 an original Landscape of Smerling 393 a sea piece of
old Perse 394 a Landscape very fine of Snerling 395 a Landscape of Manby 396
Oliver Cromwell 397 King Charles the second 398 a Haunch of Venison 399 a head
of Castro 400 a Crucifix in an Ebony frame 401 Our Savior well done 402 an old
Woman and Monkey chucking her 403 a piece of still Life 404 another ditto 405
The Duke of Albermarle after the original 406 a Sea piece of old Perse 407 a
Sea piece of Mooy well done 408 an original Landscape of Snerling 409 a curious
Fruit piece 410 The Duke Monmonth a very fine original 411 King Charles the
second his Queen original of Lemence 412 a Prometheus as big as the Life
original of Pietro Peruccino 413 a large Charity original of Goltius 414 Wild
Fowl etc. on board by an Italian 415 a Sea piece very fine of Greenwich V.
Velde 416 Herod's Massacre a large piece 417 Lord Shaftsbury when young well
painted 418 a Head of an Italian Lady 419 Europa on a Bull a sketch 420 Dedalus
and Icarnus 421 Flora by Van Hauka the Flowers Montingo 422 God making the
world, by Julio Romano 423 a very fine original Madona by an Italian 424 a
Shepherd and Shepherdess by old Sagart the Landscape Waldens 425 a Landscape with
Philip Baptising Eunuch 426 a Landscape of Vouterson 427 another ditto 428
Martius playing on his pipes original of De Ryck 429 a Friar with his Mistress
original ditto 430 Lot and his two Daughters 431 The Lady Castlemaine well done
432 a Battle well painted 433 a piece of Gypsies 434 a Battle well painted 435
a piece of Almore-Players by Dunkam 436 a Country Market-piece of Wyck 437 a
large Pallas, Original of Lemenoe 438 a Dutch Banquet, a very fine Original 439
a Winter-piece 450 a Fruit-piece by a Disciple of Bougdan 451 an Italian
Landscape, with Diana a hunting 452 Bacchus, Venus and Cupid, by an Italian 453
The Virgins going to the Temple 454 a fine Sea-storm, by Sailmaker 455 a
Ballad-singer, by Haemskirk 456 a Conversation neatly painted by Haemskirk 457
a Cobbler well done 458 Flowers well painted 459 Cleopatra after Guido Romano
460 Still-life by Van Heden 461 a Landscape in small 462 another ditto 463 a
Shoulder of Venison 464 a very fine Original Madona 465 a Landscape
extraordinary fine by Hondius 466 a piece of Hermits of Haemskirk 467 a
confession ditto 468 a piece of Drunkards ditto 469 a Head of Rembrant 470 a
Prospect of Nimikin 471 a Quakers meeting of old Haemskirk and Laroon 472 a
Satyr and Nymph by a Disciple of Titian 473 Gypsies telling a Lady her Fortune
by Laroon 474 a Lady and her Gallant ditto 475 a Nudity by Lastro 476 a Cat,
Dog and Pigeon, strongly painted 477 Carrots, etc. well painted 478 a Nudity,
very fine, on Copper 479 another curiously done on Copper 480 a Bunch of Grapes
481 a Winter-piece 482 a piece of Ruins 483 a Winter-piece 484 a Sea-piece by
old Peerse 485 a Landscape by Snerling 486 a Carpet by Wall 487 a prospect of
Plymouth by Sailmaker 488 a prospect of Rotterdam, in black and white 489 a
prospect of Yarmouth, by Sailmaker 490 an old man's head in small 491 a small
fea-piece 492 an oval Landscape by Griffith 493 an original Madona 493 a
moon-sight sea piece 495 a small head by the Life 496 a Head in Limning 497
Another ditto 498 a Battle curiously inameled in Gold 499 a very fine piece of
Prospective in a Box and case 500 a Cilindre being a great curiosity in the
Optics 501 a large Landscape in limning 502 Another ditto 503 a good
flower-piece in Limning 504 Another ditto 505 a Fight between English and
French by Sailmaker 506 a curions Orig. Flower-piece well painted 507 Joseph's
Flight into Egypt by Vorjoy 508 a Fortune orig. of Berry strongly painted 509
The siege of Buda, with above 100 Figures 510 a Fruit-piece very fine 511 a
small Landscape in Limning 512 St. Paul's head in Limning 513 a curious orig.
flower-pc, of W. Warelst 514 Andromeda by Burguinion 515 Bacchus and Seres by
Permois 516 a Lucretia ditto 517 a man hugging a Child 518 a piece of fruit 519
a Battle of Wyck 520 a piece of fruit 521 a Turkish woman's head 522 a plate of
Cherries 523 St. Peter's head in Limning 524 St John's head ditto 525 a head very
fine in Cryons by Burguinion 526 another ditto 527 a head by Haemskirk 528 a
winter piece well painted 529 Fruit by a disciple of Bogdan 530 a carpet of
Morse 531 a woman's head by Haemskirk 532 a smoaker ditto 533 a stag hunting by
a good master 534 an Italian Landscape 535 Another on copper 536 Fruit by a
disciple of bogdan 537 Cattle by Moy 538 an Italian Landscape 539 a prospect of
Rotterdam in black and white 540 The Angel appearing to Peter 541 Two boys by
Deryck very fine 542 a head by Haemskirk 543 Cupid well done after Housman 544
a small moonlight and storm well done 545 Fruit by a Dutch master 546 a woman's
head by an Italian 547 Three Drunkards very fine by Laplas 548 a Cupid by a
good master 549 King James II: well done 550 St. Peter delivered out of Prison
551 a Landscape by Buchorst in a fine irame 552 a small Vanity neatly done 553
Old Boon pictured by himself 554 a country Clown by Haemskirk 555 Another well
painted 556 The sporting of Bacchus an original 557 a little Landscape 558 a
piece of still-life 559 a Dog by the life 560 a man's head, etc. 561 a piece
after Albaden 562 a Landscape 568 a Boor-piece
APPENDIX to the Paintings.
1 A fine Turkish Horse 2 a large piece of Mars and Venus 3 a large piece of K.
W. landing at Carrickfergus 4 a large sea-piece in an Ebony frame 5 a large
piece of Fruit, by Long Jlan 6 a large Battle-piece by Muilner 7 a sea-piece by
Sailmaker 8 a large piece of Roman Monuments and Tombs 9 a half length of Anto.
Moor 10 The Offering of the three Kings, by Albert Durer 11 K. W. embarquing at
Highlake, and landlng at Carrickfergus, two pc. in one Lot 12 Two small pieces
of still-life on cop. by Lion in one Lot 23 The Offering of the Three Kings by
Rubens 14 an original piece of Oysters by Adama 15 Acteon and Diana, an
original of Croas 16 The four Seasons of the year, by Castiles 17 an Original
piece of Cows, by Colona 18 an original Landscape by Ostade 19 a man's head by
Holbien 20 a half Length supposed of Lilly 21 a large piece of prudence by an
Ital. 22 Lot and his two Daughters, by Deryck 23 Boys in Armor, by Fuller 24 a
Duchess supposed by Van Dyck 25 Titian and Areton by Raphael Urbin in an Ebony
frame 26 a piece of Fowls by Lazulier 27 an original piece of Fruit, supposed
by Rubens 28 Our Savior at his last Supper by an Italian 29 an original Droll
by Brower 30 Czar of Muscovy well painted 31 a fine head by Perkins 32 a man
and woman's head by Rembrant 33 a head by Contelmo 34 Count Teckelys head when
young in water colors 35 an old man's head by Rembrant

