GREAT NEWS FROM Count Teckely, OR, An Account of some Passages 'twixt a True
Protestant English Volunteer, and a Teckelytish MAHVMETAN in the Turkish Camp.
Sent over by the Counts Secretary to a Brother in London.
En! Psuedo-Protestantium flagellum.
ENGLISH TRVE P. COnfound me if I care a Fig for Christianity, it is a dull,
sneaking Institution; a pitiful, mean piece of Morality that Heathens would be
ashamed of. It gives no Encouragement to good substantial Debauchery; no
rewards to Treason and Rebellion; allows no Poligamy, nor a train of rampant
Concubines, to Cherish and entertain a Man in those days of Visitation. Hang it
Brother, I hate Persecution, and Lectures of Damnation upon every little
Miscarriage; give me a good Frolicksom Religion, and see what a Zealous Votary
I Will be.


Teck I believe you Brother, the Christian Religion indeed is too severe for
Flesh and Blood; it makes a Man Honest, which is a damned Scandal in the latter
Age of the World; and by Beelzebub, you did a generous act to quit your
pretenses to it. It Is such a melancholy, niggardly Religion, that none but
incorrigible Sots could court and admire it.


Eng. True P. Very right; the Alcoran is undoubtedly superior to the Gospel in
all Things. What Man of sense would hearken to Self-denial and Mortification,
when the uncontrolled pleasures of the World are before him; when he might
gratify his appetite to the full, and be a Libertine with Impunity? for my own
part Brother, I have lived among the Godly in England, and hang me if all their
clutter about the purity of their Religion signifies a Rush, and we that
professed it were Persecuted into the bargain.


Teck. No, no, I tell you, you acted like a Man of Politiques to leave it, as
you found it, an empty Name. Besides who'd be toss't like a Dog in a Blanket
for a Religious qualm upon the Stomach? you had no liberty of Conscience in
your country; and who would be subject to the severity of such a stingy
Government? Here Is Paradise before thee Lad, and a good Old Cause; and who
would not be a Friend to the Grand Signcour upon such Honorable Propositions?


Eng. True P. I like the Cause Man, I come a Volunteer to the Army; and I Will
Stand and Fall by the new Grand Vizier, under whom I have listed my self.


Teck No doubt of success; show but thy Zeal and thy English Valor; and be an
Illustrious President for others to follow thee, and thou wilt see blessed Times
this Campaign. There will certainly be Monuments erected in memory of all
Glorious Volunteers; their Names will be written in Brass, that future Ages may
see their generous Undertakings.


Eng. True P. No Janizary in the Turks Dominions shall perform nobler Exploits,
then my self, in the Station I am. I Would hew down the Christians, as I would
tear down their Crosses (...) their Chapels. Who would not be Circumciz^d for
the Turk, that has been Anathematized by ^he Pope? who would not hate the name
of Christianity, that has heard of the Whore of Babylon? the Mufti's of our
Conventicles in England say, (...) a Beast with ten Horns, and the great Turk,
ha^ but two, you know; therefore she is the greater Monster.


Teck. Oh! your Mufti's in a long Cloak are plaguey fellows about the
Revelations; they make nothing of a Prophecy, or a knotty Mysterious Riddle.
But hang it, let us no longer dispute about the merits of the Cause; to be sure
we are in the right; we are of the strongest side, tho we had not success last
year proportionable to our Expectations: but we have a formidable Army now,
shall make the Pope, and the Emperor Tremble.


Eng. True P. Prithee my Friend let us confer Notes together alittle. What might
be the reason of so many unlucky Disappointments? how came the Grand-Vizier and
your Count Teckely to be so often Defeated?


Teck. Nothing but bad Conduct and ill Success you may swear for it. We had
number enough for the Battle, but the, Devil flattered us: we had not firm
Resolutions enough; we were not bold and daring as Bully John of Poland.


Eng. True P. Yes, yes, ye were bold enough, but ye wanted the Prayers of the
Godly. We were not rightly informed concerning your Proeedings. As soon as our
Teachers had acquainted us with your Teckelitish Principles, your noble
Resolutions against your Liege Lord the Emperor, we instantly espoused your
Cause, and in all our discourses Vindicated your Proceedings.


Teck. We have some friends I find in your little Island, as well as elsewere.
Some People call us Rebels, Revolters, and Stigmatize us Confoundly but it
signifies nothing.


Eng. True P. Not a Rush; what other People call Rebellion and Apostasy, we
call Right and Equity, and the Liberty of the Subject. Who would not rather
that the Turk should Reign over us, then his Holiness? I tell thee, all the
Republicans of England, are Tooth and Nail for the Turk.


Teck. What did they say concerning the Relief of Vienna.


Eng. True P. Oh! they hung down their Heads like a Bull Rush, when the news
was confirmed. They suspended their Grief at first, trusting that it might be a
false Relation. They Would hold ye ten to one that Vienna was taken, and were
ready to make Bonfires on the same Presumption. The Grand Viziers and Count
Teckely's Health were Drank with a great deal of Gratulation: nay one Brother
Burnt his Hat amidst the Frol que.


Teck. Well but what said they when the general Report of the World had
contradicted their Wishes?


Eng. True P. Why really they were damnably Discomforted; with lifted up Hands
to Heaven they disowned a Providence, and denied their Christianity in favor
of Turkism. But yet all their Hopes are not yet Defeated, they think to hear
better New, this Campaign.


Teck. I Am glad to hear of such passionate Resentments for our Cause. Believe
me there should be a College Erected in Constantinople, or Adrianople, for the
Education of true Protestant Mahometans. their hearty Zeal for the Turk, and
Count Teckely, is far Superior to their Muftie's, or our Priests; and I fancy
their Prayers would be more Successful.


Eng. True P. As for their Prayers and good Wishes you may be sure of them;
they are joined as the Heart of one Man for the Mohammedan Cause. You Will
certainly hear of a Fast Day very speedily (before the two Armies meet) wherein
will be Prayers and Supplications made for the Persecuted Brethren, the
adherents to Count Teckely.


Teck. What Is the reason the Conventiclers are such mighty favorers of the
Count and his Interest?


Eng. True P. Why they bear the same Respect and Veneration to the Count, as
they do to Lucifer, and the fallen Angels. They were bred up in Rebellion, and
sucked Treason from their Mothers Duggs; and would you not have them appear for
those of their own Tribe and Opinion?


Teck. Yes, yes, by all means; I think they are a very good natured sort of
People; and the Treason has not succeeded with them of late, they bear a good
Respect and Veneration, to those who are like to Succeed in so glorious an
Attempt.


Eng. True P. Their damned Disappointment at home, would have made their
Spirits droop, had not Count Teckely so luckily appeared to Allarm the World
with his Performances. They appeared with very gloomy Faces, when some of their
chief Conspirators were hurried to the place of Execution: but now they prick
up their Ears, and outface the Noon Day.


Teck. It Is Confidence, and an incorrigible piece of Impudence, that can
support us amidst any Dreadful Disasters. If we should decline the Cause now,
because we were Miserably Discomfited last Year, we should appear Timorous; and
the Devil would never assist us at a dead Life.


Eng. True P. Never fear he will always be kind to his Friends, that have listed
themselves under his Banner. As for our True Protestant Brethren, the English
Teckelyte's, they will assist us with their Prayers; and if occasion should
require, they will open their Hearts, and their Purses toward our Assistance. Let
the Pope send his Contributions to the Polish King, and their German Forces;
they will afford theirs to the Teckelyte's, and the Turk. You Would Bless your self,
to come into a Meeting House, and hear such hearty Prayers for our Success.


Teck. Never had we so distant, and yet so firm Friends, and Benefactors.


Eng. True P. Alas! they offer up their Prayers so fervently, with such an
affectionate Zeal, that Heaven can never be deaf to'em; they ball out and Pray
to God after such a tumultuous manner that he is almost necessitated to take
notice of 'em. [Your Prayers are desired in behalf of Count Teckely.] Assist
him O Lord, and support his Cause: Let not the Mighty of the World prevail upon
him.


Teck. This indeed is a cunning way of desiring God to destroy Christianity.


Eng. True P. Why they look upon the (...) to be a Civiler Person, a better
natured Chris^^^^ as a Brickclayer said) then the old Gentlemen at Rome.
They Will be Saints on Earth, and enjoy a Paradise here with the Mahometans,
rather than obey the Precepts of our Savior, and his Apostles, upon a tedious
expectation of Happiness and Glory hereafter.


Teck. Why in good earnest the present Satisfaction is the best. Who'd stint
himself of Pleasure, and not be sure of a Reward? your English Conventiclers I
find differ not much from our Mahometans, only in Name; they jump together in
Practice; and agree in all their Political Proceedings.


Eng. True P. But I Am afraid they would not like Circumcision? I confess thy
love a Seraglio, as well as the Turk: and Love (upon the priveledge of
Saint-ship) to suck the sweets of the Earth. Some have been free to talk that a
true Protestant Mufti, mounted up into the Wainscoat, used a Mohammedan Trick,
(in imitation of the Grand S^gneour) and threw his Handkerchief to his Female
Auditory.


Teck. I Swear by Mahomet, that your true Protestants are rare fellows, to make
a Conventicle a kind of Baudy-House. What do their adversaries talk of them for
taking part, (as they say) with Infidels?


Eng. True P. Why they represent them a parcel of Factious, Self Interested,
Rebellious, Irreligious, Atheistical sort of People. And indeed they don't
contradict the charge, by their Practice. Their Lives are so Lewd, their
Conversation is so Treacherous; that they will not admit them fit for humane
Society. Every step they make is toward, or in favor of a Rebellion. Their
Principles are so visible. that their Malignants boldly affirm, that as long as
there is a Conventicle in the Kingdom, we shall never be without a Republican
Atheist, or a true Protestant Mohammedan. Farewell Brother, and next Meeting
expect a new Teckelitish Letany.


London, Printed by George Croom, at the Blew-Ball in Thames Street, over (...)


