A GENERAL EPISTLE To the Whole Flock of God Wheresoever scattered upon the
face of the Earth, who are among Men called QUAKERS, whether in Prisons, or
Sentenced for Transportation, or in any other Trials or Temptations whatsoever;
unto you, and for your sakes this is given forth, by the compassionate life, in
perfect love to you all, who are the Children of the most high God: through one
that wishes Grace, Mercy, and Peace may always abound among you, and that the
glory of the Lord may always rest upon you. By him who is one with you all in
Tribulations, and also in Rejoycings.

Your Brother in the Truth that never changes, Thomas Green. If I forget thee,
O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its cunning, Psalm. 137. 5. Epaphras, who
is one of you, a servant of Christ, soluteth you always, laboring frequently
for you in prayers, that you may stand perfect and complete in all the will of
God, Col. 4. 12. I thank God, whom I serve from my fore-fath^rs with pure
conscience, that without ceasing, I have remembrance of you in my prayers night
and day, 2 Timothy 13. Printed in the Year. 1665.

DEarly beloved of the Lord, my love is with you, and my life reaches unto
you, and with it I salute you all, who are gathered and chosen from amongst the
families of the earth, to be a people to the praise of our God, who created and
formed us in the womb, and has brought us forth in this present age, and has
made us witnesses of his eternal power, and as spectators of his heavenly and
glorious appearance in this his blessed day; and all this, and more then can be
by word declared, has the Lord to many of us made known, since the day we
first received the light of his Son Christ Jesus, which he caused to shine in
our hearts and consciences, by which we have been brought into true fellowship
and unity with God the Father, even we who once were strangers unto him, as
were our fathers all, and as Pilgrims in a strange land, and as Captives in a
far Country, and as Mourners without true faith or hope, being tossed to and
fro with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight and cunning craftiness of men.
And thus were we tossed, not knowing an Anchor to stay us; yet there was a cry
in us, as was in the Spouse in the days of old, who said, Tell me, O thou whom
my soul loves, where thou feedest, and where thou make thy flock to rest at
noon; for why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy
companions? In this state did the Lord find us, even lost, as in a way-less,
weary Wilderness, without the true knowledge of him, though there was something
cried in us for want of his presence, not knowing the Messenger of peace was so
near, even he that did show us our wants, and our present state; but of that we
could not learn, not knowing from whence it came, neither could we understand
the end of its cry, at which cry we were many times troubled; but where that
should be manifest that should satisfy it, we knew not. O then, then was the
time of the Lords infinite, endless love extended unto us, even when we sat in
darkness overshadowed with death, and the life in us was buried; then did the
Lord cause his Word to be heard, and did utter his voice as the noise of
Thunders, and as the sound of many Trumpets, which Voice the dead heard, and
the Lord breathed upon the slain, and said to the earth (in our hearing) Thou
shall no longer cover my Royal Seed (whose Nature is heavenly;) for now will I
manifest my power, and make known my mighty strength, by raising up my seed,
even the seed of Abraham my servant, unto whom the Gospel was Preached by my
Spirit in his day, That in his Seed should all the kindreds of the earth be
blessed; and this will I perform for my Name and Glory sake, says the Lord God
Almighty, who changes not. And when the Lord did bring us out of the many
ways into the truth, the immortal seed, in which the blessings are manifest,
then did he open our understandings by his light that did before shine in our
dark hearts, but we rather choosing darkness, could not comprehend the light,
but was always willing and ready to entertain any thing, and from any one that
would deny or lightly esteem that which did judge us in our hearts and
conscience: And from this we would have hid our selves many a time, and would
endeavor to heal the wound that this would give us, but this was privy to all
our actions, whether they were good or evil; and in due time it was manifest*
That that which reproved in the conscience for sin and iniquity was the way of
life, and above all things to be minded; and it being believed in, and turned
to, and received of a little remnant, the good effect of it was soon known, and
that which was heard in the ear, was preached as upon the house top, and that
which was known of the work of the Lord in the heart, was uttered forth in the
demonstration of the spirit of God, by which many were turned from darkness to
light, and from Satan's power, unto the power of the true and living God, and so
was brought to the beginning of the work of the Lord in our own particulars;
for we had been too long keeping others vineyards, and our own we did not keep,
neither knew the vine-dresser, but now are brought to a waiting in the light by
which secret things are made known, and hidden things revealed; but when we
first received the light, the truth, the spirit of God, oh! then what a
striving was there in our hearts, even with they two in the womb, the seed
which was elected before the world began, and that seed whose kingdom is of
this world, whereby the creature in whom this war and combat was, came into a
great straight, and much trouble and watching, till they or he knew the
election to obtain, and the seed of Jacob to arise over all as a valiant
Prince, who wrestle with God till the promise was obtained. This is the royal
seed at this day, and this is the light of life by which the hidden things of
Esau are searched out, and his rough and profane nature known. And no sooner
were we turned to the light, and were joined unto it, in it to be one with the
heavenly seed, which was elected before the world began, but the Dragon, Beast,
and false Prophets were in a great rage, and began to do their utmost, in
casting out their floods of cruelty and persecution, to make an end of us, even
as Herod in the time of Christ's birth according to the flesh, so was this
generation at his appearance in his people, and his leading of us by his
spirit, who, as Gog and Magog, and as Goliath the Philistim, and as Balak king
of Moab, consulted against Israel, have they violently rose up against us, or
rather against the appearance of the Lord in us, and have defied us, because of
our littleness, and because of the Lords work in us, they have scorned us,
doing their utmost to destroy us many times, that we might not have a being
upon the face of the earth. And notwithstanding they have the honor of the
world outwardly, yet (they) like proud Haman, are troubled, and are not
satisfied to have a true Jew live in their country. Surely the Lord has
beheld them, and the Almighty has taken notice, and his bowels have yearned
for his peoples sake, who have been termed desolate and forsaken: Oh! us has
he chosen, and and has often filled us with new wine, and has been strength
unto us in our greatest weakness, and a shelter to us, and a rescuer for us,
when the Dragon has pursued us, and the false Prophets and hirelings made a
prey of us, then has the Lord brought the hearts of the faithful into such a
frame, (and they have waited till it was so) even to suffer the spoiling of
their goods with joy, having an earnest in themselves of that durable treasure,
that the moth cannot corrupt, nor thieves steal away.

Therefore ye children of the Lord, who are brought to the knowledge of this,
and are gathered into the everlasting covenant of endless life, my love is
drawn out to you, and I knowing my life is among you, I am constrained in my
spirit even to write to you (even) as the dearly beloved of my father, and as
children brought up with me, we having drank together in the one pure spirit of
the water which has flowed from the living fountain, (according to the
determinate counsel of our God) which has been in us as a well of living
water, springing up to (the Lord our God) the eternal life.

And friends, thus far has the Lord brought us, and to this day he has been
with us, even when our enemies have rose up against us, who have encamped about
us on every side, even as at this day. Therefore lift up your heads, for now is
the Lord opening the everlasting gates that the righteous nation may enter in,
who keeps the truth, and are born of the royal seed, for the Kingdom which
cannot be shaken they are the heirs of, and they shall enjoy it, says the Lord
that lives for ever, though unto it they come through great tribulations, yet
in them they shall learn patience and experience, and witness that living hope
of which they shall never be ashamed.

Therefore thou weakling, and tender mournful one, who sometimes fears thou
shall not hold out to the end, thy trials are so many, for thy sake I am
enlarged, thy mournings, thy sighings, thy faintings, the sense thereof lies
as a weight upon me, and I cannot pass by thee, as if it was nothing to me, to
see thee in sorrow and grief, saying within thy self, did thou ever see such
a weak one undertake such a journey? and the true birth in thee says, the Lord
knows my heart, I would fain run to the end, that my God might be glorified,
who has regarded my low estate, and has vouchsafed to keep me unto this day,
but my enemies are so many on every side, and I think I shall one day fall, my
strength is so little, that I can cry, surely there is none like me, and yet I
have not wanted supplies from my God till this day. Oh! thou child, thou tender
one, who cannot forget the day of thy visitation, thy God beholds thee, and if
he cause thee to do a man's work, he will give thee a man's strength, and thou
shall know that all power is from him, therefore cast thy care upon him, and
wait that thy mind may be kept out of all visible things, in the poverty of
spirit, joining to the spirits cry, turning thy back upon all questionings, so
will thou have access to the Lord, and know thy approaching in the spirits
life, to the throne of his grace with boldness, where thou shall receive grace
for grace, and into his arms will the Lord gather thee, and give thee of the
milk of the word, that the little one in thee may grow as the willows by the
water brooks, and though thy enemies be as the tall Cedar, and strong as the
mighty oak, yet will thy God bring them under, and make thee more than a
conqueror, through his son Jesus, that thou shall say with gladness of heart,
salvation is come to my house, and shall feel the spirit of the son to rule in
thee, whereby thou shall cry Abba Father.

And whoever thou art who has begun in the spirit, thou know thou can not
be made perfect in the flesh, therefore wait to be led by the spirit of the
Lord, so thou may come to the knowledge of the sonship and heirship, in the
everlasting covenant the light. So look not at thy weakness, for in that will
the Lord ordain strength, and out of the mouth of the babes will he perfect his
praise, and for thy sake that's faithful to him, he will cause the mountains to
be removed, and the hills to melt away, and will make a straight path for thy
seet, and will lead thee in the way everlasting, where thy peace shall be
extended as a river, and his loving kindness to thee as the waves of the sea,
that instead of mourning thou shall rejoice, and instead of sighing thou shall
sing, and instead of fainting thou shall be strong, and in the strength of thy
God, thou shall praise him; and in the feeling of his heavenly virtue thou
shall magnify him, and say, My lot is fallen in a good ground, on which the
showers from heaven fall; yea, even as the former and the latter rain in its
season. And now thou shall see thy God has not forgotten thee, neither is the
Almighty changed, but he keeps covenant for ever with his people; and man
cannot disanul it, for says the Lord, the holy one of Israel, if they could
break my Covenant with the day, that there should not be night and day in their
season, then might they break my Covenant with my people Israel, and the seed
of Jacob my chosen. Therefore thou least of the Flock be not cast down, but
look thou steadfastly to the Lord, whose mercies endure for ever, and his
loving kindness to his own seed, from generation to generation. So whatever thy
trials, temptations, or exercises are, let thy mind be joined to the light, by
which thou may behold the Ancient of days, as thou dwell in the pure fear
of him; so will thou be kept out of the tossings, whirlings and imaginations,
in the truth in which is stability, in which thou will feel the springs of life
running to refresh thy soul, flowing from the Lord who is fullness it self, who
does all things freely; yet will he be waited upon by his people Israel, and in
their waiting upon him, he does and will renew their strength, mounting up in
his heavenly power over all temptations, and snares of the souls enemies, both
within and without, to the praise of the almighty God. For indeed, this is a
day of temptation, but blessed is the man that endures, for when he is tried,
he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to those that
love him.

And now all you my dear Brethren and Sisters, who are in sufferings and
Prisons, and under grievous sentences for the blessed testimony of Jesus, in
these last days, my life is with you all, and my love does flow unto you; for
ye are brought into my remembrance in my Supplications to the Lord our God, and
my soul cries, O Lord, accomplish thy work, and perform thy purpose, and bring
to pass thy strange act, and exalt thy Name and Truth, and thy holy people in
it over all the world and power of darkness, that as thou have upheld in the
many trials, so thou may be known to all thy Children, a deliverer out of all
troubles.

Well, my Brethren, Sisters, and Friends who have known the goodness of the
Lord, from the day of your Childhood in his truth, how he has cared for you,
and has been strength to you in all your besettings, and has been your
comfort in all your afflictions, even a God nigh at hand, and not a far off.
Well, cast your care upon him, so will he cloth you as the Lilly, and fill you
with his heavenly virtue, and will make you as a Garden often watered; and will
fence you about that your enemies shall say, You serve not the Lord for naught,
for he has set a hedge about you, and has fenced you on every side, so that
neither Enchantment, nor Divination, or weapons formed, do prosper against you,
because the Lord is making known his power as in the days of old, in
preserving his Children in the flames, as he did Schadrach, Meshech, and
Abednego, the three Children, among whom a fourth was manifested, like unto the
Son of God, who caused them to ascend in the sight of their enemies, and to
rejoice in the Flames, as do the faithful in their afflictions at this day, who
suffer for the Lord and his truth's sake. And now many people of Nations are
gathered against thee, that say, Let her be destroyed, and let our eyes look
upon Sion. But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they
his council: For he will gather Sion as wheat in a garner, and he will make his
horn as iron, and his hoof as brass, and the Nations shall be confounded at all
their might; and they shall lay their hands upon their mouths, and their ears
shall be deaf, and they shall lick the dust like Serpents, they shall move out
of their holes like worms of the earth, for they shall be afraid of the Lord
our God, and shall fear because of Sion, and because of the reign of their God
in the midst them.

And now, dear Friends, you that the Lord has honored first, and has given
you power to endure with joyfulness the Sentence of Banishment, for the Cause
of our God; well, your Integrity has affected my heart, and the hearts of
many, and you shall not loose your reward: Only be low before the Lord our God,
because he is your strength, else had you fainted. And let your Prayers and
mutual Cries be unto the Lord for them that is behind. And let them that is not
so forward in suffering, bless the Lord in preserving ye; and none be exalted
that is before, neither he that is behind be cast down, but all, as members of
the body, keep every one in his office, that God may be glorisied, and ye in
his life and love preserved by the strength given you of the Lord, in all your
trials and temptations that you meet withal, that so all those strokes and
sufferings may drive you nearer to the Lord, and one unto another, that you may
be as saviors upon mount Sion, to judge the mount of Esau; you knowing the
Kingdom is the Lords, and his seed shall possess it for evermore. So, in that
which keeps self in the dust; in that abide, and in that read one another, and
in that lift up your heads ye children of the Lord, for he is on our part, and
at this day is pleading our cause with our adversaries; for, he has set bounds
to the Sea, till the day and night come to an end, and he will reward the
wicked according as their works shall be; for while they are folden together as
thorns, and whilst they are drunken as the drunkards, they shall be devoured
as stubble fully dried, before the fierce anger of the Lord, and his terrible
indignation which shall burn as fire, till the ungodly be consumed. For this is
the day that the Beast is making War with the Lamb, but the Lamb shall overcome
and have the victory, for he is the Lord of lords, and King of kings; and they
that are with him, are called, and chosen, and faithful: And these shall sing
the Song of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are
thy works, O Lord God Almighty! just and true are thy ways, thou King of
Saints. Therefore now ye chosen of the Lord, stand still (in your minds) that
salvation you may see to be of the Lord alone, and that your hearts may be
filled with his heavenly virtue, as sweet Incense in a golden Cencer, that pure
may be your prayers, and living praises through your purified hearts may
spring, unto the Lord that lives for ever, by the strength of the demonstration
of his Spirit through you all, which alone can set forth the goodness of the
Lord, and will over all exalt his Name and Kingdom; and let it be so says my
soul and spirit. Amen.

And now, all ye tender ones, that the Lord has visited in these last days,
who are of late convinced of Gods eternal truth, who have not only the Dragon
to encouner withal, but also the Serpent, who is more subtle then all the
beasts of the field, and by him thou art in most dange^ at this day; and for
thy sake I cannot be silent, but it is upon my heart to give thee to know, That
this is the day wherein God is building Jerusalem, which has been as the
fallow ground, or as land that has not been fenced, where every devourer and
beast of prey has had a lodging, but now is the Lord making up her breach, and
is building up her waste places, even in this troublous time, and is refining
her sons and daughters, as gold in the fire, that their beauty und brightness
may appear to the Nations, and their excellency to the ends of the earth, that
the Lord is adorning them withal in these trying times.

Well, thou whose heart is made tender, and is melted in the sense of the
heavenly visitation of the Lord, and says within thy self, Oh! how long has
the Lord strove and born with me, and has waited for me, till his head has
been wet with the dew, and his locks with the drops of the night, and has
knocked and called at the door of my heart, but I gave him no answer, but have
folded my hands as one who has delighted to slumber, but now my heart is
overcome, and my bowels are melted, in the sense of my Gods tender mercies, in
that he did not give me over, but waited as a tender Father, for my return, and
continued calling unto me, till a voice in me said, speak Lord, for thy servant
he ars. And now I cannot but look upon him whom I have pierced, and admire his
long-suffering, and patience, and loving kindness. And now I am constrained,
and cannot but love the Lord, and his truth, above all the world, because he
has forgiven me very much, therefore am I abundantly ergaged unto him, and a
cry is in my heart, that iniquity may never have a seat in me again, and that
my love may never wax cold to the Lord, his truth and people, but that in the
innocence I may dwell and feel the growth of the immortal seed of God in my
heart, and that nothing may hinder its appearance and prosperity but that by
the truth the partition wall which has stood between me and the Lord may be
broken down, and I kept in the peace with the Saints of God, even in that which
passes knowledge and understanding, and that by the power of God, of which I
have somewhat felt, and have had some experience of, in that I despised not the
day of (...) things, but received the truth in the love of it, when indeed I
could (...) ^onger be without it. And now my soul desires that death may be
swallowed up of life* and the power thereof destroyed, and that I may walk
worthy of the Lords love that has been extended to me; for indeed his banner
over me has been love, and that I may not be the cause of hiding his face from
me again, but that I may set the Lord always before me, that I most of all
desire, that I may not be moved, nor soon tossed to and fro with the wiles and
sleights of men, nor subtilty of the serpent, whereby I am sensible he lies in
wait to deceive, and to draw out of the simplicity. Well, that thou may not
be deceived, nor overcome by the Dragon nor Serp^nt, keep thy mind to the true
and eternal light, for whatsoever is to be known of God, is manifested in man
by the light which discovers all things, and manifests unto man his state and
condition, and is given thee of the Lord, to be a leader and a guide, and to be
his salvation to the ends of the earth; so go not out, but remember Dinah, who
went out, and came in ravisted, and him that put his hand to the plough, and
looked back, was not fit for the kingdom; so to the true and faithful witness
of God in thy conscience do I commit thee, by it to be guided in all things,
and take heed of consulting with flesh and blood, or entering into carnal
reasoning, but keep to the anointing of the Father in thee, so shall thou need
no man to teach thee, but as the same anointing will teach thee of all things,
which is truth, and is no lie; and take heed of entering into disputations, or
vain janglings about the things of God, for by that thou may wound thy self,
and bring dishonor upon the truth, and cause the way of it to be evil spoken
of, if thou should boast of other men's lines, or of the truth received in the
judgment or opinion, and has not learned it of the Lord, by the feeling of his
work and power in the heart; therefore wait, that thou may say as David, who
said, come and see, all you that fear the Lord, and I will tell you what he
has done for my soul, and that thou may say as the Queen of Sheba, who
heard of the wisdom of Solomon, when she came to see, said, I have not heard
one half of which I now behold. Therefore this I leave with thee, and take my
leave of thee, that thou wait in the light, in the truth, by it to be set free,
and in it to live to the glory of the Lord, where thy souls comfort thou may
feel, to the praise of our God, who lives for ever and for evermore. Amen.

And now all my dear brethren, sisters, and friends, whether in bonds or at
liberty, or under the sentence of transportation, wait, that ye may all be
found in the prevailing life, in the prevailing seed, which must possess the
gates of its enemies, when it has accomplished the work of God by finishing
transgression, and making an end of sin, and when this is known in the heart,
then are ye in the blessed state, for blessed are the pure in heart, for they
do see the Lord, even as Job, for themselves, and not for another, and shall
know the Redeemer lives, and shall praise the Lord in the land of the living,
and shall witness the Winter to be past, and the Rain to be over, and gone, and
the voice of the Turtle shall be heard in the land, and now Jerusalem shall be
joy and her people rejoicing, the redeemed from the earth shall sing praises to
the God of heaven, and give glory unto him that sits upon the Throne, for
ever and for ever; therefore all ye that know the faith, by which the mountains
are removed, dwell in it, and abide in it, for this is the day wherein the Lord
is trying the faith of his children, and the Just shall live by it; but if any
man withdraw himself, Gods soul will take no pleasure in him, and happy and
precious shall they be in the sight of the Lord, who make not shipwreck of
faith and a good conscience, in this day wherein the beast is exercising his
power against the Saints, even the beast that was not, and now is, and must go
into perdition, and into everlasting torment, but well shall it be with the
righteous, who dwell in the faith of the elect seed, in that which sees over
the seas, even to the ends of the earth, to the beginning, to the first and the
last, who lives for evermore; these are the people that shall dwell alone, that
shall not be numbered amongst the Nations, but shall be rejected of men, but
chosen of the Lord, in his everlasting Covenant; for these does he marry, even
as a young man does a Virgin, and these will he (for ever) take care of, and
these will he deck with his Jewels, and cloth them as with broidered work;
only this does he require of them, even faithfulness unto him, for my glory
(says the Lord) I will not give to another, nor my honor to graven images,
but they that are faithful unto me, even unto the death, I will crown them with
eternal life, and they shall live and reign with me for evermore. Therefore all
ye tender ones, whose hearts are melted in the sense of the goodness of God,
who feel his left hand to be under you, and his right hand to embrace you, oh!
let your hearts be tender before him, that they may never be hardened again,
because that hardness of heart provokes the Lord to anger, therefore thou that
art born of God, not of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of men, feel the
seed remaining in thee, and thou in it, for in it is the unity with the Lord,
and the true fellowship, which they that love darkness, and walk in it, are out
of, so in the meek and quiet spirit let us all dwell, in this the day wherein
our God is making up of his Jewels, and is purifying his sons and daughters by
his spirit of judgment and burning, and is exalting his own name in the midst
of them, and is giving strength unto the weakest child, and is saying unto the
poor, Come up hither, and is calling the mighty from their seats, even they
that have been exalted as high as heaven, is he bringing down into hell, for
now Babylon is come into his remembrance, and he will reward her, as she has
rewarded others, and will give her double to drink of the Vials of his fierce
wrath, till her place is not to be found, for as a millstone falls into the sea,
so shall she pass away with a noise, when the Lord shall have tried his chosen
to the utmost, this shall be performed; therefore now wait, ye children of the
Lord, and stand still a little while, for your redemption draws nearer, than
when ye first believed, therefore hold fast that which you have, that none may
take your Crown, nor cause the offense of the Cross to cease, so in the hidden
life given unto you of the Father, read me, as I do you day by day, and dwell
in that that is righteous, that ye may never want of the Lords heavenly
blessings, for the time is near now, in which it shall be said, let him that is
filthy, be silthy still, and let him that is holy be holy still, and let him
that is righteous be so still; so shall he shine as a star in the Firmament,
for ever and ever.

This from a friend to Gods people, and one that labors in the Gospel,
according to the proportion of strength that God gives him, who is your friend
and brother. Thomas Green.
London, 23d. first month 1665.
This to be read in the Assemblies of the people aforesaid, in the fear of the
living God, as any find freedom.
THE END.

