THE TRIAL OF RELIGIONS; WITH CAUTIONS To the Members of the REFORMED CHVRCH
AGAINST Defection to the ROMAN.

By FRAN. GREGORY, D. D. Rectour of Hambleton in the County of Bucks, and one
of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno 1674.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, WALTER Lord Bishop of Worcester, and Dean
of his Majesty's Chapel, etc.
MY LORD,
IT IS well known to every man that has the least Acquaintance with our late
and modern Historians or Divines, that the Adversaries of our Faith have been
very Industrious and Active, ever since the happy Reformation of our Religion,
to reduce the Superstitions of the Roman Church once more into Ours. That such
Attempts may not only be still continued, but prosecuted with greater Vigor,
the Emissaries of Rome, taking occasion from our late Confusions and present
Indulgence, have encouraged themselves to come amongst us, as all men believe,
in unusual numbers, though not without their wonted Disguise and Vizards. What
their Business is, no man is ignorant; and that they want no Arts to carry on
their Designs, who does not know? If Flattery and Courtship can prevail with
Persons of Quality; if external Pomp and Pageantry can prevail with our Ladies
of Honor; if Ostentation and shows of Devotion can prevail with Religious and
Pious Souls; if Indulgence and Liberty can move the man of Pleasure; if Gold
and Silver can tempt the Poor; if Promises of Pardon can work upon and win over
the Guilty; if Sophistry and Fallacies can persuade the Weak and Ignorant, they
want them not.

But certainly, that which gives our Enemies the greater Advantage against us
is, the gross Ignorance and desperate Debauchery of this unhappy Age wherein we
live; the Ignorant Person does not know, the Debauched Person does not care,
what Religion is best. It Is no difficult Task for some subtle Priest or Jesuit
to reason an Ignorant man out of his Faith; nor is it an hard matter to
persuade a Vicious Person, that has no Religion indeed, to pretend any, even
the Roman, if some secular Advantage does so require.

These Confiderations might well give me just occasion to compose these
Sermons; wherein my present Design was, to confirm my own Parishioners in their
present Faith, and to warn them against all Temptations to the Roman. That I
have now made them public, it is not as if I thought that the Church of England
wants them: no; whosoever is acquainted with the Works of our Learned and
Reverend Divines already extant, Hooker, Whitaker, Reynolds, Jewel, Laud,
Morton, Davenant, Featly, and many other, deceased or yet alive, must needs
acknowledge, that as there is no Church so capable of a sound Defense as ours,
so there is none better provided with it.

But yet notwithstanding, as the very little Finger may afford some Help even
to the strongest Arm, so perhaps the weakest of God's Servants may lend some
small Assistance toward the establishment of that Religion which is already so
well maintained with the strongest Arguments, and those managed by better Heads
and Hands.

My former experiences of your Lordship's Favor have emboldned me to dedicate
this Discourse to your Lordship's Name; not that I think it worth your View,
but that I know it wants so great a Protection. No man can blame me for choosing
such a Guardian, whom the world knows to be so willing to encourage the Friends
of True Religion, and so able to confute its Adversaries. And the Truth is, I
am not in the least Capacity, by any other means to testify that cordial
Respect and Veneration which my self, and every man else that loves our Church,
must needs have for your Lordship's inward Worth, and Personal Excellencies:
nor could I think of any other way to make a Grateful and Public
Acknowledgement of those various Obligations which your Lordship has laid upon

the meanest of God's Servants and our Church's Sons, FRAN. GREGORY.

THE TRIAL OF RELIGIONS; WITH CAUTIONS to the Members of the Reformed Church
against Defection to the Roman.
1 THESSALONIANS. 5.21. Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.


WE read in Sacred Writ and Ecclesiastical History, that the Christian Church
in its infancy, as well as the Jewish in its elder years, had in it several
persons that were really endued by God with the spirit of Prophecy; and others,
who did but pretend it. Wherever God had his Church, the Devil endeavored to
have his Synagogue too. To that end, it was the great design and policy of
Hell, to send its Residentiaries and Legates amongst those persons where Heaven
had its commissioned and faithful Ambassadors. If Christ send forth his Simon
Peter; the Devil will send forth his Simon Magus too: if Christ send forth a
Saint John, a Saint Paul, and other Apostles; the Devil will not fail to send
forth a Cerinthus, a Marcion, and other Heretics too.

The true Prophets of those times did reveal nothing else but what was
certainly the mind of God: but the false Prophets and counterfeit Apostles
delivered the Suggestions of Satan, or at best the Dreams and Fancies of their
own fantastic brain. And yet so politic was the Devil, that he veiled his
Errors with a disguise of Truth; and that with so much artifice, that it was
no easy matter for the young Novices of that Age, who were but lately become
Proselytes to Christ, to distinguish betwixt false Doctrines and true, betwixt
tares and wheat, betwixt the Devil's counterfeit, and God's real Pearls.

In this conjuncture of time, when Heretics pretended to be Evangelists; when
wild Enthusiasts, acted by the Devil, pretended to be inspired of God; when at
the same season, and in the self-same places, Divine Truths were preached by
some, and devilish Errors broached by others; the Servants of God and
Apostles of Christ, who were entrusted with the Concerns of his Church and the
care of his Souls, could not but think themselves obliged to do whatever in
them lay, that their late Converts to the Christian Faith might not either
unworily admit what was indeed an Error, nor yet unadvisedly reject what was
indeed a Truth.

To prevent this double Hazard, Saint John (1 John 4.1.) does thus command
them, Try the spirits, whether they are of God. There was, it seems, even thus
early in the Church a great variety of spirits; (...), says Theophylact,
(...), says Oecumenius; Prophets true, and prophets false: and yet even these
Impostours too pretended to be from God. Well, what must the Christians do in
such a case as this? Must they receive all Doctrines, because some were
certainly true? or must they reject all, because some were certainly false? No
such matter; the Apostle gives them and us another Rule to walk by: and that is
this, (...), Try the spirits. Be not rash in receiving, be not rash in
rejecting neither. Perhaps the Doctrines that are delivered by such and such
may be from God; and if so, what a sin would it be to slight them? but withal,
it is possible that such and such Doctrines, delivered by such and such
Pretenders, may be from the Devil; and if so, what a danger must it be to
entertain them? Wherefore that both extremes may be avoided, that ye may be
able to distinguish Truth from Error, that ye may know the Devil's Emissaries
from Christ's Apostles, (...), says Theophylact; prove, examine, pass a mature
and deliberate Judgment: and that is one great part of that advice which Saint
Paul gives us in the Text, (...), Prove all things. Whatever Doctrine is
broached among you, though it bring along with it the fairest pretenses
imaginable, yet because it may possibly prove too light, put it in the balance,
and try its weight; because it may possibly prove a counterfeit, bring it to
the Touchstone, and try its sincerity: and if, upon this strict enquiry, it
prove not right, let it go; but if it be found Orthodox, sound and good,
(...), hold it fast.

So then the Text commends to our Practice a double Act, each of which relates
to matters of Religion. For,

1. We are required (...), to prove them, to examine all Doctrines, Principles
and Practices, whether they be right, such as the Holy Scriptures recommend, or
at least allow. It Is our business to consider, as Cornelius a Lapide words it,
an sint Prophetiae, an instinctus spiritus humani, whether they are the
Revelations of God, or the Inventions and Imaginations of men.

2. We are required, after this strict Examination and Judgment passed, to
dismiss whatever is naught, but to retain and hold fast that, all that, and
only that, which proves to be good, and consequently from God. So that the
whole business of the Text will lie in these Two Conclusions.

1. That every person whatsoever is highly obliged to examine the nature of
that Religion which is recommended to him.

2. That after an impartial and strict Enquiry, that Religion, and only that,
which proves to be good, right and true, must be stoutly asserted, constantly
retained, and held fast for ever.

The First Doctrine.
That all persons whatsoever do highly stand obliged to examine the nature of
that Religion which is recommended to them. But here two things may be demanded.

1. It may be demanded, whether all persons whatever are fit to judge for
themselves in matters of Religion. Is every man so well qualified, as to be in
a capacity of defining Points of Faith and Worship? Shall every illiterate and
bold Mechanic presume so far, as to suspect any Doctrine which the Church
delivers, or scruple any Practice which she recommends? I answer:

Certain it is, there is a very signal respect and a very great veneration due
to the Church of God; and doubtless, where matters are difficult and Points are
controverted, it is our safest course to consider the Determination of the true
Church, and to acquiesce in Her Judgment rather then in our own. But in other
cases, where the Word of God is express and plain, where we have an
intelligible and easy Rule, we are not obliged to take up our Religion upon
other men's credit in those matters wherein our own Reason can best secure us.

It Is our Savior's command, ( Matt. 11.15.) He that has an ear to hear, let
him hear: so say we, He that has an eye to see, let him see. Methinks where
the Object is clear and visible, especially if it be of great concern too, it
were high Imprudence to rely upon another man's sight, since God has given us
eyes of our own, that may see as well, and be trusted better. And certainly, it
were an act of the greatest folly, to depend barely upon other men's judgments
for those grand Concerns of Eternity, about which God has given us rational
Souls and all other means that are sufficient and requisite to inform our
selves. But if perhaps through sin and vice we have debauched our own Reason;
if we have extinguished that light which our great Creator set up within us,
and by so doing have disabled our selves to obey the Command in my Text; we
have then just occasion to condemn our selves, but none to blame that God, who
did as well give us an eye, as bid us see. And doubtless, since God has given
to every man an understanding faculty and the use of Reason, to be employed for
his own advantage, it must needs be the very highest Tyranny to interdict any
person the improvement and exercise of that Reason, but especially about the
great Concerns of that immortal Soul, wherein that Reason of his has its
proper Seat and only Residence.

And since this personal and private examination of our Religion is that which
our God commands, and our Reason does enable us to; methinks no true Church of
Christ should ever dislike or quarrel at it: it is not possible that a true
Church should disallow what God requires; it is not possible that a true Mother
should rob her Children of that without which they can neither be Christians
nor Men. No; it is for the Whore of Babylon to close up her bastards eyes, lest
perhaps they should discover the nakedness of their Mother: it is for the Church
of Rome to deny her Proselytes, in all matters of Religion, the exercise of
their own Reason, lest perhaps they should detect the weakness and want of
hers. But as for the Church of England, so sure is she that her Religion is
right, that she does not only allow, but encourage, her Sons to bring it to
the Test: such are her Doctrines and such are her usages, that she does rather
provoke, then decline, the strictest Trial: the Truths which she teaches are
so Divine, the Customs which she retains are so Apostolical, that, like so
many true and orient Pearls, the more they are examined, searched and tried,
the brighter do they shine. And if so, if to examine the matters of our
Religion be an act of Obedience to God, if it be the way to bring honor to our
Church and satisfaction to our selves, what should hinder us, except it be that
gross and foul Ignorance of ours, which will indeed destroy our Ability, but
never take off our Obligation? But,

2. From this great Command in the Text, Prove all things, it may be yet
demanded thus, Must we then turn Scepticks in Religion? must we always hang in
doubt, and never fix? must we for ever be examining, and so come to no settled
Resolution in Points of Faith and Worship? I answer:

It Is certain that these Inferences can never be gathered from that which God
requires in the Text: our proving all things will be so far from introducing
Skepticism and uncertainties in matters of Religion, that it is the surest way
in the world to expel, banish and root them out; it will be so far from
shaking our Faith, that it is indeed the most likely means to settle and confirm
it. For when once a man has duly measured the Grounds, Principles and
Practices of his Religion by that Rule which cannot fail him, and there finds
it straight and right, all his Jealousies and Doubts are over: What Doctrine
soever he finds warranted by the written Word, that he may most safely embrace,
and for ever conclude it to be from God.

It Is in this case as it is with him that suspects some piece of money, that is
offered him as current Coin; if he brings it to the Touchstone, Scales, or
Standard, and there finds it right Metal and full weight, he receives it
without farther scruple, and lays it up as a part of his Treasure. So here,
suppose some Novice in Christianity, such as these in the Text, that is not yet
well grounded in his Religion, is not sufficiently assured whether such and
such a Doctrine or Practice, that is commended to him, or required from him, be
right or wrong; if he bring it to the Scripture, which is the great and only
Standard in this case, and there find a sufficient warrant for it from some
Prophet, Evangelist, or Apostle, with what confidence may he then receive it,
and for ever most justly count it one part of his Faith? Well, such ignorant
Novices in Christianity we all are or have been; and, upon that score, if we
have not already examined the Principles of our Faith and grounds of our
Religion, we are obliged now to do it. See why in some Particulars.

1. We are obliged to examine the nature and matters of our Religion by all
that respect which we owe to the great, frequent and peremptory Commands of God.

This is that which the Text requires in terms as express as can be, Prove all
things. What all things does he mean? Matters of Religion sure; Doctrinas,
Revelationes, etc. so Estius: whatever Doctrines are recommended to you as
Revelations given from God, discernite, dijudicate, examine, search and judge
them. So much does Saint John require too, when he thus commands us, (1 John
4.1.) Try the spirits. And thus Saint Paul, (2 Cor. 13.5.) Examine your selves
whether ye be in the faith. Nay, our Blessed Savior himself does, in effect,
enjoin the same thing too, when he gives us this Command, ( Matt. 7.15.) Beware
of false prophets. God Almighty by these Commands has revealed his pleasure,
that he would not have us take up such and such Doctrines at a venture, lest
perhaps they should prove to be none of his; nor would he have us unadvisedly
close with such and such Religious Practices, lest peradventure they should
prove such as have no warrant. That God, who highly deserves and most justly
expects whatever service man can do him, will be worshipped in his own way;
and which that is, and where it lies, he bids us go to his own Book and learn.

And methinks, had we no other Motive in the world to examine the matter of our
Religion save only this, yet this should be enough; it is one of those Duties
which Man owes his Maker; the strict Examination of our Religion the Commands
of God have made a considerable part thereof: so that it is impossible for us
to take up any Religion upon Trust, but we must, by so doing, disobey our God,
and thereby show that in truth we have none. Sure it is, that we have a certain
Rule and Standard to measure all Religions by; it is the signal mercy of Heaven:
and to make a right use of that Standard, it is the great Command of God, and
therefore the great Obligation of Man too.

2. We are obliged to examine our Religion by all that respect which we owe our
Neighbor, our Friend, our Child.

That we are concerned not only to profess a Religion, but promote it too, no
man, I think, that has one jot thereof will ever deny. We are bound by several
obligations to instruct and teach our Brother the Principles of that Religion
which we own our selves. It Is that which the Scriptures require over and over.
Thus Saint Paul, (1 Thessalonians. 5.11.) Edify one another: and so again, ( Col.
3.16.) Teach and admonish one another. We are engaged by the frequent Commands
of God, and that eternal Law of Charity, in our capacities, and as occasion is
offered, to propagate our Religion; to plant it where it is not, and to water
it where it is.

But then, methinks, we are deeply concerned to secure our selves and others
too, that the Religion which we advance in the world be indeed the Religion of
God; we must be sure that we plant not Weeds in stead of Flowers, that we sow
not Tares in stead of Wheat: for, to promote a Religion that possibly may be
false, were a desperate venture indeed; and he that does it hazards the honor
of God, and the Soul of man. I find that our Blessed Savior and his Apostles
taught no Doctrine but what they were sure of. Thus Christ tells Nicodemus,
(John 3.11.) We speak that we know: and thus Saint John tells the world, (1
John 3.19.) We know that we are of the truth. Certainly, whosoever undertakes
or is obliged to instruct another in matters of Religion, had need very well be
informed himself.

It Is with us in our present case as with the Physician in his; who doubtless
stands bound by whatsoever is dear unto him, to prescribe no Remedies but such
as he thoroughly understands: That Mountebank deserves a Check rather then a
Fee, who dares administer he knows not what; and, by so doing, is more like to
kill then cure. The case is ours: We are all obliged to prescribe our Children
the Rules of life; we are all obliged to train up our little ones in the fear
and worship of God; we are all obliged to direct our Brother in his way to
Heaven: but if our Directions should chance to prove wrong, what then? Suppose
we instill into the minds of men Error and Heresy in stead of Truth, what
would the issue be? Should some careless Father strew Ratsbane in stead of
Sugar, and thereby poison some dear child of his, whom probably he designed to
feed, would not all the world condemn him? Well; this, and worse then this,
does that man do, who, through a careless Credulity and want of a stricter
Enquiry, does scatter abroad wherever he comes those unsound Opinions and
unknown Errors, which directly tend to the ruin of that Soul whom probably he
designs to save.

It Is indeed an act of Charity to instruct the ignorant, and lead the blind:
but withal, the man must have eyes in his own head that undertakes it. Our
Savior has told us, ( Matt. 15.14.) If the blind lead the blind, there is
danger in it; it is like enough they may both fall and perish in the ditch. And
if so, since we are all bound to direct and guide one another in the way to
Heaven; since we are all obliged to promote the Worship of God and the
Salvation of men; let us most strictly enquire into those matters of Religion
wherein we are to instruct and help our Brother: for if not, it is like enough
that we may be cheated; what we rashly take for the Doctrines of Christ, may
perhaps, upon a review, prove the Doctrines of Devils; what we unadvisedly take
for the Institutions of God, may perhaps, upon a stricter survey, prove nothing
else but the Impostures of men: and if once we come to propagate these, what
greater pleasure can we do the Devil? what greater disservice can we do the
Church of God? what greater injury can we do our Neighbor, our bosom Friend,
our darling Child? Certain it is, we are much engaged to sift the Grounds of
that Religion which we are to propagate in the world and teach our Brother;
lest otherwise, through our own mistake and idle confidence, we become guilty
of cruel Charity, and prove instrumental to damn that Soul whom we in^end and
are obliged to save.

3. We are obliged to examine our Religion, and see it is right, by all that
kind respect which we owe the Church and Nation where we dwell.

That the Welfare of Kingdoms does but little depend upon the truth of their
Religion, may perhaps be objected from that known example of the Turks and some
other Nations, where Idolatry reigns, and yet success, power and wealth attends
them: But surely that such Nations flourish, it is not from any Covenant or
Promise, but from the general Providence, and perhaps the Wrath, of God: it is
not from the consideration of their Religion, but rather from the want of ours.
Solomon tells us, ( Prove. 14.34.) Righteousness exalts a nation. Yea, where
Virtue thrives, where true Religion flourishes, it is sure that Kingdom will
do so too. We read that whilst the Jews retained their Religious Worship in
its Purity, they were a rich and thriving Nation: beloved of God, and therefore
feared of men: but when once they suffered Idolatry and Superstition to steal
in amongst them, it is very remarkable, that this very sin proved the subversion
of their State, and the ruin of their Church.

Methinks this dreadful Instance should make us exceeding wary what Religions
we admit amongst us. Certainly it will be our wisdom not to permit, much less
to establish by Law, any Doctrine whatever that has already been not only
suspected, but, upon mature advice, condemned too; except we are now fully
satisfied by clearer Arguments, that it is at least reconcilable to those
Divine Truths which our Savior has taught, and our God approves.

For if we do otherwise, if our Folly, Carelessness, Ignorance or Vice shall
prove a means to retrive those erroneous Doctrines and superstitious Practices
which the wisdom, Piety and Zeal of our Forefathers have justly banished; it
we shall reduce those superfluous, vain and burdensome Ceremonies of the Roman
Church which our noble Progenitors have so deservedly exploded; if we shall
basely let go those great and concerning Truths which our heroical Ancestors
have derived unto us sealed with their dearest blood; if we shall exchange a
good Religion for a bad; what can we expect, but that our holy God, who is so
jealous of his great Name, should be angry with us, even till he has quite
conjumed us? It is true, God indeed may bear with the Idolatries of poor
ignorant Turks and Pagans, who neither do nor can know what is better: But as
for this Nation of ours, we have his Law and his Prophets, we have his
Evangelists and his Apostles, we have the Gospel of his dear Son to confirm and
settle us in our most holy Faith: and if so, should we turn Apostates, should
we embrace a false Religion and become Idolaters, so dreadful would the
Consequences be, that we may justly tremble so much as once to name them.

If therefore we have any bowels of mercy toward the womb that bore us, if we
have any kindness for the breasts that feed us, if we have any compassion for
the Nation that warms and clothes us; let us never close with any other
Religion, except it produce some better warrant then our present Church can
show; and that not from a Priest, not from a Jesuit, not from some pretended,
forged and abused Father; but from a Prophet, from an Evangelist, from an
Apostle, one of whom is of more value and greater credit then the whole Romish
Conclave and all their Councils, though every member thereof were a better man
and more Infallible, even the best of Popes.

4. We are obliged to examine our Religion by all that respect which we owe
unto our selves. See why in 2 Particulars.

1. That man who never troubles himself to search into the Grounds of his
Religion, and by infallible Arguments to secure himself that his Faith and
Worship is sound and right, must needs be in doubt whether it be good or no.
For it is very possible that the Report which he hears concerning it may be
false; the persons that recommend it to him may be mistaken; his Forefathers,
from whom he derives his Religion, might be deceived; nay, that particular
Church whereof he is a Member may possibly be in an Error too. For, tell me,
how grossly was the Church of the Jews mistaken, though they had all the
Prophets to inform them, concerning that which they were most obliged to know,
the Person, Doctrine and Miracles of their own Messiah? and how stiffly does the
Church of Rome this day contend for those foul Errors and abominable
Superstitions, for which there is very little to be pleaded, save only the
Practice and Tradition of their Predecessors; amongst whom Ambition, Pride,
Avarice, Luxury and Ignorance did so prevail, that they had little of true
Religion left to transmit and bequeath to their Posterity? so that to believe
as the Church believes, is to believe, at best, but at a venture; and he that
does so, has no assurance that his Faith is right. Now what Inconveniences
will arise from bare Doubts, Jealousies and Suspicions of our Religion, we may
see in 2 Particulars.

1. That person who is thus uncertain and doubtful of his Religion can never
expect any great satisfaction, comfort, pleasure, in any of those Religious
acts which he does perform.

Doubtless, that Joy which arises to a good man and knowing Christian from the
true Service of God is very considerable and exceeding great. My soul shall be
satisfied as with marrow and fatness, says holy David, who well knew what he
did, when he served his God thus and thus. And without all controversy, there
is not so much delight to be found in any thing whatever, as there is in the
Worship of God. The consideration of God's special Presence, his favorable
Interpretation of our desires, his kind Acceptance of our poor endeavors, the
Smiles of his Countenance, the Testimony of his Spirit, how do they fill the
heart with Joy?

But withal, sure it is, that these things cannot be expected by that Soul who
is not sure that his Religion is right. If a man be uncertain whether he
present to God a sheep or a swine, a lamb or a dog, what Acceptance can he look
for? If a man be doubtful whether he offer up to his Maker incense or snuff,
sacrifice or sin, how does he know whether he does please his God, or provoke
him? The Scriptures tell us, ( Romans 14.23.) Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.
And if so, that person who dares perform such and such an act at a venture,
whether right or wrong, has cause enough to expect from God a Frown rather
then a Smile, and a Check rather then a Commendation. Wherefore if ever we
desire to feel the Comforts of Divine Worship, if ever we desire to taste the
pleasures of God's Service, it must be our care, and it is our Concern, to
secure our selves, by infallible Arguments, that our Religion is such indeed as
our God requires, likes, and blesses.

2. That person who does but only suspect and doubt the truth of his Religion,
though peradventure it may be sound and right, yet notwithstanding he will be
easily moved to renounce and leave it, if not through persuasions and
flatteries, yet at least through cowardice and fear of suffering.

Indeed, that prudent and pious Christian who has thoroughly examined the
nature of his Religion, and is fully convinced and satisfied that it is indeed
the Religion of God, dares not part with it upon easy, nor indeed upon any
terms whatsoever: but that uncertain and wavering Soul, who, having never
tasted the matchless Pleasures of Religion, does still lie under suspense and
jealousies, whether that Profession which he yet owneth be right or wrong, how
easily will he quit it? If perhaps some other Religion be recommended to him by
such and such persons whom he loves, how quickly will he yield? If such and
such a Profession be urged upon him by such and such plausible Arguments, which
perhaps he cannot answer, how soon will he be persuaded? If perhaps he be
fairly invited to embrace such and such Doctrines by Promises and Hopes of
advantage, how soon will he give his consent? Or if perhaps he be pressed to
own such and such Practices by Threats and Menaces, how suddenly will he
condescend?

True it is, we are commanded, and that under the pain of eternal death, if
need be, to suffer for our Religion: a Gaol, a Dungeon, a Gibbet, Fire and
sword, whatever Devils can invent or Tyrants inflict, must be endured, if God
so please, and Times should so require. But, tell me, will that man do this,
that questions whether his Religion be true or not? Can we think that he who
doubts, will die too? Is it imaginable that he who is not thoroughly satisfied
that such and such Doctrines are certainly of God, will ever confirm and seal
them with his blood? Every man will tell you, that Estates, Liberties and Lives
are things of greater value then to be thrown away upon bare Peradventures and
Possibilities: it is not credible that any man will lose what he counts so dear,
in the defense of his Religion, except he be first convinced that this Religion
of his is so good, so holy, so Divine, that the Vindication thereof will
infallibly turn his blood into a Sacrifice, and his death into a Martyrdom.

Thus Saint Paul, (2 Timothy 1.12.) For this cause I suffer these things. What
things does he mean? Persecutions, reproaches, bonds, imprisonments, and indeed
what not? But why all this? Himself tells us in the self-same Verse, I know
whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, etc. When a man knows his Faith is
right, when he is fully persuaded that his Religion will certainly bear him out
and make up all his losses, O with what alacrity and cheerfulness may he
suffer? But on the other hand, if we are not acquainted with the goodness and
excellence of our Profession, but continue strangers to it, how easily shall we
shake hands with it, and, in stead of being noble and faithful Martyrs, become
so many unworthy Renegadoes, and prove, like Julian, false and base Apostates?

2. That person who takes no care to inform and satisfy himself concerning the
matters of his Religion, but takes it up as he finds it, may very easily be
mistaken, and close with a wrong in stead of a right.

So great is the variety of Religions in the world, so politic is the Devil,
so plausible is the Heretic, so subtle, smooth and insinuating is the Jesuit,
that if we have not a watchful eye and a discerning spirit, if we are not the
more careful to enquire of God and good men, it is like enough that their fair
and specious Pretenses may deceive us. It Is very possible that Vice and Virtue,
Truth and Error, the Counterfeit and the Pearl, may look so like to another,
that there is none but an Artist, who has a prudent Head and a piercing Eye,
that can readily apprehend and see the difference.

That several persons are most miserably trepanned and sadly deluded, the
Scriptures tell us. Thus the Evangelist, ( John 16.2.) Whosoever kills you
will think that he does God good service. Here Is Murder took to be Religion,
and innocent blood thought to be a Sacrifice. Saint Paul himself was thus
deceived, ( Acts 26.9.) I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many
things contrary to the name of Jesus: but what made him think so? he tells us
elsewhere, sin deceived me, (Romans 7.11.) And certainly if Saint Paul, that
eminent and learned man, were thus mistaken; if such an one as he took
Persecution to be Devotion, Sin to be Service, and an high Trespass to be a
Duty; how then are we concerned to take heed, lest we take up something for
Religion which indeed is not so? lest we close with such and such Superstitions
and Vanities, and yet count our selves devout in doing so? O remember how easy
and usual it is to be mistaken. If we take up our Religion, as it seems Jacob
did his wife, upon trust and in the dark, it is like enough that we may be
cheated; it is like enough that, in stead of being that beautiful Rachel which
we expected, it may prove no better then a blear-eyed Leah. And if so, what
grand Inconveniences are like to follow, give me leave to show you, though but
in 2 Particulars.

1. That person who is mistaken in the choice of his Religion, if he be, what
Religious persons should be, devout and zealous in his way, is in great danger
to run himself upon the commission of the greatest sin; except, perhaps, he can
plead an invincible Ignorance for its extenuation.

Doubtless, whosoever he be that makes Religion the main business of his life,
will think himself concerned to promote that Religion which he owns and takes
to be true, and that with vehemence and zeal. It Is the nature of Religion,
whether true or false, to propagate, spread and establish it self; and that it
may so do, it becomes importunate and restless, till it have removed, by force
or argument, whatever seems to stand in its way, and be its Rival.

And if so, O what a dangerous person is every mistaken Zealot! Sure it is, of
all Villains in the world the Religious Villain is the worst. As for other
Villains, who are inwardly convinced that what they do is naught and wicked,
they cannot choose but now and then find some remorse, regret, and such checks
within them, as must needs damp their spirits, and gall their souls, and put
some little stop to their Iniquity: But as for the Devout and Pious Villain,
what Trouble can possibly invade his spirit? what Pangs of Soul can he feel
within him? what can make him so much as once demurr and pause in the least,
when his own Conscience, being misinformed and sadly deluded, does so far cheer
him, as to bid him expect a reward for that Sin, which it does not only
represent, but commend and applaud, as a Duty which God requires, and will
certainly bless? We need no other Instance in this case but that great one of
Saint Paul: Whilst he believed the old Religion of the Jews to be the only
true one, whilst he was possessed with Prejudice against Christianity, and
took the Gospel to be but a mere Juggle, a new Imposture, and a false way of
worship, what strange havoc did he make of the Church of Christ, and that in
the defense of a wrong Religion, and the Persecution of a right? All the excuse
which he pleads for himself is only this, I did it through Ignorance. Yea, had
but Saint Paul's knowledge then been as great as his zeal; he would rather have
laid himself then others in the Gaol: had he but examined matters a right, and
found Christianity to be indeed the Religion of God; he would have been so far
from shedding other men's blood, that, in the defense thereof, he would ten
thousand times rather have lost his own.

But O the direful effects of a mistaken Zeal! This is the thing to which we
must ascribe the most inhumane actions that the world ever saw. From hence
proceeded that bloody Massacre of Paris, and that unparalled and hellish
Powder Treason: from hence has proceeded the Assassination of Princes, the
Subversion of Empires, and the Ruin of Churches. And what if I tell you, that
misapprehensions of Religion have hung the Son of God upon the Cross, and laid
his Servants in the flames? It cannot be imagined that the Jews would ever have
crucified the Savior of the World, and their own Messiah too, had not an
ignorant Zeal inclined them to it: Nor can we reasonably conceive, that the
Papists are such Monsters rather then men, that they would ever have burnt so
many Martyrs, had they not thought that Religion did require it. And if so, if
the Consequences of a mistaken Religion be so dreadful, then surely we are
highly concerned to make sure of the Truth of ours; lest perhaps an Error in
our choice should put us upon the Commission of those horrid Crimes which none
but a Religious and Zealous sinner dares attempt.

2. That person who is mistaken in his Religion is very like to lose that which
is the blessed fruit, reward and end of that Religion which is sound, true and
right.

It Is such a Consideration as, methinks, should mightily quicken us to the duty
in the Text, Prove all things. But why so? why? alas! a mistake here would
utterly undo us. That the Consequences of Religion are of the greatest concern
imaginable, it is beyond dispute: so great, that it cannot be a thing
indifferent whether our Religion be right or wrong; unless it be a thing
indifferent too whether we are blessed or cursed, whether we shall to Heaven or
Hell. That Religion which is right is the only way, through Christ, that leads
to Heaven; and that Religion which is wrong is one of the nearest and quickest
ways to Hell. I remember the Scriptures mention the Doctrine of God, the
Doctrine of Christ, the Doctrine of the Apostles; these, being embraced and
obeyed, will surely make us happy: but, on the other hand, the same Scriptures
mention other Doctrines, strange Doctrines, the Doctrines of men, yea and the
Doctrines of Devils too, which being entertained will surely make us miserable.
But, you will say, how shall we know them? how shall we pass a judgment, whether
such and such a Doctrine be indeed the Doctrine of God, Devils, or men? I
answer:

1. All matters of Religion must be examined, proved and determined by the
written Word of God. This is the only sure Balance to weigh, and Touchstone to
try, all matters of Faith and Worship.

To this the Prophet directs, ( Isa. 8.20.) To the Law and to the Testimony. To
this our Savior sends his hearers, ( Joh. 5.39.) Search the Scriptures: and
again, How read thou? And, which is remarkable, the Ignorance of Scripture
does he make the only occasion and ground of Error in Points of Faith: so he
tells the Sadducees, Ye err; but why? not knowing the Scriptures. It seems,
that it is the written Word of God which must be our Guide in matter of
Religion; it is this which is the only infallible Rule and unalterable Standard
to measure all the Doctrines and Practices which such or such a Church does
teach, recommend, or require from us. But,

2. The Decrees of General Councils, those I mean that were convened in the
first and purest times, before the Superstitions and Idolatries of Rome, that
crept in by degrees through Carelessness, Vice and Ignorance, had overspread the
Church, are of great use in this case too.

True it is, the Scripture is man's only authentic Rule to walk by; and this
Rule of ours in the most material and concerning Points of Faith is obvious,
plain and easy: but yet there are some other matters of Religion, though not
of absolute Necessity, yet of considerable Import and moment, about which the
Scriptures are not so intelligible, at least to ordinary Readers, but that they
want some good Interpreter.

And who more fit to declare the sense of doubtful and difficult Texts then
the first and best of Councils? I read of the Council of Nicaea, called by
Constantine the Great, against the Heresy of Arrius; the Council of
Constantinople, summoned by Theodosius the first, against the Heresy of
Macedonius; the Council of Ephesus, called by Theodosius the second, against
the Heresy of Nestorius; the Council of Chalcedon, called by Martian, against
the Heresy of Eutyches. These Councils, occasioned by these early Heresies, and
consisting of some hundred Bishops, having the Glory of God in their Hearts,
the Settlement of the Church in their Eye, and the Bible in their Hands, did
establish several Canons for the extirpation of Error, and the confirmation of
the most concerning Truths of our Religion.

And, certainly, the Determinations of these Councils, whether it be in the
great or some less Concerns of our Religion, being made up of Persons so
exemplary for their Piety, and so eminent for their Learning, who resolved on
nothing but with mature Advice and Deliberation, are of as great Authority, and
afford as much satisfaction in matters of Religion, as any thing of man can be
or do. For the Truths of God, once taught the world by Christ and his
Apostles, being unchangeable for ever; and our Bibles, which are the only Rule
to measure Religion by, continuing one and the same for ever; that which was an
Error in those times must needs be Error still, and that which was a Truth in
those days must needs be a Truth still. And if we cannot think of any more
proper means for the right understanding of Scripture, and the discovery of
Truth and Errors, then the deliberate and unanimous Judgment of so many
hundred pious, learned and unbiassed men assembled together; then certainly the
Determinations of those Ancient Councils are very considerable Evidences for
Truth, and against Error: and the rather, because they consisted of such
persons, who, besides their eminent Piety and Learning, had the great Advantage
of living nearer the Apostles Age; and thereby were the better able to inform
themselves and us too, what was certainly believed and done in the very Infancy
of the Church.

3. The Writings of the Ancient Fathers, those especially that lived within the
first Six Centuries, wherever they agree, and are not since corrupted or
maimed by the fraud and forgeries of the Roman Church, are of singular use in
this matter too.

That Ignatius, Clemens, Origin, Athanasius, Cyril, Nazianzene, Basil,
Chrysostom, Hierom, Augustine, and some others, were indeed Persons of great
Devotion and excellent Parts, cannot be denied. And although some of these
great Names, in some particular matters, had their peculiar Mistakes, and
showed themselves to be but men; yet in all Points where we find an unanimous
Consent amongst them, we are to have so much veneration for their Authority, as
not easily to suspect or contradict it.

True it is, if we take these Fathers singly, man by man, where we find any of
them alone in their Opinions, as Origin in reference to the Punishments of
Hell, and Saint Augustine in reference to Infants that die unbaptized, we are
not, in this case, much more obliged to accept their Judgment then the Judgment
of some person yet alive, who perhaps may be as Pious and Learned as some of
them: But if we take all the Fathers that lived within six hundred years after
Christ together and in the lump, where we find them one in Judgment, they are
enough to make a wiser Council then any one Age could probably afford; a
Council certainly of more Value and far greater Credit then that Conventicle of
Trent, wherein there sat, sometimes at least, little more then 40 Bishops, and
some of those but merely Titular and suborned too. And upon this score the
Church of Rome must needs excuse us, that we do rather adhere to the united
Judgment of so many Ancient Fathers, then to those late Decrees and Canons of
Trent which contradict them. It Is well known to our Adversaries of Rome, that,
in the great Controversies betwixt us and them, we appeal to the most Ancient
Councils and Fathers, whom we look upon as the most impartial and able Judges;
the whole matter in question we offer to their Decision, and are willing to
stand or fall as they determine. But, alas! there is no Tribunal like Saint
Peter's Chair, one Pope is of more value with them then ten Saint Augustines.
Nor indeed can we blame them; for, where the Cause is notoriously bad, it were
strange Imprudence to refer it to any other Vmpires and Arbitratours, save
only such who are prepossest with the strongest Prejudice, and obliged by the
greatest Interests to defend and own it. And thus stands the case with the
Roman Church. But as for us, where matters are doubtful and Scriptures are not
clear, we dare not run to uncertain Traditions and the pretended Infallibility
of Popes, but rather to Ancient Councils and Fathers, from whom we do
rationally expect more satisfactory Resolutions, and far better Comments. But,

4. There are several Systems of Divinity, Confessions of Faith, short
Abridgments of Christian Religion, that are, especially to unlearned persons,
great helps in this matter too.

And here, methinks, those Ancient Creeds of the Apostles, Nice, and
Athanasius, which are so generally received by the Church of God, are of great
Authority to settle our Judgment in the main and most necessary Points of
Faith. Whatever contradicts any one Article delivered and contained therein,
may be justly suspected of Heresy, Error and Innovation. And as for other
Doctrines, Practices, and matters of Discipline, we may have recourse, and that
with good satisfaction, to the known Articles of the Church of England, the
Book of Homilies, and that excellent Liturgy of ours, which that of Saint
Chrysostom or Basil does not transcend, and perhaps not match.

Besides these, there are many choice and excellent Catechisms, composed by men
that were Pious, Learned and Judicious, acquainted with Scriptures, well versed
in the Primitive Councils and Fathers. These short Catechisms, compiled by
persons of singular Endowments, and approved by the Church, are little less
then so many contracted Bibles, containing in them whatever man is obliged to
know, and delivering enough, in plain and easy terms, to inform us in matters
of Practice, to secure us from Errors, and confirm our Judgments in all the
great Points of Faith.

So then, the Sum of all is this; We are obliged to examine the matters of
our Religion by the written Word of God: but because this Word, in some
material cases, according to the different Fancies or Interests of men, has
different Interpretations given concerning its true sense and meaning, it is our
only way, for our better satisfaction, to betake our selves to the most able,
faithful and unbiassed Judges; and they are the most Ancient Councils, the
Primitive Fathers, public Confessions of Faith, and Orthodox Catechisms set
forth or approved by the Church of God.

Uses.
I. Consider how much to blame those persons are, who, without any Examination
whatsoever, take up their Religion barely upon Trust.

We are thus commanded in the Text, Prove all things: but, alas! we are so far
from this, that we will prove nothing; and although perhaps we pretend to
abhor the Religion of Rome, yet so far do we act like Papists, that an
Implicit Faith serves our turn.

It Is the great Imprudence and Crime of many persons, who are so supine and
careless, that they will not examine their Religion; but, withal, it is the sad
Calamity of some others, who are so sottish and ignorant, that indeed they
cannot. That we are required to prove our Faith, and of what concern it is so
to do, we have already seen; and that all matters of this nature must be
judged by the Word of God, and that, in doubtful cases, to be expounded by
Ancient Councils and Fathers, has been already showed: Yea, but what is all
this to the man that is utterly unlearned and ignorant? Can that man prove his
Religion by the Word of God who knows it not? can that man help himself in the
understanding of difficult Scriptures by the Assistence of those Councils and
Fathers to whom he is but a stranger?

And this is the case of those poor people who are bred up under the Tyranny of
the Roman Church: they cannot obey the Command in my Text, because they are
kept in Ignorance; they cannot do what Saint John requires, they cannot try
the spirits, because that only Touchstone is denied them; they are in no
capacity to weigh the matters of their Religion, because they are not suffered
so much as once to touch the Scales.

But, alas! this gross Ignorance, which is their sad Calamity, is our grievous
Crime: that utter Inability of obeying God, and proving all things, which
arises from their invincible Necessity, springs from our Carelessness and
Choice. It Is sure enough, that we have sufficient means to inform our selves of
our Religion: we have Bibles to read in our families; we have the Scriptures
expounded in our Churches; we have many excellent Catechisms and other Books
within our reach: and yet how ignorant still! We are so far from being able to
give a satisfactory Account of our Religion in its several Branches, that there
are many amongst us who do not know so much as what Religion means, what
Christianity is, who Christ was, what he has done, or what he requires from
us. Certainly, if such persons do take upon them the profession of any
Religion, they must needs do it upon Trust: and how that is done, we may see in
3 Particulars.

1. There are some persons who take up their Religion barely upon the Trust and
Credit of their Parents and Progenitors, who owned such and such a Profession,
and continued therein perhaps to their very dying-day.

And the truth is, the very highest Account that many an one can give for his
Faith and Worship is but this, It was the old Religion of his Family, it was
the Faith and Worship of his Fathers, and therefore his too: insomuch that
persons generally are not made, but born, Christians, as well as men; and do
commonly receive their Faith, as well as their Flesh, ex Traduce, barely by
Propagation.

It Is true, Christianity, which certainly is the Religion of God, is that which
we all profess; but in the mean time there are but few amongst us that examine
the Principles upon which this Religion stands, nor do we consider the Designs
to which this Religion tends: only we take it up from our Forefathers, as if
it were barely bequeathed us amongst other Legacies, or left us as a part of
our Inheritance. It must be confessed, that true Religion, preserved for us and
transmitted to us by the Care and Piety of our Progenitors, is a blessed
Inheritance indeed; such an Inheritance, so great and so glorious, that we are
concerned, if in any case, much more in this, to prove our Father's Will, and
to consider how suitable it is to both the Testaments of that better Father,
which is in Heaven.

2. There are some persons who take up their Religion barely upon the Trust and
Credit of vulgar and public Examples.

What Religion we find established in the Kingdom, exercised in the Church, and
commonly professed throughout the Neighborhood, that we do not stand to
examine, but immediately embrace: We make our Faith a matter not of Election
and Choice, but barely of Imitation. Doubtless, there is many a Soul amongst us
that professes himself to be a Christian, not because he knows the Truth,
Reasonableness and Excellence of Christianity, but because he had the good
fortune to be bred and live in Christendom.

Suppose a man bred among the Persians; this man adores the Sun, and makes that
his Deity: take a man bred amongst the Turks; this man's Bible is the Alcoran,
and that Impostour Mahomet little less then his God: Suppose a man bred up in
Spain, France, or Italy; this man, forsooth, though he knows not why, proves a
Roman Catholic; he owns the Pope, let him be who he will, to be his
Grandfather, and that Church, or, if you will, that Whore, to be his
Grandmother too: Well; give me a man bred up in England; it is ten to one but
this man proves a Protestant. But why all this? Why, alas! we take up our
Religion, not from the Convictions of our own Judgments, but barely from the
force of Examples, and the mere power of Education.

3. There are some persons who take up their Religion upon the Trust, Credit,
or Commands of Princes.

Certainly, man, who is a wise, knowing and noble Creature, of the very next
degree to Angels, may easily convince himself, how unreasonable a thing it is,
that he should adore and worship any thing that is so far from being a Deity,
that he evidently sees and certainly knows that it is his own Inferior and
much below himself. And yet notwithstanding, if Jeroboam set up his Calves, if
Nebuchadnezzar erect his Image, and command their Subjects to adore them, who
almost disputes it?

But, alas! we need not look back so far as the times of the Jewish Church for
pregnant Instances; our own Chronicles will tell us, that whilst the Kings of
England were Slaves to the Pope, so dull and sottish, so easy and pliable were
the People, as to be so too: and since our Princes have justly shook off the
Roman Yoke, the Subjects have generally been, if not so Religious, yet so
Conformable, as to become Protestants too.

Tell me, Sirs, if the Roman Religion be good, why did the People of England
cast it off? but if the Roman Religion be stark naught, as certainly it is, why
did the People of England ever own it? Doubtless these General and sudden Turns
of Religion, these Universal and Epidemical Changes of our Faith and Worship,
which do not arise from any mature Deliberation and new Convictions, are
evident Demonstrations, that men take up or lay down their Religion just as
they do their Fashion; it is this or that according as the Court thinks fit to
alter: as if, to believe as the King believes, and to do as the King does,
were a part of that Allegiance which we owe him.

But is this indeed to obey the great Command in my Text, Prove all things?
It Is sure, the Kings of England do not pretend, like that Usurper at Rome, that
they cannot err; nor is it imagined by any, that there is any more
Infallibility annexed to the Prince's Throne then to the Pope's Chair. No; we
are required, and deeply concerned too, to examine the Grounds of that Religion
which the King's Laws do establish: and if we find, as upon strict Search we
certainly shall, that the present Religion of our Church, commended to us by
the King's own Example, and confirmed by his Laws, is warranted by the Word of
God, by the Canons of Ancient Councils, by the joint Testimony of the Primitive
Fathers, and many received Confessions of Faith; let us then bless our God,
that we have as yet a Prince who styles himself, really is, and declares his
resolution to continue, the Defender of that Faith which, past all per
adventure, is truly Ancient and Apostolical.

II. Consider what abundant cause we have to be jealous of that Religion which
will by no means submit to this great Command in the Text, which fears to be
examined, and dares not stand the Test.

Certainly, we have all the reason in the world to suspect that Religion which
does so manifestly suspect it self. It Is a great Argument that a man does doubt
his Cause and question its merit, when he shows himself exceeding loath to
come to a Trial: and it is a shrewd sign that Wares are corrupt and naught, when
they are produced and showed only in the dark. What our Blessed Savior (Joh.
3.21.) says of Persons, may fitly be said of Religions too; He that does
truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest. The man that is
honest, virtuous and learned, does rather hope then fear to be searched into:
but he that constantly lurks in corners, and walks under a disguise, does give
the world sufficient ground to suspect that he is some broken Bankrupt or
Knave. It Is thus with Religions too: That Religion which dares appeal to the
Tribunal of God and man; that Religion which desires to be examined by
Scriptures, Councils and Fathers; that Religion which does publicly expose all
its Doctrines, and does not only allow all its friends, but provokes its
utmost enemies, to fifth and try them; it is easy to think that such a Religion
is sound, right and true: it is full weight, that fears not the Scales; and
right metal, that does not dread the Touchstone.

But now, if there be such a Religion found within the Church that is jealous
of it self, that fears its own Proselytes, that dares not endure the Scrutiny,
no not of its own friends; have we not a sufficient reason to suspect it? Now,
shall I tell you? such is the Religion of the Roman Church, which dares not
suffer its own Members so much as once to peep into the Bible, lest perhaps
that clear and Sacred Glass should immediately represent, even to vulgar eyes,
those foul, and by them as yet undiscerned, Spots, which that corrupt and
scabby Religion has upon its Face. I remember, Chemnitius, who has somewhat
narrowly enquired into the Council of Trent, and discovered to the world the
nakedness of their Decrees, is, for that very Reason, styled, not a Saucy
fellow, but a downright Heretic; and so, for making some considerable
Inquisition into their Religion, was thought to deserve at least their Great
one.

As for the Religion of the Reformed Church, it is otherwise with us; the
examination of our Doctrines is not only allowed, but required too: we put the
Scales into your hands, and bid you weigh them; we set the Touchstone before
your eye, and bid you try them; we translate, we print, we put the Bible into
your bosom, and bid you thence examine what our Church does hold, what our
Ministers do preach, and what you your selves must believe and do. I can tell
you, this fair dealing is not to be found at Rome: no; there the Holy Bible,
that dangerous Book, must be withheld. And the truth is, though there be Sin
and Sacrilege in their so doing, yet there is a great deal of Craft and Policy
too: for where the Cause is naught, if there be some material Witness whose
Testimony will certainly overthrow it, if he cannot be bribed, it is great
Prudence to remove him out of the way. And this course takes the Roman Church;
it is that miserable Shift which a bad Cause drives them to; what ever comes of
it, the Scriptures must be withdrawn: for, should they permit their people to
peruse them, they have just cause to fear that, at first sight, they would
dislike such and such gainful Doctrines; and, upon a serious review, abjure
them quite. And upon this score do they find themselves necessitated, as to
withdraw the Bible, so likewise basely to corrupt the most Ancient Councils and
Fathers; acting, methinks, like some knavish Merchant, who sells bad Wares, and
that by false Weights and Measures, and therefore is concerned to see that
there be no Standard near him.

What is the great Axiom of the Roman Church, Estius, a Friend, Champion, and
Son of theirs, does thus inform us, (2. These. 5.21.) Tenendum quod tenet
Ecclesia; What the Church believes, what the Church requires, i. e. whatever
the Pope and his Council thinks fit, that, and only that, without more ado,
must be believed and done. It Is evident that they require little more of their
Proselytes then a bare implicit Faith, and a blind Obedience. And that they
ground upon this fond Presumption and rotten Principle, That their Councils, at
least if confirmed by the Pope, cannot err; how vicious soever the Pope may be
in his Conversation, yet when he sits in Cathedra, in his Chair, he must be
Infallible in his Judgment still: as if the Golden Mitre and triple Crown,
which adorn his Head, must needs inspire it too.

But if these things be so indeed, what need they fear the severest Trial? If
Councils cannot err, what need they fear the strictest Search? If the Pope be
really Infallible, what need he dread the closest Scrutiny? Search the
Scriptures, says Christ himself to all his Hearers: Search not the Scriptures,
says his pretended Vicar; and yet Infallible? Try the spirits, says the
Apostle: Try not the spirits, says the Roman Bishop; and yet Infallible? Prove
all things, says Saint Paul: Prove nothing, says the Successor of Saint
Peter; and yet Infallible?

No; they manage a bad Cause that are afraid to see it opened. It Is not
Religion and Conscience, but Craft, Guilt and Fear, that make them withdraw the
Bible, and so decline a Trial: for, had but the poor people that live under the
Tyranny of Rome liberty, means and knowledge, to examine those Doctrines which
now they are constrained to take up upon Trust; and were but the Princes of
Europe, whom the Pope has sometimes used, and still accounts, as his Slaves
and Vassals, were they but once at leisure to mind the things of God, and the
Concerns of his Church; would they but once impartially and thoroughly examine
matters of Religion, and bring them to the Rule; we should quickly see the Pope
unmasked, Kings undeceived, and the whole Christian world become Protestant.

And as this should be the subject of our earnest Prayers; so must the Duty
required in the Text be the matter of our Obedience too: what the Protestant
asserts, what the Papist pretends, examine both. The Grand difference betwixt
us and them lies in their affirming, and our denying, the Doctrines of
Infallibility, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Indulgencies, Invocation of
Saints, Adoration of Images, works of Merit and Supererogation, etc.

Now if any of these, or the like Doctrines, shall be commended to you by the
plausible Insinuations of some subtle Jesuit, O remember what my Text commands,
Prove all things: bring them to your Bibles; bring them to your Ministers;
bring them to the Reverend and Learned Bishops of our Church, those that are
now alive, or those that are gone, but have left behind them such excellent
Books which our Adversaries can never answer. And if you find, as upon a due
examination you certainly will, that your Bibles do contradict their Tenants;
if it appear that our Christ and his Apostles are against their Pope and his
Councils; if our Divines have satisfactorily answered whatever theirs have
sophistically objected; if we can produce such Testimonies of Scripture, as to
any wise and impartial Judge shall appear sufficient to prove our Doctrines,
and disprove theirs; if it shall be evident, that the Reformed Religion is the
only Religion which Christ brought into the world: let me then allude to the
words of Elijah, If God be God, then follow him; If our present Religion be
right, let us then embrace and own it still. Remember that, for the defense of
our established Religion, we do, in some cases, appeal to the common Sense of
all Mankind; in other cases, we appeal to sound Reason; and in all cases, we
appeal to the written Word of God. And if so, if our own Senses, which we trust
without all jealousy in other Concerns, do not deceive us in this, which is
the main; if all that Reason, which God has given us to distinguish Man from a
Brute, has not left us; nay, if the Word of God, which is infallible in it
self, and as it is expounded by the most ancient, unprejudiced and wisest
Councils and Fathers, cannot fail us; we may conclude, that our Religion is
true, right and good: and since it is so, let us unchangeably resolve to
profess, defend and maintain it even for ever. And if perhaps the defense
thereof shall cost us dear; yet remember, whatever we expend in this matter,
it is bestowed upon that God who well deserves it: should it cost us our
Estates, our Liberties, our very Lives; (which, we trust, the mercy of our God,
and the Constancy and Care of our SOVEREIGN, will still prevent;) yet remember,
there is no charge that can be too great, which is bestowed upon a Blessed
Jesus and an immortal Soul.

The Second Doctrine.
That after an impartial and strict Enquiry, that Religion, and only that,
which proves to be good, right and true, must be stoutly asserted, constantly
retained, and held fast for ever. See why upon 3 Accounts.

1. To let go a Religion that is good, is matter of Sin. It Is the great
Command of God in the Text, (...), Hold fast that which is good. It Is that
which Saint Paul presses again, ( Heb. 10.13.) Let us hold fast the profession
of our faith. It Is that which Christ commands from Heaven, ( Apoc. 3.11.) Hold
fast that which thou have. We have Precept upon Precept: God is so jealous of
his Name, and so much concerned for his Religion, that he gives us one Command
after another, that he may the more oblige us not to quit it.

And certain it is, we may, with as little Offense to Heaven, with as little
Injury to our Neighbor, and with as little Prejudice to our selves, make bold
with many other Commands, as with this. It Is not to be disputed, but we may
with less Guilt become false to Man then treacherous to God; it is safer to
prove a Thief, then to prove an Apostate: we may with greater Innocence
squander away any thing that is our own or other men's, then that Religion of
God, which he has committed to our Trust, and that with this severe
Injunction, even as if it were a Jewel of his Crown, Hold it fast. But,

2. To let go a Religion that is good, is matter of Shame and great Dishonor.

And here, methinks, if we are not so good Christians, as to value the Commands
of God; yet we should be so much men, as to respect our own Reputation and
Credit: if we will not hold fast our true Religion for fear of Sin; yet let us
do it for fear of Shame. To renounce that Faith that is right and sound, is not
only to disobey our God, but to reproach and vilify our selves too. There is
no Pretense to be named, no Motive to be imagined, for our casting off the true
Religion, but Dishonor and Shame attends it. See this in 4 Particulars.

1. There are some persons that forsake the true Religion barely for want of
Discretion, Judgment, Knowledge, and better Abilities to defend it.

Certainly, Imprudence, Ignorance and Weakness of understanding is a great
reproach to any man whatever, but especially to such as want no means to inform
themselves much better. So thought Saint Paul, (1 Cor. 6.5.) I speak to your
shame: Is it so, that there is not a wise man among you? The expression is
tart, and it clearly imports, that there is scarce a greater reproach to Humane
nature, but much more to the Members of the Christian Church, then the defect
of Prudence and the want of Understanding. It Is the exercise of Reason that
makes us men; and the more we fail in this, the more do we degenerate into
Brutes.

And thus stands the case with every man that parts with a true Religion barely
because he is not able to maintain it. Whosoever manageth the better Cause, and
yet is baffled, does plainly discover to his Adversary, and may justly assure
himself, that he wants a great deal of his Reason, and therefore is so much the
less a Man. True it is, to be overthrown and worsted in the Patronage of a bad
matter is nothing else but to be happily beaten, with safety and great
advantage: but, on the other hand, if our Quarrel be good, and yet we are
foiled; if we stand on the higher Ground, but cannot keep it; it is not the
Cause, but its sorry Champion, that must be blamed.

And that is our case this day in the defense of our Religion. We have all
Advantages on our side; the best and most Ancient Councils, the universal
Practice of the Primitive Church, the Testimony of the Fathers for six hundred
years together, and, that which is more then all, the written Word of God,
which is the only Rule to serve God by, are certainly for us. And if so, what
a dishonor would it be, if any of us, for want of Skill to use these Weapons
which God has put into our hand, should suffer His Religion as well as ours to
receive a blow and be defeated? What would become of our Reputation, should we
suffer some crafty Jesuit, by mere Sophistry and Fallacies, to captivate our
Reason, and to lead us with pomp and triumph, as so many Prisoners rather then
Proselytes, to Rome? What would the world say, should we suffer the best
Religion that it ever saw to be lost, not by Force and violence, but mere
Frauds and Cheats? should we suffer it to be,, not extorted from us for want of
stronger Arms; but surprised and stolen, for want of clearer eyes and better
brains?

It would be indeed a great Unhappiness (but that we need not fear, since our
Protestant Prince resolves to defend it and us) to lose our Religion by Force
and violence: but to surrender it our selves, through the cunning Pretenses of
our Adversaries and our own gross Mistakes, were, methinks, the fouler
Disgrace. The Honor of man does not lie in his Strength, but in his Prudence:
nor is it our Discredit to have feeble Hands, but weak and impotent Heads. And
certain it is, since God has given us an understanding Heart, and since that
Understanding of ours has no Employment so honorable as the Defense of our
Faith, we cannot possibly bring upon our selves any greater Disparagement by
any means imaginable, then by suffering our selves to be basely baffled, even
to the loss of that Reason that makes us men, and that Religion that makes us
Saints.

2. There are some persons that forsake the true Religion barely because the
Examples of other men, who do so to, invite them to it.

That we are indeed obliged to follow the Examples of all good men, in all good
things, there is nothing surer. Learn of me, says our Blessed Savior, (Matthew.
11.29.) and, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ, says the great Apostle,
(1 Cor. 11.1.) But, alas! in stead of following the example of Christ, who, to
the loss of his blood, witnessed a good confession; in stead of following the
example of Saint Paul, who proved a Martyr for that Religion which he owned; we
tread in the steps of Julian, that base Apostate: perhaps we see such and such
a neighbor, one that has the name of a Scholar, one that has the repute of a
Religious and Charitable person, we see even such an one change his Religion;
and, upon that account, we think fit to do so too.

But tell me, Sirs, is it not a shame for persons that have their wits about
them, to make the examples of other men their great or only Motive to cast off
their present Religion, and embrace a new one? It Is no new thing for such and
such Professors, who make great shows of Religion, and pass in the world for
real Saints, to prove mere Jugglers, and, upon every small occasion, to
renounce their Faith. The Evangelist tells us, ( John 6.66.) Many of his
disciples went back, and walked no more with him: some little offense they took
at his Doctrine, and away they marched, and that by Troops. Well; what says
our Blessed Savior concerning this? The next words tell us, Jesus said unto
the Twelve, Will ye also go away? There is a considerable number of my
Disciples fallen off and gone; but what then? shall their example encourage you
to be gone too? We read that Saint Peter himself, that otherwise brave and
gallant Person, was so far prevailed with as to deny his Lord; but what of
that? is Peter's example a sufficient warrant for the other Disciples to deny
him too?

What it is that moves such and such a person to alter his Religion, we are not
sure; whether he do it from false and rotten Principles, whether he do it to
base and unworthy Ends, whether he be not cheated in his Judgment, and merely
trepanned of his Faith, we cannot tell: and yet shall we be like him? Nay more,
it is possible that men may prove such great Dissemblers, as, for some by end or
other, to enter upon some new Profession, and yet reserve their former Judgment
still; it is possible for men to act as Proselytes to a new Religion, and yet
inwardly to approve their old one still: and yet shall we be like them?

No; the Alteration of our Religion is a thing of weight and moment; such
weight and such moment, that we cannot safely do it without better grounds
then any man's Example can afford us. It Is dangerous for us to take our
measures from other persons, whose weak Abilities to defend their Religion, or
wicked Intentions in leaving it, we do not know. What though such and such
persons, whether profane, or ignorant, or hypocritical, are become Papists, and
have now left our Church? shall we therefore leave our Mother's bosom too?
shall we also show our selves to be in the number of those rotten Leaves, that
drop one after another, till the poor Tree that bore them be left quite naked?
No; if we are indeed Christ's real and faithful Disciples, whatever becomes of
others, whatever contrary Examples may lie before and tempt us, yet let us
vigorously hold fast our most holy Faith: if we are indeed Christ's Flock,
though perhaps the Goats may rove and wander, yet let us, as becomes his Sheep
indeed, keep close within that excellent Pasture where he himself has in mercy
placed us. Sure I am, the Roman Church, if a Church it be, it is not like ours;
and why then should any foolish Examples induce us to make a Change? We would
not tread in any man's steps that should lead us to those dangerous Precipices,
where he must needs hazard his own neck and ours too.

Well; that is the case: the Roman Religion, if it be not certainly damnable,
yet it is very dangerous sure; it is more dangerous to all new comers then to
most of its native Professors. What hazard the Proselyte runs, our Blessed
Savior does thus inform us, ( Matt. 23.15.) Ye compass sea and land to make
one Proselyte; and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of Hell
then your selves. It Is certainly thus with every besotted Soul, that forsakes
the Reformed Religion wherein he was bred, and becomes a Proselyte to the Roman
Church; his Crime is higher, and his Danger is more: and if so, shall any
Example lead you thither? Tell me, shall we imitate the poor Sheep, not in
their Innocence, but in their Folly? shall we act like that silly Flock, which
follows the Bell weather, even although he lead them into the briars that tear,
or into the ditch that drowns them? Remember, the Church of England, that has
brought us forth, is well able to nurse and breed us too; the Mother that has
born us wants no breasts to feed us: and if so, why should we suffer our selves
to be seduced by any fond Examples, to leave our own Dam, and suck a stranger's
dug; and such a dug too, as runs with Poison in stead of Milk?

3. There are some persons that forsake the true Religion, and take up a false,
barely because that Debauchery, and those Vices which they will not leave, do
so incline them.

It Is not only the weak Head, but the wicked Heart; it is not only the
depraved Judgment, but the depraved Conversation too, that makes a great
Alteration, and that for the worse, in some men's Religion. Our Savior indeed
has told us, ( Matt. 21.31.) The Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of
God. It seems by this expression, that many wicked persons of those times
changed their Religion, and became Proselytes to the Christian Faith. But
withal, certain it is, that these persons who thus changed their Religion did
change their Conversation too; as they came off from their Judaism in
Profession, so they came off from their Heathenism in Practice too: they came
over to a Religion that was so far from allowing their former Crimes, that it
did both command and help them to leave them.

Thus stood the case in our Savior's time; but how is it in ours? We hear
sometimes of persons, and great ones too, that are altering their Religion; but
what is their motive? Is it because their present Faith is unsound and naught?
is it because they design to embrace a better Religion, and to lead much better
lives? Alas! there is no such matter: but, their present Religion is too nice
and tender for them; the Church of England does not allow men their wanton
Mistresses, their painted Jezebels, their perfumed Concubines; we dare not
teach that Fornication and Whoredom are but trivial sins, and may upon easy
terms be bought off at pleasure. No; the Gallants of our Age, that resolve to
go on in sin, do find the Reformed Religion too strict for their unreformed
lives: and, upon that score, there is no Church for them like that of Rome.
That Is a pleasing Religion indeed, that grants a public allowance of Stews;
that is a welcome Religion indeed, that sets but an easy rate upon Iniquity:
and if perhaps the Priest shall be so rigid and sour, as, upon Confession, to
impose a Penance, it is commonly such as shall not balance the pleasure of the
Sin; or, if it do, there is an Indulgence to be had, even such a Pardon, and
that upon easy terms, as shall secure the Sinner (so they tell him) not only
from the Clamours of his foul and guilty Conscience, not only from the present
Censures of the Church, but from the pains of Purgatory, yea and of Hell too.

But tell me, Sirs, shall we change our Religion upon such a score as this?
What shame? what dishonor would it bring us? Shall the world justly say, that
such and such a person has left his Religion barely because he would not leave
his Sin? such and such a man is become a Papist, because he resolves to live
like a Beast? But, by the way, though men are determined to indulge their
corrupted nature, and so far to gratify their Lusts, as for their sakes to
alter their Profession; yet, methinks, as they shame themselves, so they do not
much oblige their new Religion, by making it to be thought their Bawd. It Is
sure, that true Religion does aggravate and greaten Sin; but what Religion then
is that, which does not only extenuate and mince, but even invite it too? True
Religion sides with Heaven; but O cursed Religion that takes part with Hell,
and courts men thither! Well then; let Rome applaud herself and triumph, as she
please, in the Access of such Proselytes as repair to her expecting from her
the Patronage of their Vices; it is the great honor of our Church, that its
Doctrines and Laws are too strict for such Offenders. And, doubtless, that
signal Holiness of our Religion, which moves such notorious Transgressors to
renounce and leave it, does lay the stronger obligation upon every man that is
good, to embrace, defend, and hold it fast. It Is a main proof that our Religion
is from God, that it abhors every Vice, cries down every Sin, and exacts from
us pure Hearts and holy Lives. And if upon that very score we do not like it,
the more is our shame, because it is an infallible sign that we have not in us
the Fear of God, no nor the Reason of Men. For, doubtless, that person is so
far from being a Christian, that he is worse then a Brute, who, by casting off
his Religion barely because it is strict, declares to the world, and must needs
assure himself, that he loves some cursed Lust better then an immortal Soul;
that he chooses rather to serve his Sin then to serve his God.

4. There are some persons who quit a Religion that is good, and take up one
that is naught, because some secular Interest invites them to it. See this in 2
Particulars;

1. The hopes of Profit, Preferments, Honors, some worldly Advantage or other,
does prevail sometimes, with such and such persons, to alter their Religion,
and that for the worse too.

It Is very possible that, at some times and in some places, a man's Religion
may stand betwixt him and his gain, betwixt him and some considerable
Advancement in the world: In this case the man perhaps for a while may be at a
stand; he disputes with himself, whether it is better to gratify his Conscience
or his Interest. But at length the temptation prevails: he thinks it better to
serve himself then his Maker and to part with his present Religion, rather then
with his present Hopes. I remember what a Complaint Saint Paul makes of this to
Timothy, (2 Timothy 4.10.) Demas has forsaken me. But what moved him thus to
forsake his friend and his Religion both at once? The account is this, having
loved this present world The Sinner considers, that the main Rewards of
Religion, if there be any such things, do lie elsewhere, and are but in
Reversion; yea but the World has something for him in hand: and this
Consideration tempts and overcomes O how many Souls!

And with this kind of Vermin does the Roman Church bait her Hooks, and catch
her most considerable Fish. It Is well known that some learned men of our Nation
have now and then deserted our Church, and run away to Rome: but what should be
the matter? what drives men hence, and what invites them thither? Alas! the
Church of England, how well soever it seem provided, yet it has been so
curtailed and pinched, that it has not an Estate left for every Son: it is
otherwise at Rome; their Monasteries are flourishing, their Abbeys are fat,
their Bishoprics are numerous and rich; and, what is more, what Hypocrite
would not be encouraged by the hopes of a Cardinal's Cap, and the possibility
of a Triple Crown?

Certain it is, so direful are the effects of Discontent and Pride, and so
inviting are the Promises of some secular and great Advantage, that men who
grow too sensible of their own Parts and Merits, from their want of Preferments
at home, and their hopes thereof abroad, will even quit their Religion, forsake
their Mother's bosom, and accept the Embraces of that Roman Whore, because she
is better able to lap up in Scarlet.

But is this indeed a sufficient ground for the changing of our Religion? does
it indeed make for our honor, to prove so having and so mercenary, as to cast
off the true Service of God, and accept the Devil's Drudgery, and that barely
in hopes of some better and present Vails? Sure it is, the nature and practice
of true Religion is gentile and honorable; and as sure it is, the nature and
practice of Idolatry and Superstition is sordid, base and vile: and if so,
then, methinks, no ingenuous Soul, no man that pretends a noble Spirit, should
ever reject the one, or close with the other, from an expectation, though of
the greatest Advantage which the World can give, or man receive.

Wherefore, my brethren, if this Temptation should ever chance to be laid in
your way, should the World invite you to a new and false Religion by promising
you this or that; yet, I beseech you, consult your Credit, consult your Honor:
remember, it is the Reformed Religion that you have espoused and owned; a
Religion so pure, so chaste, so immaculate and undefiled, that it is exceeding
hard to find the least Pretense, but impossible to find any just Cause, to make
a Divorce betwixt it and you. And if so, how unworthy an act must it be to
forsake and cast her off? How ignoble were it, should we suffer our selves,
like Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. page 196.
Natalius of old, to be corrupted and basely bribed into Apostasy? Were not
this to tell mankind, that we prefer Earth before Heaven, and value Mammon more
then God?

2. The fear of Persecution, the dread of Suffering this or that for their
Religion, is another thing which prevails with many to quit a true, and take up
a false.

I remember Saint Jude does thus command us, (verse 3.) Contend earnestly for
the faith. Dispute for the Faith; but if that will not do, die for it: contend
for the Faith with Arguments; but if these will not serve, contend with blood;
not by shedding other men's, but by losing your own. And thus did the Martyrs of
old contend for the Faith of Christ; and thus must we, if God so please, and
the Times should so require. Should we live to see our Religion likely to
expire, it should expire within our bosoms; should it come to pass that our
Religion must die, and breath its last in our days, we can do nothing that is
more noble, then die with it and for it.

But, alas! where almost shall we find a man that has so much kindness for his
Religion, as to suffer for its sake? Eusebius tells us, ( Hist. l. 6. c. 10.)
that many Christians, of whom Serapion, though a good man, was one, that did
(...), fall off in times of Persecution. And that every Hypocrite would do so
too, we cannot doubt, since our Blessed Savior has thus foretold us, ( Matt.
13.21.) when Persecution arises, by and by he is offended. Bonds and
Imprisonment, Fire and Sword, flesh and blood looks upon as untoward things to
deal with.

And yet I must tell you, that to decline Sufferings and make choice of Sin, to
save our Liberties, Estates or Lives, with the loss of Religion, is so
dishonorable, that it does no way become us; it is an argument of an ignoble
Soul, one that is far from that Gallantry of Saint Paul, (Acts 21.13.) I am
ready not only to be bound, but also to die, etc. A Gaol, a Dungeon, a Cross,
he dreads them not; they are his Glory. See that expression of his, ( Gal.
6.17.) I bear in my body the marks of our Lord Jesus Christ: (...), the Scars,
the Cicatrices, the marks of Christ; (...), I bear them: but how? (...), says
Saint Chrysostom; not as burdens, but as Trophies and Ensigns of Honor.

And certainly, if it be indeed such an Honor to suffer for a good Religion,
what a shameful act must it be, through Fear and Cowardice, to disown and quit
it? Methinks the person that does it must needs, in his own apprehensions,
should the world say nothing, esteem himself unworthy, sordid, base. Eusebius
tells us, ( Hist. l. 5. c. 10.) that those poor-spirited Souls, who for fear of
suffering denied their Faith, were (...), dejected, cast down, full of shame.
And well they might indeed; for there is no Coward so base as he that quits the
field, and runs away, even then when the Quarrel is God's. And the truth is,
one would think that a little Courage might serve our turn, and excite us to
suffer, though somewhat considerably, for that Religion which, if constantly
embraced, owned and practiced, will infallibly secure us from those sorer and
most dreadful Sufferings which are reserved for the fearful, the unbelieving,
the unworthy Apostate, and that for ever.

3. To let go a Religion that is good, is matter of strange Imprudence, and the
most desperate Folly that can be.

For, as amongst that great variety of Gods which are adored by the several
Nations of the world, there is only one that is true: so amongst that great
diversity of Religions which are embraced and owned, there is only one that is
good. And if so, if there be but one Faith that is sound, if there be but one
Worship that is right; then whosoever forsakes this one that is good, must either
take up none, or one that is bad.

But, tell me who can, what folly greater? To be of no Religion is to be worse
then Brutes; for even they, in their kind, do pay some homage to their Maker:
and to exchange a true Religion for a false, is to become more silly then a
Child. See how smartly Saint Paul takes up the Galatians upon this very score,
( Gal. 3.1.) O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you? The Text imports,
that whosoever parts with a good Religion, and takes up a worse, is like a man
bewitched, strangely besotted, one that has quite lost his brains, and shows
himself a mere babe again.

True it is, an Infant may be so foolish, as to exchange Gold for glittering
Counters, and Pearls for pretty Babies; but will any man, that has his wits
about him, do so too? Well; false Religion, even in its richest dress, is no
more then a gaudy Baby: though it may seem somewhat pompous, and thereby take
some vain and inconsiderate persons; yet in it self it is but a pitiful and
worthless thing: what Varnish soever is set upon it, what fine Shows soever it
makes, yet what it is, Saint Paul really tells us, (1 Cor. 3.12.) wood, hay
stubble. It Is hay, that is fit for none but beasts; it is wood and stubble,
that is fit for little but the fire. Yea, but what is Religion that is true? is
that any thing better? Yea, the same Text styles that Gold, Silver, Precious
stones. It Is a thing of use, it is a thing of value: and if so, an exchange of
such a true Religion for a false would be, not (...), an exchange of Gold, not
for Brass, but mere Dross; an exchange of Silver, not for Lead, but Dirt. Sure
we are, whosoever exchangeth the only good Religion for any bad one, does
exchange God for an Idol, Heaven for Hell: and what a wise Bargain were this!
It Is such a Bargain as no man can make, but he must at least adventure the sore
wrath and highest displeasure of God.

It Is a dreadful expression that of the Apostle, (Heb. 10.38.) If any man draw
back: what is that? si fidem abjiciat, if he cast off the true Faith: what then?
my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Such a man, without a serious and timely
repentance, shall suffer the just Indignation of God, possibly in this world,
but certainly in the next.

It Is such a Consideration as does mightily oblige us, in the defense of our
selves as well as Truth, to be constant to our Religion, whatever it cost us.
It Is a great deal that we can do sometimes to avoid the wrath of man: we dare
even sin, we betray our Reason, we wound our Conscience; and all this to escape
the displeasure of man. But if the wrath of man, who is but a Worm, be
dreadful; the wrath of him who is the strong and jealous God is so much more.
Man's strongest Arm is nothing to God's little Finger: the hardest blows, the
heaviest strokes, the very utmost that man can inflict, is not to be named with
one angry word, with one sour look, one frown from Heaven.

Well then, here lies the Apostate's Folly: to pacify or please a man, he
provokes a God; to escape the sting of a Wasp, he throws himself into the
Eagle's claws; to escape Man's wrath, he adventures and stirs up God's. Or, if
perhaps he change his Religion in hopes of some Advantage, his Folly is the
same; because such hopes of earthly gain are like to end in the sad despair and
loss of Heaven.

O let us then remember that concerning expression of our Blessed Savior,
(Matt. 10.33.) Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before
my Father, etc. That person who shall unworthily deny his Savior, his Truths,
his Religion, before the Tribunal of Man, him will Christ disown before the
Judgment Seat of God; if we make that our Sin, Christ has made that our danger
too: and if so, if our Religion be good, what desperate fools shall we show our
selves, if we do not hold it fast?

Uses.
I. Consider how much to blame those persons are who do not concern themselves
for that which is good, but most stiffly retain and resolutely hold fast that
which is stark naught.

That every debauched and vicious person does so indeed, the case is plain: the
notorious Offendour cannot but know that his present Course of life is wicked,
and yet he will not mend it; it is impossible for the Sinner to be ignorant,
that his Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Swearing, Cheating, and
the like, are certainly evil things, and yet he will not leave them. Nor is it
thus with vicious persons only, but so stands the case with those that have
taken up such and such false Religions too. Such is the perverseness and
obstinacy of men, that, although it be but an easy matter by strength of
Argument to confute such and such a Papist, yet it is a difficult task to
convert and bring them off: so stiff, resolute and sullen is the poor deluded
Quaker, that, although we produce the clearest evidences of Scripture and
Reason against their wild and extravagant Opinions, yet where is the man that
can reduce them?

The truth is, so inclinable to evil, so averse from good, is the corrupted
nature of man; so great is the power of Education, so considerable is the
prevalence of Prepossessions and Prejudices, and so almost irresistible is the
Tyranny of evil Habits and Customs; that when once a man has taken up, and
been wont to, such and such Opinions or Practices, how unhappy soever, it is an
hard matter to prevail with him, even by the strongest Arguments, to change his
Religion or Course of life, though it certainly be ten thousand times for the
better. But what should be the Reason? what is it that makes the Sinner so
resolute and settled in his evil way, that no Argument can move him? Does man
indeed count it a dishonor to exchange Vice for Virtue, Falsehood for Truth,
that which is naught for that which is good? is it indeed a reproach to our
Judgment, to acknowledge our former mistake in the choice of a false Religion
by our present embraces of a true? Certainly, there is that spiritual Pride in
the heart of man, which does mightily retard and withold him from recanting
those Errors which hitherto he has vigorously maintained. Methinks it is with
a stiff Sectary in a bad Cause as with a stout Soldier in a good: though he
see himself overcome and beaten, yet he will rather die then yield; rather then
quit the ground whereon he stands, his dead Carcass shall cover it: so here,
there are some Papists, Heretics and Sectaries in the world so settled upon
their Lees, so dogged and resolute in their Heterodox and false Persuasions,
that, although we beat them out of all their Holds, though we baffle all their
Arguments, though we evidently prove the Soundness of our Profession and Vanity
of theirs; yet nunquam dimoveas, they are so far from renouncing their old
Opinions, that they will rather die in them, yea, and hazard their being damned
too. And if so, how well would it be both for our selves and the whole Church
of God, if every good man and Orthodox Christian would but hold Virtue and
Truth with that tenacious, fixed and unshaken Resolution, wherewith the Sinner
and the Sectary do hold fast Vice and Error?

II. Consider what abundant cause we have not only to justify the Innocence,
but magnify the Piety, and applaud the Prudence, of those worthy Persons who
were the Reformers of our Religion.

What various Censures the Reformation of our Church lies under, it is perhaps
no news to tell you: it lies under the Contradiction of sinners, being blamed,
upon different accounts, both by the Papist and Sectary too. The Papist blames
our Church, as if we had laid aside too much; the Sectary blames our Church, as
if we had laid aside too little: the one finds fault, that we have thrown away
some things of theirs; and the other finds fault, that we have not thrown away
all.

But such was the Wisdom of our first Reformers, and so great is the Prudence
and Piety of our present Church, that they have justly thought themselves less
concerned in the contradictory and groundless Cavils of men, then in the holy
and just Commands of God. It Is well known, that those Learned and Pious Persons
who were first employed about this honorable Work were not men of Luther's hot
and fiery spirit, they did not do it with Precipitance, Rashness and Haste,
but with mature Advice, Deliberation and Counsel. It Is sure enough, that they
well knew and duly considered what my Text requires. Prove all things; they did
so: again, hold fast that which is good; they did so too. For the Roman Faith,
which was then the established Religion of the Nation, being strictly examined
in all its Points, and all its Doctrines and Practices being exactly measured
by the Rule, whatever was found to be crooked, erroneous, heterodox, they cast
away; but as for that which proved good, necessary or laudable, they still
retained it.

And, methinks, this Consideration alone should be enough to take off that
slender Objection which some inconsiderate persons are wont to make against our
excellent Liturgy, as if it were the worse, because derived, as they say, from
the Roman Missal. For what if the Reformers of our Religion took that very
Book, which was then the Rule of Divine Service throughout the Kingdom, and
after a serious Enquiry into all its Parts and Offices, razed and blotted out
whatever deserved the Sponge? shall we blame them, if, after they had thus
proved all things, which is the first Command in the Text, they did also, in
obedience to the second, hold fast that which is good?

When Solomon was to build the Temple, I do not find that he liked his
Materials one jot the worse because they were fetched from Hiram, who was a mere
Pagan and an Idolatrous King: no; the Cedars being good, though presented by a
wicked hand, yet Solomon liked them, and so did God Almighty too. The case is
much like ours: When those eminent Persons of our Nation, under the happy
Reigns of Edward the Sixth and Queen Elizabeth, had leave and opportunity to
rebuild God's House, and repair the woeful Ruins of his Religion, their great
care was to furnish themselves with good Materials, not much regarding whence
they had them. Their business was, not to erect a new Church, but mend an old
one; and in so doing, they did no more then what is usually done by those
persons who are not so much to build, as to repair.

Put the case that a man take a ruinous house in pieces, with a design to
contrive and raise it better; shall we condemn this man for a fool, if,
throwing away whatever Stones and Timber prove to be naught and rotten, he do
use such old Materials as do appear firm and sound even as new ones? Thus stood
the case with the Reformers of our Church. They were encouraged to new mould
that old Religion which had been corrupted: well; they took it in pieces, they
considered all its Parts; whatever was naught and vicious they laid aside, but
whatever was good they still retained: and who can justly blame them? Pray tell
me, if Gold be right, if it be cleansed and scoured, what is it the worse for
being found upon a Dunghill? And if the Liturgy of our Church be such Gold
indeed, if it be so well purified and so thoroughly reformed, that it exceeds
all Liturgies besides, what is it the worse, if perhaps some parcels of it were
borrowed from the same Rome from which, peradventure, (after the Invasion of
the Pagan Saxons) we recovered by the hand of Austin the Monk our very Bibles
too? What our Concern is, my Text informs us, Prove all things; search, try,
examine that Service of our Church which our Reformers have recommended to us:
and when once that is done, if we find it innocent, good and holy, here is our
duty, Hold it fast.

III. Consider how much to blame those persons are, who out of Ignorance or
Debauchery, from Hopes or Fears, or the prevalence of such and such Examples,
have deserted the Reformed Religion, and embraced the Roman Religion, shall I
say, or Superstition? Such persons, in stead of obeying the great Command of my
Text, have most shamefully broke it; in stead of holding fast that which is
good, they have very unworthily let it go.

That the Reformed Religion is certainly good, that the Roman Religion, where
it differs from ours, is certainly naught, many pious and learned Divines, of
our own and other Churches, have proved by such Arguments as the Pope and all
his Councils can never answer without Sophistry, and with Satisfaction. They
have proved the Reformed Religion to be that very Religion which Christ and his
Apostles taught the world; that Religion which the most Ancient and wisest
Councils ratified; that Religion which the most early and judicious Fathers
have confirmed; that Religion which Pagan Tyrants persecuted; that Religion
which enabled the Martyrs with Comfort and Joy to kiss the Stake and embrace
the Flame; that Religion which teaches man to serve his God, obey his Prince,
and love his Neighbor.

And if so, if the Reformed Religion be indeed the Religion of God, whereas
that of Rome, in many things, is but the mere Invention of man; if the Reformed
Religion teach us the Worship of God alone, whereas that of Rome requires the
Adoration of Creatures too; if the Reformed Religion teach us to obey and
honor even wicked Rulers, whereas that of Rome teaches the deposing and
assassination of all Princes, how good soever, that do not please them; if the
Reformed Religion does protest against the Breach of sacred Oaths and other
Sins, whereas that of Rome dispenses with them; in a word, if the Reformed
Religion be certainly good, and that of Rome stark naught: I beseech you by all
that tender respect which you have for your Comfort in this world, or your
Interest in the next, by all that regard which you have for Christ and his
Church, for the honor of God or the Soul of man, Be steadfast, be unmovable, be
not trepanned out of your Religion; be not surprised nor cheated, nor yet be
scared and frighted out of your most holy Faith. O remember what my Text
commands, Hold fast that which is good. Why, Sirs, my soul for yours, your
present Religion is such; it is good, it is holy; it is a Religion that advances
Virtue, and beats down Vice; it is a Religion that exalts Christ, and lays
the Creature low; it is a Religion that pleases God, and saves man: and if so,
will you cast it off, and change it for a worse? Shall we be so much like
Aesop's Dog, as to exchange Substances for mere Shadows? Shall we be such
Naturals and perfect Fools, as to exchange Pearls of value for splendid and
gaudy Trifles?

Its true indeed, the Religion of Rome does transcend and outshine ours in
external Pomp and bravery; but what then? it is not this which takes with God,
and why should it take with man? There is many a dissembling Hypocrite that
makes a more glorious show then the real Saint; the dirty Comets do outblaze
the real Star: and yet shall we like them better? no; it is not for men, but
children, to be taken with Babies and Puppets. Secure your selves, that the
Religion of Rome, though it be magnificent and pompous, yet it is naught; though
it seem never so fair and fine, yet it is rotten: be confident that if you
change, you change for the worse; you cannot change, but you must dishonor
God, and undo your selves. I tell you again, it is worse, far worse, to be made
and turned a Papist, then to be bred one. The man that is so bred from his
Infancy, though his case be dangerous enough, yet here is something that
extenuateth his Sin, he neither does, nor, perhaps, for want of all better
means, can know any thing that is better; and, upon that score, as he may justly
plead, so, peradventure, God may mercifully spare, his Ignorance.

But however it fares with him, it will be worse with that person who, being
bred in the Reformed Church, where no means are wanting for his Confirmation in
the Protestant Faith, which he there embraced, does notwithstanding, upon this
or that Pretense, cast it off, turn Romanist, and thereby does at once become
an Idolater and an Apostate too. How God may deal with those who are born and
bred in the Roman Church, that are devout in their way, and think themselves
right, I cannot tell: but as for the Protestant, who might know, and yet is
ignorant, if he be betrayed by that supine and inexcusable Ignorance of his, or
tempted some other way to the Change of his Religion, his Sin is greater, his
Shame is greater, and his Danger is greater too; and so great, that it is more
then probable, that whosoever does thus remove from the True Church of England
to that Corrupted one of Rome, without a timely Repentance, and a serious
Recantation, his next remove will be from Earth to Hell.

Dxa THe.
FINIS.

