THE Complete Conformist, OR SEASONABLE ADVICE CONCERNING STRICT CONFORMITY,
AND Frequent Celebration OF THE Holy Communion. IN A SERMON Preached (on the
seventh of January, being the first Sunday after the Epiphany, in the Year
1682.) at the Cathedral; And in a Letter written to the Clergy of the
Archdeaconry of Durham. By Denis Grenville D.D. Archdeacon and Prebendary of
Durham.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1684.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Right Reverend Father in God NATHANIEL Lord Bishop
of DURHAM, AND Clerk of the Closet to His Majesty.
My Lord,
AS it has been matter of great Joy to all Devout Christians that God has put
it into the Heart of our most Reverend Primate of All England, to attempt the
Revival of Primitive Piety, and the long Eclipsed Honor of our Savior, by
restoring a weekly Celebration of the Holy Sacrament in his Metropolitical
Church: so I am confident it must needs be an extraordinary satisfaction to the
Regular Clergy of your own Diocese, where Conformity has fluorished in a high
measure (blessed be God) ever since the Restoration.

As I acknowledge it my Duty, my Lord, to render my self by all means, whether
in season or out of season, serviceable to God's Church, especially to the
Jurisdiction under you, wherein his Providence has placed me: so the due
Obedience and Reverence I justly bear you, oblige me to dedicate to your
Lordship the pains I have taken to promote a frequent Parochial Celebration of
the Holy Communion; humbly beseeching your Lordship to Countenance this
seasonable performance of my Duty, and honest Design to quicken my Brethren in
the faithful discharge of their Office.

And I do assure your Lordship, that I shall never Endeavor to promote my own
private Fantasies, either by adding to, or diminishing from the Established
Laws of our Church; but as firmly as my weakness will permit, shall strive to
maintain that excellent Order and Discipline which the Public Authority of the
Church has obliged us all unto; and as both your Self and Predecessor have
enjoined me, I shall as strenuously and prudently, as I am capable, administer
the same, for the promotion of the true end thereof, the Glory of God and
Salvation of those committed to my Care. Since, I know, I can neither do God,
nor your Lordship, more real, and, I hope, more acceptable service, than in so
doing.

That my Sermon (which was preached in my ordinary Course at the Cathedral) was
never intended for the Press, will easily appear from the Examination of the
Discourse it self; and that it was not Vanity, nor an Itch to be in Print,
which was the motive to this Publication, will (I am persuaded) be readily
granted by all those, who consider that it carries with it, no Temptation to
expose it to public View, but some well meant Zeal, which in a Censorious Age
is more apt to procure Contempt than Commendation.

Had I not in the Applicatory part (for the sake whereof I now set it forth)
pressed with some earnestness the Topic of Conformity, and the chief part
thereof, frequent Communion, (which to promote is the main design of this
Application to my Brethren) it had never seen the Light at present. But having
in the Conclusion of the Sermon set a Scheme of Conformity before the eyes of
the Laity, as I have in my Letter to the Clergy, presented them with another
belonging to Ecclesiastics, I judged the Discourses, not unfit to accompany,
since they may strengthen, one the other.

As an honest desire to contribute to the Public Good was my chief reason for
publishing my Sentiments in these matters; so is it a considerable motive for
my presuming in this manner to present them to your Lordship, that I may
discharge my own Conscience, and demonstrate how much I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obedient and most humble Servant, D. G.

Newly Published.
SHort Discourses upon the whole Common Prayer designed to inform the Judgment,
and excite the Devotion of such as daily use the same; by Tho. Comber D. D.

The Laver of Regeneration, and the Cup of Salvation, two plain and profitable
Discourses upon the two Sacraments: The one laying open the Nature of Baptism,
and earnestly pressing the serious consideration, and religious observation of
the Sacred Vow made by all Christians in their Baptism: The other, pressing as
earnestly the frequent Renewing of our Baptismal Vow at the Lords holy Table.
Demonstrating the indispensible necessity of Receiving, and the great sin and
danger of Neglecting, the Lords Supper, with Answers to the chief Pretenses
whereby the Absenters would excuse themselves.

The General Catalogue of Books Printed in England since the Dreadful Fire
1666, to the end of Trinity Term 1684. To which are added, a Catalogue of
Latin Books Printed in Foreign parts and in England since the year 1670.
Printed for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in S. Paul's Church Yard.

A SERMON.
JOHN I. 29. Behold the Lamb of God.
THE very first word of my Text does powerfully command your attention, and
require you to behold him to day, whom the Church presented as manifested
yesterday, which will be no unseasonable Meditation (you will find,) if you
examine the Services of the respective Sundays after the Epiphany, till the
Purification. It is no small matter in Scripture, that has an Ecce prefixed
thereunto; and nothing can better deserve it, than those passages that relate
to our Lord's wonderful Incarnation: namely, God manifested in the Flesh to be
true and very man, Born of a Virgin (the chief subject of Devotion on the Feast
of our Lord's Nativity) or the man Christ Jesus manifested to be God (the
subject of the Devotions on the Feast of the Epiphany) three several ways:
First, By the Wise men's coming to worship him twelve days after his Birth.
Secondly, By a Voice from Heaven at his Baptism, thirty years after. And
thirdly, By his first Miracle in Cana of Galilee where he turned Water into
Wine.

Which way soever we turn our Eyes to behold, either God manifested to be Man,
or Man manifested to be God, the Spectacle will be glorious and wonderful, and
every way deserving of our highest Admiration and Praise; which is in a
particular manner proper for our consideration at this Instant, when we are
approaching to the Table of our Lord to feed on his blessed Body and Blood.

And that that holy Duty of the Altar, as well as the other of the Pulpit, may
succeed to the honor of God, and comfort of our Souls, let us beg the
assistance of God's most holy Spirit, etc.

Ye shall pray for the holy Catholic Church of Christ, the Congregation of
Christian People, etc.

Behold the Lamb of God. Never any Spectacle in the world so well deserved a
Crier to call the People to behold it as this in the Text: Nor was there any
man in the world so fit to call Spectators to this Spectacle as the Baptist.
God is come down into the World in the Form of a Man, and shall not all men
desire to see him? The Baptist leapt for Joy at the news of his coming, when he
was yet in his Mothers Womb; How much more may he now congratulate his
Presence, when his eyes see him upon the Earth? Out of the abundance of his
heart his mouth speaks, and ravished (as it were) with the sight of his
Savior, he no sooner sees him [himself] coming, but he calls all others to
behold him, Behold the Lamb of God.

We read in Scripture of Ecce's before this of the Baptist, to the like
purpose. The Prophet Esaias had his Ecce, Behold a Virgin shall conceive. The
Prophet Zachary had his Ecce, Behold thy King comes. But John's Ecce is more
Emphatical than theirs. John was more than a Prophet. They showed him to the
Eye of Faith, he shows him to the Eye of Sense, so proving himself not only an
Harbinger, but an Herald. As he prepared his way before he came, so now does
he declare his presence being come. Behold the Lamb of God. The Text (with the
subsequent words) is an Epitome of the whole Gospel, preaching Remission of
sins by Jesus Christ. The grand Prerogative of the Church, the only happiness
of every faithful Soul, the ground of that Article of our Creed, wherein we
profess to believe the forgiveness of our sins. Here we learn that our sins are
pardoned and taken away, and that by Christ, through his Mediation, for his
Merits. If the Church has then, (as she has undoubtedly) power to set apart
days of Thanksgiving for any Blessing received, who can imagine that she should
not have power to separate one for the Commemoration of this stupendous mercy
we have lately Celebrated, the Son of God becoming the Son of the Virgin? Never
greater Blessing came to the Church than Christ's coming into the world. If the
Resurrection consigned that Day which we celebrate weekly for the Christian
Sabbath, his Nativity, Ascension, sending the Holy Ghost, and other Acts of
his, might no doubt (if the Church thought fit) have their peculiar Days of
Remembrance and Thanksgiving too, as free from Superstition as any present
Practice that has not a particular Precept.

The words are a Declaration of Christ come in the Flesh, (...), Behold the
Lamb of God.

In this Scripture we shall observe three things:

First, He came, '(...), A Lamb. Secondly, Not simply '(...), A Lamb; but by an
Excellency, (...), The Lamb. Thirdly, Not only so neither, but (...), The Lamb
of God.
1. Behold a Lamb. Our Savior is pleased in his Gospel to ask, To what shall
we liken the Kingdom of God? And by his Example we may here ask, To what shall
any man liken the Son of God? The Son of God is God, and God is incomparable.
As there is no other God besides him, so there is no other thing like unto him.
To whom shall we liken God, or what likeness shall we compare unto him? says
Esaias 40. 18. And yet the Baptist here calls him a Lamb, and in the Revelation
of St. John he is called a Lion, Chap. 5. v. 5. To clear this, you shall know,
that these and the like Metaphorical Appellations are given to God, not to note
his Essence, but certain of his Properties. And therefore we are not warranted
hereby to picture him like these, or any other Creatures, or to conceive of
him, as if he were any Created Thing, but to learn some of his Properties by
these Titles. Christ is as a Lamb, and as a Lion; as a Lamb in Patience, as a
Lion in his Power; as a Lamb in his Passion, as a Lion in his Resurrection. The
Holy Ghost is often pleased in Scripture to descend to the Capacity of Man, and
to express Divine Mysteries by Phrases most easy, and suitable to Humane
Apprehension; not that we should grossly conceive of God to be the thing by
which he makes himself known; but that by these Metaphors we may the more
plainly discern certain properties in him, as by the Title of Lamb in the Text.
The Baptist might have said, Behold the Messiah, Behold the King of Israel,
Behold the Son of God; but passing by these, he says, Behold the Lamb of God.
In which Metaphor we may note three Properties of Christ naturally to be known,
viz. his Innocence, Meekness, and Profitableness; or that great Benefit which
redounds to the Church by him, as I shall show you in every particular, with
great brevity, intending to be more large than ordinary in the Application.

1. Lamb notes his Innocence, for the Lamb is ever esteemed (...), the best
among mere Animals; and so we account him the most harmless Creature, an Emblem
of Unspotted Purity, and therefore a fit Title to set forth the Innocent Son of
God to the world; who was so innocent, that his Judge could find no fault in
him, John 18. 38. I find no fault in him, said Pilate there. Nay, the Devil
himself had nothing to accuse him of, The Prince of this World has nothing in
me, John 14. 30. The Council that condemned him, were forced to seek false
Witness, and though they sought, yet found they none, says the Evangelist,
Mat. 26. 59, 60. Both he that condemned him, and he that betrayed him,
pronounce him innocent, Mat. 27. 4, 24. And therefore St. Paul calls him a Lamb
without Spot or Blemish. He was indeed so eminently Innocent, that no one durst
say he was any way Nocent. The best of men are liable to Censures, and just
Castigations; their very Virtues are Imperfect and Censurable: But this Lamb is
so pure and white, that no man durst say that he was ever touched with the
least Peccadillo or smallest offense. He was clear of Original Sin, Conceived
of the Holy Ghost; he was void of all Actual Transgression, in Thought, Word,
and Deed; Clear in Thought, he knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5. 2. Clear in Word, There
was no guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 4. 22. Clear in Deed, he did no sin, in
the beginning of the same Verse. All which S. John gives in this General, There
was no sin in him, 1 John 3. 5. And this is our happiness, we are hereby
confirmed in our Faith, that he died for our sins, having none of his own, and
that God has accepted him for our Transgressions, he being so pure and
Immaculate a Lamb, of such infinite Worth, so perfect a Sacrifice, and
satisfactory Oblation.

St. John probably might have some special aim in the Title. As thus, He
professes, that his Baptism was for Remission of Sins, and Christ coming to be
Baptized of him, the People might think he had Sins to be remitted. To prevent
this suspicion, he calls him an innocent Lamb, Behold Christ coming to be
Baptized, (he might have said) but not for the same Ends as you. You are
Baptized for your selves, that your sins may be forgiven; but He for you, that
your Baptism may be available for the Remission of your sins. He was baptized
in his Natural Body, that you might be Baptized Spiritually in his Mystical
Body. He came not to cleanse himself by the Water of Baptism, for he was
without sin, but to sanctify the Water of Baptism for your Purification; To
cleanse the Font, and not himself; To elevate the Water of Baptism above its
natural Condition; To be the Instrument of the Holy Ghost for the spiritual
washing of our Souls, to make it indeed such a Fountain of Water, as was
promised to be opened to the House of Jacob for Sin, and for Uncleanness, Zach.
13. 1. Behold then in the first place an Innocent Lamb.

2. As Christ is a Lamb for Innocence, so likewise for Patience and Meekness.
St John Baptist might have called him, as in the Revelation, The Lion of the
Tribe of Judah: but then they might have feared him; for what more terrible
than a Lion? But that he might not hinder their Baptizing, whose Baptism he
came to sanctify, St. John calls him a Lamb, which as every one knows, is
sincerum, simplex, and sine fraud Pecus, the meekest, sincerest, and most
simple Creature. Every other Creature has some Frowardness in it. Even the Fly
has its spleen, and the Worm that is trod on, turns again; but the Lamb is led
to the slaughter, without striving, and is dumb before the Shearer, not opening
his mouth, Esaias 53. A most notable Instance whereof was seen in our Lord
Jesus's sufferings; for was not Christ just such a Lamb? shorn (if I may so
say) and shaven by the cruel Censure of an unjust Judge, at Gabbatha, John 19.
13. and slaughtered by his bloody Crucifiers at Golgotha, ver. 51. and yet all
this while never moved to any Impatience. They Fleece him of his Coat, fley him
of his Skin, if not wholly, yet in part, by their Whipping, and Scourging, and
Goaring of him; more Pitiful to his Coat than to his Skin and Body, and yet he
is still as meek as a Lamb. He endures all their Butcherly handling of him,
with silent Patience, without Clamor, and without Complaint, who when he was
reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2. 23.
There was a Sword drawn, by one, in our Saviors defense, and a wound given by
it, but it was much against his Will; who to show his dislike, Cured the Wound,
and checked his Disciple for giving it, Mat. 26. 52. John 18. 11. and therefore
this Act of the Disciple can be no prejudice to his Master's Patience, who was
so harmless, that he never did hurt to other, and so wonderfully meek, that he
never resisted those that injured him. Though the Wrongs he suffered were
extreme, the Indignity he bare, to Flesh and Blood intolerable; yet in this
Extremity he commits his Cause to him that judges righteously, and for all the
Cruelty and Indignity which he underwent, he never opened his mouth in anger;
not one ill word against his Persecutors, but many good ones for them. All the
Revenge that he desires is, that no Vengeance be taken on them. Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do. Moses the meekest man upon the Earth, had
his Patience moved at Meribah, Numbers 20. 10, 11, 12, 13. The Patience of Job
is famous even to a Proverb, and yet he often complained. Beyond these and all
other Examples, Christ suffered more than all, with the incomparable meekness
of a Patient Lamb. When I think of this, I cannot but wonder at the Nature and
Disposition of them that call themselves Christians, and yet herein are quite
opposite to the nature of Christ: And that such a glorious Example of Virtue
should be no more prevalent with us, and have no power on us. He endured, for
our sakes, all things that were most painful to Humane Nature, without the
least kind of murmuring or complaint. He suffered Reproaches, Revilings,
Scoffings, Scorning, Buffeting, Whipping, Death it self, nay, a most painful
and shameful one, without the least desire of Revenge. When we, alas, poor
despicable Worms, cannot for any sake, God's sake, or Christ Jesus sake, suffer
the least contradiction either to our Nature, or our Humor. A little loss of
Reputation, or Goods, (which are less valuable,) a Blow, or but a Word,
sometimes are thought things intolerable. All our power and might on such
trifling accounts, (as if Vengeance were ours, and not God's) is presently
raised to revenge our Quarrel. In this our Nature crosses our Title; for if we
be Christians, we must be Anointed with some Drops of that Oil, with some
degrees of those Virtues, that so much abounded in him. So says St. Peter in
the present Case, He gave himself an Example, that we should follow his steps.
Christ's sheep hear his Voice, and follow him, Joh. 10. 27. His Disciples [all
that belong to him] are Sheep, not Goats, not Wolves but Lambs, Innocent and
meek Lambs.

3. As Christ is Innocent and meek, so like a Lamb, he is profitable also. As a
Lamb, to the Owner affords both his Fleece and his substance, one to Cloth
him, the other to Feed him; so is Christ to us, both our Garment to cover our
Sin, and our Food to nourish our Souls.

How Christ is our Garment to cover our sin has been the subject of a former
Sermon; and the design of this Discourse, and Duties of the Day, will not give
leave to repeat; how he becomes our Food, I hope you will find soon after, by
experience, in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, on which I shall reflect in
the Application: but before that, we have two particulars to be yet briefly
handled. It is remarkable the Baptist calls him not simply a Lamb, but The
Lamb, and not barely so, but The Lamb of God.

II. Behold The Lamb, (...), The Lamb which the Prophet Esaias foreshewed to be
the Propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of his People, Esaias 53. 7. The Lamb
prefigured by Moses in the Passover, Exodus 12. As the Blood of the Lamb
sprinkled upon the Posts of the Door, saved the Israelites from the Plague of
the Destroyer; so the Blood of this Lamb, sprinkled by Faith on our Hearts,
shall preserve us from Sin, and all the Powers of Darkness. In a word, The Lamb
that was Prefigured in all the other Lambs under the Law, That, in the Daily
Offering, That, in the Trespass Offering, and That, in the Peace Offering, all
of them, and all other Legal Sacrifices; the Truth, the Substance of them all,
is in this Lamb. Which Lamb is our Passover, 1 Cor. 5. 7. We have no other Way
or Means to make the Lord pass over the houses of our Souls, in the Day of his
Wrath, but by the observing of this Passover. He only is our Propitiation, 1 John 2. 1. We have no other Sacrifice for Sin, no other Peace Offering; our
Reconciliation, our Atonement is only in his Blood, who alone was perfectly
Innocent, fit to Redeem Sinners, essentially Meek and Patient, fit to suffer
for Trespasses; and so Dear to God, that he alone could prevail with him to
turn his Wrath from us. And therefore leaving all other Sacrifices, we cleave
only to him. All other Sacrifices had all their Virtue from him, the most
sufficient Sacrifice in himself, being The Lamb of God.

III. The Lamb of God? Are not all Lambs, you will say, His, The Lambs of God?
All the Beasts of the Forest are his, and so are the Cattle upon a Thousand
Hills. Yes, But this by an Excellency, is God's Lamb, God's Lamb in a most
peculiar and especial manner. The others are God's Lambs for the Priest to
sacrifice, this for God himself to sacrifice. Therefore, says Ferus, is Christ
called Agnus Dei, because God gave him. So God loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, John 3. 16. Sacrifice and Offerings in Scripture are
called theirs that presented them. The Firstlings of the Flock which Abel
offered are called his Offering, Genesis 4. 9. And the Bullock which the People
were to offer for their Sins, is by Moses called the Peoples Sin-Offering; and
in this Sense Christ is called the Lamb of God; because God gave him, God
offered him. Christ being thus God's Sacrifice, Offered by himself, he is
therefore called God's Lamb. See, Hear, and Admire then the wonderful Love of
God. Was there no Ransom for the Sin of Lost Man, but only the offering the Son
of God? Was not a Lamb sufficient, but it must be the Lamb of God? And was
there no other to offer him, but God? the Father to sacrifice his only Son? Oh
how great was God's Love to do so much for us! How great our Sin to require so
much to be done! The Sacrifices of Beasts were but for a time, neither were
they sufficient of themselves, at any time, to make the Comers thereunto
perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, Heb. 9. 9. All their Virtue and Worth
was from this Sacrifice of God's Lamb, which was Typified in theirs, the
Substance of these shadows. When their Time was fulfilled, God put a Period to
those kinds of Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices for Sin; Then his own Lamb comes
to the Altar. His own Son has a Body fitted, and comes to do his Father's
Will; by which Will we are sanctified, through the Offering of the Body of
Jesus Christ once for all, as the Apostle speaks.

And thus having dispatched all the Particulars I proposed to discourse of,
give me leave to spend the remaining time in some useful Improvement of, and
Reflections on, the Text, the Time, and the Sacrament to which we are
approaching, and whereto both Preacher and People ought chiefly to draw their
Meditations. And therefore I hope for pardon, if I employ a considerable part
of the time allotted, to this purpose.

Application.
We have, lately, Celebrated three great and solemn Festivals, relating to our
blessed Lord and Savior, his Nativity, his Circumcision, and his Epiphany. In
the first, we remember his taking upon himself Humane Nature; In the second,
his becoming obedient to the Law for Man; In the third, the manifestation of
himself to be God. The business of the Text, then, can be no unseasonable nor
unprofitable Employment, the beholding him, who has been so lately exposed to
view, especially on a Day, when the very Sacrament of his Body and Blood (those
Sacred Pledges of his Love) are exposed on his Altar; and to what end this Son
of God was manifested, we learn from St. John, namely, to destroy the Works of
the Devil. He was born, that we might be Newborn. He was Circumcised in the
Flesh, that we might be Circumcised in Heart and Spirit. And he was manifested
to the Gentiles, that their Posterity (of whom we are part) like the Wise men,
might throughout all Ages, Worship and Adore him, with all due respect and
humility both of Body and Soul; nay, I might add likewise, with their Estates
too: for otherwise we shall be very deficient in imitating their pious Example,
for they did (during his low estate of Humiliation, even to a Stable and
Manger) pay him Tribute, not only from their Souls, but from their Bodies also,
for they fell down and worshipped him (a Respect which many of us too often
grutch him now he is in his highest Exaltation;) and not only thus paying him
Tribute from their Bodies, but from their Estates, Worshipping him with Gifts
and Oblations, offering him Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh. Which may serve as a
sufficient Justification of our Churches Practice, in requiring the Offertory
to be a constant Companion of the Holy Communion (yea, and that too a very
significant part of the Office) and also a sufficient ground of Reproof to all
those, that shall presume to neglect so Laudable and Edifying a Practice; an
Imposition unexceptionable, and reasonable to be performed by the Poor as well
as the Rich, since the poor Widows Mite is Recorded in Scripture to be as
acceptable to God, as the rich man's Abundance, cast into the Treasury.

But to return to our glorious Spectacle, whether we view him in the Inn, in
the Arms of his Mother, or in the Temple, bleeding under the Hand and Knife of
the Priest, or lastly, receiving Divine Worship from Kings who came to Adore
him; we have before our eyes a Pattern of the greatest Love, Purity, and
Condescension; indeed the Grand Exemplar of all Virtue, more especially of
those Virtues, which have been the subject of the Discourse, Innocence, and
Meekness. Certain it is, that if we could but take a full and perfect view of
this Prospect (of all the most lovely) it would have some blessed Effects on
us, in Transforming us into his Likeness, in making of us (at least in some
small measure and degree) Pure as he is Pure, Innocent as he is Innocent, Meek
as he is Meek. Were we but Obedient and Faithful to our God, to our Church, to
our own Souls, in frequenting the House of God (on these solemn Occasions) but
with honest Hearts, and good Meaning, viewing him in his service, viewing him
in his Sacraments (by Faith) we should never want some comfortable Issue of our
Endeavors, we should not be so unsuccessful (as we are) in the Reformation of
our Lives, and the Conforming of them to the Life of Christ, the Innocent,
Meek, and blessed Jesus. To do this (and we can do nothing of greater
importance) should be the subject of all our Resolutions, (it has been no holy
nor happy Christmas, if it has not prevailed with us to resolve to be better
men:) But such a Resolution does most particularly concern us, who are now
approaching to God's Altar.

Brethren, we can put no tricks upon the Almighty, who searches, and sees,
the Heart as we see Faces. It is not our demure Looks, nor our outward humble
Postures, or most solemn Prostrations, that can render us acceptable. Guests,
and unite us to our Savior; but a lively Faith, firm Hope, a fervent Charity,
and sincere Resolutions of new Obedience, especially in reference to those
matters, wherein we have most notoriously displeased God, and defiled our own
Consciences. The Exercise of these things in sincerity, though not in
Perfection* are Essentially necessary to secure unto us the Pardon of our Sins,
and a Title to the Kingdom of Heaven. Which as it is the main design of all our
receptions of the Lords Supper, so should it be more especially our business,
when we perform this Duty at great and solemn Festivals, and so extraordinary a
Time, when the very newness of the Year will powerfully invite us to newness of
Life. Such as are perfectly deaf to this Call, and can resist all the
Invitations we have, from the very Time and Custom, to amend our ways, are not
likely to make it much the business of their Thoughts for the remaining part of
the Year. To begin well does not absolutely necessitate a good Conclusion, but
certainly is a considerable step toward the same, otherwise it would never
have been familiarized into a Proverb, What Is well begun, is half ended. Let us
all then, I beseech you, in the name of God, take care how we enter upon the
New-year without newness of Life, after having received so many Mercies, and
committed so many Sins the Year past. Among those Gifts which Custom does
oblige us to bestow, let us, in the first place give our Hearts unto God. Let
the Glutton and Drunkard renounce his sottish Intemperance: Let the common
Swearer renounce his inexcusable sin of Profanation of God's Name: Let the
Malicious renounce his Malice and Revenge: Let the Proud and Imperious renounce
his Haughtiness of Mind: Let the wretched Miser renounce his Avarice, and
oppression of his Brother: Let the Furious and wrathful renounce his Anger and
Impatience: And lastly, let the stupid Sluggard (I mean chiefly in reference to
Religion) forsake his Sloth, and carelessness of his precious and immortal
Soul. Let every Sinner renounce his most beloved sin, and seasonably discharge
himself of that Burden, which may chance (as light as he makes it) to press
him, before another Anniversary, into Hell. We are all yet (God be praised)
alive, and have our Day of Salvation continued to us, and are capable to lay
hold on Eternal Life. Our merciful and gracious God has carried us, thus far,
through the dangers of Body and Soul, wherewith we have been, from our Cradles,
encompassed. But that we should (all here present, every individual Person)
live to see another Year, and to enjoy the blessed opportunity (which I fear
too many of us will wilfully reject) of Feasting on our Savior's Body and
Blood, in this very place, is hardly possible to conceive. It is highly
probable, that sundry of our Friends and Acquaintance, who did, with as much
confidence, as we do at present, promise themselves long life a year ago, are
now mouldred into Durst, and gone before us into the Land of Darkness, where
they inherit, as the Wise man speaks (as to the state of the Body) nothing but
Worms and creeping things. And that we should think our selves more immortal
than those that have gone before us, is contrary to all Reason as well as daily
Experience. Certain it is, that it would become us, (the best of us) if we
consider our selves but as men endued with Common Sense, to take a little more
care of our future state, and how we do launch forth, unprepared, into the
Ocean of Eternity, and descend into the Grave, out of which there is no
Redemption. Upon these, and the like Considerations, methinks we should
(without any more ado) all resolve, for the remainder of our days, to be as
constant Guests at our Lord's Table, as he requires, and our Duty obliges us
to; and in particular, none should dare let slip the present Call we have, from
the very Season, to a Heavenly Banquet, where we may have Communion with the
God of Heaven, Converse with the Holy Angels, and Feast on the Son of God, and
thereby be made partakers of those inestimable benefits Christ purchased for
us, by his bitter and bloody Death and Passion, namely, pardon of Sins,
sanctifying Grace, and a Title to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Here, here is the best (...) and truest Trial, not only of our growth in
Grace, but of our sincerity in Religion; I mean, how we stand affected to the
holy Sacrament of Christ's precious Body and Blood. If we make that, which, if
rightly performed, is, the most Essential part of God's Service, a Ceremony to
be done, when we have little, or nothing else to do, and can contentedly,
without just or lawful Impediment, absent our selves from God's House, even at
the most solemn times of Celebration, or can boldly, without scruple, turn our
backs on the Lord's Table (a higher Act of profane Contempt than the former)
when we see it ready furnished, and hear our Dear Lord and Savior summoning
us, by his Ministers, and inviting us to Sup with him, in order to our being
Everlastingly happy, we are either grossly ignorant, stupendiously negligent, or
egregiously profane.

To produce in our Souls an earnest longing to be united to our Dear Lord and
Savior by Faith, Hope, and Charity; and to receive these Pledges of his Love,
in these holy Mysteries, is the main End, both of our Prayers and Sermons. And
therefore to dote so much on a Sermon, as to justle out the Sacrament, the
highest Office of Christian Religion, is a most Preposterous way of Devotion,
and a Piece of Anti-Christianism, rather than Christianity; for the chief
design of Sermons is to fit, and prepare for this Sacrament, without doing
whereof no Sermon can be prevalent and effectual to a holy life, which made a
great and holy Writer of our own Country Thorndike.
declare in his Works, That he knew not what those Sermons did signify, that
did no ways dispose toward the Reception of the blessed Eucharist, which
cannot be denied to be the most undoubted Instrument, and best means to convey
Grace to: and promote Virtue in, a Christian Soul.

This caused the Church of England too (we may conceive) to keep her ground in
the Reformation, in retaining part of her Communion Service, on all Sundays and
Holy Days, even when there is no Celebration; Proclaiming that she is always
ready to give it (as a worthy Churchman notes) whenever any People shall be
so Religiously disposed as to desire it: nay, absolutely enjoining it, in all
those solemn places, (whether Collegiate Churches, or Colleges) where she was
assured of an Assembly of Priests and Deacons, from whom she might justly
expect more constant attendance, and higher Devotion: taking care, that when
she rejected the Corruptions, Superstitions, and Idolatries of the Mass, she
might pay as much respect, as a degenerate, and indevout Age would bear, unto
the Communion; no where condemning the Daily Celebration heretofore practiced,
or yet Vide Liturgies of Edward VI.
retained in any Christian Church, but the solitary Communion of the Popish
Priests, and their way of Offering up Christ daily, as a Sacrifice for the
Living and the Dead; (neither of which can be termed a Communion.) For a
private Mass, when no one Communicates with the Priest (or when there does, if
the People are deprived of the Cup) can neither in Logic, or Grammar, deserve
the name.

The Church of England would by no means descend so low, as the Church of Rome
does, in her expectation from the Laity, (that Church requiring Laymen to
receive absolutely, but once in the Year, under Penalty) but imposes on every
one of the People, in the most busy Circumstances, and in the most
inconsiderable Parish or Chaplery, where there be fewest Communions, an
Obligation to receive at least three times in the Year, looking on it (as
certainly it is) an intolerable Relaxation to let People go lower. Which yet,
it is to be feared, is, as high, or higher than many of us go, who live nigh a
Cathedral, where there are Celebrations Monthly, and cannot be denied Weekly,
if any reasonable Number of devout People did heartily desire that great
Privilege that the Church allows them. Which, rightly considered, is the
greatest Benefit and Happiness of a Son of the Church of England; as it is one
of the greatest Honors and Ornaments of our Common Prayer Book, that there is
a Rubric or Rule, which supposes a Priest weekly Officiating at the Altar.

There is not among us a more undeniable Relic or Remainder of Popery (which
may be truly so termed) than the notorious and scandalous contempt of the
Communion. This was (I well remember) declared in one of our first Synods of
the Clergy, by our Diocesan after the Restoration. No Church in the Christian
world, pretends more, and shows less respect to, the Communion, than the Church
of Rome; most of their Tokens of Respect being the highest Dishonor and
disgrace that was ever cast upon the Son of God, and his holy Sacrament of his
precious Body and Blood.

This sad Contempt of the chiefest means that ever Christ instituted for the
support of Religion, (which loss of ground in the Church of God, gave the
greatest Wound that ever was given unto Piety) has been fairly, or rather
foully, Copied by the Separatists from the Church of England; insomuch, that we
may term seldom Communicating to be a piece of Fanaticism as well as Popery,
the holy Eucharist being never so disgracefully Rejected, and vilely Trampled
on, as in the Times of Schism and Rebellion, when those who showed great Zeal
for Sermons, (in many places daily) were contented without a Sacrament Yearly:
nay, those that would have three or four Sermons on a Sunday, did not once, in
some places, Celebrate the Lord's Supper in three or four Years; no, (I dare
affirm, and I know what I say) in thirteen or fourteen years together. A
blessed Reformation!

So egregious and lamentable a Contempt of Christ's Death, and the last
Commands of a dying Savior, Do this in Remembrance of me, as we see our
Adversaries, on both hands, do concur in, should create a holy Indignation in
us, who in some things are forward enough to have a kind of Antipathy against
them, and oblige us to distinguish our selves by a contrary Practice, as much
as possible, from such false and pretended Catholics and Protestants, who by
their Pretenses thereto, God knows, have almost brought both Catholic and
Protestant Religion into Contempt.

And here a kind of Spirit of Opposition, or Contradiction (whereby too many do
only measure their Religion) would be very laudable, and the most effectual
means, under God, to preserve us from the Machinations, or Malice of either.
True Piety, as it is the best Policy, will be the most sure defense against our
Adversaries of every Persuasion. Let us be sure to be in truth and reality what
they Profess, and would be thought to be, sticking closely, nay, giving up our
selves entirely to God and Goodness in a sincere, spiritual, and devout use of
those means of Salvation, which are undoubtedly of Christ's own Institution; not
fondly pretending to be Honourers of God's Word, and yet downright Contemners
of his Worship (whereof this Sacrament, to which we are approaching, is the
most excellent part) nor Friends to his Sanctuary, when we are none to his
Sacraments, nor to be zealous Assertors of the Religion of our Church, and yet
live contrary to the Established Rule of God's Worship, i. e. our
Common Prayer Book, wherein every Member of our Church, (though they are not
engaged thereto by so Sacred a Tie, as the giving an Assent and Consent
publicly in a Congregation,) has a part to act (and a great one too) which
would require much serious study and consideration (and which, by a few
particulars I hope to demonstrate.)

First, It is without all doubt, that every Layman, of our Communion, is bound
to assist at, as the Minister is to say, Divine Service daily, when God places
him in such blessed Circumstances (as you are) to enjoy the same, and the
necessary and indispensable Affairs of his Life and Calling will permit; and
when they will not (which is a just Impediment) on days of business to send, if
possible, some Person of his Family to be a Representative, and keep up its
Interest in that continual Sacrifice, appointed by God and the Church to be
Offered up, in behalf of the whole Congregation, and which extends to the
Faithful that are lawfully absent as well as the present.

Secondly, Without all dispute, it is the Duty of every Person, when he comes
to God's House, to labor as much as in him lies, to secure a whole Service,
and more especially the Beginning and the Conclusion; I mean the Confession and
Absolution, together with the Final Prayers and Benediction, which a multitude
of People, through their slothful negligence in repairing to, and profane haste
in departing from, the Temple, seldom enjoy all the Year long, thereby losing
the chief ends of their coming; and such People too, oftentimes, (their own
Consciences can bear me Witness) who are very loath to be Herded among
Non-Conformists.

Thirdly, It is of unquestionable Obligation, that all Persons, of every Sex,
should join, not only with Heart, but Voice, at all the appointed parts of the
Service belonging to the People, and study the Order and Rules of the Book, (to
which it is a horrid shame and sin for any to be a stranger) so, as to be by no
means ignorant of what is Incumbent on them; making it their Business, or at
least their Divertisement, at home in their Houses (especially when God has
blessed them with a Harmonious Voice) to qualify themselves for the
performance of their Duties in Public. I mean, chiefly, the Eucharistical
parts of the Office, which are the special parts of God's Public Service, and
which truly make it the Sacrifice of Praise, the best Fruit of our Lips, and
part of our Christian Sacrifice, which we are to offer up to God continually
all the days of our Lives, by and through Christ our High Priest, now entered
into the Heavens, giving Thanks unto his Name.

Fourthly, It is every Persons Duty, that has no Infirmity of body, to observe
punctually all those Decent and Reverend Postures and Gestures, which are
Commanded by Authority, and so strictly required at all Times, and in all
Places, (even where External Reverence and high Solemnity are more dispensable
than in the Quire of a Cathedral) that whosoever shall dare to neglect them in
this solemn Place, I dare pronounce him a man of more than ordinary Assurance
and Profaneness. And this Affront done to God, and his Worship, is most
unpardonable in those, that have no Pleas against our Liturgy, from an
Erroneous or Scrupulous Conscience.

Fifthly, To pay the Honor due to God's House and Service, by resorting to it
for all those Church Offices that are commanded to be performed publicly in
the Congregation, and never moving, nor pressing the Priest to bring that into
the Church, which by the very Nature of the the Thing, as well as Order of the
Book, Visit. of sick.
is absolutely confined to the Chamber.

Sixthly, To observe all those Holy Days, Times, and Seasons, which are, by
Lawful Authority, set apart and Dedicated to God's Service and Worship in such
devout manner as the Church requires, and good Conscience obliges, all pious
Christians; making it often Matter of serious Thought and Consideration, so as
to manage and order the Business and Affairs of our Lives and Callings that
they may not Interfere, and Clash with our more Imediate Duty, and Homage to
God, which is of greater and higher Obligation; and through want of Religious
Foresight, to multiply necessities of our own making, and then to plead them as
a sufficient Exemption from doing our Duty to God; and think them sufficient
Motives to tempt us to rob God both of his Time and Service; I mean our Holy
Festivals, and proper Offices on them, which is a certain piece of Sacrilege
and of an higher nature than what we sometimes term so, not unworthy the
consideration of those who pass for, and pretend to be great friends to both,
but give small Evidence thereof by their due respect to either.

Seventhly, Remembering that Religion, and our Church, enjoins Fasting as well
as Feasting, and allows Days and Seasons for the Exercise of Repentance as well
as Spiritual Joy, it concerns us rightly to employ and improve them for the
Necessities of our own Souls, as well as the Example of others, sacrificing
sometimes our own Reputations, to revive such wise and Godly Institutions (if
we cannot do it at a cheaper Rate) since the contempt of them, (especially
among pretended Friends, those that should have supported the Honor of them)
has proved sadly to the decay of true Piety and Devotion; for the restoring
whereof there are no more probable means, I am apt to believe, than the
Restoration of the Primitive use of them.

Lastly, (And which comes nearest to the Point that I have chiesly pressed in
my Application) duly to frequent the holy Sacrament, that Celestial Feast and
Banquet, at the Table of the Lord, where it is most Just and Congruous, (here
in this Church) that there should be higher Festivity than elsewhere, since our
Local Statutes oblige us to extraordinary Feasting at our own. And those who
regard not the frequent spiritual Calls they have from God's Church and
Ministers to the one, more than the Lay-Invitations they have to the other,
discover less Conscience than Civility.

It is, I humbly conceive, without all Objection, that there is scarce a Church
in England, that may more justly expect, than the Church of Durham, a Communion
Table well furnished with Guests and devout People, crouding up to the Horns of
the Altar, in as great Numbers on our constant ordinary Communion Days (which
are too often Thin even to scandal) as we usually have on our high and greatest
Festivals; which very badly deserve the Name, when they have not the
Celebration of the Eucharist on them; and are, in some sort, turned into
Fasting days, when there is great Feasting at our own Tables, and none at the
Lord's. A Meditation I am sure no ways improper for this Place and Country,
which is so great a Pretender to, and which does so much surpass other parts of
the Nation in Hospitality.

And here having presented you with a brief Scheme of that Conformity, which
the Church expects from all her Children, give me leave to add that a bare
outward Respect and Regularity cannot denominate us true Conformists. He that
is not a sincere Christian, is not a right Conformist, and however he may
chance to Evade the Penalties of the Law, yet can no ways approve himself to
God. The wholesome Rules and Orders of our Church are wisely contrived, for the
Promotion of Godliness and Piety in the Souls of men; And he that does
Conscientiously use and obey them, will quickly find the truth of what I say by
experience. Every Christian that does faithfully and devoutly labor to put his
Soul into a right Frame to recite his part of the Public Prayers, in a
spiritual manner, and with Understanding, shall never fail to profit his own
Soul, and please God. And whosoever does heartily strive to do this daily in a
better manner (and certainly it is all our Duties so to do, and we cannot more
profitably direct and employ our Private Devotions than to this end and
purpose) shall not fail to improve himself in Virtue and Devotion, and grow in
Grace and Christian knowledge, till, from a very Babe, he become a strong and
perfect man in Christ Jesus; especially if he keeps pace with the Church in
that high respect which she pays to the holy Eucharist, and blessed Memorial of
Christ's Death and Passion: which as it is, and ever has been, esteemed in the
Church of God, the very top of our Christian Services; so it is, rightly used,
Equivalent to them all, and will prove to all humble, wellmeaning Souls, that
approach thereunto with a Habit of sincere Devotion (though by unavoidable
Encumbrances and Impediments deprived of much time to be spent in Actual
Preparation) more Efficacious than all other Performances.

How great stress the Church lays on the constant use of a Liturgy, and the
offering up to God Forms of Prayers and Praise, stamped with Authority, every
Morning and Evening in Public, is sufficiently evident from her own
Injunctions; and how much greater stress she lays upon the offering up unto
God, a Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, in the Sacrament of his Body and
Blood at the Altar (which ought to be esteemed by us equal to a whole weeks
other Services) appears by her great Zeal for the Communion, in the
Reformation, when she rejected the Superstitions, crept into the Roman Missal,
injoyning as great Frequency as any Church in Reformed Rubr. for daily
Communion. 1 B. of Edw. Vi.
Christendom.

And how great sin, both of our Forefathers, as well as our selves, may be
charged on us, for deserting God's Altar; and how great Vengeance may hang over
our Heads, and the Heads of our Posterity, for such Profane and Contemptuous
trifling with God, and our Souls, (as has been, and is customary in most
Assemblies of our Nation, and in none, I fear, more than in these, relating to
this City, on this Account,) I leave to God, and your own Consciences to judge;
Beseeching him that by a seasonable shunning of the Sin, you may effectually
avoid the Punishment. Now to God the Father, etc.

Soli Deo Gloria.
ADVICE CONCERNING Strict Conformity and frequent Celebration of the Holy
Communion, etc.
Reverend Brethren,
SINCE the most Reverend PRIMATE of all England has at this time judged it
expedient, to restore the Blessed Eucharist in his own Metropolitical Church,
and sundry other Cathedrals, so far to its due Honor, as to revive those
Rubricks which necessarily suppose a weekly Celebration thereof in all
Cathedral Collegiate Churches and Colleges; And in Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches and Colleges, where there are many Priests and Deacons, they shall all
receive the Communion with the Priest every Sunday at the least, except they
have a reasonable cause to the contrary. Rubr. 4. after the Communion Office.
and that there is reasonable ground to hope that other Cathedrals will
speedily follow so good an Example; I humbly conceive it the Duty of every
Archdeacon and other Ordinaries, that have Jurisdiction, to improve this
present occasion by stirring up all the Clergy, committed to their charge, to
imitate, as far as in them lies, an Example so pious and worthy of their high
Station, by celebrating the Holy Communion more frequently, than of late has
been accustomed in Parish Churches, even as often as the Circumstances of their
People and Cures do require and will bear; it being the Duty of every Parson of
a Parish, to quicken his Flock, to repair more frequently and with more zeal to
God's Altar, since God's Providence, and the care and wisdom of our Governors,
do now at an extraordinary conjuncture of Affairs invite them thereto; when not
only the Church of England, but other Reformed Churches, nay all the Christian
Churches in the World, call for solemn Devotions, Prayers and Praises to God.

Accordingly, I do very gladly embrace this happy occasion to invite you, my
Brethren, to put your helping hand to this pious work of Reforming the
unaccountable neglect of the blessed Sacrament, the most necessary and assured
means of Grace and Edification, which has by the Indevotion of the Age too far
prevailed, (whereof our Governors now seem very sensible) not only in
Parochial Churches, but even in Cathedrals themselves, to the great scandal of
our Religion and detriment of Men's Souls. Craving therefore the liberty to
remind you, that as God has put it into the Hearts of our Reverend Prelates,
to rectify this great abuse in sundry Cathedrals, so it seems to be in a
particular manner the Duty of the Clergy of our Diocese, to lead on others
within the Province by their good Examples, in this great piece of Piety and
Devotion; since we did by the zeal, care and vigilance of our deceased Prelate,
sooner than other Dioceses, arrive to a high pitch of Conformity and more exact
observation of the Laws and Rules of our Church, established by Authority, and
expressed in our Common Prayer Book (I may say it without Injury to others)
than any other part of England.

In this Order, established among us by Bishop Cosins, we have been encouraged
to continue by our present Diocesan, in his public Discourses to the Clergy,
in his primary and later Visitations, and more particularly in his last
Discourse which he made to the Clergy in the Church of St. Oswalds in August
1683. when he advised all Ministers to take heed, how they governed themselves
by their own Fancies in the Execution of their Office, rather than the Rule of
their Book: And I hope, you will all do me that Justice, as to ackowledg, that
I have always endeavored, ever since I did relate to the Arch-deaconry of
Durham, which is somewhat more than twenty years, faithfully (though weakly)
according to my bounden Duty, to see the Injunctions of both these my Lords the
Bishops put in Execution, without allowing any Liberty to any of the Clergy, to
vary from the clear Rules of the Church, whereto they have given their assent
and consent; and that among other matters, I have not failed to use some honest
zeal, to move you to the frequent celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, the main end both of our Services and Sermons; desiring that it should
be administered in every Church, so frequently, that all Persons might have an
opportunity to participate so often, at least, as the Law requires under
Penalty, which is thrice in the year. But sundry of the Clergy, notwithstanding
mine, and more powerful Arguments, in several Episcopal Visitations, having not
been prevailed on to administer the very Sacrament it self oftener than so
(which renders it impossible for a confiderable part of the People to comply
with that important Obligation) I could not satisfy my Conscience to let slip
this very fit occasion of pressing them to the performance of their Duty in
this particular, that though through the profaneness of the Age, the number of
Guests may chance to be very few at the Lord's Table, yet that there might not
lie so much Guilt at the Clergies door, as not to furnish the Table, and give
the People frequent Invitations thereto, nor more Guilt at the door of the Arch
deacon, in ceasing to press them to a Duty of so great moment as the frequent
and Reverend Administration of the Holy Sacrament, I have judged meet at this
time, thus to apply my self unto you.

The serious consideration of such a Duty, now incumbent upon me, did first put
into my Thoughts the publication of the foregoing Sermon, the conclusive and
Applicatory Part being an Exhortation to that Duty, which not only your
unworthy Archdeacon, but our Superiors at the Helm, call you unto, hoping
that it may by God's Blessing give you some occasion to consider the greatness
of the Sin of this Age, in the contempt of this most holy Institution of our
blessed Lord and Savior, and the fitness of this present Conjuncture for all
us of the Clergy, to return to the discharge of this most essential part of our
Ministerial Function, which hitherto we have to our shame and sin too generally
neglected. It is now a matter of Prudence as well as Piety to remove so great a
scandal, since this Return to our Duty begins regularly, and is the result of
the wise and godly Counsels of our Governors; The chief Metropolitical Church
by its Example inviting all Cathedrals to Celebrate the Eucharist, according to
the Rubric, every Lord's Day at least.

The Example of Cathedrals begins already, God be praised, to encourage this
good work Canterbury, Oxford, Ely, Worcester, Exeter, Chichester, Gloucester,
etc.
of Piety for the increase of Devotion, wherein they seem decently to admonish
the Parochial Churches to a proportionable frequency; That as the Mother
Churches advance on toward the Primitive practice of a daily celebration of
the Sacred Memorials of Christ's Death and Passion, so may they as obsequious
Children, advance as far as is practicable, and morally possible for them,
toward a weekly Communion, by celebrating the Holy Sacrament at least Monthly,
in all considerable Towns and populous Villages. For even a daily celebration
of the Sacrament was retained by the Apostolic zeal of our Blessed Reformers,
and required not only in Cathedrals, but in the most considerable Parochial
Churches also. Therefore give me leave to recommend a monthly Celebration in
populous Towns and Villages, as a Duty not only very pious and reasonable, but
even necessary; that every one may have an opportunity to communicate so often,
as the Law requires, that is, at least three times every year, whereof Easter
is still to be one. For it is unjustifiable in any Minister, not to allow his
Parishioners opportunity, to avoid the sin of Breaking, as well as incurring
the penalty of the Law. Yet this cannot easily be done in great Parishes and
Towns, without a monthly Communion. As for Example, Suppose but six hundred
Communicants in a Parish (and you know that we have a great many Parishes that
have double that number) and but one Minister upon the place to serve the Cure,
if we should allow fifty for each celebration, a Monthly Sacrament is necessary
to give all the six hundred an opportunity to receive once, with any tolerable
convenience, and a Communion every Fortnight (i.e. four and twenty Communions)
to give them an opportunity to receive twice, and three Communions in a Month,
i. e. six and thirty Communions in the year, to afford them an opportunity to
receive thrice; and four Communions in the Month, that is, a weekly Communion
or forty eight Communions in the year, at least to receive four times each; and
to have opportunity to receive less than four times, no good Christian ought to
be in any manner satisfied. For even the Reformed Churches beyond Sea, whose
Distress we commiserate, and whose Defects we pity, come not lower than this;
though in many places they are forced to go ten, a dozen, and sometimes more
Miles to enjoy that Benefit. So that you see, if we should consult the
conveniences of a populous Parish, whose number of Communicants exceed not six
hundred, a Weekly Communion is not more than necessary; and granting this,
which is demonstrable, a Monthly Communion is the least, which can be dispensed
withal in any Parish in the former circumstances, in the respect of the People.
But more than that is required, if we regard the Ministers due performance of
his Office: for where there are 600 Communicants and but a Monthly Communion,
to give them an opportunity to receive every one four times a year, there is a
necessity to distribute the same to two hundred Communicants at once, each
Distribution; which is as much, as it is possible for any one Minister to
undergo, and much more than any Minister can undertake, unless he be of a very
strong and healthy constitution. Besides that, where a Minister reads all the
Prayers according to the Rubric (as he is obliged to do, by all the Authority
God has committed to either the Church or State, and by his own Solemn
Protestation) and preaches also, so large a Communion will lengthen the time
beyond measure.

These things considered, do render it very expedient to have the Blessed
Sacrament often administered on the great and solemn Festivals also, as well as
once a month, since fewer celebrations will be an intolerable burden to the
Minister, where people frequent the Holy Sacrament; and yet not to afford
devout People so many opportunities to receive as they may desire, and are
obliged to, is to discharge the Duty of our Ministry neither Devoutly nor
Faithfully.

It being then absolutely necessary, to save people from the penalty of the
Law, and commodious for all Persons, as well as for enabling every Minister
duly and rightly to discharge his Office according to Law, to have such
frequent Celebrations as I press for, I hope I shall meet with no opposition
from you, my Brethren, in this honest and reasonable motion.

Since the daily Homage that is offered unto God in our Parish Churches (a
thing I fear more rare in other Dioceses) has preached a long time very
successfully to the Nation, and may have contributed, in all probability, to
that good order, which some other places are now advancing to; Let us, in the
name of God, lead on in those higher Duties of Religion, and endeavor to
outstrip other Jurisdictions, in our Respects to God's Altar, as we have
hitherto in our love to God's Service, and an exact conformity to the Rules of
our Common Prayer Book. This will be an emulation very laudable and profitable.

The Church of England, when she abolished the Mass in the Reformation, neither
condemned nor rejected the frequent celebration of the Holy Communion, for that
would have been more a Deformation than a Reformation. The Rubric of the first
Book of K. Edward VI. both supposes and ordains even a daily Communion. It
supposes it in this Rubric, in the order how to read the holy Scripture. Ye
must note also, that the Collect, Epistle and Gospel appointed for the Sunday,
shall serve all the Week after except there fall some Feast that has his
propre. Again, before the Exhortation to the Communion, in Cathedral Churches
or other places, where there is a daily Communion, it shall be sufficient to
read this Exhortation above-written once a Month, and in Parish Churches upon
Weekdays it may be left unsaid. See before the Exhortation to the Communion,
etc.

That they ordained a daily Communion, appears by this Rubric. Also, That the
Receiving of the Sacrament of the blessed Body and Blood of Christ may be most
agreeable to the Institution thereof, and to the usage of the Primitive Church,
in all Cathedrals and Collegiate Churches, there shall always some communicate
with the Priest that ministers: the sixth Rubric at the end of the Communion.

And this was truly primitive indeed; for St. Austin says, Per hoc sacerdos
est, ipse Offerens ipse and Oblatio, cujus rei Sacramentum Quotidianum esse
voluit Ecclesiae Sacrificium, quae cum ipsius Capitis corpus sit, seipsam per
ipsum discit offerre. S. Aug. de Civitat. Dei, Lib. 10. c. 20. The first of
these Rubricks are yet retained in our Common Prayer Book, and why the rest
were omitted, seems to me only for brevities sake, as a thing known; as the
after Reformers did in many other things, to avoid prolixity as near as can be
judged.

Upon the Restoration of the King and the Church, after so deplorable Disorder
in Church and State, when all God's public Worship, as well as his Holy
Sacraments, had been for many years together thrown quite out of Doors, and the
holy Sacrament not administered any way for fifteen years together; it was a
great matter to procure Guests enough at the Lord's Table, to keep up a monthly
Communion in Cathedrals; which is the Reason I suppose why the Governors of
our Church, after they had in the Convocation, strengthened the Rubric
concerning Weekly Communions, had not put this holy practice generally into
Execution. But we having now gained that point, blessed be God, and lived to
see the Monthly Sacraments not only in many Cathedrals very well, and in all
Cathedrals reasonably well frequented, but also in Parish Churches, not only in
great Cities and Towns, but even in the Country (whereof God be praised in this
Diocese we want not some Instances), we of the Clergy ought to proceed farther
toward a right and due administration of the holy Sacrament, using our utmost
diligence in the administration thereof in our Churches, and utmost zeal in
quickening of people to repair to it with due Reverence and frequency, not
doubting but that in a short time, by God's blessing, we shall see the Lord's
Table as well furnished once a Month in Country Parishes, as it has been of
late even in some Cathedrals, and Weekly Sacraments in them ^re long, as well
frequented as Monthly have been for the time past. For these means of Grace
being of Christ's own Institution, must be acknowledged the most effectual to
revive Devotion and increase Religion in a profane Age. And consequently the
frequent and Reverend Administration of the holy Sacrament, and the peoples
right use of the same, being the most probable course that can be taken in
order to the salvation of their Souls, it becomes the duty of every faithful
Priest zealously to embrace this blessed opportunity to concur with the will of
their Superiors, for the enjoyment of more frequent opportunities.

As the decay of true devotion and Divine Charity in the World did first
occasion among Priests, this deplorable negligence (whereof there is great
ground of complaint;) so the inexcusable neglect of Administering the holy
Eucharist, has sadly increased Indevotion and uncharitableness among Men. If
we then do heartily and sincerely desire the Revival of Christian Piety and
brotherly Love, let us betake our selves to the right use of those admirable
means that our dear Lord and Savior instituted, to the very end and purpose to
beget and increase those and all other necessary Graces in Men's Souls.

Whether we consider the present circumstances of our own Church and Kingdom,
or the public state of Christendom, we have at this time an especial Call to
the Duties of the Altar. We have here in this Nation of late received some
never to be forgotten Mercies at the hands of our Heavenly Father, nay God has
extended his Love also this year past, in an extraordinary manner, to all
Christendom, in preserving the Christian Army against the Infidels; and some
very remarkable returns of Gratitude to Almighty God, are incumbent upon all
that profess Christianity. For God having removed in a good measure our Fears
at home, and defeated in a signal manner our common Enemy abroad, gratulatory
Sacrisices were never more seasonable. Such stupendous Mercies as we have been
partakers of, deserve more than one single day of Thanksgiving; and the most
acceptable returns of Thanks that we can possibly make to our gracious God,
will be those praises that are from Reformed Lives, sincere Hearts and
mortified Souls, devoutly offered to him at his Altar, Gratitude is the most
essential Grace to a good Communicant, and does denominate the Eucharist. The
best standing Monument then of our thanks unto God, will be our vigorous
endeavors to restore this blessed Sacrament to its due Reverence and esteem,
being to us the communication of the Body and Blood of Christ. This seems to be
the sense of the Fathers of our Church in choosing this critical Minute, to
restore the holy Eucharist to a Weekly Celebration in Cathedrals, to their high
honor and praise and the great comfort of truly devout Souls.

We have had more than sufficient experience both in Church and State, of the
dismal effects of Irregularity in God's public Worship, and there is little
ground of hopes, that we shall ever be delivered from the contagion of
Conventicles, as long as the example of our own People, and too often God knows
our own Clergy, spawn new Nonconformists; i. e. while they are but half
Conformists themselves, they give wrong measures to disaffected or
indifferently affected people, and insinuate into them very wrong Notions of
Conformity, so that much more exactness of obedience to the Laws of the Church,
both in Priest and People, must be concluded absolutely necessary toward our
settlement.

And therefore all Priests would do well to remember that their public assent
and consent to their Commonprayer Book, the subscription of the 3d Article in
the 36. Canon, and the sealing with their Saviors Blood at their Ordination
all their holy Vows and Resolutions, to practice such diligence in their Office
and holiness of Life, as is incumbent upon a good Priest, do render those that
have not made it their serious endeavors to observe their Rule of Conformity,
grounded on the Law of God, established by the Authority of the Church and
State, and confirmed by their own Acts and Deeds, highly guilty both before God
and Man.

In the next place, Lay People also would do well to consider that they have
public Obligations to observe their Common Prayer Book, (when they are in the
public Assembly) as far as it concerns them, as is shown in the conclusion of
the Sermon. To which Law there must be better regard had than there has been,
or we are like to continue in very tottering circumstances.

But all the noise that has been, or can be made by Clergy or Laity about
Conformity, will signify nothing, but aggravate men's guilt, if both are not
really Conformists, which no Man can be, who is a contemner of the holy
Sacrament of our Lord's Supper. Our respect thereto is the best Argument that
we can give, either of our Conformity or Christianity. And truly those that pay
no more regard to the Sacrament than they are driven to by the very penalty of
the Law, give very bad proof of their sincerity in either. The right and due
Administration of the holy Communion of our Savior's Body and Blood is equal
to all our Services, and therefore the exactest Conformity without the due
reception of the blessed Sacrament makes a person but half a Conformist, nay
indeed but half a Christian. And it is matter of greatest wonder, that such
multitudes who live in the constant neglect of those sacred Mysteries and
pledges of Christ's Love, (so as not to receive once a year) can imagine
themselves either. They are indeed so far from giving undeniable proofs, that
they are true Conformists, that they give no demonstration that they are not
Papists, nay very Heathens.

The Nation, blessed be God, begins to be somewhat sensible hereof, as we may
judge by those advances that have been lately made toward good order and
regularity even among the people of London, who, if they go on as they have
done for these two years last past, they may by their good make some amends for
the evil Example that they have given to the Nation, and contribute to the cure
of those Wounds which so bad a President has given to Conformity. To complete
then that excellent Rule of Conformity, which the Church of England aims at,
there is an absolute necessity to restore these sacred Pledges and highest
assurance of our eternal Salvation, to their just honor and use, by frequent
celebration; the want whereof has caused them to fall under a most grievous
neglect, if not heinous contempt, even among the generality of reformed
Christians; a great part of them going no farther than just to satisfy the
Law, not good Conscience, and many who yet pretend much zeal for our Church,
not far enough to satisfy either.

To set about so excellent and Christian a Work, besides the Call at this time
from our Superiors, we have more Arguments to encourage than discourage us.
For First, There do appear, blessed be God, some better tokens both of Religion
and Loyalty, than for some years past among the people of the Nation. Men seem
better than heretofore disposed toward good order in general, and begin to be
awaked into some sense of their Duty to God and the King, nay, into some real
feeling, it is to be hoped, that it is their Interest to stick close to the
established Religion and Prerogative of their Sovereign, rather than to consume
all their zeal in a needless concern for the Liberty and Property of the
Subject, in less danger than any where in the World. Most People seem now very
well convinced of the necessity of the execution of the Law, and in particular
of the Act of Uniformity; the scandalous neglect of which upon Examination may
be found one special cause of the disorders both in Church and State. And very
considerable steps have been made in sundry places of the Nation toward a
better settlement. Our gracious Sovereign has for his own part, done even
Wonders in new modelling the Capital City of the Nation, wherein God's
Providence has evidently appeared in blessing His Majesty, in the dexterous
management of Affairs, by reducing that ungovernable body to so considerable
degree of Obedience; Of 26 Aldermen, there were 18 who continued firm to the
King's Interest.
A famous Lord Mayor and sundry Loyal and faithful Members of that Body (for
whom the whole Nation has great reason to bless God) have also done their
parts worthily, in withstanding the Rabble, who it were (and not the City of
London) that did so furiously bend themselves, under a specious show of
Religion, to destroy the Government. And it is well known that some faithful
and painful Divines, have done great things beyond expectation upon this
account, with very considerable success even in the City of London, which one
would have believed in such a degree tainted, that it had been scarce possible
to have reduced any Congregation to half that order and decency, which is by
the mercy of God visible in many. And we have Instances, God be praised, of the
like nature, not only in our City of London, but in other parts of the Nation.
Devout People also in several places, have made Addresses to the Clergy to
enjoy more frequency of Communions. What remains then, but that we of the
Clergy, should faithfully and vigorously do our parts in our respective
Stations toward the restoring decayed Piety, by the diligent and reverend use
of the most effectual and infallible means to produce so desirable an end,
which are those of Christ's own Institution, namely the faithful and religious
Feeding at his Table, eating his Body and drinking his Blood. Thus piously
commemorating the precious Death of our dear Lord until his coming again. And
these things considered, it is more easy for all Priests, for us especially,
to set about the faithful discharge of their Duty, than it has been for many
years past. God has defeated the Rage and Craft of the Enemies that would
undermine us, as well as those that would devour us. We have in some manner
regained (God make us sensible and thankful) our lost ground, and are or may
be, if we please, in circumstances to do the same things that were unhappily
slipped, in practice, though enjoined at the Restoration. Clergymen may now more
plausibly set upon the performance of those Duties, which they have long lived
in the neglect of; nay, they can with no more safety of Reputation, than of
Conscience, live any longer in the Omission of them. For the very Mr. Seamour.
Mr. Lamb. Mr. Allen.
Laics of our Communion do not only invite us, by their Examples, to more
exact conformity, but very powerfully press us thereto by their Writings, who
with diverse eminent Writers convince the Ministers as well as People of the
wrong Notions they have received concerning Conformity, and constancy of
communicating; for which honest zeal they deserve much praise. In which
Christian Attempt we of this Diocese, have less reason than others to be
remiss. The Bishopric of Durham has been styled long since Terra Sacerdotum,
and ever since the happy Return of our Sovereign, it has been more famous than
other parts for Conformity; and very justly: for though there happen to be some
Omissions, even to scandal, which an honest Visitor can no way approve of (and
which I never did, nor ever shall) yet in respect of most Dioceses of England,
we have long led the Van, and outstrip'd them in good order and regularity of
public Worship; to wit, in a more exact observation of our Rubric, in daily
Prayers and constant Catechizing; nay, in some Country Parish Churches have
enjoyed monthly Communions, celebrated by fuller numbers than perhaps in some
great Cities; I might add, and speak what I know, than in some Cathedrals. It
is manifest therefore, that the time requires an exact Conformity to the Rule
of God's public Worship, being thus quickened by the Government, and chief
Governors of Church and State, by the pious Laity as well as Clergy, by both
our Friends and Enemies.

These and other Encouragements which we have, God be thanked, to provoke us to
attempt a higher pitch of good Order and Conformity, than has ever yet obtained
since the Restoration, ought to balance all the discouragements we can
possibly have to the contrary; and should create in us rather a hearty concern
for our own excellent Religion established, than an excessive aversion to other
Men's. We have talked, Preached and written sufficiently, sometimes more than
enough, against Fanaticism, and yet all the while have lived in so constant a
Breach, and contempt of clear Laws of great importance, and easily practicable,
that the Nonconformity of the Clergy has a second time been like to prove our
ruin. And so on the other side, while many have been enflamed with a mighty
preposterous zeal against Popery, they have not been concerned for the most
truly, and best Reformed Religion in the World; yea among our selves (for the
last is the sin of our Adversaries) for these hundred years past, we have shown
much more Indignation against the corruptions of the Mass, than hearty love to
the Communion, the contempt of which holy Institution of Christ, seems to be
the most visible Flaw of Professors in Reformed Christendom; which is the most
unaccountable part of the practice of the Church of England Men, and the
weakest place that we have to defend (if we are attacked) against our
Adversaries.

If we therefore would ever do any extraordinary thing on this account (and
something more than ordinary God certainly expects from us) this seems the
time. All things thus happily concurring, to promote this excellent work of
Piety, it may in all probability by God's blessing more contribute to the
reviving true Christian Charity and Devotion, than all the endeavors from the
Pulpit, or Press since the Reformation.

The Fruits and Advantages of the good Order, which we above other places
enjoy, appeared sufficiently to move others to desire and endeavor after the
same, during our late combustions. For we all know, that while Seditious and
evil Men by tumultuous Petitions, Ignoramus Juries, factious Cabals, and
rebellious Associations, were laboring to undermine both the Crown and the
Mitre, and had discovered their mischievous Designs by some bold offers toward
the same, none here in this Country dared so much as to make any offers toward
any thing of either of those Natures; though we cannot deny but that we have
some very bad Men who want no will to do mischief, were they not discouraged by
more Activity in the Magistrate, and zeal in the Clergy, than is visible in
other places.

These undeniable Advantages of Uniformity, should not only encourage others
to begin what we have long enjoyed, but spur us on faithfully to use our utmost
diligence to rectify those Irregularities, which yet remain, and whereof your
Ordinaries have in their public Conventions of the Clergy from time to time
complained. For as comparative Holiness (i. e. being better than others, when
we come short of our Rule of Christianity) will never make us Christians; so
neither will a comparative Conformity (in being more regular than those that
are deficient in their Duty) denominate us true Conformists. It is without all
dispute that no Person ought to fancy himself a Christian, that lives in the
constant Omission of any one clear Law of Christ; neither can any person be
deservedly termed a Conformist, that lives in the constant Omission of any one
clear Law of the Rule of his Conformity, i. e. his Common Prayer Book; nay,
after having made a public Declaration in the Church, in the face of God and
presence of a Congregation, there may be some question made whether he be an
honest Man.

There must be an honest hearty endeavor to obey Rules and duties of
Obligation, imposed on us by our Superiors, without the liberty of our own
prudence, to denominate us regular and Obedient. He that picks and chooses what
is most suitable to his own humor and cease to practice other matters of
equal or higher Obligation, is neither. Men's governing themselves by their
private Fancies, rather than by the wisdom of their Superiors, is always of
pernicious consequence, but never so intolerable, as in reference to God's
public Worship; which has been the reason that there has been so great care
taken by ancient Councils and Canons, to restrain the liberty of Priests in
their public Ministrations. And this certainly was the reason that the Church
of England, in the Reformation, took care to tie Men up to a prescript Rule,
leaving no liberty for variation; but in the Application to a dying Soul, and
in the Preface to the Office of Churching of Women (which last is in our
present Liturgy prefixed) nay they descended so low as to put words in the
Priests mouth, and not give him the liberty of using his own expressions before
or after a Lesson, Epistle, or Gospel. Not but that the Church well knew, that
every Person who was qualified to discharge the Office of a Priest, did
understand well enough what to say upon the like occasions, but that all Men
were very apt to abuse the Liberty that was granted them (the most conceited
persons often fancying themselves the most prudent, and taking more liberty
than others,) and that there was no surer way to prevent Ministers from
exposing themselves and prostituting God's Worship to the wills and humors of
fanciful Men, than setting bounds and limits; which no Man should under penalty
exceed.

Upon consideration of these and other great Inconveniences, attending the
Exercise of private Prudence in God's public Service; the Church of England
has all along, down from the Reformation, abridged Ministers also, of the
liberty of any Addresses to God in a precatory way in a Pulpit, before Sermon;
(and whatever liberty Clergymen have taken, it is certain there was never *
Vide A small Treatise called The old Puritan detected and defeated; written by
Dr. Stuart.
any given) enjoining a certain form of bidding Prayer, by way of Exhortation
to the People, very particularly designed to assert the King's Title, and by a
methodical Enumeration of our greatest Obligations in relation to public
Prayer, to prepare us the better to offer up to God the Lord's Prayer, the best
and most comprehensive of all Prayers.

In order to the prevention of the ill consequences of such undue Liberties,
whereby this Church has sorely smarted, it will be requisite to have a right
Notion of Prudence, and to understand fully the Power which the Church gives
Ministers, in their public Ministrations.

Now certainly it can be no Virtue but a sin for any Man, much more a Minister,
to live in the neglect of known Duty; and that it is the Duty of every Priest
of the Church of England, to discharge his Office in the Congregation, without
the Exaltation of his own private prudence above the Churches, is easy to make
appear.

First, There is a prescribed Rule of God's public Worship, according to
Ancient Canons, etc. Council. Carthag. Can. 106. and Council. Milevit. Can. 12.


Secondly, This Rule (lately reviewed and examined by a Convocation) upon
mature deliberation and great advice had, was confirmed by Act of Parliament,
and which allows no Man to take on him any Cure of Souls, without declaring
publicly his approbation thereof, and resolution to practice it.

Thirdly, As has been already hinted, Ministers do not only promise with
their Mouths, but under their Hands, an exact Conformity, in the subscription
of the Articles contained in the 36th. Canon.

Fourthly, All Ministers are by their Promises at their Ordination bound to
obey their Ordinaries and other chief Ministers godly Admonitions, which
renders all Irregularities in this Diocese more blameable than elsewhere, since
the Clergy here have been all along called upon by their Superiors, to come up
to such an exact Conformity as I have spoken of.

Fifthly, The observation of the abuse of former Liberty, makes it reasonable,
that Ministers now should be more sparing to take any, even in doubtful cases,
without the approbation of the Bishop of the Diocese, who has Power given him
by the Book to determine matters that are not clear, but none at all to
dispense with the Law.

These considerations making it plain, that a strict observance of the very
Letter of the Law of our Common Prayer Book, is not only a Duty incumbent on
Ministers, but a Duty of very high and sacred Obligation, there can be no place
left for private prudence, unless where it is supposed and specified. As for
Example, In the Office of Visitation of the Sick, and in doubtful cases, where
the resolution of the Bishop or Archbishop cannot be procured. Secondly, In
the manner of performance of his Duty more or less to Edification, as to some
circumstances, whereto the Book does not extend. Thirdly, As to the Liberty of
choice, which the Book allows of, in point of variety of Forms, etc. Fourthly,
In all occasional Addresses from the Desk (made after the Nicene Creed, the
usual time of Addresses to the people) either voluntary, within the compass of
the Rubric, or imposed on Ministers, by the King or Ordinary of the place, or
else at any other times of the Service, pro Re nata. Fifthly, In the choice of
Texts or Subjects of Sermons from the Pulpit, as well as in composing and
managing of them to Edification, with discreet and pious zeal; which is a
Province of so large an extent, that Ministers are very unreasonable, that
desire farther Liberty of Prudence, and which has been, and is still, so
notoriously abused, that there seems to be some manifest necessity, for a
restraint of the Liberty of the Pulpit, as well as for the return of Ministers
to an exact observation of their Rule, so as to go generally one way, in the
practice of such Orders as are clear and express.

Here in these like things, all Ministers have sufficient opportunity to
evidence to the World their prudence; but for Ministers to pretend to use
prudence, where it is absolutely forbidden by the Law, is to expose the
Lawmakers and themselves, and being contrary to known Duty, is certainly
desperate Imprudence, and a manifest contempt of the wisdom of the Church,
which has always judged it a dangerous thing, to give Liberty to Ministers, to
exercise their own prudence overmuch in their Ecclesiastic Ministrations; and
accordingly, has from time to time, more closely tied up their hands. And a
reslection on the undue Exercise of what Men too often term Prudence, caused a
great Churchman often to say, that, What was left to the Discretion, was left
to the Indiscretion of the Minister.

It is not of less moment for all Divines to have a very right apprehension of
true Moderation, than of Prudence. The mistakes concerning which two excellent
Virtues, have been of fatal consequence to our Church and Kingdom. Now this all
men may be sure of, that it can be no more true Christian Moderation, sor
Ministers to indulge the Peoples Sin, than it is prudence in Ministers to allow
themselves in the neglect of known Duty; much less to do both, namely neglect
known Duty, as to themselves, and indulge known Sin, in reference to their
People. And it is to be feared that all those Ministers, who live in the
constant neglect of the known Rules of their Common prayer Book, which are very
few, clear and practicable, are justly liable to a Censure of this nature; or
at least would do well to suspect themselves, since they do not only run
Counter to the Judgment and practice of some very great Lights of the Church,
all down along from the Reformation, but discern so bad a fruit and Issue of
their specious Compliances, that the Dow-baked Parson, as well as the
Par-boiled-Justice, appears to be without Dispute a great Promoter, if not
Author of our Schism. A notable Instance, nay a kind of demonstration of the
truth of what I say, is this, namely, that here, in the Bishopric of Durham,
where the Clergy have been more than elsewhere abridged in undue Liberties and
compliances, has appeared constantly a better face of uniformity and Order
than any where else in the Nation. And on the other side, where the greatest
Liberty has been taken, and most compliances used, under the color of
Prudence and Moderation, there Conformity has always more visibly declined,
and Fanaticism increased and grown to such an incredible height and pitch of
Insolence, that our danger of that, has been as great as our Fears of Popery.
This needs no proof, but may very well deserve much serious consideration. And
I do in the name of God, and by virtue of my Office, with all Humility and
Earnestness, beseech all you, my Brethren, at present within my Jurisdiction,
with great seriousness and sincerity, to ponder and examine what I have from
time to time very earnestly, by word of Mouth, recommended unto you, and now
again seasonably, in imitation of the zeal of our Superiors, repeat unto you
in Writing, that whether my honest Desires and Injunctions are complied withal,
or no, I may give some Evidence to the World, that I have honestly discharged
my Conscience in setting before your eyes, not only some past Arguments of
Conformity, which have been often insisted on, but the fitness of this present
Conjuncture for all of you respectively, to inflame your Zeal and to complete
Conformity in your Parishes, since it may more easily be done, than many
Parishes in other parts of England can be brought to that Order, which the most
Irregular place among us, has all along enjoyed since the Restoration.

But truly till we do in all Parishes, come up to such a frequent Celebration
of the Communion, as the Law requires, i. e. that the Communion may be so often
Administered, that every person may have opportunity to receive at least three
times a year, we shall have no reason to be over-proud of our Conformity: for
since the most considerable and substantial part of God's Worship, i. e. the
Sacrament of his most blessed Body and Blood is so much neglected, we are very
deficient in the use of the chief means of Grace, and so very far from true
Conformists (though we should advance on in many other points of Order) which
would be much, now, to our Reproach, if we should not, since we have very good
Example given us, lately, not only in remote parts of England, but in our
Neighbor Jurisdiction, nay even in some Corporations (where we despaired of
Conformity) and more particularly in the Town of Newcastle upon Tine, which we
cannot deny, (by the blessing of God, a worthy Vicar and good Officers and
Magistrates) is now reduced to as considerable a degree of Conformity, as any
large Corporation (being a Seaport Town) in the Nation, there being now not
any Conventicle on any day, and very full Churches on days of public Worship,
as well as some competent number of People to attend the public Prayers of the
Church, every Morning and Evening on days of work and business, and is every
day making greater steps toward the Uniformity that is aimed at in the Church
of England.

And here before I leave the present Topic of Diligence in the Office of a
Priest, in the exact observation of our Rule, in opposition to the pretended
moderation of the Age, which we have sorely felt to be in reality great Rigor
and Cruelty, permit me to mind you, that as I never did or do approve of the
Exaltation of Men's private Prudence above the Churches, in any direction that
is apparent to the understanding, and easy to be practiced, (and there are
very few other to be found in the whole Book); so I do desire and advise all
Ministers (provided they themselves officiate according to the order of the
Church) to use all imaginable Tenderness and condescension toward disaffected
or deluded People, in laboring with Christian Meekness to convince and
persuade them, and never using any severity or compulsion, till people have
rendered themselves unexcusable, by obstinacy and contempt of past Indulgence:
for the spirit of Meekness should always precede the Rod, in the godly exercise
of Discipline and execution of Law. This is that which we all promised to do at
our first admission into the Order of Priesthood, and which is imposed upon us
by the 66th. Canon, namely, to make personal application to Recusants, and to
labor to reduce Sectaries, (who are now included in the word Recusant) by
reasoning with them in private, at their Houses; which Duty I cannot conceive
how any faithful Minister can, with good Conscience, live in so constant
omission of, as I discover the generality of the Clergy of the Jurisdiction do,
to the great grief of my mind, increase of their own Guilt, and detriment of
peoples Souls.

But I wonder most of all, that Ministers, who, out of tender Regard, as they
pretend to the Temper of People, dare not officiate according to their Book,
for fear of keeping them from their Churches, or driving them out of them,
should be so wholly unconcerned for their seduced Parishioners, as to find out
no more effectual way to save their Souls, than an unjustifyable and even a
very sinful complaisance with them in their unreasonable and perverse humors.
It is now notorious that this false Moderation (from the farther progress of
which Good Lord deliver us) instead of gaining the Dissenting Party, has not
only driven them farther off from our Churches, but hardened them beyond
measure in their unjust prejudice against the established Religion; for their
observation of Ministers, living in the neglect of those Laws, by virtue of
which they were proceeded against, not only increased their immoderate love of
their own ways, but has likewise made them intolerably impatient of all kind
of contradiction; to that degree, as not to suffer the least Check from
Authority, without flying in the face of their Superiors and meditating both
the destruction of them, and subversion of the Government. A truth much more
evident and apparent, than that the laudable zeal of our ever famous martyred
Metropolitan, for his Love Archbishop Laud.
to Order and exact Conformity, was the occasion of any of the late Troubles,
or concussion in the State, as some are pleased to affirm, who are apt to show
much more zeal against Popery, than love to our own Religion. And a
consideration which would make us abhor a Laodicean Temper of Lukewarmness and
indifferency, and engage us ever to stick close to that excellent Method of
Order and Conformity, which we were so very timely put into; since we have to
our great comfort and Reputation, experienced such happy effects of the one
here among us, (which has in some sort distinguished us from all other
Dioceses of England) and the whole Nation felt such dismal consequences of the
other. Of which if you are not yet convinced (and I should be exceeding sorry,
that I had many in my Jurisdiction that were not) I crave leave to refer you to
a more through Examination of the Works of several Loyal, Faithful and
Indefatigable Writers, who have with such honest Zeal, Prudence, Constancy and
Courage stood in the Gap, and exposed themselves for the King and the Church,
against the craft and malice of our Schismatics of all denominations, that
they ought never to be forgotten by the Loyal Clergy or Laity of England and
their Posterity.

I hope therefore, Brethren, I need not spend so much Ink now, to convince any,
as I have spent breath heretofore, to persuade some, that such a Notion and
Practice of Conformity, as you have been pressed to from the Beginning, is
pious, laudable and prudent; since you see it our Duty, both in respect of the
Laws of God and Man. It obtains the End of the Law, the Honor of God in his
Reverend Worship, by Uniformity, and our Reputation will otherwise suffer both
among our Friends and Enemies. It will be our advantage if we do so, and a
great disadvantage to us and our Posterity if we do it not. In the name of God
then, if you value your Reputations, or regard your Consciences, come up to
that pitch of good order in Conformity, whereto you have been long and often
invited, not contenting your selves with out-stripping other Ministers in
Dioceses, that strive against the stream, and have wanted the advantage of
being spurred on, as we have been from the beginning, but laboring to be all,
what many are, and every one professes to be, i. e. a true Conformist indeed;
not of our Modern, but the Ancient stamp (of whom I shall venture to give this
short Character.) He is such an one, as understands that Prayer and Praise, is
the end of Sermons; And that the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, is the
most excellent part of God's Worship: And consequently thinks not either Prayer
or Praise so inseparably annexed to Pulpit Preaching, as to neglect the Juge
Sacrificium, on days of Labor, or to clip the Church Prayers, more sacred than
the King's Coin, when he publicly offers them up to God in the Congregation;
nor omits the Celebration of the Eucharist so often on other Sundays and
Festivals, besides the three great ones, but that every one may have at least
an opportunity to receive three or four times a year, which as I have
demonstrated cannot be done (with any convenience to Priest or People, in a
Parish of but 200 Communicants) under a monthly Sacrament.

Such an one as performs this Task, when he has no just hindrance, with no
less willingness than unfeigned Devotion, and who constantly and discreetly
instructs the Youth, not only in Lent, but throughout the year, who by pious
application to the Whole as well as the Sick, makes Conscience to bring home
straying Sheep to Christ's Fold, as well as assist and convey dying Souls unto
Abraham's Bosom, I dare denominate, (I say, such an one) an orderly Churchman
and true Conformist. And on the contrary shall not doubt to assert, that
whoever has not this Notion of Conformity, and does not honestly and sincerely
endeavor thus to observe his Rule, without wilful Omission of what lies in his
own power to practice, and he sees practiced by other persons, in worse
circumstances than himself, does not deserve that Name. How far Inadvertency,
or the unhappiness of Education, in not having been trained up under right and
Orthodox Churchmen (studiers and lovers of Order) so as to attain to some early
expertness in things appertaining to the Ecclesiastic Ministration, may
extenuate such a Crime, I shall not at this time determine.

But in Charity attributing the paucity of the number of Ritualists to these
causes assigned, rather than to any Aversion to our established Order of
Religion; I do earnestly recommend unto all the younger Clergy, such a serious
and hearty Study of the Liturgy of the Church of England, as my deceased Right
Reverend Diocesan advised me to, when he first entrusted me with an Arch
deaconry, and which he did not only recommend to others, but had practiced
himself, in such manner perchance, that it is scarce possible among any alive
to find a parallel. Witness his laborious and excellent Annotations and
Collections on King James's and former Liturgies, which are now extant in his
own public Library which he founded here at Durham, which, if you have never
yet perused, according to some intimations given you in my Visitations, I do
advise you to do with much consideration. You will find it a work of much Time
as well as Piety, and therein discover much Learning and Prudence, in comparing
and examining the present and former Liturgies of our own and other Churches,
together with the Rituals, Breviaries and Missals, out of which our Service
like Gold from dross was taken; which Method of Study and Devotion, seems to
have been the daily practice of this great Man, and without dispute was one of
the things that made him so great a Man, as to be relied on so much, by the
Bishops and Clergy in the Convocation, when they did review and examine our
Liturgy, after the return of the King in the year 61 and 62. This is that which
gave him so clear and full a view of the Benefits, as well as Beauty of that
Uniformity, which he, before the Troubles, had introduced at St. Peter's
College in Cambridg, and the Cathedral Church of Durham, and practiced all
along his Troubles abroad in his Exile, that he did with great Zeal and
Success, establish here among us the same at his happy coming to this See,
which all the Northern Clergy, which are Right and firm to the King and the
Church, are convinced, was no small Felicity; and taste now so much sweetness
therein, that notwithstanding the uneasiness we have felt, in being often
smartly admonished thereunto, we heartily bless God for such a providential Act
of his Goodness toward this Country, as to send after twenty years bloody Wars
and Confusions, the same Person, who had been first Instrumental in Restoring
good Order in the Cathedral before the year 1640. to complete it afterward in
the Diocese; out of Gratitude to whom, for the advantages we received from his
good Conduct and Government, (which do abundantly outweigh the Infirmities of
his old Age) we are bound to maintain, with great zeal (and no Man more than my
self) what he with great vigilance and pains, first set on foot here among us.
And I know no more effectual course to prevail with you so to do, than your
practicing that good Advice he always gave young Clergymen, before their
Ordination, to be good Churchmen, as well as good Christians, which you know he
often expressed in this Phrase (which I have some reason to believe lie learned
from Bishop Overall and Bishop Andrews) Study your Common Prayer Book. And the
Clergy of the Bishopric of Durham, being put in so easy a way to do the same,
by his good Counsel and Example which he gave us in relation thereunto while he
lived, and by those considerable helps that he left in the Library, which he
founded at his Death, will be more inexcusable than all others in the Nation,
if they do it not. For Bishop Cosins's Notes in his Manuscript, which are
inserted in a Folio Common Prayer Book, bound up with blank-Paper betwixt the
Leaves, for that purpose, will be very useful for the learning of the History
and design of the Book, as the pious and learned Pieces of our Neighbor (and
my ever honored Friend) Dr. Comber, will be helpful in the studying of the
Method and matter of the same.

To draw to a Conclusion. God having thus blessed us with a Prelate, very
famous abroad as well as at home, for his Zeal, both against Popery and
Fanaticism, who gave a great Wound to the first by his printed Books, and to
the last by his Love to Conformity and the exercise of Discipline; As also our
present Diocesan, who has both publicly admonished us all, and privately
commanded me to act according to Law; We have all Obligation in the World to
signalize our selves upon this account, and to give the World some
demonstrations by our Practice, if not by our Writing, that the most ready
course to make Men Pious as well as Loyal, is by a hearty Zeal for the uniform
practice of our incomparable Liturgy, which was so admirable a fruit of good
Judgment, mature Deliberation and mighty Industry, that the whole Authority, in
Church and State, in Parliament, doubted not to declare it done by the Aid of
the Holy Ghost; and without dispute this most unexceptionable Composure justly
deserves that notable Encomium, that Archbishop Cranmer, who sealed it with
his Blood, gives it in his Works, in these or the like words, namely, That he
did believe, that there had not been a more useful and godly Book, than the
English Liturgy, composed since the time of the Apostles: Since long Experience
shows us, that it has under God been the most effectual means to establish the
Reformation amongst us, and the most impregnable Bulwark that ever was raised
against Popery. Which some Foreiners have been so sensible of, that they have
not doubted to declare the Common Prayer Book of the Church of England, of all
Liturgies extant in the World, best deserving to be the universal Liturgy, for
being so excellent a Repository of the Holy Doctrine contained in the
Scriptures, the most conformable to Antiquity, and for keeping the most
desirable Mean, betwixt two Extremes.

Thus, My Reverend Brethren, I have in the fear of God, and with much Integrity
of Heart, laid before your Eyes, your Obligations to the Faithful and Exemplary
Discharge of your Function. I will not despair, but that I may in due time, by
the blessing of Almighty God, see some considerable fruit of these my honest,
though weak, Endeavors; if not, I shall have this comfort to my own
Conscience, that I have faithfully delivered my Soul, together with this
Additionary satisfaction, that I have proclaimed to the World, that I have done
so; to which Refuge I should not have betaken my self, had not the
Noncompliance of sundry of my Brethren, for many years together, in the
observation of some clear and easily practicable Laws of the Church,
constrained me thereunto. You know, that I have often declared unto you, that
the public and private Applications to, as well as Censures of, the Clergy, in
order to the bringing them to the exact observation of their Rule of
Conformity, has been part of the peculiar Province that I have reserved to my
self; and I hope none of you can accuse me of any scandalous negligence in the
discharge thereof: How far my Officers, especially during my absence from
England, have performed the Duties incumbent upon them, and which I have all
along left to their sole management, is better known possibly to your selves
than me. I hope they have not been the most negligent of all in England; but if
they have been culpable, it is fit, they should bear their own Guilt, as I am
willing to bear mine. And let none of us, for the Love of God, make their
failings, whether real or pretended, a Cloak for our Omissions. We must do our
own Duties, before we are qualified to complain of them. Every Archdeacon can
do considerable things, in regulating the Clergy of his Jurisdiction, in
relation to their Duty, without the assistance of his Register or Official; and
so may every one of you, without the assistance of them or your Archdeacon, or
your Churchwardens, do much in the ordering God's Worship and your People. Let
every one of us do what lies in our own power to do, without the help of
others, and then, and not till then, shall we demonstrate, that our Complaints
of one another are sincere. Commending you, and all your sincere Designs and
endeavors to God, begging the continuance of your Prayers, and assuring you
always of mine, I subscribe my self,

From Windsor (during my Residence at Court) Ascension day, 1684. Your
Affectionate Brother and Servant in Christ, D. G.
Postscript.
FOR the better Encouragement of Country Parishes, to observe Monthly
Communions, it will not be amiss to mind you, that so frequent Celebration of
the Sacrament, as I have brought to your view to inflame your Zeal, is not
only now observed by many Cathedrals (as it has been by some all along from
the Regulation of the Liturgy); but in other places, namely, St. John's College
in Cambridge, St. James's Chapel, Ely Chapel in Holbourn (when the Bishop is
present) and Dr. Beveridge's Congregation at St. Peter's Cornhill in London;
which places Celebrate the holy Communion Weekly with a competent Number and
much to Edification; and the fruit of which constant Attendance on that holy
Ordinance, is very visible in the Lives and Conversations of a great number of
devout People, which frequent this holy Duty in the forementioned places; and
very particularly among the younger sort; who give abundant hopes to Ministers
(if they do not slacken in their Zeal) that they may train up a very orderly
Generation for the time to come. And if this be possible to be done in the City
of London, I recommend it to your Consideration; Whether it be not much more
easy for us to do here in our exemplar^ Diocese.



FINIS.

