A Call out of Gross Darkness and Idolatry. (...) the light to walk, which is
the way of Life, rest, peace (...) Salvation, and a declaration of the burden
of the word (...) Lord which came unto his servant, to be declared ^he People
that meet to worship in that place ignorantly (...) St. Denis Back Church,
which is near Limestreet end. (...) the 23 day of the first Month 1662. (...)
Reproof unto them for their fall, Worship and (...), and it is a warning to
them to repent thereof while (...) have time, and here is shown how evilly they
requited (...) Servant of the Lord, who in obedience unto him, and in (...) to
their Souls, came amongst them. With a word of advice and information (...) the
simple hearted, that desire to know the right way of (...) lord, and that they
may see themselves to be out of it, and may (...) at his reproof, and come to
see his way (even the good way) and may walk therein and find rest for their
souls, by one (...) well to the souls of all people, and is known to many (...)
by the name Richard Greenway. (...) may be seasonable and serviceable to any
other that are in their nature and practice.

(...) way of a fool is right in his own eye, but he that hears Counsil is
wise,

Prove. 12. 15. ^^ghteous is more excellent then his neighbor, but the way of
the wicked will deceive them,

Prove. 12. 16. (...) I said surely these are poor, they are foolish, for they
know not the way of their God,

Jeremy 5. 4. (...) ways and see and ask for the good old paths, wherein is
the good (...), and walk therein and ye shall find rest for your souls,

Jer. 6. 16. London Printed for the Author. 1662.

To the Reader or any that this may hear.
FRiends the Lord of Hosts, the mighty God is risen in his mgihty power, and in
great Glory, and he is come and coming, to make known his everlasting name and
truth in the Earth, and to make manifest all deceivers that turn his truth into
a lie, (as far as they can*) and all them that hold the truth in the
unrighteousness, he is revealing his wr^th against them and all that keep the
seed in bondage, he is visiting in his sore displeasure sor the Cry of the poor
he has heard, and the growning of the opressed is come up before him, and he
has taken notice of the sore bondage of his Captivated seed and he is come
down to deliver his Heritage that has long been grevously opressed, and
burdened by the Cruel Taskmasters, that bears rule in (...) Land of Gross
darkness.

And the Lord in his love and tender mercy, has sent his servant^ to declare
his offer of Grace, in which he would deliver his seed out of bondage and to
show unto them his Salvation which he has prepared for them that wi^^ receive
it and believe therein, and he is now come to seek and to save tha^ which has
long been lost, and in his great love and tender mercy, he has sent to call
back again, that which has been driven out of the way, upon the Hills and
barren Mountains, in this Cloudy and dark day, whereon they have been scattered
and driven to and fro not knowing whether they have been going, for the right
way has been hidden from them, by reason of the thick foggs and mist of
Antichrist that has darkened the Air, so that the ligh^ of the Sun could not
appear, which should show the way, now the Lord by his power is expelling the
fog, and moving the Clouds, and all that has hindered out of the way, and
blessed will all them be that do not resist his Love nor slight but accept of
his kind visitation and offer of Grace, and so Friend what is written in these
following lines, is for thy sake that art out of the way read it therefore in
the fear of the Lord, and turn in thy mind to the witnes^ of God in thee, and
consider it in the singleness of thy heart, and coolnes^ of thy mind, and then
I know the witness in thee will answer hereunto, for it is unto that I desire
to be made manifest, and unto it my love and service (...) herein, to which I
am a friend.

Richard Greenway.

A Call out of Gross darkness and Idolatry.
Hear on people and give ear unto the visitation of the Lord, and slight not
this the day of his kindness, in which he is reaching out his hand of Love and
tender mercy unto you, to gather you out from the way of wickedness darkness,
gross blindness and Idolatry, into which you are fallen, that so you may come
the way of life to know, and in walking therein may find peace and rest for
your souls for ever.

Upon the 17 day of the first month commonly called March, 1661. as I was at my
labor with my mind to the Law of God in me (which Solomon calls light, the
word of the Lord came unto me, (even that word which is powerful, and has been
as a fire in my bones) saying in me, go unto that meeting house near Limestreet
end, on the next first day, and stand and behold their way, and the blindness
of their worship, and then speak these my words unto them.

Woe, woe, From the Lord to him or them which has a male in their flock, that is
without blemish, and shall continue to offer in Sacrifice, unto the God of
Heaven, the lame, the halt, the maimed and the blind, he will not accept it at
your hand and people such is your sacrifice it is lame, and your devotion is
blind and the Lord does not regard it.

And people this to you was and is the word of the Lord, therefore take heed it
be not slighted by you, and something more I believe the Lord had spoken by me,
if your hearts and ears had not been uncircumcised, by which the spirit of the
Lord was resisted* woe unto you st^^ecked as your Fathers of old resisted the
Lords spirit, so do you.

And as I was standing to behold your devotion, my heart was grieved within me
to see your Idolatry, and my spirit was sore troubled to see and consider the
darkness and blindness that was over you, and I pittyed you with my very heart,
to see you so greedily licking up again with your tongues that which by many
was spued up so long ago, and I was sorry to think your stomachs were become
so dead of feeling, that you swallow down, and bare, that which has been and
now is loathsome unto many tender people, and it is loathsome in the sight of
the pure Eye of the Lord, who is a spirit and will be worshipped in the spirit,
and in the truth, and such he has sought and is seeking to worship him, which
is the new and living way, and was the good old way in which the Saints and
holy men, worshipped, and served the Lord in days that are past, in all ages
of the world the servants of the Lord worshipped him in spirit, and not in the
oldness of the Letter in which you are pretending to worship.

And friends though you have gotten good words to cover your selves with, the
St. words which is the sheeps clothing, the Prophets words, Christ's words, and
his Appostles words, yet you are ravened from that Spirit which was their life,
by which they were moved, and by which those words were brought forth by them,
and though you make never so goodly a show outwardly, yet you are but ravening
Woolves* within you have that nature standing which will rend and tear the
Lambs when they are sent amongst you, but now the Lord has appeared, and is
farther appearing to strip you of your Covering, and your nakedness will more
and more appear, and many shall see your shame and loath it, for the woe does
belong, to all that have gotten a Covering which is not with his Spirit.

And people that you may not think better of your selves then you ought,
through Ignorance of the falsness of your way and worship, and the Idolatry in
which you are wallowing: I shall in tender love show you plainly wherein your
sacrifice was Lame and your devotion Blind, and such as is nor of the Spirit^
leading, nor like the Saints practice, and therefore the Lord will not except
it from you, nor you therein.

First of the place you meet in to Worship, it is Idollatry in you or your
Teacher to call it a Church, (and though he call it so, and teaches you so to
call it) that you may have the higher esteem, of his Shop or Market house in
which he ^rads for dishonest gain, and in which he sels unto you that on his
market day which he has stolen, on other days of the week) yet it is in
truth, no more, nor less, than an old Mass-house, which was by the Popes power
and order built, and consecrated as they call it, and set a part for that use,
and some of your Grandfathers could remember (I believe) the Popes Mass, sung
and said therein in the Lattine tongue, (I have heard my Grandfather tell of
it,) as now you have the same in whole or in part in English: But friends
search the Scriptures which your teacher tells you, is your law and rule, and
see therein if you can find any such thing called a Church, which I am sure
you cannot, but therein ^ find the Apostle Paul said the Church is in God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, These. 1. 1. And the Church is not made of dead
but living stones no nor dead men neither, such as are dead in sins and
trespasses, and so he that knows not aright what is the guide or rule of a
Saints life, it is no wonder that he knows not the true Church of Christ, and
if ignorance and gross darkness indeed were not over people, they would see
these things, and if they did know the true Church of Christ, and themselves
but coming to be Members of it, then they would not endure any longer to follow
such blind guides as shall call a house of Lime and Stones a Church, to give it
that name which only is proper and belongs to the body of which Christ Jesus is
the head.

If you were all of you believers, and did know and follow Christ Jesus the
light, and did meet in the name and power of the Lord, and so did worship him
in the Spirit, and in the truth, yet the best name you could properly give the
house or place you meet in, was but a meeting house, and therefore now while
you are in the unbelief, in wickedness, Idollatrous and ungodly practices, how
can any one call it any other then a Sinagogue of Satan, and not a meeing house
of believers or Saints, much less a Church though you are met therein, for God
who is light, has no fellowship with darkness nor the workers thereof, those
that walk in the light, as he is in the light, they are in and of the Church,
which is in God the Pillar and ground of truth, and such have fellowship with
the Father and the Son in the Spirit, and one with another, and therein the
blood of Christ is witnessed, which cleanses from all unrighteousness, and
such are the peculiar people of God, that are zealous of Good works, and such
connot but bare testimony against the contrary, Steven the Apostle of Christ he
bore witness against the Tempel, which once commanded of the Lord to be builded
and worshipped in, but when it was Idolized by the people, (as you do now your
stone Church) then the Lord sent the Apostle to bare witness against that
Tempel, as you may read Asts 17. 24. God that made the World and all things
therein, seeing b^ is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made
with hands ^^ither is he worshipped with the works of men's hands, (mark that)
and friends God never commanded that to be built, and set apart for his worship
which you call your Church.

Secondly that which you offer in your high place (built by the Popes order,)
is but the works of men's hands, and that is abomination unto the Lord, as you
may read Acts 7. 4. And they made a Calfe in those days and offered sacrifice
unto their Idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands, then God gave
them up to Worship the Host of Heaven. So that when a people gives themselves
up to Idolatry, then they may be left of the Lord to be more and more overcome
therein; now your prayers as you call them, are they not a devi^^d thing, or a
form that is composed or made ready by men's hands, and so is as a Calse which
is made and set up, which you are worshipping, (with your bodies and lips, but in
it there is no Spirit nor life, but is a dead blind Lame Image, and the Apostle
said bodily exercise profits little; but Godliness is profitable unto all.

Friends if bodily exercise profits little, or nothing at all in the worship
of God, consider your practice and your several sorts of jestures which you
know nothing of the leading of the Spirit of God thereunto, (...) its
abominable unto the Lord and he may justly say, (as he will do one day) who
required such things at your hands, and what ever you may think of it through
Ignorance the Vale being over your hearts, yet this I ^estifie unto you in the
fear of the Lord, that it is not the true Worship of the true God, and it is
not in the Spirit, and he will not accept of it, nor you therein, as before
said, when you read the Prophets words, you keep on your hats, and when you
sing and say them in your common praying, then you put them off, waht example
or command from God have you for so doing.

Thirdly, As for your singing, it is not according to the practice of the
Saints and primative Christians, as you may read the Apostle said, I will pray
with the Spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also; I will sing with
the spirit and I will sing with the understanding also, 1 Cor. 14. 15.

Now friends, your singing is not with the spirit, nor with the understanding,
but you boast in other men's lines, made ready to your hand, and though that be
granted that the Apostle said, if any be merry let them sing Psalms; yet what
is that to you, that have no other P^almes but them which John Hopkins and
Thomas Sternhold, and others have made for you, who were Poets like
B^llad-makers, who (long since Iame^ spak those words) have turned David's
condition into Songs, the Apostle that said he would sing with the spirit, and
with the understanding, he also said if any one have a Psalm, or a doctrine,
or a Revelation, or an Interpretation, let all be done to edefying, it was not
their manner to sing all together in that confused manner as you sing, having
the condition o^ another given you to sing, which is not your state nor
condition, is David's prayers, his cryings, his roarings, his tears, and his
praises, and his large experience in which he glorified God, all which, when
you sing that which is not your condition, you sing lies before the Lord, which
is great wickedness and Hypocricy, and beside there is much adding and
diminishing in these Songs from David's words, and it is written cursed be every
one that adds or diminishes from that which is written.

Consider a little with your selves, and let us a little look into your
singing, and see whether it be by the spirit and in the truth, and with the
understanding, as when you sing O Lord I am not puffed in mind I have no scornful
eye, I do not exercise my self, in things that are too high, but as the weaned
child oven from his mothers breast so have I behaved my self, in silence and i^
rest. Now let Gods witness search you and let the light in you witness are you
not puffed up in your minds, in Pride and Ambition, and vain^ glory, and that
you are not weaned from it yet, and are you not excercising your selves in
things that be to high, for you when you sing palpable untruths, as the Lord is
your Shepherd nothing therefore you need when as you are not subject to, nor
guided by him, they unto whom the Lord is a Sheephard they are led by by his
Spirit, and so are come to know his Crook by which he gathers his Lambs that
thirst after him, into his pleasant pastures therein to feed, and to lie down
in his fold of rest, where none can make them afraid, and till this be known
you cannot say of a truth you want no good thing, and farther consider can you
say in truth as it is, Psa. 26. Lord be thou my judge, and thou shall see my
paths be ^ight and plain: O People does it not otherways appear unto the Lord,
that searches your hearts, and trys your reins, and knows your goings and do
not your ways appear wrong crooked and rough to the Lord, and can you sing and
say the truth, as it is in the 26. Psalm. 3, 4. ver. For of thy truth I tread
the trace, and will do all my days, I do not lust to haunt, or use (...) men
whose deeds be vain, to come in house I do refuse, with the deceitful (...): I
much abhor the wicked sort, their deeds I do despise, I do not once to them
resort, that hurtful things devise.. Friends what ever you may think of your
selves, yet this I know you cannot come to witness these things, but (...) you
come to feel the light in your selves, and are guided thereby, and till you are
taught of the grace of God that has appeared unto every man, you cannot come
to say and do as David did. And farther, look back upon that which you sung in
my hearing, in the fifth part of the 119. Psalm. (mark it well) In the right
paths of thy precepts, guide me Lord I require, ^^ther pleasure do I wish, or
greater thing desire, and here you excercised yourselves in things that were to
high for you, for your hearts desire were not according to these words, and
therefore Dear people consider better of these things, and sink down to Gods
witness the light in you, and it will give you a better understanding and sight
into your ways and practices, and it will lead you to do the thing that is
righteous, and to speak the truth, for that was not speaking the truth, when
you said and Sung; (these words) Confirm thy gracious promise Lord, which thou
have made to me, who am thy Servant and do love, and fear nothing but thee. Now
friends, (weigh it well,) can you look back upon these things and not be
ashamed, or were you able to say as David was when he wrote the Psalms* My
hearts desire (...) thy Law to keep for aye, O these were very high words and
things which you were excercised in, and very much to high for you, and here is
matter for you to blush at, and to be ashamed of for your lies, for the Prophet
David had many a weary step, and sorrowful day, and before became to witness
that high pitch of experience, which you so easily got to boast of, but this
your refuge of lies the Lord is coming to sweep away with his Besom of
destruction, and you will be taken there with, except you repent and turn to
the Lord, and learn of of his holy Spirit, a measure of which is given, to
every one of you, to profit withal, and what ever you to without the leadings
thereof, is not to the praise and glory of God, but to his dishonor, and though
you stand up and seem with your tongues, and bodies, to confess and give honor
and glory to God, yet in your dead works you do deny and dishonor him.

But some of you seem to be offended with me, for keeping on my hat in the time
of your worship, what I did therein was in obedience to the Lord, who sent me
to stand there as a witness against your Idollatry, and not in contempt to any
man* or to disturb any of you, as the Lord is witness for me, you that were
offended with me or my hat being on, which was but a covering to my head: if
your eyes had not been blinded with envy, you might have seen others whose
heads were covered as well as mine when they seemed to be ^ncoverd, which was
but hypoc^icy in them, for is not a Cap as close a covering to the head as a
hat^ only one has a b^im and the other has none, and had not your preaching
Priest and Reading Priests their Cap^ on, and the Clarke and many other men if
you have any reference to the Apostles words, who said he that prays or
p^ophecys with his head^ covered dishonors his head, he did not speak those
words against the hat and tolerate the Cap to be on, nay in some Countries they
w^a^ no hats but only caps and I believe hats have not always been of use in
England, and if the Apostle be so understood as that you are not to pray or
prophecy with your head covered, then were not many among you transgressors,
that pretended to pray and did not, your Priest transgress^^ in both praying
and preaching with his Cap on, but I believe the Apostle had a higher meaning
then that, well people be not deceived, the Lord will not be mocked with your
shows nor likeness of drawing near him, with your bodies, when your hearts are
far of from him, after your coveteousness, and the satisfing of your lust* it
is not Reading not hearing the Saints words read over, nor the keeping part of
a day once a week, that will give you exceptation with the Lord, while you are
in the evil state and nature, untranslated out of the Kingdom of darkness,
unchainged in your nature, unconverted and unturned from your works of sin and
Iniquity, which seperates between the Creature and the Lord, the wicked and the
ungodly he beholds a far off, how near soever they pretend to draw unto him.

And what though the man you call your Minister, do call you (as he did in my
hearing) the children of the most High, what are you the better for that so
long as in works, you show your selves to be the children of another Father,
for mark what Christ said to the Pharisees that had as large a profession as
any of you, and could boast as much of their Law, Ordinances, and Temple
outward as you can, and yet he told them they were of their father the Devil,
whose lusts they will do, see John 8. 44. and the Apostle says, His Servants
you are whom you obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience (...)
righteousness, but try a little this flattery of your hierling, what can you be
the Children of the most High, and yet have cause (as he said) to (...) to, for
being more vilde in your conversations then they which are called heathens
(mark) friends, can a child of God, which is one that is lead by his Spirit, or
can a Christian that is one that believes in, and is a follower of Christ, or
is Christ like, that is a partaker of his Divine nature, which is our, and
clean, and yet I say can the Heathens by name and nature ^^tstrip you in an
honester conversation and better life; friends it was mere deceit in him so to
flatter and delude you, and it was the Enemies policy in him to make you think
better of your selves then you ought to do, that so he may keep you always in
his snare, my spirit way greived, and my very heart within me was troubled, to
stand to hear what manner of stuff your were sed with, even mere chafe, such as
is good for nothing, but for Swine ^o muzel upon, it will never satifie the
hungry ^oul that thirsts for Gods righteousness. Woe is me for you, this word is
true upon you, The Prophets prophecyfalsly and the ^riests bare rule by their
means, and the people love to have it so, but that will you do in the end
thereof, if the blind lead the blind, (and it continue so to be) will not both
fall into the ditch, and pit of miserry out of which there will be no recovery,
therefore in time repent, and though he told you, you might look upon the good
in the heathens, and the bad in you'selves and b^^sh thereat, yet he said you
had a Law to be your guide, which would show you at all times what you ought to
do, saying if you are in the Church you have a Law to show you how you ought to
carry your selves there, if at your ^^^ses at home, you have a Law shows you
how you ought to carry your selves there, if in your Shops you have a Law shows
you how you ought to carry your selves there in your trading and if alone you
have a Law shows you how you ought to carry your selves before the Lord, and
this he aplyed to the Letter of Scripture.

But is that Law such a guide unto you, and does it show you, and lead you as
he said, let the witness of God in you judge, I know it does not neither can
it, so it is but a dead Letter, and the Letter kills, it is the Spirit gives
life, there was a time when I heard men preach out of Scripture, and to that
time it was not a guide to me, so to show, teach and direct me (as he said to
you) but I erred very much in many things; and the true guide which was able to
save me out of sin, I knew not till I was turned, to the ^ight of Christ in me,
which is a measure of the Spirit and gift of God, the good word of his grace,
which I have found alone able to convince me of, ^^liver from, and save me out
of sin.

And friends this is your guide, and this is the Law of the Spirit of life
which is in and comes from Christ Jesus the light of the world, who is (...)
true light that has lighted every man that is come into the world which sets
free from the Law of Sin and the Law of Death, and what ever h^ be that sets up
any other thing for a rule, and for a guide, is a deceiver, (...) Antichrist,
and no Minister of the true Christ.

And people such a one is he that perswads you to look for that in the
Scriptures which only is to be found in Jesus Christ, the light of the world*
(mark Christ's words to the Pharisees he said) search the Scriptures* in them
you think to have Eternal life, they are they which testify o^ me, you will
not come to me that you may have life, and does he no^ bid you hearken to be
taught of the letter, to keep you in that state to te^^ in the letter of
Scripture without you, from looking into Christ Jesus the wisdom and power of
God, who is the life of men, and is to be felt within in man, let none mistake
me, I do not deny or slight the holy Scripture, bu^ I say they are a true
declaration of the rule of life, but they are not the rule of life, Christ
Jesus is the rule of life, the Scripture is a declaration of the way to life
and peace, but Christ Jesus is the way which leads out (...) sin, into well
doing and so to peace, the Scripture is a declaration of the truth, but Christ
Jesus he that is the way he is the truth, and be leads hi^ people that follow
him into the truth, by which they are made free, the Scripture is a declaration
of the everlasting word, but Christ Jesus is the word that lives and abides for
ever.

And thus people in the fear of God, having received the knowledge an^
understanding of that which was the Saints rule and guide, of old, I cannon but
in tender love to your souls, show you what it is, and reprove that spirit that
would set up any thing else in the room of it, in which there is (...) life,
as I said before; the Saints had a guide before the Scripture, or Lette^
outward was, Abraham had a guide, Lot and Enock had a rule by which they walked
with God, and Moses had a rule, the inspiration of the Almighty gave him
understanding, by which he saw things that were in the beginning, and wrote of
them, so that was his rule by which he wrote, and b^ that he was guided to
choose the affliction with the people of God, rathe^ then the pleasures of sin
for a (...), and this rule all the holy men of God bare witness to, David said
It was a lite unto his feet and a Lamp unto hi^ paths, by which he was lead in
the way of peace; and the Apostle Paul said* we have a more suer word of
prophesy, whereunto you will do well that (...) take heed as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawn an^ the day star arise in your
hearts (mark that) in the heart the day star mu^^ be waited for, to be seen to
arise, even the bright and morning sta^, knowing this first that no p^ophesie
of the Scripture is of any private interpretation, for the prophesies came not
in old time by the will of man, but holy me^ of God spoke as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost, so that from hence (...) affirm the light of Christ, which
shines in the heart and conscience (...) mankind is the rule to steer their
actions by, to keep them out of evil, for it ^^^vinseth of sin, and it leads to
well doing, and this is the candle of the (...), which is of the Lord lighted
in man, by which he searches their (...) and tries their reigns, and this is
often put out in the wicked, by (...) of sin which quenches and puts out, or
vails the candle which is the ^easure of Gods spirit, Job 21. 17.

The reason why men that have gotten a large profession of a rule without them,
and yet are not ruled, and have gotten a great deal of the Saints (...) to talk
of, and yet are not guided according thereunto, but are out of the life of
righteousness, in the unrighteousness, unequity and ungodliness, (...) because
they have lost the knowledge and feeling of the measure of the spirit in
themselves, which was that by which the Saints were moved and (...), by which
they walked, acted, spoke and writ.

And so people having lost the true guide and pathway to rest and peace,
resubject and ready to be tossed with every wind of doctrine, following them
which cry lo here and lo there, and the way of rest they know not to be
stayed on.

The Lord has according to his promise of old, written his law in the hearts
of his people, (and Solomon says, the Law is light, Prove. 6.) and the (...)
which is written in the heart, is even that of the spirit of life, and is the
(...) of a saints life, and a true Christians guide, and this is the measure of
the spirit which the Apostle Paul said, was given to every man to profit
withal, 1 Corin. 12. 7. So friends, if you knew this, believed and wai^ed in
it, to (...) the opperation thereof, you would then be guided by it, to do in
all things to others as you would be done unto your selves, and this is the
^ace of God that has appeared unto all men, and teaches us that believe (...)
it and obey it, that denying ungodliness and worldly lust, we should live
(...), righteously, and godly in this present evil world, looking for the
^lessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God, and our (...) Jesus
Christ, who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from (...) iniquity and
purify unto himself a pecular people zealous of good works, and by the grace
alone we are kept to do unto others, as we would be done unto, and this is the
way of peace to all that walk therein, and are obedient thereto as aforesaid,
and this is that which we ascribe unto, even the grace of God that has
appeared (unto all) it is by that we are what (...) are. And this grace is
sufficient for all that believe in it, but they that (...) this good Law of God
behind their backs, and do despite to this spirit (...) grace. Isa. 59. 7, 8.
Their feet run to evil, and they make have to shed (...) blood, their thoughts
are thoughts of sin and iniquity wasting and (...) are in there paths, the way
of peace they know not, and there is no ^^dgments in their goings, they have
made themselves crooked paths, and (...) go therein shall not know peace, the
way thereof will b^ hid from their eyes, and this way is hid from the wise and
prudent men of this world, and is revealed unto the babes of the Lord as in
days past.

And this good way of rest, peace and Salvation, your false guide keeps you
from, in crying up and directing you to look unto another thing, and therein
he is a deceiver, and his voice is the voice of a strainger, and such a one the
Sheep of Christ will not follow, he stands not in the Counsel of the Lord if he
did, he would have been able to have shown you the true rule; mark what the
Lord says concerning the false Prophets by Jeremiah, Jer. 23. 21, to the 32. I
have not sent them yet they have run, I have not spoken to them yet they
prophesy, but if they had stood in my counsel and had caused my people to hear
my word, then they should have turned them from their evil ways, and from the
evil of their doings, am not I a God at hand says the Lord can any hide
himself in secret places that I shall not see him says the Lord, how long
shall that be in the hearts of the Prophets that prophecy lies, ye they are
Prophets of the deceit of their own hearts, which think* to cause my people to
forget my name, by their dreams which they tell every man to his neighbor, the
Prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream, and he that has my word (ma^k
tha^) let him speak my word faithfully, what is the Chas to the Wheat says the
Lord, behold I am against them that prophecy false dreams, and that tell them,
and that cause my people to err, by their li^s and by their lightness yet I
sent them not, nor commanded them therefore they shall not profit the people at
all says the Lord. (Mark that) So you may see what is the cause why you are
not prosited, it is your Priest cause you to Err, by their lies and their false
devised dreams and storys, which they gather and throw before you, and so keep
you from the word, which is nearer to you then the Book or letter without, even
in your mouths and hearts, and because he keps you from, that is the cause you
are not tu^ned from the evil of your ways and doings, I say he is a deceiver
unto you therein and that it may the more clearly appear that he is so.

Mark what was said by Moses the servant of the Lord, con^erning the Law in the
heart or the word of faith. Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12. The Commandment which I command
thee this day, is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off. It is not in
heaven, that thou should say, who shall go up for us to bring it down to us,
that we may hear it, and do it, neither is it beyond the Seas that you should
say, who shall go over the Sea for us to bring it unto us, that we may hear it
and do it, but the word is very ^igh thee in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that
thou mai^st h^ar it and do it. And the Apostle Paul said to the Romans To. 10.
is, 7, 8. The Righteousn^ss of says soeaketh on this wise, say not in your
hearts who shall ascend into heaven, that is to bring Chirst down from above,
or who shall descend into the deep, that is to bring up Christ again from the
dead. But what says it, the word is nigh thee even in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, and that is the werd of faith which we Preach. Faith comes by hearing
this word, and faith is the gift of God, and the word is nigh which was in the
beginning with God, by it he made all things, it came forth from him and (...)
among men even Christ Jesus, whose name is called the word of God; and they
that know not Christ, or the light, a measure of his spirit which comes from
him, in them, they are in the reprobate state, so says the Apostle.

And so friends and people t^rne in your minds to the light in your Conscience,
and that will bring you to feel and taste the word, which is as a fire, hamer
and sword, it will de^ide between the precious and the vile in you, it will
devide your good thoughts from (...) bad, for the Lord thereby shows unto man
his thoughts, and it will show your (...) words and actions from your bad,
judging the evil in you, and giving you peace in well doing; so that friends it
is very clear by the Scripture of truth, the writings of the holy men of old,
as by experience of many in this day, that the word which is to be a g^ide and
a rule of life to men and women, is nearer to them at all times then the
Scripta^e or letter outward can be, even in the mouth and heart, that it may be
felt and heard ^^ all times, and the voice of the Lord may be heard thereby,
and obeyed, and his counsel received therein, for the Saints of old heard,
handled, and tast^d of the word of life, and then thereof declared unto others,
as you may read John 1. 1, 2, 3. and the Apostles said, (when they were
forbiden to preach in that name) we cannot but (...) of the things we have seen
and heard.

So dear people hear, believe, and receive the word of life, for it is not a
dead form that will serve to present you to the Lord, so as to be excepted by
him, unl^ss you turn into the light in you, and thereby to be lead to live in
the life of righteousness, and so to worship him in the spirit and truth, all
you do will be in vain, for he is a spirit, and such as worship him, must
worship in the spirit and the truth, and such he has sought and is seeki^g to
worship him, and therefore be not any longer deceived by him that daubs you
with ^^tempered mortar, and flatters you with fained words and fair speeches,
by which the impel hearted are deceived.

He told you he had led you in a rough and tedious path, but for the time to
come he p^omised to lead you in a smother way, and prophecy smother things, by
which it seems ^e will please you in putting more pillows under your arm
holes, as calling you Saints, Christians and Children of God, when indeed you
cannot witness the new birth, or work ^^ regeneration, without which it is
imposible to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and then what are you the
better for the name of Christian, Saint, or Child of God, as long as you are in
the heathenish and unchristian-like nature, when the witness of God in your
Consciences will show you your lives is unclean, and unsanctified, and that
you are not the servants of Righteousness, but slaves and subjects unto sin, to
fulfill the lusts and mot^^ns thereof.

I cannot but pity you, oveer whom a Cloud of darkness, and Vale of
ignorance is spread, by reason of the God of this World that blinds your eyes,
so that you do not see the empty chaf, and vanity which you lay out your money
and labor for, even that which will never satisfy your souls, et him prophecy
never so smoothly, but friends mark that the Lord by the Propet says,
concerning such as desired smooth things Isa. 30. 9. 10. This is a rebelliouus
people, lying Children that will not hear the Law of the Lord* (which is (...))
which say to the seers see not, and to the Prophets Prophecy not unto us, right
things speak unto us, smooth things, prophecy unto us deceit, (and so is it
thisday among you, like (...) like people, and the horrible silthy thing is
committed in the Land, the Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule
by their means, and the people love to have it so (...) see what is farther
w^itten from the Lord by the prophet, ver. 12. and so on, wherefore (...) says
the Lord the holy one, because you despise this word, (which is i^ you) and
trust in (...) and perverseness, and stay thereon, therefore this iniquity shall
be unto you as a breach ready ^f all. And further thus says the Lord the holy
one, in turning shall you be saved in quietness (...) shall ^e your strength,
and you would not. (mark that)

So friends prise this day of your visitation, and slight not the Love of the
Lord, who is seeking to be gracious unto you, in making known this his way to
life, which is his gift in you, his word and measure of his spirit given unto
you to profit withal, and as you turn into it thereby to be guided in it
salvation you will feel, and confidence and assurance you will have therein,
and strength thereby to be preserved; but if you will not that Christ Jesus
(the light of the world) shall come to reign in you, nor if you w^ll not be
subject unto his power in your hearts nor let his light nor Spirit, be your
rule and guide, then you are the enemies that he will slay with his Iron rod,
and he will dash you in pieces like Potters Vessels.

Cease therefore from man by which you are deceived, and hearken to the true
Prophet dilligently that your souls may come to live, and may partake of the
sure me^^i^s of David, and then you will not any longer lay out your money for
that which is not bread, no^ your labor for that which will not satisfy, the
Lord complained of too evils which his people had committed in days past, and
the same evils you are guilty of, mark J^^. 2. 13. They have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, and have hewed to themselves broken Cesterns that
can hold no water; Moses prophesied of the true Prophets and said, Deuteronomy. 18.
15. The Lord will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy
brethren like unto me, unto him shall you harken, (mark) and farther from the
Lord he said, And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not heark^n unto
my words, which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him It is not
he shall be cut off that does not hear man that may come in his own name, bu^
him that came in the name of him that sent him, for as Christ said in his day,
so it may be said unto you in this day, if one came to you in the name, dread
and power of the Lord, him you will not hea^, but if one come in his own name,
or as sent by man, him you will hear, c^y up and fight for, but him that was
sent of the Lord, you cry down with him, away with him, he is not fit to live,
and so fall to halling and rending in your madness, and blind zeal smite and
beat with the fist of wickedn^ss, by which ^t appears you are not spiritual
(...), neither Priest nor people, had not the weapons whicht he Ministers and
people of the Church of Christ had, who said our weapons are not ca^nal but
spiritual, and mighty through God, for the bringing down of strong holds of sin
and Satan, and if you or your Priest had been armed with that which the
Christians were of old, and used to war with and resist gainsayers with, then
you would not have smote me with the fist of wickedness as some of you did lay
upon me, and though I was beaten, thrust and punched by some of you, yet from
my very heart I do desire it may never be laid to your charge, but that you may
come to see the evil of it, and repent and may find mercy, and truly I can say
concerning them that were most enraged against me, Father forgive them for they
knew not what spirit they were of, and I know it was blind zeal in some of
them, and it may be they might think I deserved no less looking upon me as
their enemy and one that did disturb them, but friends you that were so
disturbed, what was that which was disturbed in you? was it not an evil nature
that was in your selves, that was so soon dist^rbed, if it had not been a mad
hasty rash spirit, which rose in you against me, and carried you violently to
run upon me, if you had been but sober reasonable men, you would have heard me
in what I had to speak, and then left me to the Law, if in any thing I h^d been
a transgressor, you ought to have left me to that, to have suffered according
to Law, but amongst the true Christians it was not accounted a disturbance to
do as I did, for in the Church of true Christians, if any thing were revealed
to one that stood by, the first was to hold his peace, the Apostle and true
Minister of Christ, said you may all prophecy one by one, that all may be
edified, and sometimes the Apostle went into the Synagogs, and into the Tempels
as their manner was to dispute with them, and to bare their testimony against
Idolatry, and som^times they were haled out by the professing Jews, Sometimes
had before Magistrates, and into Prisons, and Sometimes beaten and stoned by the
vagabond Jews and baser sort of the people, and its like they might be called
disturbers then too as we are now by you, (but mark this), you may read that
the Christians were always persecuted, but never were persecutors, Paul before
he was a Christian, he was a persecutor, when he was a Zealous professing
Pharesee, he was exceeding mad in his blind zeal against the Christians, but
the Lord pricked him in his Conscience, and called unto him by his powerful
word, saying in him Saul, Saul why persecute thou me, and when he took heed to
that which pricked in him, and by which the Lord called unto him, then with the
light he saw what he had done, and was going to do, and so he repented and
found mercy, and that is the desire of my soul that those which offered the
most violence against me, may feel the checking of the witness in their own
conscience, and may repent thereof, and may find mercy as he did, and so may
come to be witnesses of the grace of God which has appeared unto all, as he
was, who said it taught to deny all ungodliness, etc. And that you all may do
to others as you would be done unto at all times, and then you will not hurt
nor wrong any one, nor in your have, rage, nor madness, offer violence unto any
because you would not so be done unto, and my friends this is the way for you
to fulfill the Royal Law of God (the light) which if you keep to you will do
well.

And now here is a word to the simple hearted.

Come you Children (in whom there is any hunger and thirst after the
righteousness of God) both young and old read and consider and I will teach you
the fear of the Lord, which David and Solomon said was the beginning of (the
true heavenly) wisdom, and knowledge, and a good understanding, have all they
that do thereafter, in keeping the commandments and observing the statuts of
the Lord, and the fear of the Lord is to hate pride, arogancy, and the evil
way, which is broad and leads to destruction and from a froward mouth and lying
tongue which are both abhorred by the Lord.

Man and woman is fallen from that state in which they were Created in the
beginning and is now by reason of disobedience erred from that which leads into
the fear and brings back again into that state which was before the fall, and
that is the light of Jesus Christ, the Son of Gods love, be is the way back
again out of the fall, he redeems the heart and mind out of the earth into
which it is driven by reason of sin and transgrssieon up again unto the Lord,
and mankind having (...) this way are in their minds alienated from the Lord
and his true fear, which is as a fountain (...) cleanse the heart of the
creature, from evil, and as a defense to keep it clean, it being lost and
mankind being strayed from the good way of the Lord, therefore before you can
come again to find it, and to feel his puere fear, you must take heed to the
Light in you, (as aforesaid) by which Christ Jesus has lighted every one of
you, and as you wait therein you will come to see your ^^il deeds, your
thoughts, words, and works which your have wrought out of the light and fear of
the Lord, and Judgment and Condemnation will be against the works and workers,
as you keep in the light, the measure of the spirit of the Lord, which is given
you to convince you of your sins, and to lead you to profit in well doing, and
that was it which Joseph of old was preserved by, when it was tempted, and so
will you be kept by it, if you take heed to it, it will cause you to say as he
did, how shall I do this thing that is evil, and sin against the Lord who has
lighted me, and let me see the evil of my doings, and friends this is my
testimony for the Lord and for his everlasting truth, (if I should never be
sent among you more, or if I should never be seen of you again) that this is
the way of life and Salvation, and there is not another way, nor name by which
any can be saved but by Christ Jesus the light, and he that is the way, has
said no man can come to the Father but by me, and he has also said he that
follows me shall not abide in darkness, nor the works thereof, but shall have
the light of life, drunckweness is a work of darkness, Whoredom is a work of
darkness, Lying, Stealing, Cursing, Cheating are works of darkness, and so are
fighting, mocking, s^^ssing and Envying, all these works are wrought out of the
Light, Christ said without are Dogs, (...), Whore-mongers, Murderers,
Idollaters. And whosoever loves and makes a lie, and they (...) without, who
are gone out from the Light which leads into the fear, and so that nature in
man which is beastly and brutish, bares rule while man is straying from the
Covenant of light and life, that which brings forth the works of righteousness,
is the light and spirit of Jesus, even that which conv^nceth of si^ and evil
deeds, and as all join to tbat, love it, obey and follow it, then you will
come to see the uglin^ss of sin and evil deeds, and you will come to loath them
as I have done, wh^^ once was my self in the broad way walking which leads to
d^struction, even as you are now with many others, and in that time I had a
profession and the name of a Christian, as y^u have, but I wa^^ out of and far
from the power and nature of Christ, which is the only thing which mak^s men o^
women Christians (that is like him and followers of him.) And when I was f^r
off from the Lord in the same way in which you have been visi^ed, the Lord in
his kindness sought me out, when I was in a high place, like unto that into
which he sent me unto you, and then ^e (...) of his servants to call me and
others, from that which did not satisfy my soul, unto tha^ way in which I have
been restored from a lost miserable condition in which I was, and am turn^d in
my m^asure from th^^ which kept me from enjoying peace with the Lord, and so
now having taken ^eed to and prised the visitation and warning of the Lord, I
am now turned to, and do walk in his everlasti^g good way, in which I have
found rest, peace, and satisfaction for my soul, and my hearts (...) is that
you may every one (in whom there is any simplicity or sincerity) find the same,
and this my f^i^nds is the way to the fear of the Lord, and tbe way to the
salvation of your souls, turning into the light by it to be guided, this is the
name in which salvation is, and it is in no other name or thing under heaven,
and as unto this name Jesus Christ the light, the spirit and power of the
Father, you ^ll ^urn thereby to be lead out of the world and way^s and works
thereof that are evil, and worships, that are Idolatrous, so will you come to
know and feel his name and nature that saves his people that obey him from
there sin, and unto this name (every one that ever will be saved) there (...)
mast how, and their tongues confess, or else salvation they cannot come to
witness, therefore while you have time (...) it every one, and take heed to
your true guide, (which is the light in you as I have said) and th^n you will
come to know your true teacher, that will never be removed from you (as you
ke^p ^o (...)) either for more gain or greater honor, and as your minds are
k^pt thereto, of it to lea^n, you will hear a voic^ behind you saying this is
the way (which leads to holin^ss^ and ^ighteous^^ss^) walk ye therein, when ye
are turning to the right hand or to the l^ft, to do the things that are no^
right.

O all people therefore now give ear, hear regard and consider of that which
conc^rn^ your (...) lasting peace, and now turn in and seek after the Lord
while he may be found, and c^ll (...) him while he is near unto you, and while
he is striving with you turn at his reproof, and be it known un^o you that if
you d^sregard his call and tend r^visitation, he will not alw^y^s striv^ with
y^u, and the when he cease to strive with you by his spirit within to check
and reprove, or by his servants without to warn you, then will you be
everlastingly miserable, and this know also, the Lord by his witness and good
spirit, has striven with you long, day by day and many times in the night
season, and you have little regarded it, and the most of you do not know that
it is the striving of the Lord, and th^rfore your state is miserable, and your
condition to ^^ the more lamented, and the bow^ls of the Lords love has been
and is moved in m^ toward you and his holy power constrained me to come
amongst you to warn you and to turn you from darkness to light, and from the
broad way which leads to the Chambers of death, gross darkness, ignorance and
Idolatry, so that in the light you might come to find the way of truth li^e,
peace, rest, and salvation.

Therefore I say be you warned and take heed that you slight not the tender
love of the Lord, in sending one amongst you which (...) raised from the dead,
that once was dead in si^s and trespasses, buried underneath iniquity, even as
you are at this day.

And so now you are warned in your life time by one that is raised from the
dead, and friends this I testify unto you in the fear of the Lord, I came not
amongst you in my own will, but contrary thereto, in obedience to the requ^ring
of the Lord and that y^u may know it more fully I have written this for you,
and that I may be clear of your blood, and the Lord also may be clear of it,
and that your blood may lie upon your own heads for ever except you believe and
repent, while you have time and space and herein I am your friend called

The End.
Richard Greenway.


