Imprimatur, Tractatus Cui Titulus Curiosities in Chemistry.

Sept. 30. 1690. Ex Aedibus Collegij. Guall. Charleton. Proefes Coll. Med.
Land. Censore.
Tho. Burwell, J. Gordon, Will. Dawes, Tho. Gill.


Curiosities in Chemistry: BEING NEW EXPERIMENTS AND Observations Concerning
the PRINCIPLES OF Natural Bodies.

Written by a Person of HONOR, and Published by his Operator, H. G.

LONDON: Printed b^ H.C. for Stafford Anson, at the Three Pigeons in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1691.

NEW EXPERIMENTS AND OBSERVATIONS Concerning the PRINCIPLES OF NATURAL BODIES.
The Introduction.
THE Ingenious Author of this Treatise has herein laid a great many Experiments
and Observations together, in order to prove that Water is the only first
Material Principle of Natural Bodies; and that all the other pretended
Hypostatical Principles are ultimate and reducible into mere Elementary Water.
Wherefore to give a brief and perspicuous account of his Reasonings upon this
Subject, he has thought it expedient to reduce them to the following
Propositions.

Sect. I.
The Ardent Spirits of Vegetables are nothing else but the Oleous Particles of
these Vegetables subtilized by Fermentation, and thereby dissolved in, and
united to some part of their own Phlegm.
FOR Lavender, Rue, Marjoram, etc. distilled without addition, and without a
previous Fermentation, afford an Oil, but never yield any burning Spirit.
Whereas after Fermentation they yield an ardent Spirit, but no Oil; which is a
manifest proof, that the inflamable Oil is converted into an inflamable Spirit:
especially, since by the lasting action of the Air upon this Spirit, the Oleous
part will at last be brought to separate it self from the phlegm and swim above
it. Moreover if you pour Oils in small quantity upon Fermenting Vegetables,
they will come over in Distillation in the form of Spirits.

As for the Spirits of Aniseeds, Wormwood, and such other Oleous and Aromatic
Vegetables, that are prepared with Spirit of Wine without any previous
Fermentation; they are nothing else but the Oils of these Vegetables that the
Spirit of Wine has imbibed and carried up along with it in Distillation. For
this Spirit, being it self no other thing than the Oil of Wine Dissolved in
Phlegm, will presently imbibe any Aromatic Oil dropped into it. Hence it is,
that, in the Preparation of Spirit of Aniseeds, the Oleous part of the Spirit
of Wine imbibes as much of their Oil as it can receive, and the rest (for they
abound with Oil) being joined with the Phlegmatic part of the Spirit of Wine,
compose a Milk-coloured Liquor, (as all Oils do when they are mixed with Water,
which we see daily in the Preparation of Emulsions) whose Oily parts may be
imbibed by fresh Spirit of Wine, and by that means yield Spirit of Aniseeds
anew.

Finally, it is upon the account of their Oleous nature, that ardent Spirits are
so Inflamable; and that they so much weaken the Corroding Acidity of Aqua
fortis, as to render it innocent enough to be taken inwardly, though they
themselves be endowed with a certain Volatile Acid.

Sect. II.
The Spirits of Vegetables, made by Incineration, are nothing else but the
Volatile Salts of the Tartar of these Plants, dissolved in their own Phlegm.
FOR they consist of the Effluvia that ascend from the Plants, while their
Tartar is a Calcining into a fixed Salt, kept from flying away into the Air, by
reason of the peculiar structure of the Furnaces, etc. employed in this kind of
Incineration: and are therefore altogether of the same nature with Spirit of
Soot, or even with the genuine bitterish Alcaline Spirit of Tartar of Wine.
N.B. Since in the Juice of Grapes, the Alcali and Acid, mutually Coagulated,
obtain the name of Tartar, Why should not the same Salts, con-coagulated in the
Juices of other Vegetables, though endowed with very different Seeds, obtain
the same Appellation, rather than that of Essential Salts? For there is really,
in the Juices of all Vegetables, a Tartar not unlike to that of Wine. So that
the Spirits, prepared by the Incineration of Plants, do, like that of Vinous
Tartar, proceed from the Tartars of these Plants; which seeing they consist of
the same Salts, namely Alcaly and Acid, those Spirits are indeed nothing else
but these Salts in a Fluid state. Hence if genuine Spirit of Tartar be drawn
off from an Alcalisate Salt, the Volatile Acid being left in the fixed Alcaly,
it will strike your Nose with the pungent scent of a Volatile Urinous Salt.

Sect. III.
The Alcaline Vrinous Spirits of Animals are nothing else, but the Volatile
Salts of these Animals, dissolved in a little of their own Phlegm.
[FOR, 1. If you put Spirit of Urine, or any other Urinous Spirit, well
rectified, into a glass conveniently shaped, a gentle heat will sublime good
store of dry Volatile Salt into the slender neck of the Glass, leaving a weak
Phlegmatic Liquor in the bottom; which would be mere insipid Phlegm, if it
could be perfectly freed from the Volatile Salt that it is yet impregnated with,
and from the subtle Particles of Oil that generally, if not constantly, ascend
together with these Spirits, and continue invisibly mixed with them (though
never so well rectified, even to a perfect transparency) for a long time, 'till
at length by the action of the Air, or evaporation of the Volatile Salt (if the
Glass be not very well stopped) or the intestine motion of the parts of the
Liquor, though it be, the Particles of Oil begin to separate themselves from
the rest of the Liquor, and gather together into numerous little drops, which,
though they be singly invisible, yet render the whole Liquor muddy and of a
reddish color. 2. In the Distillation, for instance, of Fermented Urine, or of
Sal Armoniack mingled with a fixed Salt, usually the Volatile Salt sublimes at
first in a dry form; but if you continue the Distillation, so much of the
Phlegm will ascend as shall dissolve all your Volatile Salt, and wash it it
down into the Receiver, where you have it in the form of a Spirit. 3. If you
dissolve, in common Water Distilled, as much Volatile Salt of Human Blood (for
instance) as it will take up, and Distill this mixture, you will by that means
obtain a Liquor, that by its smell, taste, and diverse Operations, appears to be
a good brisk Spirit of Human Blood; as that incomparable promoter of
Experimental Philosophy, Mr. Boil, has observed in his late useful Treatise
about Human Blood.

The same is to be said of the Alcaline Spirits, that are Distilled from Peace,
Beans, and some other Vegetables: For they appear by diverse effects to be much
of the same nature with Urinous Spirits.]

Sect. IV.
The Acid Spirits of Minerals (as Sea Salt, Vitriol, Sulphur, etc.) are nothing
else but the Acid Salts of these Minerals freed from the more Terrestrial
Parts, united with a little Phlegm, and so reduced into a fluid state by the
force of the fire.
FOR you may reduce them to a dry Salt by pouring them upon an Alcaly. For
instance, Spirit of Vitriol, after it has been employed to corrode Iron, and
the superfluous moisture evaporated, recorporifies into Vitriol. And Spirit of
Nitre, satiated with Salt of Tartar or any other fixed Salt, turns into Nitre
again after evaporation. Moreover these Acid Spirits are often found upon the
Corks (that stop the Glasses wherein they are kept) in a dry saline form.

The same is to be said of the Acid Spirits of Vegetables, as that of Vinegar,
Tartar, Guaiac, etc. which are nothing else but Essential Salts dissolved in
Phlegm.

Sect. V.
The Oils or Sulphurs of Vegetables are nothing else but Volatile Salts
concentrated, in union with an unctuous inflamable Acid; which by its
unctuosity hinders them to mix readily with Water, as all Salts use to do.
THerefore Helmont often affirms, that Vegetable Oils may be turned into
Volatile Salts. But however that be, being joined with fixed Salts, they turn
into a Soap; and if they be frequently drawn off, they are thereby at last
resolved into mere Elementary Water: which is also true of all Fermented ardent
Spirits, since they are but Oils dissolved in Phlegm. Thus Spirit of Wine,
drawn off from Salt of Tartar, leaves its seminal Acid behind it, and comes
over weak and Phlegmatic: and if this abstraction be often reiterated, it is
thereby at length resolved into pure Elementary Water, as will be more fully
declared hereafter.

There is a certain Vegetable Sulphur, found in Charcoals before they be burnt
to ashes, by virtue whereof they glow. It is separated by means of Alcali's and
Precipitation. This Sulphur is of a golden color, and of no contemptible use:
but if the Charcoal be Distilled in a Retort with an open fire, it turns, like
all other Sulphurs, into an Acid Spirit, which being poured upon the fixed Salt
of the Caput mortuum, makes an effervescence with it, and so is Coagulated into
a Salt.

Sect. VI.
The Sulphurs of Animals, namely Oil and Fat, are also nothing else but
Volatile Alcaline Salts concentrated, and somewhat suppressed by an occult Acid
(that is not manifest to sense) so that they cannot make any Effervescence with
manifest Acids.
THESE Volatile Salts may be discovered after the very same manner with those
of Vegetable Oils. Yea, sometimes Dogs-grease, for instance, exposed in a Glass
to the Sun, sublimes into a Volatile Salt without any other art: and it is, upon
the sole account of this Volatile Salt, that it has been found beneficial to
the exulcerated Lungs of Consumptive persons. The Oil of Hartshorn also may be
sublimed into a Volatile Salt.

Sect. VII.
The Acid Oils of Minerals (as Vitriol, Sulphur, Allom, Sea Salt, etc.) are not
true Oils, but Acid Salts concentrated; and differ not from the forementioned
Acid Spirits of the same Minerals, but in that they are less diluted with
Phlegm.

Sect. VIII.
All Mineral Sulphurs, if they be kindled, turn into a very Acid saline Spirit.
THE fixed incombustible Sulphurs of Metals, that Helmont speaks of, are (if
there be any such Sulphurs) reducible into a Salt, since the same Author
informs us, that the Metals themselves may be totally reduced to an
aequiponderant Salt, and this into insipid Water.

As for the Earthy part of Natural Bodies, being useless and of no activity, it
scarcely uses to be reckoned amongst the Principles. And however Helmont
informs us, that the Liquor Alcahest turns this Earth into Water, by depriving
it of its Essence, i. e. of its seminal virtue.

From what has been said it appears that all those substances, that the vulgar
Chemists obtain from Bodies by the Fire, and style Principles, are reducible to
Salts and and Phlegm (or Water.) Now our ingenious Author goes on to prove, at
great length, that even,

Sect. IX.
All sorts of Salts, whether Acid or Alcalisate, Fixed or Volatile, are finally
reducible to Elementary Water.
HERE first of all it is to be acknowledged, that Salts do naturally exist in
Bodies before they have suffered the Fire: although in many Bodies, as Woods,
Flints, etc. the Salts are so bound up, by reason of the close contexture of
the Parts of these Bodies, that they cannot easily be put into motion and
dissolved, and therefore do not affect the Organs of taste, 'till the concretion
of the Parts be dissolved, and the scattered saline Particles be brought
together and Colliquated by the Fire. Nor is it true, that the Terrestrial
Particles are turned into Salts by the Operation of the Fire: for, Why is it
then that Ashes, once Elixiviated, will not yield one grain more of Salt,
though you Calcine them again? Why do not any Terrestrial Particles acquire a
saline taste by the Operation of the Fire? But yet,

Sect. X.
The fixed Salts of Vegetables, prepared by Calcination, were not naturally
preexistent in that form, but are produced of the Volatile Salts, colliquated
amongst themselves and with the Earthy Particles, by the force of the Fire.
IT IS true, there naturally exists, in the Juice of Grapes and of all other
Vegetables, a Tartar so fixed as to be inodorous, and to endure the Air (though
not the Fire) without flying away. Which fixtness proceeds from the Acid, that
saturates the Volatile Alcali of this Tartar; as we see in the Volatile Salt of
Urine, Soot, etc. which being satiated with Spirit of Salt, are thereby fixed
into Sal-Armoniack, that has no smell. The Fermentation of the Juices, pressed
out of Apples, Pears, etc. is a manifest proof of this Tartarous Salt; for
there can be no Fermentation without Acid and Alcaly, which are the constituent
Principles of Tartar. But there is no Salt, pre-existent to Calcination in any
Vegetable, so fixed as to endure the Fire as well as the Air. For,

First, the ordinary way of preparing fixed Salts, is, by burning the dried
Vegetables to Ashes in an open Fire, Lixiviating these Ashes by decoction in
common Water, and exposing this Lee to some heat, 'till the greatest part of
the Water being Evaporated, the saline Particles, formerly dispersed in the
Pores of the Liquor, unite together for want of room into Crystals, of
different Figures, according to the diversity of the seminal Acid. Others
Distill a certain Acid seminal Spirit from the Plant, reduced to Ashes by a
moderate Fire, and Lixiviate the Salt that remains in the retort with this
Spirit. Again others, instead of this Acid, cast a little Sulphur upon the
Salt, when it is highly Calcined, whose seminal Acid gives a certain form to the
Salt, in place of that which the extreme Calcination had destroyed; lest, if
the Salt were wholly destitute of a seminal Acid, it should resolve into
Elementary Water, as shall be made out hereafter. But Tachenius's method is the
best; namely, to reduce the Plants, whilst they are fresh and green, into black
Ashes with a very gentle Fire, so as they may not break out into a manifest
flame; to Calcine these Ashes to whiteness in an Earthen Pot over the fire,
stirring them ever now and then; after this to Lixiviate them with common
Water; to evaporate the Lee to the consistence of Honey; then to urge it with a
moderate Fire to browness: and last of all to dissolve and Chrystallise it. One
pound of Ashes, prepared after this manner, will yield near four ounces of very
pure fixed Salt: whereas four pound Calcined by the former methods, will scarce
yield one ounce. The reason of so great a difference, depends partly upon the
greenness of the Plants, and partly upon the moderateness of the Fire employed
to Calcine them. For dried Plants (for instance Wormwood) do always afford less
fixed Salt than green ones; whence it manifestly follows, that by Exs^iccation
some Saline Particles are carried away with the Aqueous ones, which would have
composed a part of the fixed Salt, if the Plant had been Calcined while it was
green: now these Salts could not fly away unless they were Volatile. Again, as
the Volatile Salts of a Plant are spent by the action of the Air in
Exsiccation, so are they likewise by the action of the Fire in Calcination; and
this so much the more, by how much the Fire is more violent; for the Particles
of a manifest flame, being in exceeding quick motion, excite the Volatile Salts
to a swifter motion, and consequently a more copious avolation, than those of a
gentle smothering Fire.

Secondly, If you take the Soot that ascends in the Calcination of Tartar,
(otherwise called the Spirit of Tartar,) and put it back again to the Caput
mortuum, you will thereby much increase the quantity of the fixed Salt: And if
all the Volatile saline Particles of Tartar could be kept from flying away in
Calcination, they would all turn into a fixed Salt. But if all of them were
driven away, 'twere not possible to obtain one grain of fixed Salt: which yet
never happens, because they cannot all fly away at once, but one after another;
so that those, which were to fly away last, are by reason of their longer stay
in the fire, Colliquated, and so fixed; and that partly by the Acid Particles
that feed the flame (and condense the smoke into Soot) and partly by the Earthy
Particles, commixed with the Volatile Salts that are Coagulated in the Fire.

Thirdly, It Is impossible to extract one grain of fixed Salt from any Vegetable,
not yet calcined to Ashes, that is, so long as there remains any smoke, or the
least motion, of the Vegetable Particles (such as we see in glowing Charcoal;)
but when this motion ceases, it is a sign that all the remaining Particles are
Coagulated and fixed.

Fourthly, Soot is nothing else but a heap of Volatile Particles Coagulated
together, and yet by Calcination it affords a considerable quantity of fixed
Salt; which must proceed from the Colliquation of the Volatile Salts, since
there can be none but such in Soot: for fixed Salts are so constant in the Fire
that they cannot ascend in the form of Flame or Smoke, and consequently cannot
enter the composition of Soot. And that the Salts of Soot are Volatile, is also
manifest from hence, that, by means of Spirit of Salt, they may be turned to
Sal-Armoniack, and consequently (when the Acid Spirit is separated by the
addition of a fixed Alcali) into a Volatile and highly Urinous Salt. So that
the matter, of which the fixed Salt of Soot consists, are these Volatile Salts
of Soot, one Acid and another Urinous, Colliquated together and with the
Terrestrial Particles, by the force of the Fire. Nor can it be said, that the
fixed Salt of Soot was carried up by the Volatile; for (besides that there was
no fixed Salt pre-existent in the mixed Body) by this means it would be no more a
fixed but a Volatile Salt: and if we consider the proportion of the fixed Salt of
Soot to the weight of the Soot it self, it will easily appear, that Soot
contains not enough of Volatile Salt to elevate such a quantity of Fixed, since
that ought to exceed this almost in a triple proportion. Thus though if you
mingle fixed Salt of Tartar, with a sufficient proportion of its own, or any
other, Volatile Salt, and commit this mixture to sublimation, our Author denies
not but that some parts of the fixed Salt will be elevated by the other Salt;
yet he affirms, that these are not integral parts, but have lost the nature of
a fixed Salt, and are really turned into a Volatile one, because this
sublimation separates them from the Terrestial Particles, their union with
which was the only thing that kept them in a fixed state. In the like manner
Spirit of Wine, being digested with fixed Salt of Tartar, and drawn off by
Distillation, carries along with it some of the saline Particles (whence it is
said to be Tartaris'd,) but no Terrestrial ones, and consequently no fixed Salt
but a Volatile. Again, as it is impossible to obtain one grain of fixed Salt from
Soot, before a violent Calcination, so the quantity of the fixed Salt is
increased by all the same methods that restrain the Volatile from flying away
in this Calcination: namely if it be Calcined in a close Vessel, with an
intense Fire at the beginning, (that the Volatile Salts may be the sooner
colliquated, before they can have time to fly away) then beaten, and kept
stirring over the Fire 'till it be of a cineritious color. The Soot also, that
ascends in the Calcination of Soot, being put back again to the Caput Mortuum,
increases the quantity of the fixed Salt.

Fifthly, Whatsoever separates the Terrestrial parts from any fixed Salt, does
at the same time destroy its Fixity, and Volatilise the saline parts. Which our
Author makes out by several Experiments. 1. If you pour Spirit of Salt, by
degrees, upon a Lee of Salt of Tartar, (or of any other Alcalisate Salt,) 'till
it be almost satiated, (which is known by the abating of the Effervescence,)
you shall observe a kind of Earth precipitate out of the fixed Salt, (namely
because, upon the mutual conflict, between an Acid and an Alcali, whatsoever
heterogeneous substance is contained in either of them uses to precipitate.)
The Earthy part of the Salt of Tartar being thus separated, the saline part is
thereby rendered Volatile, and would actually fly away, were it not for the
Acid that fixes it anew: and if you separate this Acid, by the addition of new
Salt of Tartar, it will by this means be set at liberty, and strike your
Nostrils with an Urinous odor. Thus, if you separate the Liquor from the
precipitated Earth by Filtration, then reduce it to Crystals by evaporation,
and last of all, mingle an equal quantity of Salt of Tartar, with these
Crystals in a Mortar; the Acid rit Spirit will join it self to this new Salt of
Tartar, and so the Volatile Alcali, being freed from the Acid, flies away. Nor
can it be said, that the forementioned Earth did but externally adhere to the
Salt of Tartar, and was not intimately united with it by Colliquation; since
the experiment succeeds with Oil of Tartar per deliquium, though it be clear
and limpid like Rock-water: but observe, that the Earth does not fall out of
the Pores of the Oil of Tartar, 'till the Salts have attained the point of
saturation, and then the Liquor, that was lympid before, begins to look
troubled; and when the Glass has stood a while, a whitish colored substance
settles to the bottom. But the Volatile Salt, that is separated from the Oil of
Tartar, is weaker than that which is separated from the dry Salt; because Salts
approach so much the nearer to the nature of Elementary Water, by how much the
easier they run per deliquium. 2. In the very same manner, and for the same
reason, a Volatile Urinous Salt may be obtained from the Caput mortuum of
Sal-Armoniac, by the addition of new fixed Salt. For in Sal-Armoniack there is a
somewhat fixed Acid Spirit, combined with the Volatile Salt of Urine and Soot;
which Acid, being imbibed by the Salt of Tartar, (that is mingled with the
Sal-Armoniack immediately before Distillation,) the Volatile Salt is set at
liberty, and presently flies away. And in the mean time, the forementioned Acid
dissolves the Union, between the Earthy and Saline Particles of the Salt of
Tartar, and thereby renders the saline ones Volatile; which therefore, so soon
as they are freed from this Acid, by the addition of new Salt of Tartar to the
Caput mortuum, do presently ascend, even without Fire, with a most piercing
Urinous odor. And even from this second Caput mortuum you may obtain a
Volatile Salt, by the addition of a third portion of Salt of Tartar. 3. The
Volatilisation of Salt of Tartar, by the help of Vinegar, depends upon the same
Principle. For they pour Vinegar upon the Salt of Tartar, and draw it off very
Phlegmatic; for the Acid Salt is left in the Salt of Tartar. Then they pour on
fresh Vinegar, and abstract it as before; and reiterate this Operation so
often, 'till the Vinegar came over as Acid as when it was poured on: which is a
sign that the Salt of Tartar is now satiated with the Acid of the Vinegar, and
consequently Volatilis'd by the separation of the Earth that fixed it. For if
you pour Vinegar upon the Lee of Tartar, to the point of saturation, the Earth
of the Tartar will presently precipitate. 4. The Preparation of Balsam of
Samech is of no small affinity to this; namely, the Volatilisation of Salt of
Tartar, by a frequent abstraction of Spirit of Wine from it. For the Spirit
that is first poured on, though it were highly rectified, comes off
Phlegmatic, with very great loss of its igneous virtue; because it is in great
part turned into a Water, by being robbed of its seminal Acid. But, so soon as
the Salt of Tartar is fully satiated with this Acid, (which cannot be without
reiterating the abstraction of fresh Spirit a great many times, since Salt of
Tartar requires a great quantity of the strongest Vinegar to satiate it, though
the Acidity of Vinegar be manifest and more fixed, whereas that of Spirit of
Wine is occult and Volatile,) and the Spirit comes off without loss of
strength, the Alcali of the Tartar is found to have been Volatilis'd, by being
separated from the Earth that fixed it. Hence you may observe a sweetness in
the Spirit of Wine Tartarised, which argues, that the Acid Particles of the
Spirit are Converted into sweet ones, by being Coagulated in the Alcalisate
ones of the Salt of Tartar that ascend with them; in like manner as when
Vinegar is Coagulated in Saturn or Mars. N. B. It Is not necessary, in this
Operation, to separate the Acid from the Volatilis'd Alcaly, before this Alcaly
can be made to ascend, as it was in the Experiments made with Spirit of Salt
and Vinegar; because the Acid of the Spirit of Wine is much more Volatile than
that of Spirit of Salt or Vinegar, and therefore, though it be Coagulated in the
Volatilis'd Alcaly, yet it hinders not it is Volatility. 5. The same Observation
holds of Oil of Cinnamon (and the like Distilled Oils) which being long Digested
and Circulated with it is own Fixed Salt, Volatilizes it, and is together with it
totally converted into a Volatile Salt, if Helmont rightly informs us, And it is
easy to understand the reason of this, if we consider that there is an Acid in
all distilled Oils, as well as in Spirit of Wine and all other Inflamable
Substances; which we shall manifestly prove hereafter. 6. In the Fermentation
of Salt of Tartar with its own proper Ferment, namely Crude Tartar; the Acid of
the latter Precipitates the Earth of the former; (from eight ounces of each the
Author has seen two Drams of Earth separated) but the Volatilis'd Alcaly, being
kept under the power of this Acid, does not yet manifest it self: so that the
Volatile Urinous Salt which is obtained from hence, does not so much proceed
from the Salt of Tartar, as from the Crude Tartar, on which the Salt of Tartar
operates in this case, much after the same manner as it uses to do as
Sal-Armoniac. Which is the more probable, because a very piercing Urinous Salt
may be obtained from Crude Tartar alone, without any Salt of Tartar, only by
the addition of an equal weight of Crude Alum, as Dan. Ludovicus informs us. 7.
Oil of Tartar per deliquium, digested with Flowers of Sulphur in a gentle heat,
emits Particles extremely Urinous; which effect the Author attributes to the
Acid of the Sulphur: and adds, that, having had occasion to reduce faetid Oil
of Hartshorn into a soap with a certain Alcalisate Salt, the Glass grew warm
without any External Heat, and a strong Urinous Odor pierced his Nose. [I am
apt to think that this Odor came not from the Alcalisate Salt, as the Author
seems to believe, but from the Oil of Hartshorn, which without doubt contains
an Urinous Salt in it. And if it contain an Acid also, as the Author thinks it
does, the Incalescence might proceed from some conflict betwixt this and the
Alcalisate Salt, which being united together, the Urinous Salt was perhas
thereby set at liberty from the Acid that formerly detained it.] The like Odor
is observable in the Salt produced by frequent abstraction of Spirit of Wine
from Salt of Tartar: Where the Author observes that some, after they have
several times poured Spirit of Wine upon warm Salt of Tartar and abstracted it
again, do last of all pour on Oil of Vitriol, and then obtain the Volatile Salt
by the addition of fresh Salt of Tartar. Which Experiment, though the Author has
not tried, yet he judges it may succeed; since the Terestrial parts of the Salt
of Tartar may be separated by the Oil of Vitriol, and the Alcaline parts, being
united with this Acid, may be set at liberty by the addition of new Salt of
Tartar.

Here the Author takes occasion to discourse of the Virtues of Salt of Tartar
Volatilis'd, and affirms that it has no peculiar Effects, (neither in the
Curing of Diseases, nor in the Dissolution of Bodies,) but what other Urinous
Salts do likewise produce. But yet he acknowledges a Specific Difference
between them, upon the account of the Seed in the Acid of Tartar, which differs
from the Seeds of other Acids: and in this respect other Urinous Salts do also
differ from one another; since the renowned Boil has observed, that the Volatile
Salt of Hartshorn resembles a Parallelopiped, but that of Human Blood,
digested with Spirit of Wine, is like a Rhombus. This diversity of Figure is
owing to the different Seeds or Idea's, as residing in the Acids, that are the
causes of the Solidity and Coagulation of these Salt: Wherefore the Fixed Salt
of Tartar Cristallis'd does also resemble a Rhombus, because the Seminal Acid
of this Salt, is of the same kind with that of the Spirit of Wine, which being
stronger than the Seminal Acid of the forementioned Volatile Salt of Blood,
this Salt is Coagulated according to the Idea of the Vinous Acid: even as, when
Spirit of Nitre is poured upon Salt of Tartar, the Acid of the former being the
more powerful, forms the Crystals of an Oblong figure like Nitre, but not like
Salt of Tartar, which resembles a Rhombus. The Author concludes, that this
Seminal difference of Volatile Alcalies is of little moment in Medicine, since
all Alcalies, even the purest, are endowed with so much of a Seminal Acid, as
does indeed preserve them from a Spontaneous resolution, into Elementary Water,
but yet hinders them not from being in a capacity to imbibe this or that
Hostile Morbisic Acid indifferently. The same thing is to be said of the fixed
Alcalisate Salts of Vegetables, for the Seminal Virtues are lost in the
Calcination, and there remains only so much of a seminal Acid, as keeps them
from relapsing into Elementary Water, and does indeed cause them to differ
specifically from one another, but not to produce different Effects in Medicine.

From all the forementioned Particulars, concerning the Volatilising of Fixed
Salts, our Author concludes, that there can never be any Method found out to
effect it, but by separating the Terrestrial Particles. As for Zwelfers
Volatile Salt of Tartar, prepared by often reiterated Solutions ( per
deliquium) and Abstractions, he affirms that it is nothing else but useless
Elementary Water; as will manifestly appear to him that considers, that
Alcalisate Salts are fundamentally nothing else but Aqueous Particles,
converted by a little Seminal Acid into rigid Salts, which, as soon as the Acid
is destroyed, turn again into Water: wherefore the more violent the Calcination
is, and by consequence the greater your loss is of this seminal Acid, they are
the more easily resolved per deliquium in moist Air, which by it is virtue, as a
Menstruum, does in great part consume the little Acid that remains and thereby
resolve a great part of the Alcalisate Salt into Elementary Water, wherein the
other Particles, not yet deprived of their Seed, do swim, (for when Salts
approach to the nature of Water, they are readily dissolved in it;) but if the
Water be abstracted from them, and they exposed to the Air again, their
remaining Acid is destroyed, and they resolved into Water in great part: and if
they run per deliquium and be abstracted often enough, all the Seminal Acid
will be at length destroyed, and nothing remain but bare Elementary Water,
which will all of it easily ascend. And by this means any Fixed Alcalisate Salt
may be totally reduced into Elementary Water.

Sect. XI.
THE Volatile Salts of Vegetables, since they are the Matter of which
(Colliquated with the Acid and Terrestrial Particles) the Alcalisate Salts
consist; And the Volatile Salts of Animals, since (as the Author has proved)
they differ not essentially from those of Vegetables; are both of them
ultimately reducible into Elementary Water.

Sect. XII.
ACID Salts, made fluid by the force of Fire, and drawn off from fixed Alcalies,
may be thereby so robbed of their Acid, that nothing will ascend but Elementary
Water. And the Alcalisate Salt, that has imbibed the Acid, being frequently
resolved per deliquium and the Phlegmatic part as frequently abstracted, may by
this means be at length totally converted into pure Elementary Water.

Thus the Author having particularly examined the pretended Chemical
principles, and found them all ultimately reducible into Elementary Water;
Concludes that

Sect. XIII.
ALL Mixed Bodies are made up of Water, as the only first Material Principle and
Seeds (which differ according to the differing species of Bodies) as the Formal
Principle, united together by means of Acid Ferments: That is to say, Water is
Coagulated into a Plant, by the Ferment of a Vegetable Seed; into a Metal,
Stone, etc. by that of a Mineral Seed; and into Flesh, Bones, etc. by the
Ferment of an Animal Seed. For in all Mixed Bodies there are certain Acid
Particles, wherein the Seeds or Ideas of Natural things do reside, and which,
in Coagulating the approximated Aliment, do follow the draught of these Ideas,
and so are thereby determined to give it the form of this or the other
Vegetable Mineral, or Animal. Thus in a Man's Stomach, for example, there lurks
a certain Acid, that discovers it self by the sour belches of healthy men, and
by the Vomiting of Coagulated Milk, though it were taken fluid. This Acid easily
receives the Alcalical Particles of the Meat extracted by (the Alcalical
Menstruum) the Spittle, and imprints the Idea of its own Seed upon them, by
which they are determined to nourish Man only, and no other Animal; as
afterward, when they come to every particular Part of the Body, by the
Circulation of the Blood, they are determined by the seminal Acid residing in
that Part, to nourish it rather than any of the rest. And that Aliment, which
has once received the Seal or Impression of the seminal Idea of any Animal in
the Stomach, or of any part of the Animal in that same Part; will never receive
the Idea of another Animal, nor of another Part of the same Animal, unless it
be suppressed by a more powerful Ferment; as when Sheeps Bones, though furnished
with their own proper Ferment and Idea yet, being unable to resist the stronger
one of a Dogs stomach, are therein turned into fit nourishment for the Dog, and
afterward for his Musculous Flesh it self and other Parts, as well as for his
Bones. In like manner Grass has its own Ferment and Idea suppressed by that of
a Cows stomach, which seals it with such an Impression, as renders it fit
Nourishment for a Cow, but not for any other Animal. But if the same Grass had
been taken into the stomach of a Horse, it would have been turned into
Nourishment fit for a Horse, but unfit for a Cow or any other Animal. Again
common Mercury, which is the Nourishment of Metals, is converted into this or
the other Metal, according to the diversity of the Acid seminal Sulphur that
Coagulates it. Finally all Vegetables also are endowed with a seminal Acid, and
therefore their expressed Juices do, after long Fermentation, taste Acid. And in
the Fermentation of Cream of Tartar with Salt of Tartar, the Seed, Idea or
Archeus, that reside in the Acid of the Tartar, forms certain Bubbles very much
resembling natural Grapes.

All this will be better understood hereafter, from the Authors particular
expication of the nature of the forementioned Seeds, Ideas and Ferments: But
now, to put it past all doubt, that Water is the only Material Principle of all
Mixed Bodies, the Author has not only proved that all Substance's that Mixed
Bodies can be resolved into by the Chemical Art, are totally reducible into
Elementary Water; but likewise he proves particularly, that

Prop. XIV.
Water is the only and Catholic Nourishment of all Vegetables, Animals, and
Minerals.
AND It Is manifest that every Body consists of the same Matter that nourishes.
1. As for Vegetables, Helmonts Experiment proves this beyond contradiction;
namely, he put 200 pound of Earth (dried in an oven) into an earthen vessel,
moistened it with Rainwater, planted it in the trunk of a Willow Tree weighing
5 pound, and let it alone there for 5 years time, only watering it, as need
required, with Rainwater or distilled Water. [And to keep the neighboring
Earth from getting in, he employed a plate of Iron tin'd over and perforated
with many holes.] At the 5 years end he found the Tree had grown so well, that
it weighed 169 pound and three ounces: And yet the Earth, being dried again,
weighed but two ounces less than it had done at first: so that above 160 pound
of Wood, Bark, Root, etc. had grown up out of mere Water, Coagulated by the
Seminal Ferment of the Vegetable into the several Substances newly mentioned.
Hence Rain does wonderfully refresh, envigorate and advance the growth of, all
sorts of Plants, and without that they decay, wither and dye. For Water is
indifferent to them all, till it be turned by the Ferment of the Vegetable Seed
into Leffas, as Helmont calls the Juice that is the immediate Aliment of the
Plant. Thus Wolf-bane Aconitum and Lavender, for instance, growing in the same
Soil, are both nourished by the same Rainwater, which by the Ferment of the
one is Coagulated into a poisonous Herb, and by that of the other into a
wholesome one.

Secondly, That Animals are nourished with Water alone, appears in Fishes; for
they live only in the Water, and yet have no food supplied them from any where
else, nor is there any Rudiment of it to be found in their Stomachs, as Helmont
observes. [And though some Fishes feed upon others, yet these others feed only
upon Water, and therefore are materially nothing else but Water.] As for
Terrestrial Animals; some of them, as Horses, Cows, Sheep, etc. feed wholly
upon Water and Grass, which the Author has already proved to be materially
nothing else but Water, and therefore that which grows in well watered places,
prospers best, others, as a Lion, Wolf, etc. though they be not nourished by
Grass and Water only, but feed upon other Animals, yet still their food is
materially nothing else but Water, being that these Animals live only upon
Grass and Water, except when they are too young to digest Grass, that they are
nourished by their Mothers Milk, which also is materially nothing else but
Water, since it is generated of the Mothers nutriment. [The same things are
easily applicable to Birds;] and to Men, which feed only upon Vegetables,
Fishes, and the Flesh of Beasts that are nourished only by Vegetables.

Thirdly, As for Minerals; Mercury is the immediate Aliment of Metals, and some
other Minerals, and the nearest Matter of which they are produced. Now Mercury
is nothing but Elementary Water, Coagulated by a certain Metalline and
Arsenical Sulphur into such a Water as does not wet the Hands: and by other
various Sulphurs it is further Coagulated into Antimony and diverse Metals. Hence
Mines are never found but where there is a great conflux of Water. Gold is
gathered out of the Sands of some Rivers. Sand abounds no where so much as near
the Sea and great Rivers. Stones are nothing else but sand compacted together.
[And the illustrious Mr. Boil has fully proved in a most ingenious as well as
judicious Discourse about the Origin and virtues of Gems, that many Gems and
Medical Stones were once fluid Bodies. But 'twere too long, here to give an
account of the many cogent Arguments he there imploys to prove this Assertion,
which very much countenances our Authors Hypothesis.] The experienced Helmont
informs us, that it often happens in Mines when the Workmen are breaking the
Rocks, that the Wall cleaves, and a little water of a whitish green Color
flows out of the cleft, and presently thickens like liquid Soap; afterward it
grows yellow or white or of a deeper green. This Juice he calls Bur, and
affirms it to be the nearest Matter of all Minerals, and to be nothing else but
Water Coagulated by a Mineral Ferment, as Leffas is by a Vegetable.

To make it yet more evident, that Water is the only first Material Principle
of Natural Bodies; the Author undertakes to prove that

Prop. XV.
All Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals are ultimately resoluble into Elementary
Water.
[FIRST the substances that Animals are resolved into by Distillation, are
Phlegm, Volatile Salt, Urinous Spirit, Oil, and Earth or Caput mortuum, but
very little if any Fixed Salt. The Phlegm is nothing else but Elementary Water,
except in as far as it partakes of the Volatile Salt and Oil, of which it
always carries up some Particles, nor can it ever be perfectly separated from
them.] 2. The Volatile Salt of Animals is of the same nature with that of
Vegetables, which being Colliquated by the force of the Fire with Acid and
Earthy Particles, is thereby turned into a Fixed Salt. And this fixed Salt being
frequently deliquated, and the Phlegm as often abstracted, is at length totally
resolved into Elementary Water. All this was abundantly proved before; as also
that 3. The Spirit is nothing else but Volatile Salt dissolved in Phlegm. 4.
The Oily and Fat parts of Animals may be united with an Alcalisate Salt into
Soap, from which being often abstracted, they turn at length into mere
Elementary Water. And this is to be observed of all the Fats of Animals, that
by frequent Circulation with Salt of Tartar they are converted into Water. 5. [
As for the Fixed Salt of Animal Substances, it is the common Opinion that none
can be abstracted from them; perhaps because all their Saline Parts are so
Volatile, that (to speak consonantly to our Authors Hypothesis) they cannot
sustain a Colliquation with the Earthy Parts, especially since there are very
few, if any, manifestly Acid ones to concur to their Fixation. But that
indefatigable Searcher into Nature, Mr. Boil, informs us, that by an obstinate
Calcination of eight ounces and a half of Caput mortuum of Human Blood, he
obtained above seven drams of Salt, which, tho it were not truly Lixivial, but
rather of the nature of Sea Salt, yet it was Fixed enough to endure a
Calcination for two days together, without flying away. However, it is probable,
that this was nothing else but some unaltered part of the Sea Salt that
seasoned the Aliments, that the person or persons whose the Blood was fed
upon.] 6. The Earth also may be totally resolved into Elementary Water, by
being deprived of its seminal virtue by means of the Alcahest, if we may
believe Van Helmont.

Hence it is that dead Animals, when they putrify, are resolved into an Aqueous
Substance. And Helmont has delivered a notable Experiment to this purpose,
namely, that if you dig up a Frog at full Moon, in the coldest time of Winter,
( atrocissimo hyemis borea) wash it, and tie it to a stick in the Fields, the
next morning 'twill be turned into a white and transparent Mucilage, not unlike
to liquifi'd Gum Tragacanth, but retaining the figure of a Frog. Yea he affirms
that the Cadaver of a Man or Beast, exposd all night to the Rays of the Moon,
will in the Morning be almost fluid with rottenness, ( putrilagine diffluet:)
so great power has the Moon to reduce dead Bodies into an Aqueous Mucilage.

[Secondly, Vegetable Substances Chymically analys'd, yield Phlegm, Volatile
Salt, Spirit of several sorts, Oil, Fixed Salt, and Earth. To the first, second,
fourth and sixth may be applied what was said of the Phlegm, Volatile Salt,
Oil, and Earth of Animal Substances. The Fixed Salt may be totally resolved into
Elementary Water, by reiterated Solutions in the Air, and Abstractions, as
above. There are 4. sorts of Spirits afforded by Vegetable Substances. 1.
Vinous inflamable Spirits, which were formerly proved to be nothing but Oils
dissolved in Phlegm by Fermentation: as also that 2. Volatile Saline Spirits,
as Spirit of Soot, Spirit of Beans (that have been kept in a dry place for some
Months) etc. are nothing but Volatile Salts dissolved into Phlegm. And that 3.
Acid Spirits, as Spirit of Vinegar, Spirit of Beans newly gathered, etc. Are
nothing but Acid Salts in a fluid state and united with Phlegm: and being
poured upon Fixed Salts, they are together with them ultimately resoluble into
Elementary Water. 4. Adiaphorous Spirits of Box, Guaiacum etc. Which the
judicious Mr. Boil, who was the first Observer of them, suspects to be
generated of the finer parts of the Oil of the Wood, reduced to an
extraordinary smallness, and by that means exquisitely mixed with the Plegm the
juice of Grapes affords: all these 4 sorts of Spirits, as Mr. Boil has
observed in his excellent Discourse concerning the Producibleness of the
Chemical Principles.

Thirdly, As for Minerals; We must rely upon the testimony of Van Helmont, whom
Mr. Boil concludes to be a veracious Author, (except in that extravagant
Treatise of the Magnetical Cure of Wounds,) from the success he has had in
trying some of his Experiments, that might seem not the most likely to succeed:
[and I think we may justly lay great weight upon the judgment of so experiencd
and judicious a person as Mr. Boil, concerning the sincerity of any Chemical
Author.] Helmont then in several places informs us, that all Stones, Gems,
Marcasites, Metals etc. may be transmuted into an aequiponderant Salt, and this
into Insipid Water. And as for Metals, it seems indeed that common Mercury is
their nearest Matter, into which they may be resolved by the separation of
their Coagulating Salts: and the famous Langelot has made an Experiment of this
in the Regulus of Antimony. Now if the other Metals also may be resolved into
Mercury by depriving them of their Sulphurs, and the Mercury it self be
reducible into Water, ( by robbing it of the Sulphurs yet remaining in it,) as
Mr. Boil somewhere affirms, it may in great part, and as several other Authors
of good credit attest; then it can no more be doubted, that all Minerals are
reducible into Water.

[It will not be unseasonable in this place to mention a few Experiments,
delivered in Mr. Boyles Septical Chemist, that do very much countenance the
three last Propositions. That excellent Author then informs us, that about the
middle of May he caused his Gardener, to dig out some good Earth, dry it well
in an Oven, weigh it, put it in a very shallow Earthen Pot, and set in it a
Seed of Squash (a sort of Indian Pompion that grows apace) which he watered
only with Rain or spring Water. And tho the hastening Winter hindered it from
attaining any thing near its wonted magnitude, yet being taken up about the
middle of October, the Pompion together with the Stalk and Leaves weighed three
pound wanting a quarter. And yet the Earth, being very well dried in an Oven,
was found to have lost little or nothing of its first weight. He tried the like
Experiment with two Cucumbers, which being taken out of the Earth wherein they
had grown, weighed (together with the Roots and Branches) fourteen pound and
six ounces; and yet the Earth had lost but a pound and a half of its first
weight, which the Gardener judged to have been in great part wasted in the
ordering. But granting that some of the Earth, or rather of the dissoluble Salt
harbored in it, was wasted in the nourishment of the Plant; yet it is plain,
that the main Body of it consisted of trasmuted Water. This Experiment may be
tried with the Seeds of any Plant that is bulky and grows hastily. Likewise A
top of Spearmint of an inch long, being put into a vial full of Spring Water
with its lower part immersed, did in a few days shoot forth numerous Roots into
the Water, (as if it had been Earth,) and display it self upwards into many
Leaves, with a pretty thick stalk. The same Experiment has also succeeded with
Marjoram (though more slowly) Balm, and Peniroyal, to name no more. One of these
Vegetables cherished only by Spring Water, and that never renewed, afforded by
distillation (besides Phlegm) an Empyreumatical Spirit, an adust Oil, and a
Caput mortuum, that appearing to be a Coal, consisted no doubt of Salt and
Earth. And if Helmont had distilled the forementioned Tree, no doubt it would
have afforded him the like distinct Substances as another of the same kind. But
a more considerable Instance (to prove that all sorts of Bodies are nothing
else but Water subdued by Seeds) than any yet mentioned, is afforded us by Mr.
de Rochas, who tells us, that he took simple Water, that he well knew to be
mixed with no other thing but the Spirit of Life, and having with a heat
Artificial, Continual, and Proportionate, prepared it by the Graduations of
Coagulation, Congelation, and Fixation, which he had spoken of before, until
it was turned into Earth; this Earth produced Animals that moved of themselves,
Vegetables and Minerals. The Animals he found, by a Chemical Anatomy he made of
them, to be composed of much Sulphur, little Mercury, and less Salt; and the
Minerals (which were solid and heavy, and began to grow, by converting into
their own Nature one part of the Earth thereunto disposed) of much Salt, little
Sulphur, and less Mercury. And tho the judicious Mr. Boil has some suspicions
of this strange Relation, yet as to the Generation of Animals and Plants, he
thinks it not incredible, since common Water (which is indeed often impregnated
with variety of Seminal Principles and Rudiments) long kept will putrify and
stink, and then perhaps too produce Moss and little Worms, or other Insects,
according to the Nature of the Seeds that were lurking in it. And though the
Distillation of Eels yielded him some Oil, Spirit, Volatile Salt, and Caput
mortuum, yet were all these so disproportionate to the Phlegm (in which at
first they boiled as in a pot of Water) that they seemed to have been nothing
but Coagulated Phlegm; which does likewise strangely abound in Vipers, as hot
in their operation and as vivacious as they are.

And seven ounces and a half of Human Blood yielded near six ounces of Phlegm,
before any of the Spirits began to arise, and require the Receiver to be
changed. Corrosive Acid Spirits, tho they seem to be nothing but Fluid Salts,
yet you will find them to abound with Water, if either you entangle, and so six
their Saline part by making them corrode some idoneous Body, or mortify it with
a contrary Salt. Thus in making of Balsamus Samech with distilled Vinegar
instead of Spirit of Wine, the Salt of Tartar from which it is distilld, will,
by mortifying and retaining the Acid Salt, turn near twenty times its weight of
the Vinegar into worthless Phlegm, before it be satiated. And in making the
true Balsamus Samech (which is nothing but Salt of Tartar dulcifi'd, by
distilling from it Spirit of Wine till it be glutted with the Vinous Sulphur,)
as soon as the Spirit of Wine is deprived of its Sulphur by the Salt of Tartar,
the rest (which is incomparably the greater part) remigrates into Phlegm: so
that if Helmonts process be true (which was confirmed to Mr. Boil by a sober
and skillful Spagyrist, who did indeed prepare the Spirit and Salt by a way
that is neither short nor easy, but added nothing to them) Spirit of Wine
seems to be Materially nothing but Water under a Sulphurous disguise, though
being so igneous that it will totally flame away, it is of all Liquors the most
likely to be free from Water. But Helmont's grand Argument for his Hypothesis,
is taken from the operation of the Alcahest; which, he says, does adequately
resolve Plants, Animals, and Minerals into one Liquor or more, according to
their several internal Disparaties of Parts, (without Caput mortuum or the
destruction of their seminal virtues;) and that the Alcahest being abstracted
from these Liquors in the same weight and virtue wherewith it dissolved them,
they may by frequent Cohobations from Chalk or some other fit substance, be
totally deprived of their seminal Endowments, and by that means reduced to
Insipid Water. Here Mr. Boil judiciously observes, that it may be doubted
whether this Water, because insipid, must be Elementary; since the candid P.
Laurembergius affirms that he saw an insipid Menstruum, that was a powerful
Dissolvent: and the Water which may be drawn from Quicksilver without addition,
though almost tastless, will manifest a very differing nature from simple Water,
if you digest in it appropriated Minerals. However the forementiond Experiments
concerning the growth of Vegetables, do sufficiently prove that Salt, Spirit,
Earth, and Oil (which are four of the pretended Chemical Principles) may be
produced out of simple Water. But to return to our Author.]

Having proved, That Water is the only Material Principle of Bodies usually
called Mixed, by three Arguments. 1. Because none of the other pretended Chemical
Principles have a right to that Title; some of them not being naturally
pre-existent in the Bodies from which they are obtained; and all of them being
reducible to Elementary Water. 2. Because Water is the only Nourishment of all
Animals, Plants, and Minerals; and by consequence the only Matter of which they
consist. Because all Animals, Plants, and Minerals are by a true Analysis
ultimately reducible to simple insipid Water. Having evinced this, I say, by
these three newly mentioned Arguments; and Fire being the only Sublunary Body
(besides Air, of which heareafter) that these Arguments, as hitherto
prosecuted, can with any color of reason be pretended not to reach; and being
likewise by many enumerated amongst the Principles of Natural Bodies; the next
Proposition shall be, that

Prop. XVI.
Fire is nothing but an Acid Volatile Sulphur very swiftly moved.
FOR there is a certain Sulphur in every Inflamable Body, which takes fire as
soon as it is put into a rapid motion, whatsoever the Cause be that excites it
to that motion. This appears in the striking of fire by the collision of two
Flints; in the firing of the Axel-tree of a Mill or Coach, that sometimes
happens upon a long continued and vehement attrition; and in many other such
obvious Instances. Oil of Vitriol contains a great many Acid Sulphurous
Particles, proceeding as well from the Embryonated Acid, that Corroded the Iron
or Copper Oar in the Bowels of the Earth, as from the Iron or Copper it self:
these Particles, being excited to motion by the affusion of Oil of Tartar (or
even genuine Spirit of Tartar) produce a notable heat and Effervescency. The
Sulphur of Quicklime (whether it be innate, or adventitious from the fire)
conceives a vehement Heat, as soon as it is excited to motion, by the Alcaline
Lixivial Particles set at liberty by the affusion of Water. Finally (to add no
more) Butter of Antimony consists chiefly of the Sulphurous Particles of the
Antimony, and the Salino-Acid ones of the Mercury Sublimate: the latter being
washed off with Water, the former do more manifestly appear, (namely in
Mercurius vitae, which causes Vomiting without any danger of Corroding the
Bowels:) and both of them being vehemently moved by the affusion of Spirit of
Nitre, there is an intense heat produced.

So that the Formal nature of Fire or Heat consists in Motion. Now that the
Sulphurous Particles of which Fire is materially constituted, are of an Acid
nature, will abundantly appear from the ensuing Considerations.

I. The particles of the Flame of common Sulphur, being received and Condensed
in a Glass Bell, do compose a very piercing Acid Liquor.

II. There are not any Bodies more akin to Fire, than the totally inflamable
Spirits of fermented Vegetables. And yet all the Principal Effects of these
Fermented Spirits, depend upon a Volatile Acid. For It Is upon the account of
its Acid Salt, that Spirit of Wine is Coagulated in Spirit of Urine or
Salarmoniac, or in any other Volatile Alcali, as also, that it loses its
strength by distillation from Salt of Tartar, which imbibes and retains the
Acid, and receives an increase of weight thereby. And Generous Wine, that is
turgent with this Spirit, being drunk moderately, sends a Volatile Acid to the
Brain, that makes a subtle effervescence with the (Alcaline) Animal Spirits,
and thereby produces Cheerfulness and a Vigorous Promptitude to Action; (as on
the contrary, the Sadness of Melancholy persons proceeds from the Fixation of
the Animal Spirits by a more Fixed Acid.) But upon excessive Drinking, that
Volatile Acid ascends too copiously to the Brain, conquers and fixes the Animal
Spirits, and so stupefies the Organs of Sense and Motion: yea sometimes it may
Suppress the Vital Acid (or Innate Heat) of the Blood, and at length totally
Coagulate it; especially if the Wine be endowed with a strong Acid, as the
French, and chiefly the Hungarian Wines are wont to be. And indeed, that the
Inebriating virtue of Wine (and all other strong Drinks) is entirely owing to a
Volatile Acid, may be proved by many Arguments. 1. Hence it is, that Volatile
Alcaline Salts do prevent Drunkenness, especially Spirit of Salt-Armoniack, if
some drops of it be now and then mingled with the Drink. 2. Bitter Almonds and
other Oleous things, do likewise prevent Drunkenness, by weakening and
suppressing the vaporous Acid of the Wine, so that it cannot reach the Brain.
3. The same Acid inflames Drunkards Faces, and adorns them with purulent
Pimples, like so many Gems. For the whitish colored Matter, contained in these
Pimples, proceeds only from the Volatile Acid of the Wine that infects the
ferment of the Muscles of the Face, coagulates and precipitates the Blood that
comes thither for Nutrition, and so changes its Purple Color into a whitish
one. For proof of this Assertion, it is to be noted, that the Purple Color of
the Blood proceeds from the resolution of the Sulphurous Acid Parts by the
ferment of the Heart, which sets them at liberty, so as that they may mix per
minima, and make a subtle effervescence with the Alcaline Spirits: as when
Spirit of Salt-Armoniack or of Hartshorn, or any other that is Alcalical, is
digested with Spirit of Wine, they produce together a very red Tincture,
because the Acid Sulphur of the Wine, being by Digestion intimately mixed, and
making a subtle effervesence with the subtle Alcaly, (...) is at length so
resolved as to manifest it self by tinging the whole Liquor: after the same
manner, in the Tincture of the Salt of Tartar, the Spirit of Wine is tinged by
the Volatilis'd Alcaly of Tartar: and common Sulphur boiled in the Lixivium of
any Fixed Salt, is thereby exalted to a Red Color; but because the Alcaline
Salt is so tied to the Terrestrial Particles, that it cannot penetrate the
Sulphur per minima, therefore the Color is obscure and dark. Now, if you pour
another Acid Liquor upon these Sanguine Tinctures, immediately they become of a
Milk-white Color. Just so it happens, when the Blood is extravasated, and
putrefi'd in any Part of the Body, the Acidity, that arises from this
Putrefaction, Precipitates the Sulphur that tinged the Blood, and thereby turns
it into white stinking Pus; even as common Sulphur, when it is Precipitated out
of any Lixivium by the affusion of Vinegar, strikes the Nose with an
ungrateful Odor, tho it was utterly inodorous before: so that Pus is nothing
but Blood, whose vital Alcaline Balsamical Spirits are suppres'd by an hostile
Acid, and the tinging Sulphurous Particles Precipitated in Wounds and
Abscesses, while the Pus is a making, the motion of the Acid Particles do often
produce a Symptomical Fever, an Inflammation in the Part affected, Convulsive
Motions in the Brain, and Pains in the Nervous Parts: but these Symptoms abate
as soon as the Pus is made, and the motion of the Particles ceased. 4. Amongst
the External Medicines, that are wont to be applied to the forementioned Pimples
in the Face, the Preparations of Saturn are the chief; because they imbibe the
Acid of the Wine, or other Inebriating Liquor, that inflames the Face. For
Saturn readily receives all sorts of Acids or Sulphurs, even those of Metals,
as is well known to the Refiners. Thus the unripe Sulphurs of Metals,
Coagulated in Saturn, do compose Litharge. Vinegar, Coagulated in Saturn,
produces Sugar of Lead. And all Acids in general, Coagulated in Saturn, Mars,
or any other Body whatsoever, are wont to be dulcifi'd thereby. For all Sugars
are nothing but Acid Salts Coagulated in other Particles: whence it is, that
they are resolved by Distillation into a very Ardent and powerfully Inebriating
Spirit; and are extreme sit to promote or even begin Fermentations: and
therefore it is, that the Syrups of the shops have a manifestly Acid Taste; and
Sugar is very hurtful to Scorbutical persons, because upon the account of its
Acidity it excites diverse vicious Effervescencies, produces Tumors of the
Bowels etc. And vitiates the Vital Ferment of the Stomach.

III. That the Particles of Fire are of an Acid Nature, may evidently appear
from all other Inflameable Substances, especially those that are Oily and Fat,
as well as from common Sulphur and Spirit of Wine.

For in the first place, it is certain, that Oleous and Fat Bodies are really
endowed with an Acid; as appears from the following Reasons. 1. Chirurgions
observe, that Oils, and fat Substances, are very noxious to the Bones,
(especially the Skull, which is a Porous Bone) and particularly, that they are
apt to make them Carious; which must happen upon the account of their Corroding
Acid. And for the same reason, they render Ulcers sordid, by increasing the
Corroding Acid. 2. What else is that Greenness, that adheres to Lamps, but the
Acid of the Oyl-Olive Coagulated in the Particles of the Metal, that it has
Corroded? whence comes the Blew Color of Oil of Camomil distilled in Copper
Vessels, but from some Particles of the Veins Corroded by the Acidity of the
Oil? 3. The Heartburn ( Ardor Ventriculi) is often occasioned by Fat things,
(especially if you drink after them, because the Acid Salts are thereby
dissolved and put into a swifter motion) as well as by austere and sourish
Wines: and the Remedy, in both Cases, is, to use things fitted to Precipitate
the Acid. 4. Oleous and Fat things are hurtful in Erysipelatous Distempers,
(which proceed from the Coagulation of the Blood by an Acid,) because they
increase the Peccant Acidity, whence the Putrefaction is increased, the Bones
are corroded, and the Natural Heat of the Part is at last totally suppressed,
and mortified. (Yet the Author denies not, but these Effects do also partly
depend upon the Obstruction of the Pores of the Part, by the foresaid Fat
substances, so that the Effluvia, wont to transpire through the Pores, being
detained in the Body, and inordinately moved, do increase the Fever.) 5. It Is
likewise upon the account of their Acidity, that Oils are hurtful to all
Inflammations, without such a Preparation as consumes or corrects their Acid.
Thus Lin-seed Oil mingled with an equal weight of Spirit of Wine, and boiled
(with continual stirring) till the Spirit be consumed, is used safely and
successfully, both inwardly and outwardly, in Pleurisies, Peripneumonies,
Inflammations of the Liver etc. because the Coagulating Acid is readily imbibed
by this Oil, that has been deprived of its own Acid by the Spirit of Wine,
which, being a much more Volatile Oleous Body than the Oil of Lin-seed,
evaporates before it, and carries its Acid along with it; even as the same
Spirit, being mingled with Aqua fortis and distilled in a Cucurbit, ascends
before it, and carrys a great part of its Acidity along with it, insomuch that
the remaining Aqua fortis becomes a very safe Internal Medicine, though before,
the smell of it only would cause an Atrophia in the whole Body. The same Oil of
Lin-seed is also Corrected, by frequently extinguishing red hot Steel in it,
till it appear by the ceasing of the hissing and smoke, that the Acid Particles
are either Evaporated in smoke and spent by Deflagration, or Coagulated in the
Mars. And if after this it be Distilled from Quicklime, that if any Acidity
yet remains, it may be therein Coagulated, the Oil of Lin-seed becomes an
excellent Remedy for Inflammations, Burns and the like: as Oyl-Olive also does,
by Distillation from Quicklime. And this last named Oil, being imbibed in old
Tyles or Bricks (which are deprived of all moisture by their having been long
exposed to the heat of the Sun) heated red hot, and quenched in it, and then
distilled in a Retort, is thereby robbed of all its Acidity, and acquires a
singular Virtue in the Palsy, Gout, Cramp etc. And all Oils are wholsomer
boiled than crude, because a great part of the Acid is exhaled in the boiling.
6. Helmont teaches that Distilled Chemical Oils, which are otherwise very hot,
may by an artificial Circulation for three Months time with an Alcali Salt be
turned into a very temperate Volatile Salt: namely because the hot Acid of the
Oil is Saturated by the Alcali, and by that means reduced temperate. Nor can
there be any other Reason given, why the Alcaly should have this effect upon
the Oil, but that the Acid of the Oil corrodes the Alcaly and is Coagulated in
it.

Now in the next place, That the Heat and Inflammability of Oily Substances
depend upon the Acid, that the Experiments, newly delivered, prove to be
contained in them, may be evinced from those same Experiments; most of which do
not only prove, that Oleous and Fat Bodies are endowed with an Acid, but
likewise, that the effects usually ascribed to the hot Quality of these Bodies,
do indeed depend upon this Acid; and that whatsoever mitigates or destroys this
Acid, does at the same time weaken or destroy their Heating Power. And 2. that
this may also be truly applied to their Inflammability, and that the Acid
Particles contained in Oily and Fat Substances are really the Matter of which
the Flame of these Substances (when they are burning) consists, does plainly
appear by the Abstraction of Oils from Spirit of Wine, Quicklime, or Bricks;
for, being by this means deprived of their Acid, they become less Inflammable
than the crude Oils were. And Candles made of Sheeps Tallow, burn sooner away
than those made of any other Tallow, because there is greater store of Acid
Particles in it; as appears by the Griping of the Guts, which cannot happen
without a Corroding Acid, (for all the Medicines, effectual against this
Distemper testify that to be the Cause of it) and which is very often
occasioned by eating Fat Mutton, especially if the Acid Salts be dissolved by
drinking after it, in like manner as when Salt Butter is sweetened by melting
it, and pouring it into water, and thereby dissolving the Salt. Likewise recent
Fat, or Oil burns sooner away, than that which has been long kept, and thereby
lost much of its Volatile Acid. N.B. Since Tallow, as well as every other Body,
is materially nothing else but water Coagulated by a seminal Acid, and since
it is only the Acid Particles that feed the Flame; it follows, that when they
are consumed, he remainder, being robbed of, the Coagulating, Acid must return
into Elementary Water, and therefore it is insensibly dissipated like a Vapor:
even as the water of Spirit of Wine kindled vanishes into a Vapor.

IV. The Particles of Fire being fixed or Coagulated in any Body whatsoever, do
plainly manifest themselves to be Acid, as appears from the following
Instances. 1. Fire Coagulated in Mars, turns it into a Crocus, that differs
nothing from Rust, (which proceeds always from an Acid) and is every way like
to that Crocus which is prepared with Acids, and endowed with the same
Medicinal Virtues. V. Tachen. Hipp. Chym. cap. 28. 2. Fire Coagulated in Saturn
is separated by means of a Fixed Alcaly, or even of Venetian Borax; for Minium
(which received its red Color from the Sulphur of the Coals, even as the
Sulphur of Antimony Coagulated in Mercury, turns it [into Cinnabar] of an
exceeding high red, is by the help of these Salts reduced to crude Lead. N. B.
According to Tachenius's Computation, 100 pound of Lead retains in Calcination
ten pound of Fire. 3. All the Remedies for Burns are such as are capable to
imbibe, saturate, or suppress the Igneous Acid; for instance, Sugar of Saturn,
Ceruss, Litharge, Oils deprived of their Acidity, Lixiviums, etc. And unwashen
Thread mitigates Erysipelatous Inflammations, because of the Alcaly of the
Spittle.

V. And lastly, The Acidity of the Particles of Fire appears from its efficacy
in Surgery, and particularly in exstirpating ill conditioned Ulcers. For the
cause of Ulcers being a Corrosive Acid, they may be cured by three sorts of
external Medicines. 1. Those that Saturate this Acid, as Spirit of
Salt-Armoniac, Quicklime Water, Oil of Tartar per deliquium, and the like. 2.
Those that imbibe and assume this Acid, as all the Preparations of Saturn. The
Author has known Ulcers in the Legs cured, merely by applying thin Plates of
Lead to them; because the Acid, corroding the Musculous Flesh, was coagulated
in the Lead. 3. Those that by a more potent Acidity suppress this weak one; as
Verdegreese, which consists of the Acid Salts of Vinegar Coagulated in
Particles of Venus; now these Salts are much more powerful than in common
Vinegar, because they are concentrated and separated from strong Phlegm, and
thereby enabled to suppress the weaker putredinous Acid of the Ulcers; which
Aqua fortis, Spirit of Salt, and other Acid Spirits also do. But nothing
performs this so effectually, as Actual Cauteries, because there is no Acid so
powerful as that of Fire.

N. B. I. The Acid Effluvia, that are continually passing away from Inflammable
Bodies while they are burning, do compose Flame, so long as they continue
numerous enough within a certain Sphere, and in a very swift motion, but having
passed the limits of this Sphere, they begin to move more slowly, and are by
degrees dispersed. So that the same Acid Effluvia, which being in a rapid
motion, produce tormenting Pains and Convulsive Motions by corroding the
Nervous Parts; when they are in a moderate Motion, do produce in our Body a
temperate and grateful heat, by inciting the Nervous Capillaments to gentle
Spasms.

N. B. 2. Though Actual Fire be so far from being one of the Material Principles
of Mixed Bodies, that it cannot exist in them without destroying them; yet there
are certain Acid Particles in all mixed Bodies, differing but in Rest, or in
Degrees of Motion from Actual Fire, in which the Seeds or Ideas reside, that
are the Formal Principles of those Bodies. But these Acid Particles do
themselves return into Elementary Water, when they are divested of those Seeds.
Which Seeds or Ideas, so often heretofore mentioned, it will now be seasonable
to explain.

Having abundantly proved, that Simple Water is the only Matter of which all
Mixed Bodies consist, it is plain that they all agree in one and the same
Material Principle; so that their difference one from another proceeds not from
any diversity in the Matter of which they consist, or in the proportion of the
Elements that may be supposed to concur to their Composition But,

Prop. XVII.
The diversity, that is among Natural Bodies, is wholly owing to the different
Seminal Ideas, that regulate the Operation of the Plastic Spirit, which
Coagulates Water into various Substances, differing in Figure, Solidity,
Bigness, Order and Connection of Parts, and other Modifications, according as
its Motions are guided by these Ideas.
FOR when God at first Created out of nothing the Terraqueous Globe, and
furnished it with numerous Bodies of several Species or kinds; he was pleased,
because the Individuals were Corruptible, to endow them by virtue of his
Omnipotent Word ( Be fruitful and multiply,) with a Power of producing out of
Pre-existent Matter, new Individuals like themselves, and of their own Species;
that so, when the first Individuals were dissolved, the Species might
nevertheless be preserved in these new Individuals generated by the first; and
so on, as long as the world endures. This Generative Power is seated in the
seeds; [ which are very obvious in Animals and Vegetables, but more doubtful in
Minerals, at least in several sorts of them.]

As for Animals, and particularly Man; the Feminine seed is a limpid Liquor,
contained in the little Eggs, that are found in the Testicles. This Seminal
Liquor contains in it self an exact Idea of an entire Human Body (of the femal
sex,) consisting of as many particular distinct Ideas, as there are different
Parts in a Human Body, which all together concur to make up one entire Idea of
an entire Woman: so if it were possible for us to contemplate this Idea with
our Bodily Eyes, as well as we can do with our Intellectual, we might discern
in it sensible signatures of all the Parts of the Body, altogether making up a
lively representation, and as 'twere exact Model, of an entire Woman. The Idea
of every particular Part in this Seed, is a Particle of the Idea that resides
in that same part of the Woman's Body that generates this Seed. For every Part
of a Woman's (Man's, or any other Animals) Body, whether Similar or Organical,
has its own Idea residing in it, in which Idea is imprinted upon, or (which is
all one) communicates a Particle of it self unto the Blood, that Circulates
through the Part; and the Blood carries all these Ideas to the Testicles, where
they are gathered together, disposed into the same Order that the Parts, they
come from, have in the Woman's Body, and so united into one entire Idea, which
is enclosed within the Tunicles of the Egg, that being defended from Injuries
thereby, the particular Parts of it may be able to retain their due situation,
and may not be liable to be confounded one with another or misplaced. This Idea
is endowed in the Testicles with a particle of that moving Vital Spirit, which
is the Principle of all Vital Actions, and the only Mover of all Seeds, which,
without this, are Barren and Unfruitful, because they cannot unfold themselves.
But yet this Plastic Spirit in the Feminine Seed is too weak for to accomplish
the evolution of the Ideas, without it be strengthened, Actuated, and
Fecundated by that more powerful Spirit which the Masculine Seed is
impregnated with. All that has been said of the Feminine Seed, is applicable
also to this, saving, that it contains Ideas of all the Parts of a Human Body
of the Male Sex only, not of the Female; and that these Ideas are confounded
one with another, because the Seed not being enclosed in Tunicles in the form
of Eggs, but contained in the Testicles in a liquid form, they fluctuate and
cannot retain any certain Order. Hence it is, that as the Feminine Seed alone
can never be fruitful, till its weaker Spirit be corroborated by Conjunction
with the Masculine; so neither can the Masculine Seed alone ever produce a
Foetus, till its confused Ideas be reduced into due Order by conjunction with
the Feminine, each Idea taking its own proper place, by applying it self to the
correspondent Ideas of the Feminine Seed. In short, the Masculine Seed cannot
reduce the confused Ideas into Order, but being set in Order by the Feminine,
it can explicate or unfold them, which the Feminine cannot. Wherefore the
Masculine Seed must be injected into the Womb, whence it emits a Seminal and
Vital Spirituous Exhalation through the Tubi Fallopiani into the Testes or
Ovarium, where one (or more) of the Eggs, being impregnated with this
Exhalation, and foecundated thereby, is thrust out of its place, and falls into
the extremity of the Tubus Fallopianus, which conveys it to the Womb. For though
the two Seminal Spirits be now united into one, yet even this is not sufficient
for the Evolution of the Ideas; till it be excited to motion by the Heat of the
Womb; and then it begins the Evolution of the Ideas, by Coagulating the
approximated Aliment into a substance agreeable to the particular Ideas, and
applying it to them: by which means the Ideas, that were utterly insensible
before, do quickly acquire a visible bulk: insomuch that Kerkringius tells us
of a Foetus, but four days old, wherein the distinction of the Parts was
plainly discernible. This Apposition of Aliments to, and gradual Evolution of
the Ideas, begins at the first Conception, and continues after the Child has
left the Womb, till the Body have attained its full stature; (that is, to a
perfect Evolution of the Ideas, for when the Ideas are not capable of any
further Evolution, the Growth of the Body must cease.) So that Ganeration is
really nothing else, but the first Nutrition; or the Apposition of Aliment to
and Evolution of the Ideas while they are yet insensible: and on the other
side, Nutrition is nothing but a continued Generation. For it is the same
Plastic Spirit, guided by the same Ideas, that Coagulates and Applies the
Aliment to every Part, both in and out of the Womb. And the immediate Aliment
of all the Parts in both states is the same, namely Blood, but with this
Difference, that the Embryo is nourished with the Mothers Blood, communicated
to it by the Vmbilical Vein from the Placenta Vterina: whereas, after the Child
is born, it takes in various Aliments by the Mouth, and makes Blood of them it
self for its own Nourishment. This Blood is already determined to nourish the
Human (and no other Animals) Body, by the Impression that the Idea of the
Stomachal Ferment has sealed the Aliments, it is made of, with; but is
indifferent to all the Parts of the Human Body, till it come to be determined
to the Nourishment of particular Parts by being stamped (as it were) with the
Seal of the particular Ideas residing in them. For every Organ hides in its
Ventricle an Idea of its own Body, that regulates the Apposition of the Aliment
to that Part, (and is the same that regulated the first Formation of it.) And
the Native Heat, or vital Spirit of every different Part, Coagulates the Blood
into a differing Substance, and applies it in a differing manner, according to
the diversity of that Idea, which guides the Motions of this Coagulating
Spirit. These Ideas were concreated with the Parts of the first Individuals.
And after what has been said, 'twill not be difficult to conceive, how they
were folded up (as it were) and united into one entire Idea in the Seed of
these first Individuals: how the second were generated by the gradual unfolding
again of the same Ideas, and apposition of Aliment to them: in a word, how by
the convolutions and Evolutions, (so to speak) of those Ideas, the Propagation
of Mankind has been continued to this day. (And the same is to be said of all
other Animals, as well as of all Vegetables.)

This is as brief and clear an Account, as I could give of the Authors Notion
of the Generation of Animals: which though it may seem already more prolix than
is agreeable to the Design of this Treatise, yet, because the Theory of
Generation is so difficult, and because I have not elsewhere met with so
intelligible an Account of the Seeds and Ideas that Helmont so often speaks of;
I thought it would not be foreign to my Design, if I insist a little longer
upon a Theory, that will so much conduce to facilitate the Reading of an
Author, that many are deterred from, by the Obscurity of his Notions, and that
has delivered so many and so considerable Chemical Experiments; for the obscure
hints he gives of some of the Principal, will be much better understood by one
that is acquainted with His Notions, than by one that is not, caeteris paribus.
Wherefore I shall proceed, without any farther Apology, to deduce, from the
Hypothesis, already delivered, an explication of some of the chief Phenomenon
of Generation; continuing to insist upon one single Instance, taken from the
chief Species of Animals, Man: for the same things, that are here delivered
concerning Man, may, with a little alteration, be easily applied to other
Animals.]

The Sex of the Foetus is determined by the prevalency of the Ideas of the
Fathers, or of those of the Mothers Seed. If there be a parity of both, the
Foetus will partake of both Sexes.

A Mole happens, when an Egg falls out of the Ovarium into the Womb, merely by
the irritation of Lust, without congress with a Man: for the Tunicles of this
Egg swell and are extended in the Womb; but the moving Spirit of the Masculine
Seed is wanting, to unfold the Ideas of the Egg and apply Aliment to them: for
the Ideas, though they give the due Figure to every Part, yet they cannot unfold
themselves; and the Feminine Spirit in the Egg is not vigorous enough to do it;
though it have really some activity, whereby it concurs with the Masculine in the
formation of a true Foetus, and makes itself alone some unperfect evolution of
the Ideas in a Mole, which has been observed sometimes by Kerkringius and
others, to contain the Parts of a Human Body sensibly, though imperfectly,
delineated. It Is because of this strength and vigor of the Spirit of Men's
Seed, that they are said to be of a hotter temperament than Women; and that
Eunuchs turn Effeminate in their voice, manners, and disposition.

Abortion happens upon the lest manifest Acidity of the Aliment of the Foetus,
for this Coagulates and suffocates the Spirit, that by its occult and milder
Acidity should Coagulate the Aliment, and apply it to the Nourishment of the
Foetus. Hence a four Scorbutic disposition of the Blood makes Women subject to
miscarry; and the use of red Coral, Mother of Pearl, and the like is good to
prevent it.

The Plurality of Foetus's happens when more Eggs than one are foecundated by
the Man's Seed, and fall out of the Ovarium into the Womb. For the Ideas of the
Man's Seed, being to be reduced into order by application to those of the
Woman's, every particular Idea may be divided, and apply it self to the
correspondent Idea of several Eggs. This is manifest in the Seed of a Cock,
which if the Hen have but once received, it suffices oftentimes to make her
Eggs fruitful for a whole year thereafter. So that every particular Idea of his
Seed, must have been divided into as many Particles, as there were Eggs
foecundated by it. Marcus Marci, De Ideis operatricibus, ascribes the plurality
of foetus's to the Plurality of Hearts in the Seed, howsoever this be
occasioned; for the Heart being the Center of Evolution, as many Hearts as
there are, so many Centers of Evolution, and by consequence so many Foetus's.

The monstrous Plurality of Parts in one Foetus happens, when the Ideas of the
Masculine Seed are not exactly applied to the correspondent Ideas of the
Feminine Seed; but decline to the right or left hand; so that, being separately
unfolded, they make up distinct Parts.

The want of a particular Part (as Arms, Legs etc.) happens, when the Idea of
that Part is not unfolded for want of Aliment; or is extinguished by some
impure Acid Particles of the Aliment, or by the force of the Mothers
Imagination of some person presented to her, that has (by an Accident perhaps,)
lost that Part.

A Pygme or Dwarf-Stature happens, when the Evolution of the Ideas is hindered,
either by the impurity or manifest Acidity of the Aliment applied to them, some
time after the Foetus has left the Womb; or by the force of an Idea imprinted
in the Mothers Imagination, that so mingles it self and becomes one with the
Idea, that forms the Foetus, as to determine it, not only in respect of Figure
but of Stature; so that the Formative Idea, being straightly tied with the
Imaginative, is compelled thereby to stop before a perfect Evolution. If this
Idea take root in one Subject, it may be propagated to Posterity, till it be
extinguished by a supervening Idea of greater Force.

On the contrary, a Gigantine Stature proceeds from the Evolution of the
Formative Idea beyond its due bounds; which Marcus Marci ascribes to two
Causes, namely, either the Refraction of the Ideal Rays by falling into a
dissimilar Medium, or the Mothers strong Imagination of some huge Statue. And
indeed there are many obvious Instances, to prove, that a strong Imaginative
Idea of the Mothers, impressed upon the Seed, (or even upon the Embryo, after
the Evolution is begun) may have powerful Effects in the Formation of the
Foetus. For hence it is, that we can often distinguish Men of several Nations
by their Aspect: because the Women of every Nation form in their Imagination so
strong an Idea, from the constant sight of their own Countrymen, as, by
uniting it self to the Formative Idea, determines it to fashion the Foetus like
them, in some Propertyes of the Countenance, that most, if not all, of them,
agree in: Jacobs Rods also are a signal Instance to this purpose. And there are
many Relations of White Women, that by reason of a strong Imaginative Idea,
occasioned by the frequent, or unexpected and affrighting sight of Blackamores,
have brought forth black Children. This Imaginative Idea continues, till it be
extinguished by the accession of another more powerful Idea. The Author tells
us of a Woman with Child, affrighted at the sudden coming of a Blackamore; who
being presently washd all over, by the prudent advice of a By-stander, did so
strongly imagine the washing off of the Blackness hereby, that the Idea of
Blackness, formerly conceived, and already imprinted upon the Foetus, was by
this means extinguished; for she brought forth a white Child, but spotted
between the Fingers and Toes, and in a few other Parts that the washers hand
had missed. Finally, to add no more, it is a very usual Observation, that if a
Woman with Child conceive a strong Idea of any Thing, whether by a longing
desire after it, or being affrighted at the sight of it etc. the Child seldom
fails to have a Mark in some part of its Body, representing that thing both in
Color and Figure; whether it be a Cherry, Mouse, or any other such like thing:
and if the Thing, that surprises the Mother, fall upon or hit against a
particular Part, the Idea of it will be impressed upon that same Part of the
Foetus. [An Eyewitness related to me, that a pregnant Woman, that had been
affrighted with a Cat suddenly thrown upon her lap, brought forth a Child with
two Marks, one above each Knee; which Marks, when the Knees were brought
together (into the same posture that the Mothers were in, when the Cat
affrighted her) did exactly represent an entire Cat, with the Head above the
one Knee, and the Tail above the other, in the very same posture that the Cat
fell in. But, though it plainly appears from these and many more such Instances,
that the Mothers Imagination has a powerful influence upon the Foetus; yet to
give a clear and intelligible Explication of the Manner how it produces such
Effects, is a matter of no small difficulty; and our Author gives but little
account of it. However I shall offer some Considerations, that may somewhat
lessen this Difficulty, though I shall not pretend to give a clear and
satisfactory Solution of it. First of all then, I consider, that, since the
Formation of the Foetus is wholly regulated by the Seminal Ideas, it is easy
enough to conceive, that an Imaginative Idea, impressed upon the Seed, may have
a considerable Influence in the Formation of the Foetus. For Instance, the Idea
of a Blackamore (simply as such, regarding only the Color of his skin, and not
the figure, proportion, and other Qualities of the Parts of his Body; or at
least, not being so strong in regard of them, but that other different, and
more prevalent Ideas of these Qualities, may render this ineffectual, as to
them: this Idea (I say,) impressed upon the Seed, may determine the Formative
Spirit to form the Foetus with a black skin; since it has been formerly proved,
that all the Modifications (and consequently the Color) of every Part, depend
entirely upon the Ideas residing in the Seed. In the next place I consider,
that, since it is highly probable, that the Animal Spirits, which come from the
Brain through certain little Nerves to the Testes, do there mingle themselves
with the spirituous part of the Blood, brought thither by the Arteries, and
concur with it to make up the Matter whereof the Seed consists: and since the
Idea of a Blackamore (to keep to the former Instance) is conveyed to the Brain
and imprinted there by the Animal Spirits, which receive it from the Image or
Idea painted in the bottom of the Eye, upon the Tunica Retina or (as others
think) the Choroeides, by the Rays of Light reflected from the Blackamores
Body: it may be easily enough conceived, that the Animal Spirits may also
convey the same Idea from the Brain to the Testes, and there impress it upon
the Seed. For if the Animal Spirits of the Optic Nerves transmit this Idea
from the Eyes to the Brain, and there imprint it; why may not the Animal
Spirits of the Par vagum transmit the same Idea from the Brain (through certain
little Branches that reach,) to the Testes, and there communicate it to the
Seed. And since the Rays of Light, that come from the Object, may be Reflected
from a Specular Body to the Eye, without losing thereby that Figuration,
Motion, or whatever other Modification it be, that qualifyes them to paint an
exact Idea of the Object, they received it from, upon the Retina or Choroeides:
why may not the Animal Spirits, that receive the very same Modification from
the Tunicle of the Eye, be Reflected from the Brain to the Testes, and there
impress the same Idea upon the Seed. Nor can it be said, that the Seed is not a
Subject capable of such Ideas, since (as was noted before) the Animal Spirits
are Part of the Matter whereof it consists, so that by taking them into its own
substance, it must receive the Ideas they bring along with them. And it is most
certain, that many Impressions, made in particular Parts of the Body, and
transmitted to the Brain, do not stop there, but are Reflected back to the
same, or to other Parts, where they often produce very notable Effects; and
that barely by the strength of the Impression, without any concurrence of the
Wills Determination, yea many times in direct opposition to it. And though the
Substance of the Brain seems very remote from being Specular; yet since that
Quality depends upon such a Modification of the surface of any Opacous Body, as
qualifies it to Reflect the Rays of Light in the same order they fell in,
without at all confounding them, or altering the Modifications they received
from the Object; it is plain that the Brain, if it be at all capable of
Reflecting the Impressions that come from visible Objects, (as certainly it is)
must, as well as Specular Bodies, though perhaps upon very different accounts, be
qualified to Reflect them without confounding or altering them; for if the
Brain should confound or alter them, there could be no true distinct Ideas of
the Objects, they come from, formed in it.

All these Considerations may be also applied, to lessen our wonder at the
powerful Influence of the Mothers Imagination upon the Foetus in the Womb
already formed. For so long as the Foetus is in the Womb, it may very justly be
considered as a Part of the Mothers Body; since her Blood Circulates through
and nourishes it, as well as the other Parts of Her Body. And being it is very
probable, that the Animal Spirits, conveyed by the Nerves to every Part of the
Mothers Body, do there mingle with the Blood brought thither by the Arteries,
and concur with it to the Nutrition of the Part: I may very reasonably suppose,
that the Animal Spirits, that come to the Womb, may there mingle with the
Arterial Blood, and be trasmitted together with it by the Umbilical Vein into
the Body of the Foetus for its Nourishment. And if there be a strong Impression
of any Idea in the Brain, the Animal Spirits may (as was formerly explained
with relation to the Testes)* convey it to the Womb, and there impres^ it upon
the Body of the Foetus; which, being so soft and tender, may upon that account
be more susceptible of any such Impression, than the other Parts of the Mothers
Body; especially since Her frequent and solicitous Thoughts of the Womb, and
the Foetus therein contained, may determine the Animal Spirits to flow more
copiously thither than to other Parts, and keep those Pores of the Brain that
lead thither more open: so that the Reflection of any Impression, made upon the
Brain, may have a freer course that, than any other way. And though the
Impression made upon the Foetus be but weak at first, yet it may be afterward
sufficiently confirmd by often reiterated Imaginations. Finally, though it be
very little at first, yet it may increase daily as the Foetus grows: which may
be both illustrated and confirmed by Figures lightly cut in the Rind of a
Gourd, which grow bigger and bigger as the Gourd increases.

And now I see not any considerable Difficulty remaining in this Subject, after
I shall have added this one Consideration; namely, That, because the Formative
Idea, residing in every Part of the Foetus, is a Particle of the Idea that
resides in the same Part of the Mothers Body; an Imaginative Idea, produced in
her Brain, by a sudden Impression made upon any Part of her Body, may, when it
is communicated to the Foetus, be more apt to unite it self with the Formative
Idea, belonging to that same Part of the Foetus, than with any other; and upon
this account, that Part may more easily, than any other, receive the
Impression. For the Idea of the Object comes to the Mothers Brain, accompanied
with the Idea of the Part, that the Impression is made upon, and the
Imagination connects them together as it were into one Compound Idea, and
transmits them to the Foetus; where the latter easily unites it self with the
Formative Idea homogeneous to it, and the former impresses itself upon the
Part, that this Idea resides in.

If it be objected, that after all that has been said, we are still in the dark
about the main Point, for want of a clear and distinct Notion of the Ideas so
often mentioned. I answer, that many things have been already, and some more
yet remain to be, delivered, tending to clear the Nature of those Ideas, all
which laid together, and attentively considered, may go a great way in
assisting judicious Readers, to form as clear Notions about them, as can well
be expected in so abstruse a Subject, as the Generation of Animals. And it is no
less cefficult, if not much more, to give an Intelligible and satisfactory
explication, of the Nature of Imaginative Ideas, representing sesible Objects
in the Brain (which no man questions the reality of,) than of those Formative
Ideas, that the Notions, here proposed about Generation, are built upon. And he
that denies the later, because he cannot be distinct enough in his Conceptions
of them, may upon the same ground deny the former, yea and even disbelieve his
own Eyes, when he sees the Ideas of many various Objects transmitted through a
small hole (filled with a Unequal Glass) into a dark Room, and there delineated
to the life, without the least confusion, upon a piece of White Paper, placed
opposite to the hole, at a convenient distance. And such a Person I cannot
better answer, than by recommending to his serious Perusal, A Discourse of
things above Reason, lately Published; where the acute and judicious Author
very convincingly proves, that, it is highly reasonable to believe many things,
that our Reason cannot comprehend; many that we cannot form any clear and
distinct Notions of; and many that we cannot reconcile to other unquestionable
Truths. For the Ideas, we have been speaking of, may very justly claim a place
in the second of the three, newly mentioned, Ranks of Priviledg'd Things, which
that Author styles Inexplicable. It Is true, that profound and subtle
Philosopher, Des Carts, has attempted, in his Book de Homme, to give a
Mechanical Account of the Ideas, that are imprinted in the Brain by insensible
Objects. But he founds his Notions upon an Hypothesis, concerning the Structure
of the Brain, and the Motion of the Spirits in it, which though it be most
ingeniously devised, yet it is so far from being countenanced by Anatomical
Observations, that it seems utterly inconsistent with the best and most
accurate, that have been made upon that Part. But it is more than time to
conclude this Digression, and proceed to the rest of our Authors Observations
about the Seminal Ideas of Animals, and particularly of Man.

The Propagation of Hereditary Distempers (such as the Epilepsie, Gout, Stone,
Consumption) from Parents to their Children, depends upon this: That the
seminal Idea which forms the Lungs (for instance) of the Foetus, is a Particle
of that Idea which resided in the Parents Lungs: Which is to be understood also
of the Reins, Joints, Brain, and all the other Parts of the Body. Hence many
Children are born with Moles, or Spots, in the very same Parts of their Body
where their Parents had them, and of the same shape; insomuch, that whole
Families have taken their Names from the Things that the Moles, common to these
Families, were observed to resemble, as the Cicerones, Pisones, Lemuli, etc.
For there are certain subtle Corpuseles, that go out of every (even the
smallest) Part of the Parents Body, and mingle themselves with the Spirituous
Part of the Blood that Circulates through it. Which Effluvia, being modifi'd,
and as it were figured, after a peculiar manner by the Part they come from,
impress this Modification upon the forementioned Spirit; which Spirit, being
afterward united in the Seed with the Ideas of all the other Parts, (that is,
the Spirits come from every Part with a peculiar Modification impressed upon
them by it) and excited to Motion, and extricated from the grosser Parts of the
Seed by the heat of the Womb, begins to form, of its own Substance, a Body like
unto that Part, from which it received the Modifications impressed upon it. And
thus the prima stamina of the Foetus are formed; which are nourished at first
by the grosser Part of the Seed, and afterward, partly by the Mothers Blood,
and partly also, perhaps, by the Liquor contained in the Amnos or inner
Membrane of the Foetus. From this Process of Generation, it is easy to
understand, how that Disposition of some particular Part of the Parents Body,
which renders Him or Her obnoxious to any particular Distemper, may be
communicated to the same Part of the Foetus, and render it obnoxious to the
same Distemper. Only the nature of the Impression which is made upon the Spirit
that forms the Parts of the Foetus, and which qualifies it to form them like
the Parts of the Parents Body which it came from; I say, the particular nature
of this Modification remains in the dark still. Nor do I know how to illustrate
it better, than by comparing it to that which is little less obscure than it
self; namely, the Modification, which the Rays of Light receive by being
Reflected from various Objects, and by which they are qualified, to produce, in
a darkened Room, lively and distinct Representations of each of those Objects,
both as to their Figure and the Color of their surface; and it is from the
surface only, that the Rays received this Modification, whereas the
forementioned Effluvia come from all the innermost Recesses of every Part, and
therefore from the correspondent Part of the Foetus like unto it, not only in
Figure and Color, but in the whole Nature and inward Textur of it.

That the Ideas of all the Parts do really exist in the Blood, appears from the
following Arguments. 1. They have sometimes visibly appeared in the Blood,
received into a Cucurbit immediately as it slows out of the Vein, (whilst it is
warm and turgid with Spirits) for some Medicinal Preparation: See Borell.
Observe. 2. Some, that have drunk the Blood of any Animal, or of another Man,
have been observed to partake of the Nature and Disposition of that Man or
Animal. Commodus his disposition was owing to his Mother, who, presently after
his Conception, drank the Blood of a cruel Gladiator that she was desperately
in love with. A certain Maid, having drank some Cats-Blood, as a Remedy for the
Epilepsie, did imitate Cats in her voice, motion and Actions, when the Fit was
coming upon her; watching silently at little Mouse-holes. See Becker.
Microcosm. Therefore (to note that by the way) the Transfusion of Blood seems
not a safe way of curing Diseases. 3. The Spittle of a Mad Dog makes other
Dogs, Men, Horses, or any other Animal, wounded by his Teeth, turn mad also,
and imitate his Actions and Gesticulations, such as Barking, Grinning,
Fearfulness of Water, etc. Now Spittle is an immediate production of the Blood
that circulates through the Salivary Glandules, and therefore must have
received from thence the Ideas, that it infects the Spirits of the bitten
Animal with. Also other Venomous enraged Animals, as the Tarantula, etc.
communicate such Ideas by the little Wounds that their Teeth make in the Part
they bite, as transform the Spirits of the Party bitten to a ridiculous
imitation of their Gesticulations.

Though every particular Part of the Foetus be formed, as has been said, by the
Evolution of its own Idea, conveyed, by the Circulation of the Blood, from the
Correspondent Part of the Parents Body, unto the Testes, where the Seed is
made; yet maimed Parents may have perfect Children; namely, if both Father and
Mother be not mutilated (at least not of the same Parts;) or if they have had
perfect Seed in store, before they were dismembered; or if the defect of the
Architect tonic Spirit, that should have come to the Seed from the Part that is
deficient, be supplied by the strength of the Parents Imagination; who by
seeing daily other Infants, Boys, Girls, Men, Women, all perfect, without the
defect of any Part, may conceive so firm an Idea of a perfect Foetus, as will
(by the Sympathy, between the Imagination and the Seed, formerly explained)
produce the very same Modification in the Seed, that an Idea, conveyed by the
Blood from the deficient Part, (if it had not been wanting) would have done.
For the Mothers Imagination may not only add to the Foetus a Spot representing
the Thing Imagined in Figure and Color, but even the very Thing it self in its
whole Nature. How many Instances are there of Pregnant Women, that have
conceived so strong an Idea of the Horns of some Beast that has terrified them,
that the Impression, thereby made upon the Foetus, has produced (not a Spot
only representing it, but) a real substantial Horn, though, perhaps, this Cause
of the Phenomenon be not always observed. And hence it is, that if the Parents
be maimed from their Birth, their Children are often mutilated of the same
Part, because they cannot easily conceive a firm Idea of the entireness of that
Part, which they never felt entire in themselves: But if they were dismembered
long after, they can easily form a strong Idea of the Part that they have felt
entire, and known the use of, in themselves, and so supply the defect of that
Idea in the Seed. It Is also probable, that the Mothers Imagination is the
principal Cause, why the Child's Face sometimes resembles the Fathers, sometimes
the Mothers, and sometimes some other Person, according to the Idea that is
prevalent in the Mothers Brain, while she is with Child.

That the Mother (as well as the Father) is furnished with true Seed, endowed
with the Ideas of the Parts of her own Body (as well as the Fathers is with the
Ideas of his) and consequently, that she does contribute part of the Plastic
virtue that forms the Foetus, as well as afford the Matter of which it is
formed and nourished in the Womb, appears from several Parts of the foregoing
Discourse, as well as from the three following Considerations. 1. The Ideas of
the Masculine Seed can only be taken from the Parts of the Man's Body, and
therefore can never form the Organs peculiar to a Woman. 2. The vicious
Conformation of any Part of the Mothers Body, as well as of the Fathers, is
often propagated to the Foetus. 3. When a Male and Female of differing Species
copulate, the Foetus is of a mixed kind, resembling the one in some of its
Parts, and the other in others. We have (besides the instance of Mules) too
many instances of this in the Monstrous Foetus's produced by the detestable
Venery of some Men, that copulate with Female Brutes. The flowing of the
Menstruous Blood to a young Woman's Womb, is a sign of Maturity, because it
signifies, that, besides the Seminal Idea of her own Sex (which she was really
furnished with before) there is now also Aliment provided for the Evolution of
that Idea, whenever it comes to be Foecundated by the Masculine Seed.

Death happens, when the Vital Spirit (or Calidum innatum) that is the chief
Mover in the Evolution of the Ideas, and in all the Animal Functions, is
supp^^ss'd or extinguished by any Cause whatsoever. (This may be better
understood from what was formerly delivered of Abortion, which is nothing else
but the Death of the Foetus.) But the Ideas do still remain in the Cadaver,
though they are become Barren for want of the Moving Spirit; which shall be
restored again at the Resurrection, and no new Evolution thereby made, but the
entire Idea, as it was already unfolded at the time of Death, resuscitated or
animated anew. And some of the Specter, that are seen in Churchyards, may be
nothing else but the Ideas, remaining in the Human Cadavers, elevated by means
of a certain Central Heat, which would be seen in the day time also, if the
Light of the Sun did not keep them from appearing. Serpents, cut to pieces and
putrefi'd, breed new Serpents by the influence of the Sun, which restores to
the quiescent Ideas that moving Spirit, which they had lost by Death. Frogs
also bruised, in the Winter, and resolved into Mud, do, upon the same account,
revive in the Summer. Ducks, putrefi'd, are reported to breed Serpents, and it
has been confirm^d to the Author, by a credible eyewitness: whence it
evidently appears, that the seminal Ideas of the Serpents Flesh (which they use
to feed often upon) have not been totally destroyed, even by so many
Digestions, but have continued entire under the dominion of the Ducks seminal
Ideas. Swallows, when the cold Winter comes, bury themselves under the Water,
where they continue without any sign of the least Motion or life, 'till the
returning Sun inspire them with new vital Spirit, and thereby raise them to
life again. All these Instances do strongly argue the possibility of the H^^^^^
Resurrection: Which (as also the Authors conjectures about Sp^^^es) is likewise
much confirmed by the Resuscitation of Vegetables, hereafter mentioned.

Naturalists observe, that, in some Persons, the Passion is so great in time of
Coition, that, for the present, it quite bereaveth them of the use of Reason.
And therefore it is, (which should have been noted before) that the Parents
Imagination, at that time, produces more powerful Effects in the Seed, than the
same Imagination, at any other time, could have done. For when the Animal
Spirits flow in such abundance into the Organs of Generation, any Idea, that is
very strong in the Imagination, must of necessity be carried down together with
them and infect the Seed. But I have already insisted too long upon this
Subject: And therefore I shall add no more, but pass on to the Generation of
Vegetables.

Every Species of Vegetables has its own particular Seed. The visible Seed is
but the Receptable, that contains, and secures from External Injuries, the true
Seed or Idea of the Plant, which (says our Author) all sound Philosophers
affirm to be but the 2800 parts of its own Body; intimating this determinate
Proportion, that in all Generations the true Seed is very remote from any
sensible bulk. The Seminal Idea of every Plant (as was formerly said of
Animals) consists of as many particular distinct Ideas, as there are different
Parts in the Vegetable, all together representing an exact Model of the entire
Plant. The Evolution of this Idea is performed in this manner. When the Body of
the Seed, or external Capsula of the Seminal Ideas, begins to be softened by
the moisture of the Earth, so that the Ideas may take up a larger space, the
heat of the Sun excites the innate fire of the Seed, which is Congeneal to it;
(for all fruitful Seeds are endowed with a Particle of that universal Spirit of
Life, which is the Principle of all Vital Actions, Foecundates all Seeds, and
is the only Mover in all Generations:) and which being, put in motion, begins,
by the Coagulative virtue it is endowed with upon the account of its Acidity, to
Coagulate the Water that is at hand, into a Substance agreeable to the nature
of the Ideas, and fill up the little spaces of the Ideas with it: Which are by
this means gradually explicated, 'till they have attained the utmost Evolution
that they are capable of. This Evolution, of the Ideas of a Vegetable seed, may
be clearly represented to the Eye by Artificial Vegetation, which is performed
in the following manner, according to Tachenius.

Take the ripe Seed of any Plant, gathered in fair Weather, bruise it in a
Glass Mortar, and keep it in a Glass Hermetically sealed, of a shape and
bigness answerable to that of the Plant, 'till you observe a convenient
Evening, when Dew is like to fall; then take out your Seed, and expose it all
night upon a Plate of Glass, that it may be wet with Dew; but be sure to seal
it up again before Sunrise, with a solution of the Salt of Dew, in its own
distilled Liquour poured upon it to the height of three fingers breadth.
Expose this sealed Glass to the Rays of the Sun and Moon in fair Weather, and
keep it in a warm Fire-room in rainy Weather. After some days the Seed will
appear like a Mucilage, and the supernatant D^w will be of a Green Color
saturate according to the nature of the seed, and coverd over with a skin or
diverse Colors. When these signs are complete, if you heat the Glass, you shall
see a perfect lively Idea of the Plant rise up within it, which will disappear
again when the Glass is removed from the Heat. This odd Phenomenon depends
upon a Particle of the Universal Spirit contained in the Dew, which excites the
innate Spirit of the Seed to an occult Fermentation, whereby the Idea is freed
from its external earthy Receptacle, so that it may be elevated by the
application of external Heat, leaving the heavy terrestrial Particles behind.
But the Author does not give credit to the Experiment, that some pretend to, of
elevating this Idea from the Ashes of a Plant; because the Calcination drives
away that Spirit, which is the immediate Receptacle of the Idea of the Plant.
The forementioned Salt of Dew is made by Filtring and Distilling the Dew 'till
it leave no more Faeces, then Calcining the Faeces, and Extracting the Salt
from them, which is to be dissolved in the Distilled Dew, and so poured on upon
the Seed, as above.

In the last place, Minerals also are endowed with Seminal Particles. For
though they be not made up of so many dissimular Parts, and of distinct Organs,
as Vegetables, and especially Animals are; and consequently, though we cannot
suppose any Ideas in them consisting of Integral Organical Parts: Yet they have
a certain Seminal Ferment, which, in Metals particularly, is evident enough;
for it is this Ferment that converts Mercury into a Metalline Substance.
Therefore, Iron Mines, that have been almost quite exhausted, are after some
years found as rich in the Oar as they were at first. And the same thing is
observed in Tin, (and likewise in Nitre.) And such a Seminal Power there is in
common Gold, though this Metal be unfit to impregnate other Metals therewith,
and consequently improper for the Grand Philosophical work of Transmutation;
because its Sulphur, being once Coagulated, loses all Power of Motion for the
future, and therefore is unfruitful and dead. But 'twas this same Seminal
Sulphur, that, when the Gold was produced, did Coagulate it self with Mercury,
and thereby convert it into Gold. And there appears not any solid Reason
against the possibility of the Transmutation so much sought after; since,
though Seeds cannot be converted into other Seeds, yet those, that are endowed
with a weaker Mover, may be overcome by, and brought under the Dominion, of
such Seeds as are furnished with a stronger.

And now having established the Material and Formal Principles of Natural
Bodies, the Efficient only remains to be considered.

Prop. XVIII.
The chief Mover (under God) of all Natural Bodies, that actuates and
foecundates all Animal, Vegetable and Mineral Seeds; that Coagulates Elementary
Water into all sorts of Bodies, according to the various Ideas of those Seeds;
that applies the same Water to those Ideas, and in a word, the chief Efficient
in all the Phenomenon of Nature, is a certain subtle Spirit of an Igneous
nature, diffused through the whole visible World, but chiefly treasured up at
the Center thereof in the Sun.
N.B. [1. BY Spirit here, is not meant an Immaterial Substance, but a Body
consisting of very Minute and very Active Particles, peculiarly fitted for
Motion, and endowed with a great measure of it. 2. By the visible World, I
understand here, that part of the Corporeal Universe which contains the Earth
with the other six Planets, and makes up one great Vortex, whereof the Sun is
the Center. As for the rest of the Universe, it is altogether unknown to us,
only, as that most ingenious conjecture of the incomparable Des Carts
concerning it, is very likely to be true; namely, that every one of the fixed
Stars, we see, is the Center and Sun, as 'twere, of a distinct Vortex: So it is
no less likely, that each of them has the same relation to its own Vortex, and
the same Influence upon the Planets, or whatever Bodies they are which it
contains, that the Sun has to our Vortex, and upon the Bodies comprehended
there in particularly the Terraqueous Globe. And though this Part of our
Authors Hypothesis concerning the Anima Mundi or Universal Spirit, may be
applicable in the sense newly explained, to the whole Universe of Bodies, yet
his other Principles of Water and Seeds are not so comprehensive; and whatever
he says of them, must be limited to the Bodies contained in this little Point
of the Universe, that the Almighty Creator has given to Mankind for an
Habitation. And the truth is, we have but little certain knowledge of the other
Parts of the World, and that little we have is very superficial.] 3. This
Universal Spirit is actually Igneous in its Fountain, the Sun; and after it is
incorporated in Terrestrial Bodies, even the coldest of them, it differs but in
the slower Motion of its Particles from actual Fire, and therefore, whenever
they are put into a rapid motion, it turns into actual Fire again. And those
Particles of Combustible Bodies, that, being in a vehement Agitation, do
chiefly constitute our Culinary Fire, were once Particles of this Universal
Spirit, and came Originally from the Sun. 4. This is the Spirit that moved upon
the Water at the beginning of the Creation. For when God created the Matter of
which he intended to form this Terraqueous Globe, namely, a great Mass of
simple Elementary Water, he endowed it with all sorts of Seeds, and made use of
this Spirit to Coagulate a great part of the foresaid Mass, according to the
Signatures of those Seeds, into Mineral, Vegetable and Animal Bodies of all
kinds. [And the Word in the Original, which our Translators render Moved, seems
to agree very well with this Hypothesis: For it properly belongs to Birds
sitting upon and fluttering over their Eggs and young ones, to excite, quicken
and foecundate the Seed contained in the Eggs, and so bring forth the young
ones; and to cherish them when they are brought forth: so that, in this place,
the Word may be very reasonably supposed to imply, that the Vital Spirit, which
God had Created, did, as 'twere, sit upon, and move it self in the Waters, to
actuate the Seeds they contained, and by this means Hatched, as 'twere, and
brought forth the after-mention'd Bodies.] 5. Though this Spirit, by Coagulating
the Elementary Water into several Bodies, was it self Coagulated and
Incorporated together with it, and though it has been propagated to all sorts of
Bodies that have been produced, by Generation, ever since the Terraqueous Globe
was first Created; so that every fruitful Seed has a Particle of this quickening
Spirit connate with it: Yet this Particle is not sufficient to accomplish the
Evolution of the seminal Ideas, and actuate the Body in all the Functions that
belong to it, unless it be maintained, corroborated, and multiplied by constant
fresh supplies, from that Inexhaustible Treasure of this Vital Fire, which is
placed in the Sun; and thence diffused, with the Rays of that glorious Body,
to all Parts of the visible World, and particularly to the Terraqueous Globe,
where it maintains and actuates the forementioned Native Spirit of all
Animals, Vegetables and Minerals. 6. The Vital Substance, that flows
continually from the Sun, is equally capable of all Forms, and unites it self
indifferently with all Seeds. But when it is once united, it loses its
indifferency, and is specified according to the determinate nature of every
particular Seed that it incorporates with. Hence the Sulphurs of Vegetables are
quite different from those of Animals, and both from the Sulphurs of Minerals;
nor can they be transmuted into one another by humane Art: So straightly does
the Universal Spirit unite it self with particular Seeds. The reason of this so
close an union, is, because the Native pre-existent in every Seed, is of the
same Spirit Nature and Original with this Universal Spirit.

As for the Proof of the Proposition hitherto explained, the Universal Spirit,
asserted in it, is manifest, 1. From the absolute necessity of constant
Respiration to Men, and most other Animals; for hence it is evident, that there
is a certain Vital Substance in the Air, that they cannot live a Minute without
fresh supplies of, now that the Air is but the Vehicle of this Vital Substance,
flowing continually from the Sun, and the Medium, through which it is conveyed
to sublunary Bodies, shall be proved hereafter. So that it must be the
Universal Spirit, clothed with Air, that is constantly received into the Lungs
by Inspiration, and thence transmitted to the Heart; which (being the chief
Fountain of the Animal Life, that constantly diffuses a Vital Spirit through
the Arteries, together with the Blood, to all Parts of the Body, and thereby
maintains and cherishes the Native Heat and Vital Spirit residing in each of
them) must have constant supplies from the Universal Spirit, to Corroborate,
Maintain, and Multiply its own Particular Spirit. For the Universal Spirit,
that flows from the Sun to all Parts of the Macrocosm, is of the same Nature
with this Particular Spirit, that flows from the Heart to all Parts of the
Microcosm, and is therefore very fit to nourish and support it with constant
new supplies. 2. The same Universal Spirit is no less evident from what has
been delivered under the former Proposition, concerning the Generation of
Animals. To which I shall only add, that Nature has solicitously provided to
secure the Seed from External Air, because, if it were exposed but a moment to
the Air, the Universal Spirit, that dwells there, would instantly suck up (so
to speak) the Congeneal Spirit that foecundates the Seed, as not being yet
incorporated. [Wherefore the Seed, of Oviparous Animals, is carefully shut up
from the Contact of the External Air within the Egg. And in Viviparous Animals,
presently after the Injection of the Masculine Seed into the Womb, and the
Union thereof with the Feminine,] the Orifice of that Part is exactly closed,
and the two united Spirits do presently fall to Work, and begin the Evolution
of the seminal Ideas, and the Apposition of Aliment thereunto. But this Work
could never be accomplished, nay, nor even begun, unless the seminal Spirit
were excited, cherished, corroborated, and supported by the Heat of the Womb,
[and by constant supplies of the Mothers Vital Spirit, conveyed, with the
Arterial Blood, from her Heart to the Placenta Vterina, and thence transmitted,
through the Vmbilical Vein, into the Vena Cava, and so into the Heart of the
Foetus, which is the Center of Evolution, and the chief Spring of all the
Animal Actions, both in and out of the Womb: But no sooner is the Foetus
separated from the Mother, and thereby deprived of the supplies that the Vital
Spirits, residing in the Heart, received from her in the Womb, than it begins
to draw supplies for maintaining of the same Vital Substance, from the
Universal Spirit lodged in the Air, as was said before. 3. It Is the Vital
Spirit residing in every particular Part of the Human, or any other Animals
Body, maintained by the Influence of the Universal Spirit conveyed with the
Air, by Respiration, into the Lungs, and from thence communicated, by means of
the Circulation of the Blood, first to the Heart, and, from that, to the whole
Body;] it is this Spirit, I say, that Coagulates the Fluid Blood into the solid
substance of that Part, and is the true Efficient of all the Vital Functions
belonging to it. [Those Animals that are destitute of Lungs, are nevertheless
endowed with Organs of Resparation of an equivalent use. For that excellent
Anatomist, Malpigius, has happily discovered, that those blackish Points, which
we observe in Insects, all along the length of their Body, on both sides, are
really the Orifices of so many Tracheas or Wind-Pipes, which convey the Air
into the Stomach, Spinal Marrow, and all the other Bowels, as well as the
Heart, so that the Air has immediate access to seed the Vital Spirit that
resides in each of them, because there is no Circulation of the Alimentary
Juice in these Animals; or if there be, it is too slow to convey sufficient
supplies of the Universal Spirit from any one Part to all the rest, as it does
from the Heart and Lungs in perfect Animals. And the constant ingress and
egress of the Air by these little Holes, is so necessary to the life of
Insects, that if you immerge their whole Body into Oil, or but anoint these
little spots with it, they presently dye; whereas if you anoint only the
Intervals with Oil, without touching these little Holes, they receive no harm.
And though Fishes have no Lungs nor Air Pipes, because they live in the Water;
yet instead thereof they have Gils, which are Dilated and Contracted by a
perpetual Reciprocation, to give ingress and egress to the Water, as the Lungs
of other Animals are to Inspire and Exspire the Air. Nor can Fishes live
without Water, any more than Land-Animals can do without Air. Whence it is
highly probable, that the former receive constant supplies of some vital
substance from the Water, as well as the later do from the Air: especially if
we farther consider, that the Vital Liquor Circulates through the Gils of the
one by the Ramifications of their Arteria Bronchialis, as well as it does
through the Lungs of the other by those of the Arteria Pulmonaris. Wherefore,
if in Land-Animals the said Vital Liquor divide it self into little Rivulets in
its passage through the Lungs, that every part thereof may at each Circulation
receive fresh supples of Vital Spirit from the Air, that is diffused through
the whole substance of those Respiratory Organs, by the numerous Ramifications
of the Windpipe; if this be so, I say, (as we formerly proved it to be) we may
very reasonably suppose, that in Fishes the same Vital Liquor Circulates in
like manner through the Gils, that it may receive constant fresh supplies of a
vital substance from the Water, that washes the Gils perpetually. N. B. The
Gils of Crusted Fish, as Lobsters, etc. and of Shellfish, as Oysters, etc. are
spongious, and not only receive the Water into all their innermost parts (where
it communicates with the numerous Vessels, that diffuse the Vital Liquor
through the whole substance of the Gils) but give it a Passage also into all
the Internal Cavities of the Body, where it is laid up as in Bottles, to supply
the foresaid Fishes with Vital Spirit, when the Ebbing of the Sea leaves them
in sicco: whereas the Gils of sanguineous Fishes that live constantly in the
Water, are not spongious, and the Water washes only their outward surfaces
without penetrating any farther. But instead of enlarging any more upon this
point, I shall refer the curious Reader to Dr. Willis's Book of the soul of
Brutes, Chap. 3. where he will find it very fully and accurately handled.] 4.
The Existence of an Universal Spirit is evident from what has been said
concerning the Growth of Vegetables. For it is a Particle of this Spirit in the
seed, excited, strengthn'd and maintained by the Suns Vital Influence, that
Explicates the Seminal Idea, and Coagulates the Water into solid substances, as
Wood, Bark, etc. which could never be produced out of simple Water without this
Coagulating Spirit. 5. The same Argument may with equal, if not greater, force
be applied to Minerals, and especially to Metals, which, though they be the
solidest substances yet known, are nevertheless made of Mercury, which of all
Liquors is the most fluid.

In the next place, To evince that the Sun is the chief Fountain of this
Universal Spirit, I need only put the Reader in mind of what was formerly
observed concerning vegetable seeds; namely, that they would be perpetually
barren, if their Native Spirit were not actuated by that vital substance which
is every where diffused with the Rays of the Sun. But to confirm this a little
farther, it is evident beyond contradiction, that the Growth of Vegetables
depends upon the Influences of the Sun, since the different Seasons of the
Solar Year have so constant and so powerful Effects upon them. For in Winter
the Influence of the Sun is very weak, because of the Obliquity of his Rays,
and the shortness of the days: and therefore Seeds lie dormant in the Earth
without any motion: Herbs fade and wither, or dye totally: Trees are deprived
of their Leaves and lively Verdure, shoot forth no Twigs, produce no Blossoms,
bear no Fruit, and in a word cease from all Vital Actions. Yea many Animals
themselves loose much of their Vigor, and some of them (such as Flies, Frogs,
Swallows, etc.) lie dead, as it were, all the Winter long, in Chinks of Walls,
or in Cavities of the Earth, or under Water, without any motion, Sense, or the
least appearance of Life: But when the Sun comes to be more vertical, and the
Days grow longer, every thing capable of Life is quickn'd or revived; and the
whole Face of the Earth, that looked dead and lifeless before, appears fresh,
verdant, lively, and quite new, insomuch that it is astonishing to behold so
vast an alteration: the Vital Spirit remaining in the Roots of such Herbs, as
did not quite dye in the preceding Winter, being Revived, Excited to Motion
and Corroborated, falls to work afresh, and produces new Stalks, Leaves,
Flowers, Seed, Fruit, etc. the Vital Spirit that had in a great measure retired
from the Branches of Trees into their Roots and Body, explicates it self anew,
restores their fresh and lively Verdure, and adorns them with new Leaves,
Twigs, Buds, Blossoms, Fruit, etc. Finally the Vital Spirit of the
forementioned Animals, that had Concentred it self in the middle of their Body,
actuates the Members anew which it had before deserted, and restores to them
Sense, Motion, and the Exercise of all their Vital Functions.

Lastly, The Universal Spirit appears to be of an Igneous Nature, 1. Because it
flows from the Sun, which is an actual Fire. Yea the Solar Rays themselves,
which diffuse this Vital Substance through the Visible World, being Collected
by a Burning Glass into a Center, produce all the Effects of our Actual
Culinary Fire. [2. The Vital Spirit of Animals is fed by the Universal Spirit,
as has been evidently proved, and by consequence is of the same Nature with it.
Now this Vital Spirit, in Hot Sanguineous Animals, has all the Essential
Properties of an Actual Flame: For it constantly diffuses a sensible Heat
through all the Members of the Body: it is maintained by constant fresh
supplies of sulphurous Fuel from the Aliments, that are taken into the Stomach
and thence conveyed to the Blood, where this subtle Flame invisibly burns; and
of an Aerial Pabulum from the Air, that is taken into the Lungs by Inspiration,
and there communicated to the same Liquor: it constantly emits Fuliginous
Effluvia, both through the Windpipe also through all the Pores of the Skin,
which are like so many Chimneys appointed to ventilate this vital Fire: It is
kindled first in the Seminal Liquor, either by another vital Fire, as in
viviparous Animals; or by the Intestine Motion of the Sulphurous Parts,
excited and cherished by a continued External Warmth, as in Oviparous Animals:
but so long as the Foetus is included in the Womb or Egg, it burns very
faintly, and never breaks out into an actual Flame till the Air have free
nccess to it by Respiration: finally it dies as soon as it is deprived of
Sulphurous Fuel, of Aerial Pabulum, or of Ventilation. Now these Properties
seem to be peculiar to Flame: and particularly there is nothing we know of in
the World besides Life and Fire, whose Motion is instantly suppressed by
withdrawing the Air. See Willis de Accentione Sanguinis.]

Prop. 19.
The Universal Spirit, that Coagulates Elementary Water into Solid Substances
of the Animal Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms, consists of Acid Particles.
For 1. IT is of an Igneous nature; and Fire has been proved to consist of Acid
Particles put into a rapid Motion. 2. All Chimists agree that the Concretion of
Bodies depends upon the Saline Principle. Now Acaline Salts are apt rather to
Dissolve Bodies, than either to Coagulate or be Coagulated: Whereas we have a
multitude of Instances of Coagulation and Fixation performed by Acid Salts;
which though they Corrode (and so Dissolve) many Bodies, yet their Property is to
Concoagulate with the Bodies they have Corroded. [Thus Quicksylver is Fixed and
Coagulated by the Acid Particles of common or Antimonial Sulphur, into
Cinnabar; by those of Salt and Vitriol into Sublimate Corrosive; by Spirit of
Nitre into Red Precipitate, as the Chemists abusively call it; by Oil of
Vitriol, Oil of Sulphur, or Oil of Alum into Turbith Mineral, finally by the
Acid Particles of Fire into Precipitate per se. These Instances are the more
pertinent to our purpose, because Mercury is a more Fluid Body than Simple
Water it self. And the last of them, though at first it appear somewhat
Paradoxical, yet upon better examination it seems to be very reasonable; since
Precipitate per se, as well as the rest of the newly mentioned Preparations of
Quicksilver, may be revived into running Mercury, by being distilled from Salt
of Tartar, Quicklime, or such other Alcalisate Bodies as are very apt to be
wrought upon by Acid Salts, and thereby to disengage the Quicksilver that was
Coagulated with them: and since the Particles of Fire (which have been proved
to be Acid) may penetrate Glass, and many times increase the weight of the
enclosed Bodies, as Mr. Boil has undeniably evinced by a great many
Experiments: and finally since Fire is the only Agent in this Preparation.] The
Sulphur of Lead deprives Quicksilver of its Fluidity. Volatile urinous Salts are
so powerfully fixed by Acid Spirits as to endure an open Fire for some time;
but they recover their former volatility, as soon as they are disengaged from
the Acid Salts that fixed them, by the addition of any Alcalisate Body. All
sorts of Acid Salts do coagulate Milk: and the Coagulation of the Creamy parts
of Milk into Butter, depends upon the internal Acid of the Milk; for if you
throw any Alcalisate Salt into it, there can be no Butter obtained from it. The
Acid Salts of Nitre do so powerfully fix the vomitive Sulphur of Antimony, as
to render it a good Diaphoretic. [The Acid of Spirit of Wine instantly
Coagulates Spirit of Urine; for, if both these Liquors be highly rectified, as
soon as ever you have mingled them, the whole mixture loses its Fluidity,
insomuch that though the Glass be inverted, not one drop will fall out: yea our
Author affirms that] if Spirit of Wine highly rectified be kept for some months
upon Salt of Urine in a gently digestive heat, they will unite together into a
Calculus of a reddish Color: and (which is yet more strange) four parts of
this Stone will convert one part of new Spirit of Urine into its own Substance,
and four parts of this one more, and so on without any end: and that the Stone
in the (...) may be Generated after the same manner by the Plaistick Virtue of
an Internal Acidum, joined with the Salt of Urine, and being mixed with Gravel
by Fermentation, concentrates into a Concreate Substance. We found by a Stone
being taken out of a Humane Bladder, and Anatomized, by Distillation, to
consist of Oil, Spirit, and Volatile Salt, with a very large Caput Mortuum: but
of this we shall say no more at present, but leave the Reader to judge what may
be gathered by the foregoing Experiment; so that it is believed, the Universal
Spirit that Coagulates Elementary Water, as well as other Bodies into solid
Substances, consists of Acid Particles.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for and sold by Stafford Anson, at the three Pigeons in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1691.
1. DIctionarium Historicum, Geographicum, Poeticum: Opus admodum utile and
apprime necessarium. A Carolo Stephano Inchoatum. Ad incudem vero revocatum,
innumerisque pene locis auctum and emaculatum per Nicolaum Lloydium, Collegii
Wadhami in Celeberrima Academia Oxoniensi socium. Editio novissima. In qua
Historico Poetica, and Geographica seorsim sunt Alphabetice digesta; and Liber
totus tum emendationibus, tum additamentis (recentioribus tredicem Annorum
Lloydii Elucubrationibus, manuque ultima) ita adornatur, ut novus ac plane
alius videripossit. Cui accessit Index Geographicus, ubi hodierna and vernacula
Locorum nomina Antiquis and Latinis proponuntur. 2. The History of the Council
of Trent; containing eight Books. In which, besides the ordinary Acts of the
Council, are declared many notable Occurrences which happened in Christendom,
during the space of forty years and more, and particularly the Practices of the
Court of Rome, to hinder the Reformation of their Errors, and to maintain their
Greatness. Written in Italian by Pietro Soave Polano; and faithfully translated
into English by Sir Nathaniel Brent, Knight. Whereunto is added the Life of the
Learned Author, and the History of the Inquisition, in Folio. 3. Dionysii orbis
Descriptio, Annotationibus Eustathii, and Hen. Stephani, nec non Guil. Hill
commentario Critico and Geographico, ac Tabulis illustrata, 8vo. 4. P. Virgilii
Maronis opera, Interpretatione and notis Illustravit Car. Ruaeus, ad usum
Delphini. Juxta Editionem novissimam Parisiensem, 8vo. 5. Horatii opera ad Vsum
Delphini, 8vo. 6. Phaedri Fabulae, ad Vsum Delphini, 8vo. 7. Virgilii operacum
Annotationibus Johannis Minellii. 8. -- -- Id. cum Notis. T. Farnabii, 12ves:
9. P. Terentii Comoediae cum notis. T. Farnabii, 12ves: 10. Isocratis Orationes
duae. 1. Ad Demonicum. 2. Ad Nicoclem. Nova methodo and apprime utili, quoad
verbum and sensum Latin redditae: Graecismis Phrasibus and sententiis in
quibus maxima vis Rei consistit,
(...)
