A Thanksgiving SERMON For the Deliverance of Our KING From the Late Intended
ASSASSINATION. Preached April the 16th. 1696.

A Thanksgiving SERMON For the Deliverance of Our KING From the Late Intended
ASSASSINATION OF His Sacred Person: And of the Kingdom from the French Invasion.

Preached by Francis Gregory, D. D. Rector of Hambleden in the County of Bucks.

LONDON: Printed for R. Sare, at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holbourn, 1696.

Psalm. 18. 50. Great Deliverance gives he to his King, and shows Mercy to
David his anointed, etc.
GOD Almighty, having rejected Saul from being King, was pleased to choose and
name David to be his Successor. And in order to it, was David, by God's
Command, privately anointed, whilst King Saul was yet alive. And that David
might be the more firmly settled upon his Throne, God gave him a very great
Interest in the Hearts and Affections of all his Subjects. The Text tells us, 1 Samuel 18. 16. All Israel and Judah loved David. And the Reason why they did so,
is given us, Verse. 14. David behaved himself wisely in all his Ways, and the
Lord was with him. God had blessed him with wonderful Success in fighting their
Battles, he had lately crowned him with a glorious Victory over that monstr ous
Giant, who had so often scorned, and so proudly defied the whole Army of
Israel. Upon this mighty Conquest the Generality of the People were so
transported with Joy, that even the Women came out, and met them with
Instruments of Music, dancing and singing: Saul has slain his Thousands, and
David his ten Thousands.

This Acclamation, ascribing a great deal more of Honor to David, than to Saul
himself, displeased Saul to that high Degree, that the Text says, Saul eyed
David from that Day and forward. He grew so jealous, and was so very much
afraid of him, that, lest David should dispossess him of his Royal Throne, he
took many Ways to destroy him.

But what Injury had David ever done to Saul? We read, that he had often and
much obliged him; he had successfully fought his Battles; he had charmed and
turned out the Devil, with whom Saul was possessed; he had spared Readiness Life,
when he was at his Mercy; he only cut off the Skirt of Readiness Garment, when he
might as easily have cut his Throat; but notwithstanding these great
Obligations, Saul still feared, envied, and pursued David; but David, through
the kind Providence of God, still escaped the Hand of Saul.

Now, in Memory of his manifold Preservations, David did pen this Psalm. Its
Title, which runs thus, tells us so. To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David,
the Servant of the Lord, who spoke unto the Lord the Words of this Song in the
Day that the Lord delivered him from the Hand of all his Enemies, and from the
Hand of Saul. In the grateful Remembrance of God's many signal Favors to him,
and particularly for his protecting Providence, does David, like a Man in an
Ecstasy of Joy, begin the Psalm thus, I will love thee, O Lord, etc. And very
good Reason had he so to do; for in the next Verse his own Acknowledgment is
this. The Lord is my Rock, and my Fortress, and my Deliverer; my God, my
Strength in whom I will trust; my Buckler, and the Horn of my Salvation, and my
high Tower. By all which metaphorical Expressions David means only this;
namely, that it was the Hand of God, which had preserved him in all his
Dangers. And as he begins this Psalm with these grateful Acknowledgments; so
does he end it too, in the Words of my Text. Great Deliverance gives be to his
King, and shows Mercy to David his anointed.

Concerning this Deliverance mentioned in the Text, Four things may be
considered: First, Its Author; He gives; and again, He shows Mercy. He, i. e.
God. Secondly, The Person concerned in this Deliverance; and that is David,
which is here styled, His King; and again, his anointed; i. e. God's King, and
God's Anointed. Thirdly, The Motive, which inclined God to work this
Deliverance for David; and that was his own free Grace and Favor: For, says
the Text, He gives Deliverance; and again, He shows Mercy: By giving
Deliverance he does so. Fourthly, The Nature and Quality of this Deliverance;
the Text styles it, Great Deliverance.

First, The first thing considerable in the Text is the Author of this
Deliverance, and that is God. He gives Deliverance, and by so doing, He shows
Mercy, and to him does David again and again most justly ascribe it, Psalm. 18.
48. He delivers me from mine Enemies. It is not my own Policy, it is not my own
Courage, it is not my own Conduct, it is not my own Army that delivers me; it is
none but God; that God, whose Wisdom is infinite, and whose Power is
irresistible; who knows the most secret Plots, who can easily confound the
most cunning Devices, and break in Pieces the greatest Strength of wicked Men.

Now, This God was David's Friend: So he tells us, Psalm. 118. 6. The Lord is on
my Side; and again, Verse. 7. The Lord takes Part with them, that help me. It
is true, David had some Assistances from Men; Jonathan discovered to him Readiness
Designs to kill him; his Friend Hushai was employed to countermine the
dangerous Counsel of Achitophel, and he did so; Joab, the General of David's
Army, was employed to fight his Battles, and with Success he did it: All these
did contribute something toward the Deliverances of David; but notwithstanding
this, Jonathan, Hushai, Joab, and all David's Assistants, were but so many
living Tools and Instruments in the Hand of God, and acted by the Influence and
Guidance of his Providence.

And for this Reason, when David reflects upon his manifold Preservations, he
overlooks all second Causes and Humane Helps, and attributes them all to God;
so he does, Psalm 62. 2. God only is my Rock and my Salvation: And so in my
Text, He gives Deliverance to his King: And again, He shows Mercy to David
his Anointed.

And may not our English David say as much? May not our King as justly say, as
even David did, God only is my Rock and my Salvation? For when wicked Men had
entered into a Combination to murder his sacred Person; when the Plot was laid
and ripe for Execution; when the Time and Place were appointed; when such and
such bloody Villains had undertook this barbarous, inhumane, and devilish Work,
I mean, by Pistols or Blunderbusses to shed our Sovereign's Blood, and end his
Life; when this cursed Crew had mutually engaged themselves by Oath to keep
this Hellish Design secret, pray, who revealed this hidden Plot, and so
prevented its Execution?

We cannot think that this Hellish Plot was discovered by any immediate
Revelation from Heaven; but by one of those bloody Butchers, who had been privy
and consenting to it. But how came such a Miscreant to reveal it? It Is possible
that the Fear of his own Life, should the Plot be otherwise detected, and so
miscarry, might somewhat move him; or perhaps the Hopes, not only of Pardon,
but of a considerable Reward, might much incline him: But, above all, it is
most probable, that such a Man's own Conscience, being awakened by God, whose
Vicegerent it is, might so confound and terrify him at the Prospect, and with
the Guilt of so great a Crime, that he could find no Rest in his Bosom, till
he had both disclaimed and revealed it.

But whether it were Fear or Hope, or Conscience which prevailed with this Man
to make this Discovery, we must conclude that God Almighty, by his wise and
overruling Providence, raised and used him, as his Instrument, to do this
happy Piece of Service. For, without the Divine Influence, neither Fears, nor
Hopes, nor Conscience, can move the Heart of a Wicked Man to renounce his Sin,
and do such a blessed Act, as this Man did by this Discovery. It was indeed
this Man's great Sin to engage himself in such a detestable Conspiracy, and to
involve himself in so deep a Guilt; but since he had unhappily done so, he
could never have took a better Course to expiate his Crime in some Degree, than
by confessing, lamenting, and discovering it; and for his so doing he has
Reason to bless that God, who inclined him to it, as well as we.

But the Discovery of this secret Plot is not the only Evidence, that God is
the undoubted Author of our Deliverance: For when the French Troops were
gathered together with a Design to invade us, when their Fleet was ready, when
their Men, Horses, and Arms were imbarqued, put to Sea, and thought to surprise
us, Who drove their Ships back to their own Coasts, save only that great God,
whose Command the Winds and the Seas obey? Nay more; when, before this Plot was
known, a considerable Number of our own Ships were sailing to the Streights, a
Place very far from England; that God, who knew the French Design, was pleased,
by turning the Wind, to send our Ships home again; that in such a dangerous
Juncture of Time we might not want and be without them. So that confess we
must, that it is God, who gives great Deliverances: And if so, how are we
obliged this Day to bless him for it?

Secondly, The Second thing considerable in this Deliverance is the Person
therein concerned; and that is David; here styled his King, and his Anointed.
First, God's King, and, God's Anointed: And indeed David was so in an
extraordinary Way, and peculiar to those Times, wherein God was pleased now and
then, once particularly, to name his own Vicegerents.

Of this Number David was one; God's King by Nomination; and God's anointed by
his own immediate and special Command.

But in these Days of ours, there is no such King to be found in all the World;
none named from Heaven, none anointed or crowned by God's own immediate
Institution. And yet since God Almighty tells us, Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings
reign, and since St. Paul says, Romans 13. 1. There is no Power but of God; We
may conclude, that our present King is His King, and His Anointed: Though not
as David was, by Nomination, yet by the secret Direction and Guidance of his
overruling Providence.

For, pray tell me, who was it that inclined the Prince of Orange, with the
Hazard of his Life and Fortunes, to venture into England, to secure us from
Popery, which then threatened our Religion; and that arbitrary and despotical
Government, which then threatened our Laws and Liberties? And when this Prince
was come over, who inclined several Regiments, that were sent out against him,
to run into his Assistance? And when this was done, who moved our Nobility and
Gentry to place this Prince upon that Throne, which the late King had deserted,
and left vacant and quite empty? And since the King has been so crowned, who
is he, that has generally inclined the Hearts of Subjects to own him for their
Sovereign Lord, and pray for him, as such? If it be God, that has done all
this, methinks we may conclude from such a Concurrence of Divine Providence,
that our present King, who is highly concerned in the Deliverance of this Day,
is owned by Almighty God, to be, according to the Expression in my Text, His
King and His Anointed.

And if so, it is not our Business to dispute his Title, but to acquiesce under
his Government, to submit to his Laws, to furnish him with necessary Supplies,
to pray for his Life, Health, and Prosperity, and to obey his just Commands.

True it is, the Deliverance of this Day does plainly show, that some Men are
of another Mind; but were it put to the general Vote of this Nation, whether
the late King should be restored, or the present King be continued; if we set
aside the Roman Catholics and the debauched Russians of this Age; I am
persuaded, that of twenty Religious and sober Protestants, nineteen would vote
for King William.

And by the way, I am apt to think, that this late Attempt to Murder our
present King, has given him a greater Share in the Affections of his loyal
Subjects; and thereby settled him the more firmly upon his Throne; even as a
Tree, which, being shook now and then by the Wind, is abought to root the
deeper, and consequently to (...) ^and the faster. But,

Thirdly, The third thing considerable in the Text, is the Motive, which
inclined God Almighty to work this Deliverance for David; and that is intimated
in those two Expressions, He gives Deliverance; and again, He shows Mercy,
which imports, that David's Deliverance did not arise from any Worth or Merit
of his own upon Terms of Justice; but barely from the free Grace and Kindness
of God.

And if it were so with David, it cannot be otherwise with us: David was One,
who loved his God, and took Pleasure in his Service; but as for us of this
Nation, there is amongst us such a general Corruption of Manners, so many gross
Errors and Heresies about Matters of Faith, so much Carelessness and
Irreverence, such Schisms and Factions about Matters of Worship; nay, such
downright Atheism and Irreligion, that we deserved a final Destruction rather
than a Deliverance.

That sober Man, who considers the reigning Vices of this Age, the Swearing,
the Drunkenness, the Whoredom, and other Debaucheries of England, whereby the
Laws of God are miserably transgressed, and the Majesty of Heaven basely
affronted, must needs confess, as the Prophet did, Lam. 3. 22. It is of the
Lord's Mercies that we are not consumed, that we are not yet given up as a Prey
to cruel and blood-thirsty Men. We must needs say, as David here does, God
gives Deliverance: And He does it, because He shows Mercy.

Fourthly, The fourth and last thing considerable in this Deliverance is its
Nature and Quality; the Text styles it, great Deliverance: And certainly such
is Ours; great in four Respects.

First, Our Deliverance is Great in Respect of our Enemies from whom we are
delivered.

Secondly, Our Deliverance is great in respect of the Persons, who are
delivered.

Thirdly, Our Deliverance is great in respect of that dreadful Danger, which
did attend us, and was so near us.

Fourthly, Our Deliverance is great in respect of its vast Extent and Latitude;
for it reaches far both as to Time and Place.

First, Our Deliverance is great in respect of our Enemies, from whom we are
delivered; I mean the French King and his Myrmidons, his Priests and Jesuits,
his Troopers and Dragoons, those his late Reformers of Religion, who have not
one strong Argument against the Doctrine of our Church, save only that which
hangs by their Sides. I mean their Swords and Pistols. It is well known, that
the French King is a Potent Monarch; his Dominion is large, his Kingdom is
rich, his People are numerous, his Army great, his Fleet considerable; and
though he may have lost the Affections of his Subjects, yet still has he an
absolute Command over their Persons and Purses.

But all this Greatness cannot satisfy this proud and ambitious King: His
Design is to make himself the sole Emperor of the West; and because our
present King, by his extraordinary Courage and Conduct, stands most in the
French King's Way; since his Armies had not the Luck to kill him fairly in the
Field, the Report is, that the French King himself contrived the Way, and
encouraged bloody Villains to surprise our King at unawares, and murder him in
a Moment.

It Is somewhat strange that so much as one Thought of such a vile and
treacherous Act should have entered into a Crowned Head; but it is much more
strange that it should find such Entertainment and Welcome there: It Is for the
Honor of Kings and Princes, even when they deal with Enemies, to be generous
and noble; but for a King, and such an one, as styles himself, the most
Christian King, and stands so much upon his Honor; for him to sit down,
consult and contrive a Design* and earnestly wait for its Execution; a Design
to murder a Neighboring Prince sneakingly, and in cool Blood; it is an Act so
base, so ignoble, that, had there been nothing of Sin in it, yet there is so
much of Shame, that I cannot call it by any Name, that is bad enough.

And had this horrid Plot took that Effect, which was designed by its
Contrivers; had the French Army suddenly surprised and overcome us, with what
Severity would the French King have treated the Protestants of England, since
he lately was so exceeding cruel to the Protestants of France, who were his own
natural and loyal Subjects?

In short, this is the King, who, to enlarge his own Dominion, has unjustly
invaded the Territories of other Princes; surprised and burnt their Towns,
plundered their Villages, destroyed their Country, and drencht his Sword, and
made it drunk with the innocent Blood, perhaps of Millions.

This is the devouring Lion, from whose merciless Claws we are yet delivered;
an Enemy, that is powerful; an Enemy, that is implacable; an Enemy, whose
tender Mercies are but cruel: And certainly a Deliverance from such an Enemy
must needs be a great one.

Secondly, Our Deliverance is great in respect of the Persons, who are thereby
delivered. For these Persons are great, either, first, in Point of Quality; or,
secondly, in Point of Number.

First, Some Persons concerned in this Deliverance are great in Point of
Quality. Our Bishops and many other grave Divines are Persons somewhat
considerable in the Church of England, in regard of their sacred Employment;
our Gentlemen, Knights, Lords, Earls, Dukes, are Persons very considerable in
the State of England, in regard of their great Estates and Titles of Honor;
our Judges, in regard of their Office, are great Men too; but, above all, our
King is very great indeed; and that, first, in respect of his high Birth and
Extraction, as being born of Royal Blood; and secondly, in Respect of his high
Station, as being God's Vicegerent.

Now, it is certain that if the late Conspiracy had succeeded, all these great
Men would have very sorely smarted by it; but especially our King, who was the
first Man designed for Slaughter, and consequently the first and the most
concerned in this Deliverance.

Secondly, Besides our King, and the other great Men of our Nation, the main
Body of our common People are also concerned in this Deliverance: And what they
want in Weight, they do certainly make up in Number.

And their Number is so very considerable, that it does much advance our
Deliverance, and make it very great indeed: I remember, Joseph told his
Brethren thus, Genesis 45. 7. God sent me before you to save your Lives by a great
Deliverance. If the Deliverance of one single Family deserved to be called, a
great Deliverance, how much the Deliverance of so many thousand Families as are
in England?

Thirdly, Our Deliverance is great in respect of the Danger, which did attend
us, and that was very dreadful, and very near to us too.

We were in Danger of a French Invasion, a French Religion, and a French
Government: A Religion, which is Idolatrous; a Government, which is Tyrannical;
by the one we must have lost our Consciences, or our Lives; and by the other we
must have lost our Laws, Estates, and Liberties: So that I may say, we were in
Danger to lose whatever is and ought to be dear to us.

And as this Danger was very great, so was it very near us too: For, the French
Fleet and Army were ready abroad, and the Traitors at home were prepared to
kill the King, the Day appointed for the Murder was come, the Design was every
way ripe, and there wanted nothing, but a fit Opportunity for its Execution.

Now, in this critical Juncture of Time, there appeared for us, as the Greeks
speak (...), the unexpected Providence of God stepped in and interposed betwixt
us and Ruin; discovered the Conspiracy, and so prevented its Execution. So that
we may say, as David did in a like Case, Psalm 124. 7. The Snare is broken, and
we are escaped. God was pleased to snatch us, as so many Brands designed for
the Fire; as it were out of the Smoke, just before the Flame should have been
kindled to consume us. And may we not, upon this Ground also, very justly style
our Deliverance, as the Text does that of David, a great Deliverance?

Fourthly, Our Deliverance is great in respect of its Extent and Latitude; for
it reaches very far both as to Time and Place.

We must not think that we of this present Age, and this particular Nation, are
the only Persons concerned in it; the Benefit of it is like to redound to other
Kingdoms and other Ages.

First, To other Kingdoms; for, had the French King invaded and conquered
England, as he designed; he would easily have overrun the Territories of the
Allies and Confederate Princes, who are not able, by their own Strength, to
withstand the Power of France.

Secondly, To other Ages; for, had this cursed Plot took that Effect, which was
designed by its Contrivers, we cannot doubt, but our conquering Enemies, had
they proved such, would have derived and transmitted both Popery and Slavery,
two detestable Names, quite down to our Posterity.

Now then, if other Ages, if other Nations and Churches, but especially those
of the Reformed Religion, be concerned, as doubtless they are, in this
Deliverance, as well as we; then certainly the more extensive this Deliverance
is, it is so much the greater.

And now what remains, but that we render great Thanks for our great
Deliverance to that great God who is the undoubted Author of it: Since God has
done his Part in Point of Mercy, let us now do ours in Point of Gratitude. Nor
is it enough for us to bless our God with our Tongues for one single Day, but
let us glorify him in our Lives, as David did, even whilst we have a Being.

The Benefit of this Deliverance is like to redound to our Posterity; and why
should not our present and grateful Sense of such a Mercy be conveyed down to
After Ages? Certainly a Deliverance of this Nature deserves a Solemn Day of
Thanksgiving Year by Year: For, it is said, that this late Conspiracy was laid
as deep, and might have proved as fatal, even as the very Gunpowder Treason it
self: And if so, since we observe the Fifth of November in Memory of that, why
should we not as well observe the Fifteenth of February in Memorial of this?

But, in the mean time, let us take heed that we do no more provoke the God of
our Deliverance by our repeated Crimes; let us remember, that France is like to
be France, and Rome is like to be Rome, I mean, our implacable Enemies still:
And if Old England will be Old England still, if we still resolve to continue
as profane and vicious as ever; what may we expect at last, but utter Ruin and
Desolation? To this Purpose tends that Address, which Ezra made to God in a
like Case, and upon a like supposition, Ezra 9. 13, 14. since thou our God have
given us such a Deliverance as this, should we again break thy Commandments,
would not thou be angry with us, till thou had consumed us, so that there
should be no remnant nor escaping? But that we may keep God our Friend, and so
need not fear the Power or the Plots of our Enemies, Let us take that advice,
which our Lord gave to that impotent person, whom he had miraculously cured,
John 5. 14. Behold, thou art made whole. What then? Sin no more. So say I:
Behold, we are this Day Dlivered, and that by little less than a Miracle; well,
and what if we be? Sin no more. There is danger in it; for, as the Text
intimates, God has yet in store (...) some worse things, which may yet befall
us, even a small Excision and Destruction of our Persons, Church, and Nation.

But that our selves, our Families, and our Kingdom may flourish, let us by our
religious, holy and virtuous Lives engage our God to be still our great
Protector; and, in order to our common Safety, let us close our Thanksgivings
with that solemn Petition, which our Liturgy puts into our Mouths. O Lord save
the King, And let every good Man, who loves our Church and Nation, subscribe or
say, Amen.

FINIS.

