Dr. GREGORY's THANKSGIVING SERMON, PREACHED On Thursday the 2 d of December,
1697.

(...). OR, A THANKSGIVING SERMON FOR Peace Abroad; WITH Motives to Unity at
Home, ESPECIALLY In Matters of Religion. Preached at Hambleden in the County of
Bucks, on Thursday the Second Day of December, 1697. By FRANCIS GREGORY, D. D.
and Rector of Hambleden.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Sare, at Gray's-Inn-Gate; and Sold by E. Whitlock
near Stationers' Hall, 1697.

PSALM CXXII. 7. Peace be within thy Walls, and Prosperity within thy Palaces.
COncerning this Psalm there are Three things which may be considered; First,
The Inscription or Title, which it bears. Secondly, The Occasion upon which it
was written; and, Thirdly, The subject Matter which it contains. As for the
Title of his Psalm, it is double; for,

First, It Is styled in the Hebrew Language, Schir Hammaaloth; in the Greek,
(...); in the Latin, Canticum Graduum, i. a Song of Degrees. And, besides this
Psalm, there are Fourteen more set down in order, which bear the same
Inscription.

And why these Fifteen Psalms are called Songs of Degrees, there are several
Reasons offered by several Interpreters, all which are but Conjectural. The
Rabbis or Doctors of the Jewish Church tell us, That there were Fifteen Steps
or Stairs, by which, as by so many Degrees, they went up to the Temple, and
that upon their Solemn Festivals, the Levites were wont upon each of these
Steps or Degrees to stand still, and sing one of those Psalms; and that from
this Custom these Fifteen Psalms received this denomination.

There are others, who think that there was in the Temple a certain place
raised high above the Ground, like the Galleries in our Churches, to which the
Levites ascended by several Steps or Degrees, and there did sing these Psalms;
and that from thence these Psalms took this Name.

There is a third Opinion, that these Psalms are so called, because when the
Levites did sing them, they did by degrees raise their Notes, advance their
Voices, and tune them in an higher Strain than ordinary. But the consideration
of this being a thing rather of Curiosity than of Edification, I will say no
more about it.

2 dly. The second Inscription or Title which this Psalm bears in the Hebrew
Tongue, is this, Mizmor le Dabid, a Psalm of David; the Greek Translation reads
it, (...), a Psalm to David: But that is an Hebraism, where the Article le does
govern sometimes a Genitive, and sometimes a Dative Case.

This Title shows us who was the undoubted Penman of this Psalm; namely, the
Royal Prophet, a King inspired of God, whose Name stands prefixed before most
of the Psalms, to distinguish those which were written by him, and those which
were Penned by some other inspired Persons; as, Asaph, Heman, Aethan, and
Moses. But to pass by this.

Secondly, The second thing considerable, in reference to this whose Psalm, is
the Occasion whereupon it was composed and written, and that is thought to be
this:

We read that David had been forced to fly from Jerusalem from his own House,
and God's, by the Rebellion and Treason of his own Son Absalom, who endeavored
to dispossess him of his Kingdom, and probably of his Life too; but, within a
short space, Absalom being slain, and his Army dispersed, and David returned in
safety to Jerusalem, it is believed that he might, upon that happy occasion, Pen
this Psalm.

But, Thirdly, the third thing here considerable, is, the Subject Matter which
this Psalm contains in it; and the most remarkable Passages therein are these
two:

1 st. David's exceeding Joy for his Restoration to the Place of God's Public
Worship, from which, to his unspeakable Grief, he had been so lately Banished.

During the whole time of David's Exile, there was nothing that did so much
disquiet David's Soul, as the consideration of his forced Absence from the
Sanctuary of God; none of his Troubles, none of his Misfortunes did he ever
lament so long, and so often as that.

But when once David had recovered his former Liberty, when the Doors of the
Sanctuary did again stand open to him, like a Man transported with Joy, he
abruptly broke out into this Expression; I was glad when they said unto me, Let
us go into the House of the Lord; and so it is with all Religious Souls: To
them the House of God is a place of the greatest Joy and Pleasure.

2 dly, The second of those things, which are most considerable in this Psalm,
is David's earnest Request, both to God and Men, for the Happiness of
Jerusalem, and for the continuance of those Spiritual Privileges which they did
now enjoy.

His Address to Men was this, Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; and what he
requested other Men to do, he did himself, backing his Exhortation with his own
Example; for, upon the account of Jerusalem, being then the Royal City, the
chief Place of God's most solemn Worship, and a Type of the Universal Church,
David put up this Petition to Heaven, Peace be within thy walls, and
prosperity, or, as our old Translation reads it, Plenteousness, within thy
Palaces.

Now, from the Matter and Method of this Petition, which David here presented
to his God, there do very naturally arise these two plain Conclusions; First,
That Peace is a Blessing that is very desirable, why else did David persuade
his Neighbors to beg it? And why else did he himself so earnestly Petition God
to grant it?

Secondly, That Prosperity, or Plenteousness, is commonly the Fruit and
Consequence of Peace. This I observe from the Method and Order of David's
Petition, Peace be within thy walls; that is the first part of his Request: and
then the second follows, Prosperity or Plenteousness be within thy Palaces.
And, the truth is, without Peace first obtained, Prosperity or Plenteousness
can hardly be expected.

First, the first Conclusion which does naturally arise from the Text, is this,
namely, That Peace is a Blessing that is very desirable indeed; and so it is; 1
st, In the Private Families of Particular Men. 2 dly, In the Public Societies,
Commonwealths, and Kingdoms of the World. 3 dly; In the Catholic Church, which
is God's more special Kingdom, and the only Family of Christ here below.

I. Peace is a Blessing, that is very desirable in the private Families of
particular Persons.

There are three chief Relations, which are commonly found in the Families of
Men; that of Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants;
and how pleasant, how joyful a thing must it needs be for all the Relations,
who constitute the whole Family, to live together in Peace and Unity! Husbands
and Wives are called One Flesh; and certainly it can never do well if they be
not of One Spirit too; for, can they who are but One Flesh be divided without
sore Rents and Wounds? Again, Children are but the Parts of their own Parents,
and can any part, that is quick and living, be separated from the whole,
without sense of much pain and anguish? And as for Servants, they are their
Masters Trustees; and if they bear a grudge to their Masters Person, it is ten
to one but they will falsify their Trust too.

But where Husbands and Wives are of the same mind, and draw the same yoke, and
in the same way; where Parents love their Children, and Children love their
Parents; where Masters are kind to their Servants, and Servants cheerfully obey
their Masters; where the inferior Relation does readily do what the Superior
does prudently require: In short, when the Hand does willingly execute what the
Head does wisely contrive and dictate. Where the case stands thus, such
Families are in the ready way, and take the right course to thrive.

But on the other hand, if Strifes and Contentions arise and grow in a Family;
if, as our Lord speaks, The father shall be divided against the son, and the
son against the father; Luke 12.53.
the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; where
Relations, who are so near in Blood, are at such distance in point of
Affection, such Families can never expect God's Blessing to make them Prosper;
nor indeed can they heartily unite any joint Petitions to beg it.

Such Families are so far from having any hopes to flourish, that our Lord has
plainly told us, Every house, Matthew. 12.25. Or 34.
every family divided against it self, shall not stand. No, Strife and
Contention are, as Gregory Nazianzene well observes, (...), the beginnings of
Dissolution; That which best Cements and Supports a Family, is mutual Concord
and Unity; and if so, how desirable a Blessing is Peace even in the private
Families of Men?

II. Peace is a Blessing very desirable in the Catholic Church, which is the
great and only Family which God has in this lower World.

Ephesians. 2.19.
St. Paul tells his Christian Converts thus, Ye are fellow Citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God; not as Servants only, but as Children too.
All the sincere Converts of the World, all true Believers have the same God for
their Father, the same Christ for their Brother, the same Church for their
Mother, and if so, themselves must needs be Brethren.

And is not this Fraternity such a near Relation, as should incline us to Peace
and Unity? See that Expression of Abraham to Lot, Genesis 13.8.
Let there be no strife, I pray thee, betwixt me and thee, for we are Brethren.
We all pretend to be Travelers toward the heavenly Canaan; and if we be such
indeed, that Counsel which Joseph gave his Brethren does much concern us; Genesis
45.24.
See that ye fall not out by the way; O remember, that God, who is the Father
of us all, is styled, The God of Peace; our Blessed Savior, who is our Elder
Brother too, is styled, The Prince of Peace; and he has given us a fair
Intimation, that every good Man is, and ought to be, a Son of peace, Luke 10.6.
one inclinable and well disposed to mutual Concord, Amity and Agreement; to
this end did our Lord give his Apostles this Charge, Have peace one with
another. Nay, says St. Paul, Mark 9.5^ Romans 12.18.
if it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men; but
especially with all Men of the same Religion.

See how very earnest St. Paul was for this, I the prisoner of the Lord beseech
you; What to do? to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: And
truly, where this Unity of the Spirit is not kept, where this Bond of Peace in
matters of Religion is once dissolved, it is a clear Evidence, that Men are not
such Christians as they should be; St. Paul plainly told the Men of Corinth so,
I hear that there are divisions amongst you, 1 Cor. 11.18.

1 Cor. 3.4. 1 Cor. 1.12.


division about their Teachers; One says, I am of Paul, another says, I am of
Apollo, and a third says, I am of Cephas; and what does St. Paul infer from
this variety of their Opinions? That he tells them, Whereas there is amongst
you envyings, 1 Cor. 3.3.
strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? Not as becomes good
Christians, but like sinful Men.

Now, much like to this Case of the Church of Corinth is the present Case of
the Church of England too; for, as they were divided about their Preachers, so
are we; as, among them, one was for Paul, another for Apollo, and a third for
Cephas; so, among us, one is for an Episcopal Preacher, another for a
Presbyterian, a third for an Independent: One Man is for those set Forms of
Prayer which our very Excellent Liturgy prescribes, and I cannot blame him;
another Man is for extempore Effusions; and sure I am, that even these also are
set and stinted Forms, though not to the Speaker himself, yet to every other
Man that hears them: Again, one Man is for performing the Duties of our Public
Worship in a Church, a place Built and Dedicated to the Service of God alone;
but another Man is for Worshipping the Great Majesty of Heaven in an homely
Barn, a place built and designed only for the Civil and Common Uses of men.
Once more; One Man is for our Public Assemblies, which are Established by our
Laws; another Man is for Conventicles in Private Houses; and since these
Conventicles have been so very numerous, and since so many sorts of Dissenters
have resorted to them, it is from the Good Providence of God that these
Conventicles have not yet emptied our Churches, that these back Ditches have
not yet drawn the main Stream quite dry.

But can the Wisest of men amongst us foresee what the end of our Divisions may
prove? Sure I am, its present Effects are but sad ones; for, by these Divisions
we do prejudice the best Religion in the World; we do thereby very much
discourage Jews, Papists, Turks, Men of all other Religions, from embracing
ours. For, may they not justly say, the true way of Worshipping God being but
one, since there is amongst us Protestants such a diversity of Opinions about
it, who can assure us, which may be the only right one?

Besides, this Difference in Judgment does naturally produce Difference in
Practice too; and difference in Practice does commonly create difference in
Affection; and when these Differences meet together, they are wont to produce
Schisms in the Church, Seditions in the State, and Confusions in both. Nay,
when Differences in matters of Religion ferment and grow high; when divided
Parties are zealous every one for his own Opinion, how often do they break out
into Civil Wars, some of them defending their Errors by the Sword, which they
could never have defended by any other Arguments?

Now then, if these be the usual Consequences of Divisions in matters of
Religion, how desirable a Blessing must Unity and Peace be in the Church of God?

III. Peace is a Blessing very desirable in the Civil Societies of Men, in
Towns and Cities, in the Commonwealths and Kingdoms of the World; at Home
amongst our selves, and Abroad with all other Nations too.

I need not tell you, that in Halcyon days, when things are quiet at Home, the
Tradesman may safely mind his Shop, and the Husbandman his Plow; In times of
Peace, our Flocks and Herds are wont to Multiply, our Corn comes safe into the
Barn, our Markets are full, our Courts are open, our Laws retain their Force,
and Justice betwixt Man and Man may freely be administered; In times of Peace
every Man may sit under his own Fig Tree, under his own Vine, and quietly eat
the Fruit of his own Labor.

And when we are at Peace abroad with other Nations; how cheerfully may our
Merchants Transport their Goods beyond the Seas, and bring back their Ships
richly laden with Silks, Silver, Gold and Diamonds? In short, when we have
Peace both at Home and Abroad, we of this Nation can want for nothing that
tends to make a Kingdom happy.

But the best way to understand and value the Benefits of Peace, is to consider
the Calamities of War; methinks Drums and Trumpets, Carbines and Pistols,
Muskets and Canons are Names which sound like to dreadful Claps of Thunder, and
Ten thousand glittering Swords seem as terrible as so many flashes of
Lightning; for where War is raised, Trade decays, Merchants break, Taxes grow
High, Money grows Scarce, Treasures are Exhausted, Laws are Interrupted, Houses
are Plundered, Towns and Cities are burnt to Ashes, Cornfieldsd are Devoured,
abundance of Blood is shed, and whole Countries are often laid Wast and
Desolate.

Now then, if the Benefits of Peace, and the Miseries of War be indeed so
exceeding great, we may well conclude, that Peace is a Blessing very desirable
by all Mankind, unless perhaps it be by some proud Tyrannical and Ambitious
Princes, or such Soldiers of Fortune as know not how to live without Rapine,
Plunder and Wages to destroy the Lives and Fortunes of other Men. Now, to apply
this

1. Consider we the great Reason we have to keep a solemn Day of Thanksgiving
with all expressions of Gratitude for that welcome Peace, which after a tedious
War, is now settled betwixt us and our Neighbor Nations.

For by this happy Peace we are, for time to come secured from those
Calamities, which we have suffered by the late War for so many Years together:
I need not here again enumerate the Miseries of War, nor mind you that it has
drained our Purses, that it has cost a World of Treasure, and which is a great
deal worse, that the Sword has drunk whole Barrels of English Blood.

And if the Miseries of War be so exceeding dreadful, our Deliverance from them
must needs deserve our Thanks, and those Thanks are due both to our God, and to
our King.

First, Our Thanks for Peace are due to our God; for he who is our God, is the
God of Peace, the great Author of it; so does the Psalmist tell us, Psalm. 46.9.
He makes Wars to cease to the end of the Earth; he breaks the Bow, and
cutteth the Spear in sunder; he burns the Chariot in the Fire. When it is his
good Pleasure so to do, he can, and does incline the Hearts of Men to Peace,
and in order to that, they shall lay aside the usual Engines of War; so the
Prophet tells us, they shall beat their Swords into Plowshares, Isa. 2.4.
and their Spears into pruning Hooks; Nation shall not lift up Sword against
Nation, neither shall they learn War any more. The doing of this is a peculiar
Prerogative, which the Glorious Majesty of Heaven does most justly claim to
himself. Isa. 45.7.
I make Peace, and create Evil; I the Lord do all these things. It Is he that
raises War in his Wrath; and it is he who puts an end to War; and creates Peace
in his Mercy; and if so, since by him we now enjoy the Blessing of Peace, can
we do less than bless him for it?

Secondly, Our Thanks for Peace are also due to our King, as being the great
Instrument in God's hand to procure it for us.

We have now a King well qualified with Prudence and Policy to manage our civil
Affairs in times of Peace, and we have a Prince of wise Conduct and most
excellent Courage to lead our Armies in a time of War; a King who for his
Conduct and Courage, does deserve a greater Renown, than Hannibal, Scipio,
Julius Caesar, Alexander the Great, or any other General mentioned in the Greek
and Roman Stories.

To this King of ours, not only England, Scotland and Ireland, but the States
of Holland, the King of Spain, the Princes of Germany, and the Emperor himself
does under God, owe their Preservation; for had not our King interposed, the
French King, who is so Ambitious and so Strong, easily might, and certainly
would have overcome them all: And in that case the only Favor which England
could have expected, would have been this, namely, to have been devoured last.

But thanks be to God and to our King, that Danger is now quite over; for, the
French King found his Kingdom reduced to such Extremities, that he was forced
to desire a Cessation of Arms; but that being denied him, he saw himself
constrained to conclude a Peace; that Peace, which no man could have hoped for,
had not our King disabled France to continue the War.

And what Returns shall we make to our King for this? Let our Hearts be with
him, and our Prayers for him; and if any just Occasion shall once more so
require, let him have our Hands and our Purses too.

Secondly, Since we have now a settled Peace betwixt us and other Nations beyond
the Seas, let us endeavor to restore and settle a lasting Peace amongst our
selves here at Home; I do not mean Civil Peace only, but a Peace Ecclesiastical
and Sacred.

It Is said of the Primitive Christians; Acts 4.32.
the Multitude of them that believed, were all of one Heart and one Soul; it is
said again, Acts 2.44, 46.
all that believed, were together, and continued daily with one accord in the
Temple. Were it thus in England, we might hope to see golden Days yet once
again.

But alas, as it was said of Old, for the Divisions of Reuben there were great
Thoughts of Heart; Judge. 5.15.
so may I now justly say, for the Divisions of England there are sad Thoughts
of Hearts, Fears and Jealousies, lest, whilst we contend about the
Circumstances of our Religion, we lose it is very Substance; but would our
Dissenters act like Men, and hearken to right Reason; would they act like
Christians, and laying aside all Prejudice, consult their Bibles, and make that
their Rule; I am well Satisfied, that they could find no just Ground to
withdraw themselves from the Church of England; that Church, in whose way of
Divine Worship there is nothing Prescribed, nothing Practiced, but what the
Scriptures do either Command, or at least Allow.

The Substantial parts of God's Worship are all Commanded by himself; but it is
necessary Circumstances are not so; the Minister, who is to Read, Preach and
Administer the Sacraments, must wear some Garment or other, but whether it
shall be of Linen or Woollen, of Stuff or Silk, a Cloak or a Gown, of this
Color, or that, the Scriptures do not tell us. Again, in what particular
Place, and at what particular Hour, we must meet to Worship God, whether the
Preacher must sit or stand, whether the Lord's Supper should be Administered in
the Church, or in the Chancel, the Scriptures do no where teach us; no, these
and the like indifferent Circumstances must, to prevent Disorders, be
determined by the Piety and Prudence of our Church Governors; and when once
they in order to Decency, Uniformity, and the more solemn Administration of our
Divine Worship, have upon mature Advice and Deliberation, prescribed us such
Rules, as are no way contrary to the Word of God, by the same Word do we all
stand obliged in Conscience to obey them; and were this generally done, our
Disputes and Quarrel about our Ceremonies, which are but few and innocent,
would be at an end.

But so long as we think our selves either more Knowing, or more Conscientious
than our Rulers; while we refuse to submit to their Determinations about things
indifferent, and thereupon break and crumble out selves into many Factions and
Parties, we do by these Divisions exceedingly Gratify our Adversaries of Rome:
And whilst we pretend to abhor their Religion, we do indeed give very great
Advantages to it: for when once Men separate from our Public Assemblies, and
meet in Private Conventicles, it is well known that Priests and Jesuits, under a
Disguise, creep in amongst them, and by degrees instill their Poisonous
Doctrines into the Minds of Unwary and Credulous Men.

Let me therefore Exhort and Prevail with you to do what St. Paul, Heb. 13.17.
or rather God, by St. Paul, requires, Obey them that have the Rule over you, 2
Cor. 13.11.

Ephesians. 4.4.


and Submit your selves: And again, Be of one mind, live in Peace: And yet
again, Endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; it is
that which our Religion and Duty requires: Yea, and so does our very Interest
too.

Thirdly, Since it has been die good Pleasure of God to Bless us at present
with a Civil Peace both at Home and Abroad, let us so behave our selves both to
our God and our King; to our God, as the Author, and to our King, as the
Instrument of our Peace; that this Peace may be still continued to us and our
Posterity without any Interruption.

The Interests of a King, as the Head; and of the Subjects, as the Body
Politic, are so interwoven and twisted together, that a Breach between them
may prove Fatal to both; but still, when Kings and Subjects break with Heaven,
that is Infinitely worse: For, as there is no Friend, so there is no Enemy so
considerable as God. And what is it that makes this God an Enemy to any Nation,
but those Epidemical Sins that overspread it? And verily, if we of this Kingdom
shall still persist in our Vicious Courses, our present Peace cannot long
secure us; for, if we break our repeated Covenants with God, he can easily
incline our Enemies to break their Covenants with us.

That which Moses told the Wicked Jews, does as much concern sinful Christians
too: Deuteronomy. 28.49.
The Lord shall bring a Nation against thee, whose Tongue thou shall not
understand; a Nation of fierce Countenance, which shall not regard the person
of the old, nor show favor to the young; and he shall eat the fruit of thy
Cattle, and the fruit of thy Land, until thou be destroyed. An Invading and
Conquering Enemy does God here threaten to raise against a Wicked Nation.

But on the other hand, if a Nation prove Religious and Holy, what the Event is
like to be, we may learn from Solomon, who says, When a Man's ways please the
Lord, Prove. 16.7.
he makes even his Enemies to be at peace with him. What is here said of a
Particular Person, is as true of a whole Nation; to please our God by a Pious
and Virtuous Conversation, is the only sure way to obtain and continue Peace
with Men.

And that a firm Peace may be for ever Established in all Christian Churches
throughout the whole World, let us all heartily join in that Charitable
Petition, which our Excellent Liturgy has put into our Mouths, namely this,
Grant, O Lord, that all they who do confess thy Holy Name, may agree in the
Truth of thy holy Word, and live in Unity and Godly Love. Let us also pray more
particularly for our own Jerusalem, our own Church and Kingdom, as our Royal
Psalmist did for his in the Words of my Text; Peace be within thy Walls: and
Prosperity, or Plenteousness, within thy Palaces.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Sare, at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn.
DR. Gregory's Divine Antidote against Socinianism. 8o

The Fables of Esop, with Morals and Reflections. Folio.

Erasmus's Colloquies. Octavo.

Quivedo's Visions. 8o.

The three last by Sir Roger L'Estrange.

The Genuine Epistles of St. Barnabas, St Ignatius, St. Clement, St. Polycarp
the Shepherd of Hermas, etc.

A Practical Discourse against Swearing. 8o.

The Authority of Christian Princes over Ecclesiastical Synods, in Answer to a
Letter to a Convocation-Man. 8o.

Sermons on several Occasions. 4o.

These by Dr. Wake.

Epictetus's Morals, with Simplicius's Comment. 8o.

A Sermon Preached upon the Death of the Queen.

A Sermon at the Commencement at Cambridge.

A Sermon on the Death of Dr. Towerson.

These four by Dr. George Stanhope.

The Doctrine of a God and Providence Vindicated and Asserted. 8o.

Discourses on several Divine Subjects. 8o.

These two by Thomas Gregory, Lecturer of Fulham.

Essays upon several Moral Subjects. In Two Parts. By Jeremiah Coslier, M. A.
8o.

Complete Sets consisting of Eight Volumes of Letters writ by a Turkish Spy,
who lived 45 Years at Paris undiscovered; giving an Account of the Principal
Affairs of Europe. 12o.

Moral Maxims and Reflections: Written in French by the Duke of Rochfoncault,
now Englished. 12o.

Of the Art both of Writing and Judging of History, with Reflections upon
Ancient as well as Modern Historians. By Father Le Moyne. 12o.

An Essy upon Reason, by Sir George Mackenzie, 12o.

Death made Comfortable, or the way to Dye well. By John Kettlewel, 12o.

The Parsons Councellor, or the Law of Tithes. By Sir Simon Degg. 8o.

The Unlawfulness of Bonds of Resignation, 8o. Price 6. d.

An Answer to all the Excuses and Pretenses which Men ordinarily make for their
not coming to the Holy Sacrament, 8o. Price 3 d. By a Divine of the Church of
England.

Remarks on a Book Entitled, Prince Arthur an Heroic Poem. By Mr. Dennis. 8o.

An Appendix to Dr. Pope's Life of Bishop Ward, 8o. Price 6 d.

A Gentleman's Religion in three Parts, the first contains the Principles of
natural Religion. The Second and Third the Doctrins of Christianity both as to
matters of Faith and Practice. 12o.

Fortune in her Wit's, or the Hour of all Men. By Don Franciso de Quivedo,
Author of the Visions of Hell. Translated by Capt. John Stevens. 8o.

Humane Prudence, or the Art by which a Man may raise Himself and Fortune to
Grandeur. The 7 th. Edition. 12o.


