THE GREAT AND NEW ART OF WEIGHING VANITY: OR A Discovery of the Ignorance and
Arrogance of the great and new Artist, in his Pseudo-Philosophical Writings. By
M. Patrick Mathers, Arch-Bedal to the University of S. Andrews. To which are
annexed some Tentamina d^ motu penduli and projectorum.



GLASGOW, By ROBERT SANDERS, Printer to the City, and University, 1672.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
I doubt not but thou art surprised to find me in print: and I assure you, that
it is not more above your hope and expectation, then it is contrair to my
former designs and resolutions: But as Atis his dumbness from the womb could
not keep him from brusting into speech against those soldiers whom he saw
ready to have killed his father; so my general insufficiency in all things
else, cannot keep my natural affection in longer silence, when I see my
bountiful Mother, this ancient and famous University, and all her beautiful
Daughters, the other Universities of this Kingdom, in hazard to be murdered by
one of their unnatural children.

And finding that he with whom I have to do, has given but a very lame and
partial account of the occasion of our debate, I judge it both thy interest and
mine, that I correct it by a more full, perfect and impartial one: For as ^he
Magicians feigned miracles found greater belief with the Egyptians, then the
true ones of Moses; so a false information having nothing to contradict it, often
times prevails as true with us.

Thus then it is. My adversary having published his Tyrocinia Math. and his
Ars. Magna and Nova, etc. one here who well understands those things, intending
to oblige the Author, and redeem his Country from further injury by his
writings, friendly represented to him some of his failings in them. And
another, whose judgment he ought to have esteemed much, with the same
intention, expressed to one of his nearest friends, his dislike of those Books,
and his regrate for the loss which the Author put himself and his Country to
by them. But this was not sufficient to convince him of his weakness; for he
proceeds to give the world another instance of his folly, in printing his
Hydrostaticks; and notwithstanding what had past, he yet fancies that the
Masters of this University have as high an esteem of his sufficiency, as he
himself: And therefore not doubting of their encouragement to so noble a work,
he confidently fends his petitory letters to some of them, entreating their own
concurrence, and their assistunce for procuring the encouragement of others
thereto.

With his Letters, he sent this following Edict.

Forasmuch as there is a Book of Natural and Experimental Philosophy in
English, to be printed within these four months, or thereabout; Wherein are
contained many excellent and new purposes: As first, Thirty Theorems, the most
part whereof were never so much as heard of before: in which are proposed
briefly the chiefest and most useful principles of that new Doctrine, anent the
wonderful weight, force, and pressure of the water in its own Element. There
are next, twenty Experiments in order to that Doctrine, not only most pleasant,
and most easy to all capacities, but most useful likewise, which are set down
after this method. First, each particular Experiment is briefly and clearly
described, by its own distinct Schematism and Figure. Secondly, the curious
Operations, and natural effects of it are showed. Thirdly, the true causes of
these natural effects are searched into, and most evidently explicated, and
demonstrated; not only by the force of reason, but by the evidence of sense
also. And lastly, at the close of each Experiment, you will find most naturally
deduced from the preceding Demonstrations, many excellent and new Conclusions
(hitherto unknown) and these for the advancement of natural knowledge, and
practice; among which, mention is made of a new and more commodious way of
Dyving. After all which, there is a number of Miscellany Observations; some
whereof are Experiments made in Coal-sincks, for knowing the power of Damps,
and ill Air, by killing of Animals. Some made for knowing the variation of the
Compass here: and an excellent way for knowing, by the eye, the Sun or Moons
motion in a second of time, which is the 3600. part of an hour, and many others
of different kinds, useful and pleasant.

These are therefore to give notice to all ingenious Persons, who are lovers of
Learning, that if they shall be pleased to advance to Gedeon Shaw Stationer, at
the foot of the Ladies steps, three pound Scots, for defraying the present
charges of the said Book, they shall have from him, betwixt the date hereof and
April next to come, one of the Copies: And for their further security in the
interim, the Authors obligation for performing the same. Edinburgh the 14. of
December 1671.

Which so exposed to my Masters the vanity of that confident man, that they
were forced plainly to let him know their mind, as is expressed in the first
Letter of his Postscript.

To this he returned an answer, which, though it as little deserved his
superlative commendation, as their censure, was abundantly discreet for
obliging them to silence, until his Book should come to light. But to show how
contrair to his nature this was, it quickly repented him of his discretion; and
a little after, without any such provocation, as he alleges, he alarmed this
place with a flood of his fury, whereof he discharges himself in the second
letter of his Postscript.

My Masters thought it unworthy of them to give any reply to this, lest by
engaging themselves in a debate with one who had nothing wherewith to entertain
them, except railing and calumnies, they had stained their reputation, and
gained to themselves nothing but the name of foolish persons, for speaking to a
fool in his folly: but I (to be ingenuous) having no much greater reputation
for learning then himself, was content to hazard it against him: and knowing
well his bragging humor to be such, as would make him insult and erect
Trophies, if nothing were replied, I sent to him a Letter, which, to my best
remembrance, was in the words following.

Sir, I admire ex^eedingly the forwardness of your humor (I will call it no
worse) in your last to --: he is a person not concerned in you or in your
books, neither will he ignorantly commend any thing, as it seems ye expected he
should have done, when ye sent him these papers. Ye might have known long ago,
that he had no veneration for what ye had formerly published* for he made no
secret of his mind, when he was put to it. Ye may mistake him, if ye think that
any by-end will cause him speak what he thinks not: nevertheless he delivered
your commission, and was willing to be inconcerned, expecting their answer.
They pressed him to know his judgment of your last piece: he told ingenuously
the truth, that there was none of them had less esteem for it then himself. He
hopes ye are so much a Christian, that ye will not be offended with him for
speaking what he thought, when he had a call to it; and yet, albeit ye seem to
favor him more then others, he has ground to look upon himself as one of the
Sophistical rabble, for they only are such who condemn any thing ye do, the rest
of the University continuing always learned persons. It is to no purpose to
apologize for themselves, ye take all for granted, which ye have heard: I shall
not put you to the pains of proving it; yet it seems ye would hardly have
believed it so easily, had not your conscience told you, that they had some
reason for their judgment, which really was this following: That they see
nothing in your last piece, new and great, (albeit it be Ars nova and magna)
save errors and nonsense; as your demonstrations of the Pendulum, your Nihil
spatiale, your Gravitas circularis and horizontalis; your question, Whether or
no a body may be condensed in a point? etc. too many to fill several letters:
for ye must not call experiments new inventions, otherwise we are all making
new inventions every day; neither must ye call different explications new
inventions, else the same thing might be invented by almost every Writer. I
admire how ye question the R. Society; for I desire to know one point of
doctrine, which ye or they either pretend to, concerning the weight of the air,
the spring of it, or any thing else in your book, save mistakes, which was not
received by all Mathematicians, and the most learned of Philosophers, many
years before any of you put pen to paper. Ye have been at much pains to prove
that by experiment, which all the learned already grant, and some have
demonstrat a priori from the principles of Geometry and Staticks, and many a
posteriori from experience, if sense may be called a demonstration: Yet ye are
the only man who produces the Ars nova and magna, when all others are out of
fashion. But more to your commendation, it seems ye do all these wonders by
Magic; for ye have the ordinair principles of none of these Sciences: Euclid
is as much a stranger, as reason in all your Books: and for this, Perque
Mathematicos semper celebrabere fastus! At last ye come to prove a new
doctrine, which before now was near 2000. years old, with thirty new Theorems,
which must not be named, because they are of such a tender and delicat
complexion, that the very naming of them will make them old. There are also
many other excellent things, which will be all new when they were printed but
yesterday. It is like, some of these days, we may have an Ars nova and magna,
to prove that a piece of lead is heavier then so much cork. I know not
wherefore ye undervalue any man, because he has not as great esteem for your
notions as your self: Have not we as much freedom to speak our mind of you, as
ye have to write yours of the R. Society, and the University of Glasgow? The
greatest hurt ye can do us, is to make Dromo famulus one of our Principals. I
think it not strange that ye using only demonstrations of sense, should admire
the force of our imagination, in affirming no method of Dyving so good as that
of Melgim. I am sure that the man dyving for a continual time, if he be not
also of your invention, must breath of the air; and this air must either be
kept close by it self, as in Melgims way, or communicate with the air above. If
the latter be your invention, I doubt ye must also have some Chirurgical
invention to apply to your Dyver at his return, if he go to any great deepness:
If the former, it is the same with Melgims; and you cannot, neither any man
else help it, but in circumstances (which alters not the method) and perchance
to little purpose. As for Archimedes, I am sure he wanted no necessary requisite
to prove the weight of water in its own Element. I know not what else ye intend
to prove: always I am as sure that he had two great requisits, which ye want;
to wit, Geometry, and a sound head. As to what ye write concerning the
imperfections of Sciences; the scientisical part of Geography is so perfected,
that there is nothing required for the projection, description and situation of
a place, which cannot be done and demonstrat. The scientifical part of Optics
is so perfected, that nothing can be required for the perfection of sight,
which is not demonstrat, albeit men's hands cannot reach it; and these being the
objects of the foresaid Sciences, your authority shall not persuade me, that it
is altogether improper to call them perfect. In the Hydrostaticks, it were no
hard matter to branch out all the Experiments that can be made, into several
Classes, of which the event and reason might presently be deduced, as
consectaries (I speak not here of long deductions, as ye seem to rant) to
something already published: if it be noticed but rudely (as ye, not
understanding what niceties of proportion means, must do) only considering
motion and rest: And I believe there is none ignorant of this, who understands
what is written in this Science. Upon this account writing to you, I might call
it perfect; albeit I know there are many things relating to the proportion and
acceleration of the motions of fluids, which are yet unknown, and may perchance
still be. Ye shall not think that I speak of you without ground; for in your Ars
magna and nova, ye bring in your great attempts for a perpetual motion; all
which a novice of eight days standing in Hydrostaticks would laugh at. I do not
question that this age has many advantages beyond former ages; but I know not
any of them, it is beholden to you for: only I admire your simplicity in this.
Astronomers seek always to have the greatest intervals betwixt observations,
and ye talk that ye will give an excellent way for observing the Sun or Moons
motion for a second of time; that is to say, as if it were a great matter that
there is but a second of time betwixt your observations. I wonder ye tell me
the eye should be added; for the invention had been much greater, had that been
away, I do confess that a good History of nature is absolutely the most requisite
thing for learning; but it is not like that you are sit for that purpose, who
so surely believe the Miracles of the West, as to put them in print; and record
the simple meridian altitudes of Comets, and that only to halfs of degrees, or
little more, as worth noticing. However, if ye do this last part concerning
Coal-sinks well, and all the rest be but an Ars magna and nova, ye may come to
have the repute of being more fit to be a Collier then a Scholar. Ye might have
let alone the precarious principles and imaginary wordles of Des Carts, until
your new inventions had made them so: For I must tell you, Des Carts valued
the History of Nature, as much as any experimental Philosopher ever did, and
perfected it more with judicious experiments, then ye will by all appearance do
in ten ages. Ye are exceedingly misinformed, if ye have heard that any here
have prejudice or envy against you; for there is none here speaks of you but
with pity and commiseration: neither heard I ever of any man who commended you
for what he understood. As for your Latin Sentences, if they be not applied to
your self. I understand them not; for here we are printing no Books, we are not
sending tickets through the Country to tell the wonders we can do: We are
going about the employments we are called to, and strive to give a reason for
what we say. Where then are our doli and fallaciae, tabulae and testes,
sapientia ad quam putamus nos pervenisse? etc. In these things ye publish, ye
know there is no Sophistry, but clear evidence: If ye had done such great
matters in Universale and ens rationis, ye might have had a shift; but here ye
must either particularize your inventions, or otherwise demonstrat your self
derogatory to the credit of the Nation: For what else is it to confound R.
Societies and Universities with an Ars magna and nova; and yet when ye were put
to it in print, to show your inventions, all ye could say was, that the
publisher should have reflected upon the wisdom of the Creator, etc. so that
the Poet said well of Democrites, etc. of which I understand not the sense,
except ye make your self the summus vir, and us all the Verveces. I suppose
this may be the great credit that ye say ye have labored to gain to your
Nation; to wit, to get us all the hornable title of Wedders. No more at
present, but hoping this free and ingenuous Letter shall have a good effect upon
you (for I am half persuaded, that the flattery of scorners and ignorants, has
brought you to this height of imaginary learning) and that when ye come to your
self, ye will thank me for my pains. I rest,

Your humble servant.


After this I had no notice of him or his Book, until a copy of it came to my
hands: which, when I had opened it, I found dedicat to a Noble Person; whose
very name being there, did creat in me a greater respect for the Book, then I
thought my self capable of for any of the Authors works; and made me fear some
finer things in this, then any other of his Books would suffer me to expect.
For having known his Lordship an ornament to this Place, when his Virtue was
but in blossom, I have easily given credit to that universal testimony, which
reports him to have gained to himself an high esteem among Strangers, by those
excellencies, which are the glory of his Family and Name; and therefore I could
not but apprehend this present, offered to his Lordship on so solemn a day, to
be something extraordinar.

But having read over his Theorems, I admired the presumptuous arrogance of the
Author, in concerning the authority of so Noble a Name in so worthless a
trifflle: And having returned to the Dedication, to see what he said for
himself, I justified his first application for Pardon, that he had prefixed his
Lordships Name to the bastle and abuse of a Noble subject. Then I considered
the motives of the Dedication, and found them great; yea so great, that I
wonder they did not fright him from so daring an attempt: For his Lordship, I
hope, has not given security to Strangers abroad, that he might draw upon
himself injury from his Contrymen at home; his virtues have not made an
Italian shelter under his Patrociny, that this bold Scribler might be
encouraged to send his Lordship through the world, as a Protector of falsehood,
and countenancer of such as cannot handle truth without corrupting and defiling
it. Could not his Lordships Heroic virtues, and understanding mind; could not
the learning and other excellent endowments of his Lordships Father,
Grandfather, and Great-Grand-father; could not the Dignity of their famous
Ancestors, and the Antiquity of their Illustrious Family, preserve him from the
importunity of this impudent man, who will needs enlighten his dark ignorance
with the splendour of his Lordships Name? Was not his Lordships being an
encouragement to learning, sufficient to have kept this arrogant pretender
there o, from soliciting his Lordships authority, to his folly and infirmity?
Surely, when he adressed this Book, he either little considered his Lordships
abilities to judge thereof, or else he intended to court his friendship and
affection, for a defense against the power of his understanding; and if he gain
his design, he has reason to say, that his Lordships goodness is proportioned
to his other accomplishments.

After this view of the Dedication, I went through the rest of the Book unto
the Postscript, where I find mention made of the Letter which I sent to the
Author, who was wiser then to print it, lest thereby he had published his own
shame; but he lets it not pass without a cast of his craft: For finding that by
it his ignorance is discovered, he foams and rages, he is troubled in spirit,
because he is disturbed in the exercise of his Art; that is, because he is not
permitted to call other men's truths, his own, and his own falsehoods and
follies, rare and useful truths, and obtrude them upon the world as such; and
being fettered with that reason which opposes him, he, in the bitterness of
his spirit, vomits out his spite against her, calling her Sophistry,
Nonsense, and whatever his anger suggests to him: and breathing nothing but
revenge, he calls together his choicest virtues Fury, Malice, and Boldness; and
having got them to join with his Ignorance, he endeavors by these united
forces, to uphold his cause: Nor was any of them wanting to him, as may appear
from their particular achievements, which are remarkable in that review of my
Letter, which summeth up his Postscript; and in sum, equally betrays his
Insufficiency and Insincerity. For therein he treats the Masters of this
University so unworthily, (as he had done in the second Letter of his
Postscript, in answer to that Gentleman, who, by direction, wrote unto him
their mind) that I know nothing like it, except the spirit of its Author, and
that entertainment which he in the Preface to his Ars magna, and page 472.
gives to the late Archbishop of Glasgow (who had been most kind to him) and
Masters of the College there, in which some then were, and yet are, who may be
his teachers in any thing he pretends to.

But this Postscript does not sufficiently discover the Authors vortues, and
therefore he spends a part of his first Epistle to the Reader, in such flat and
vulgar railings, as prove him fitter for nothing, then to hold the principality
among the Street-scolders. And moreover, that the provocation may be complete,
he gives a formal appeal to any who dare state himself his adversary: and makes
such ostentation of his strength and courage, that, rather then want a
combatant, he will purchase one with gold; for he offers a Guiny for every
Theorem which shall be everted, either in this, or his last Book. And such is
his generosity, that I cannot doubt, but he will also be as noble in requiting
the labor of any, who shall give him some Tyrocinia, whereby he may correct his
discovered errors.

Sure I am, there may be as much gained here as would tempt my Adversary once
again, to blot a great many sheets of paper, if to boot, he could be assured of
a Crown, or Rix-dolar, or (rather then lose his market) a Legged-dolar, for
every Book that should stand himself no more then two Merks.

Now, Reader, I am confident thou thinks me further engaged after all these
provocations, then that I can retreat with honor; and so think I my self: And
therefore I have accepted my Adversaries Challenge. I have examined all his
Books: I have weighed them in the balance of reason, and have found them so
light, that they deserve no better name then Vanity. I have displayed the
Authors infirmity and folly in every one of them, without other design then to
protect my Country, and particularly all such as he endeavors to concern in
his Writings, from the mean thoughts and misapprehensions of those who have no
other character of both, then they receive from them.

Yet in this Review I have not displayed all the enormities of this Arrogant
pretender to Knowledge; for this should have made my Book swel as far above a
just measure, as his Arrogance and Insolence is above every thing, except his
Ignorance; seeing, every period of his Writings is either pregnant with
falsehood; or if it contain a truth, which he has taken from some other, his
probation thereof is either from false principles, or management so silly and
childish, as makes it appear ridiculous. Neither have I taken notice of all the
impertinencies whereof he is guilty, lest thereby I had hazarded the reputation
of my good nature: But I have only exposed some of his grosser failings, to let
the world know, that he has not so much wit, as himself presumes; and
discovered his inveterat malice, to undeceive those who think him a man of much
sincerity.

And this I have done with so much evidence and demonstration, that I fear not
thy censure, if thou be intelligent: Not have I sent this book to your hands,
under any other Patricony, then that of Reason; for she is able to reco^mend it
to the favor of my Friends, and protect it from the Fury and Malice of my
enemies. But if it were not, that the meanness of my person and station should
have made my adress as indecent, as the naughtiness of my Adversaries Present
made his, I would have offered it (as a testimony of my humble duty, and
sincere respect) to that Noble Person, to whom he has dedicat his
Hydrostaticks; and as earnestly have solicited his Understanding to judge of my
Truths, as my Adversary has done his Lordships Friendship to accept, his
Favor to protect, and his Name and Authority to convoy his Falsehoods through
the world. Nor should I either have precipitated or suspended my adress for
finding so craving an opportunity, as the day of his Lordships Birth and
Majority.

From my Chamber in S. Andrews, the 24. day of July 1672.
THE GREAT AND NEW ART OF WEIGHING VANITY.
AS in combating, each party first intends his own defense, and in the second
place only prepares an assault for his Antagonist: So I, before I make any
attempt on my Adversaries other Writings, shall endeavor to wipe off that dirt
which he has thrown upon me, in the Postscript and Preface to his Hydrostatics.

I think it no wonder that my Adversary has suppressed that Letter of mine,
which he mentions in his Postscript, and I have printed in my Preface; for
this gives him the greater liberty to belie it; which he does most splendidly,
when he says, that it is full of barbarous railings, passing all bounds of
civility against himself, friends, and works: (whereas there is not a word of
his friends in it: and what is therein said of his Works, the following
Treatise will manifest, if it deserve the name of barbarous railings.) Nor is
it strange to see one who wants truth on his side, make lies his refuge: But he
may henceforth look for the common infelicity of liars, not to be believed, if
he shall chance to stumble upon truth.

I had reason to fall upon his Ars magna, etc. because I judge ex ungue Leonem,
or rather, ex cauda Catum. Nor should the bare title have been past by, because
it is arrogant and false, as shall be made to appear in its own place. I am
unjustly in this compared to blind Vejento; for he had the beast but at one
hand; but to whatever hand I turn me, I find the beast there. And because my
Adversary complains, that I have only snarled at the horse heels, I shall
henceforth endeavor to pull the Ass from the sadle.

I excuse my Adversary for not interpreting his Latin verses, because they were
sent him from -- without interpretation.

I am obliged to his esteem, in supposing me a Master in an University. He was
never judged worthy of that dignity here: and by his ingratitude to Glasgow, he
has proven himself unworthy ever to have had it there, or any where else. And
I wonder, that judging me a Master here, he should think strange that I am not
so Pedantick, as (in imitation of him) to stuff my Letter with Latin Sentences
altogether impertinent to our debate; and which in his Letter, and his review
of mine, serve for nothing so much as to express his malice and virulency. Yea,
there be two things which I think more then strange inconsideratness in him.
The first is, that he accuses me for not writing pertinent language in my
Mother tongue; whereas in the very next page he writes, He has done as the Ape
did, that thrust the Cats foot into the fire, because he durst not do it
himself; whereof, if he or -- make good sense and Grammar, I shall give him back
one of those Guinies which I am to have for everting his Theorems.

The other is, that he should challenge an Vniversity-man for writing a Letter
without a Latin Sentence, whereas he has written Volums of Mathematics,
without ever (for any thing I have yet seen) citing a Classick Mathematician,
except once Euclid Prop. 24. lib. 1. El. Geom. in the 265. page of his
Hydrostaticks, and that erroneously. For Euclid has two sides in one triangle
equal to two in another, and our Author has only one side in each triangle.
This is like the Tarsel of a Mathematician.

I had reason to ask, Where are our doli and fallaciae, tabulae and testes,
sapientia ad quam putamus nos pervenisse? For, first, none here being further
concerned then in answering his importunat Letter, desiring the Universities
encouragement for printing his Hydrostaticks; how could any so much as dream,
that a man in his right wits, should provoke others to overthrow the title of a
Book Tabulis and testibus, after he had once refused to let them know any part
of what was contained in the Book? And yet this Author has done it, as he
himself testifies in the 310. page. Sure no other would, for this dexterous wit
is peculiar to him. But good Sir Sciole, let me tell you, it had been as great
wisdom, either still to have concealed your great knowledge, or else to have
kept up your provocations, whereby you should have saved me from the trouble of
producing proof and witness against you, and your self from the shame of being
convicted guilty of both Ignorance and Insolence by them: For I assure you,
that before your Indiscreet Challenges, I had no design to expose the folly of
your arrogant pretenses, and the contemptible infirmity of your acquittances,
otherwise I might have drawn very lucky instances of both from your Ars magna
and nova, etc.

Secondly, before he charged upon the Masters here his doli and fallaciae,
there was nothing which could be a ground for it, seeing all that had past, was
his Letter desiring their concurrence to the printing of his Book, and their
answer, wherein they declare their mind with much candor and calmness. And he
tacitly acknowledges the injustice of his challenge, in answering my question
from that Letter in which the question it self is contained: For it is against
both Reason and Religion, first to calumniat, and then to justify the calumny
from something posterior thereto; and it is yet the worse in him, that he does
it by an untruth, in alleging my letter to have another design, then any,
except himself, can discern; nor would he see it, if any other thing could be
found to excuse his malicious reflections upon persons of known integrity.

Thirdly, there are none among those whom he reproacheth, who have been so long
at his School, as to learn either arrogantly to pretend to the knowledge of
those things to which they are strangers; or vainly to fancy themselves knowing
in that whereof they are ignorant.

After this, my Author proceeds in such a strain as would almost proyoke
Meekness her self to make a Satyr. But it is so pitiful, that it cannot excuse
a serious answer from being impertinent; and therefore I pass it, without
suffering my self to digress into Satyrick reflections upon his vanity therein.
Only I beg his liberty, that since he has made me the Cat, I may henceforth,
without offending him, catch the Rat as often as he comes in my way.

Now my Adversary susficiently animat with rage, prepares himself for making a
furious assault upon some passages of my letter, about perfection of Sciences,
and begins it very learnedly, by bringing in the Historical part of Geography,
as a part of the Science of Geography; which is as good Logic, as if he had
said, that black is a part of white, because they are both colors. But that he
may the better understand this, I tell him, that Geography simpliciter is not a
Science: for a great part of it is only History: and I cannot suppose him so
ignorant, as not to know that Science and History (albeit all learning, as
almost all things else, receive their denomination from the most noble part)
are very different: Especcially in Mathematics, where the scientifical part is
firm and Geometrical, and the Historical part subject to the weakness of our
senses; the one consisting in Methods and Demonstrations, the other in
Practices and Observations. All these things he here mentions, and thousands
more, can be done by sure and Scientifick Methods, and therefore are perfected
in so far as they are a Science; except only the measuring the height of the
Sea above the Earth; and this I think can only be done by himself, to whom it
is easy to make Rivers run upwards, and so to work many wonders in
Hydrostaticks. I am sure that any person who understands Logic, will find by
these, that my Adversary has triumphed before the victory, and has unjustly
called my argument a Fallacy, while he had only reason to call it a Caption,
since he was caught thereby.

He next falls upon the Optics, where after he has vapored a little, to no
other purpose then to display his Pedantry, and discover his dislike of modest
expressions, he asks a question which proves him a stranger to this part of
learning. But that he may reap some instruction from this debate, let him know
that the Optics has scientifically so far perfected the sight, that it
demonstrateth this Theorem: In all Telescops, as the focus from the eye glass
is to the distance of the focus from the object glass, so is the simple
appearance of the object to the appearance of the same through the Telescope.
And therefore if the distance from the focus to the eye glass be one inch, and
the distance of the focus from the object glass 100000, the object will appear
100000. times longer or broader by help of the Telescope, then to the simple
eye: Or with this Telescope you may see as well at 100000. miles distance, as
with the simple eye at one: If the glasses (or rather mirrours, because they
lose no rays, and have caeteris partibus, all one determinat reflection) be
sufficiently large, and of the true Geometrical figure. By the same method, the
demonstrative, or scientifick part, teaches us to see at any finit distance,
as if it were three foot or less. The like consideratis considerandis, is true
in Microscops and Scotoscops also. If our Author do question this rule, he shall
find it in Escinardi Optica, and in the Philosophical Transactions, page 4005.
as also in others before them both. It is like if he had known it, he had
spoken better sense in his New Optical experiment.

He is mistaken in saying, that it is not known how the sight is made; for it
is done by bringing all the rays coming from one point of the visible always
to one point of the retina. It was never motioned by any learned man (since the
Optics came to this perfection) that any brutes yet known, should see
otherwise then men: Fishes indeed, because of the dense medium they live in,
have their crystalline rounder; and nightbeasts, such as Cats and Owls, their
uvea larger: yea, many other particulars there are, of which the Optics do
evidently demonstrat the reason.

Our Author might have remembered since he was a Professor of Philosophy, that
lights and colors are qualities, at least according to him; and therefore not
the object of any Mathematical Science, which is always quantity.

Reflection and Refraction were fully handled by Des Carts; for it is out of
doubt, That the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reslexion, and the
sines of the angles of incidence proportional to the sines of the refracted
angles. Infraction, is the same with Refraction, and therefore impertinently
repeated.

It is no wonder the Lord Verulam was not of my mind; for he died before the
time of Des Carts, who brought the Optics to this perfection. But it is no
small wonder to find a man pretending so highly to learning, as our Author does,
and yet print himself a stranger to the progress thereof.

It is true indeed that M. Newtown has discovered an inconvenience in
Refractions, which was not formerly known, and that therefore Metallin Mirrours
are more proper then glasses: but this has not added any thing to that
universal rule I presently mentioned, which scientifically brings the sight
to any degree of perfection, and holds in these Telescops, as well as in all
others: yea, these Telescops were known before, only their advantage above
others was not known.

What he says of M. Hook, is most improper: seeing there he only promises to
accomplish or bring to practice what hitherto has been attempted, or by all
most desired; not at all mentioning the Science, which our Author questions.

Let any man consider the vast extent of that rule, and think what can be more
large. I do not question that there may be many excellent and subtle inventions
for promoting sight, as to practice: but I am sure the scientifick part cannot
make the sight infinitely perfect, and it has already brought it to any degree
of finit perfection.

He flatters himself that he has gained the victory, as to the Hydrostaticks:
but upon what account, may be seen in my Letter; which being written in private,
only for dissuading him from making himself ridiculous, and for curing him of
his blind presumption, was framed to his capacity, and not for the learned
world. And seeing it was necessar, because of the importunity of his Letters, to
signify to him, that this Science was already perfected, as to all these
things whereof he is capable; it was more civily and respectfully spoken, to
say, that the Hydrostaticks were already perfected, then to say, that they were
further perfected then he could reach.

Our Author should know that all mixed Mathematical Sciences, are nothing else
but Geometrical Demonstrations, founded upon some Physical Experiment: So that
Geometry, to speak properly, is the only Science in Mathematics, and their
only storehouse for rules, methods, reasons and inventions: It is certainly
defective in several things; but these are far above our Authors conception.

He next strives to persuade the unlearned, that he has first taught
Astronomers the use of Telescops and Pendulum clocks; but I leave this to the
examination of his experiments. Yet I must not pass that which he desires the
Reader to mark; to wit, my nonsense, in saying, That the invention of
representing the Sun or Moons motion in a second of time, had been greater, if
the eye had been away. And I entreat the Reader to mark as well, how M.
Sinclars dullness makes him impute his own nonsense to me: for in his printed
Letter Feb. 22. he challenged as a great neglect, that the Eye is not added in
an expression of a former Letter; as if any could have dreamed that the
observation might be without the eye; to which I answered, That the invention
had been greater, if the eye had been away: and surely so it had: Nor could
this have escaped M. Sinclar, if he had not wanted his eyes; but his blindness
has made him stumble upon my expression: and because he could not bruise it
with his fall, he has lashed me for his own fault. Surely this discipline is
very near in kind to his doctrine, for they are both unreasonable.

I have nothing to say against his miracles in the West, especially that grand
one of the Sun seen in Winter for an hour about midnight, eight degrees above
the Horizon: except, that it is only mentioned in his Book; no man, I ever
spoke to, having heard of it; although I know many who have been in the place
mentioned, and very inquisitive concerning it. Besides, that laying one aside,
it far surpasses all miracles of the heavenly bodies, recorded in facred
History.

If our Author think that he was well exercised, when he was making his
observations of the Comet, he should judge a part of his time well spent, in
letting the world know for what they served: but he seems to intend no more;
then to make men believe, that he is not ignorant of a degree or a minut, although
he reckons the Suns motion by inches.

I question not, that a Coal-hewer is more useful to the Country then he and I
both: and therefore he is obliged to me, for giving him a more useful trade,
then he now drives. Nor can I deny, but he justly deserved it; for a
Coal-hewer is one who makes gain by digging in another man's mine; and so has
he done; for that History of Coal which he has printed, is none of his, although
he has made advantage by the publishing and sale thereof. But this is no great
wonder, since the most part of the truths contained in his writings, are dug
out of other men's works. And that the Author of this History may not escape the
fate of others with whom he makes so bold, he mixeth with his doctrine, some
mistakes of his own, and particularly that erroneous application of Euclid
above mentioned in page 4. of this Book.

Now my Lords and Gentlemen, who are Coal-masters, I pray you consider how
unjustly M. Sinclar inferrs, that I design for you no better name then I have
given to him; and how maliciously he thereby endeavors to creat in you a
prejudice against me. I highly esteem and honor all such whose knowledge and
virtue makes useful, and ornaments to their Country. But pardon me, that I
suffer not M. Sinclar to usurp to himself the name of a Philosopher for writing
this History, (although it were his own) since he wants the Science of Coal; for
it is not History, but Science, that makes the Philosopher.

I need not concern my self much in his censure of Des Carts; for he is as far
exalted above my commendation, as he is without the reach of M. Sinclars
detracting tongue.

He may well say, that he is not afraid I shall come the length of his labors
in Glasgow College, about Universal, and Ensrationis; for in his last Logic
Notes, he has thirty sheets of paper upon Genus and Objectum Logicae,
Universal and the Praedicables; which falsifies the first sentence of the
Epistle to the Reader of his Ars Magna.

He might have holden his peace of Rhetorical and Algebraical composition and
resolution; for he knows no more of either but the name. If he had read this
part of my Letter right, he would have had some other fancies, then he here
expresses; as I should show, were not this too sheepish a subject to be
insisted upon.

It is true that a Letter was sent to M. Sinclar, containing the words which he
printeth; but it is as true, that the same Letter contained the condition of
that promise which he there mentions; to wit, If he made it appear that his
Book were answerable to his Edict. The concealing of this is so great a proof
of his candor and ingenuity, that infallibly it will procure credit to any
thing he affirms.

Now this Good Man having spent many of his spirits in this tempestuous
conflict, is oppressed with drowsiness; and having fallen asleep, he dreams all
the rest of his Postscript. For I am sure there is not one in this University,
who ever either had his name in an Almanac, or craved any man pardon upon such
an account.

I have seen the Pamphlet he speaks of with the Advertisement to the Reader,
and found nothing in it of any ingenious Gentleman Artist, set upon inhumanely
as by two Mastives; but some Printer checked for playing the Astronomer
unhandsomly, and that under a borrowed name, for to make his Prognostication
the more vendible; a practice too ordinar. Our Author here talking of two,
judges this business to be of the same difficulty with that of D. Mores butter
Scon, which could not be sufficiently fenced from the violence of the Air, by
less then the Syllogistical force of two bold brethren.

However, if there be any errors in that Almanac, he bewrays his ignorance in
passing them; while he lets a fling at the mistake of a Table, and at some
Chronological Rhymes, things of no importance. For the first, it may be imputed
to a piece of rashness, occasioned perhaps by the obscurity of that Tables
explication, but not to ignorance; seeing such triffles, as Tobacco-boxtables,
and Pocket instruments, which produce nothing, but what can be better done
without them, conduce not to knowledge: And therefore no reproach for a man to
be ignorant of them, being contrived only for Mechanics, and such sensible
Demonstrators as my Adversary is. As for the Rhymes, I suppose there is as
little necessity of thinking the Author of them, and of the Almanac, to be the
same, as of judging the new and unheard of Hydrostatical Theorems, and the
bundle of Latin Sentences in the reply to my Letter, to have been tursed by the
same hand*

I have no regard for Rhymes, and yet for recreation, I must take notice of our
Authors two Criticisms; whereof one is, the two last lines exceed the former in
a foot, contrare to that of Horace, Primum ne medio, etc.

Consult our English Poets, Sir, what weight this authority has with them. The
other is: It should not have been said, Since that of naught the Lord created
man. But, Since that of dust, etc. Pray you, Sir, is this sound Philosophy; and
if it be, how taught you your Scholars, Cap. 7. de Causalitatib. Cause. Prim.
Creatio est actio causae primae, quares primo ex nihilo producuntur? But who
then can this Prognosticor be? It is very probable, from the rabble of
Astrology, (for there is none of that profession among us) that he is my
Antagonists Apocalyptical Astrologue, who Lib. 6. Dial. Phys. 3. Sect. 1.
besides his Astrological Predictions, and Prophesies out of the Old Testament,
did from the Revelation of S. John, with great zeal declare many, and these
even wonderful things, concerning the number of the Beast 666. and the
Alphabetical letters A. B. I. S. of great affinity with it. The mystery of
these must not be revealed, lest it occasion the discovery of that divine
Astrologue.

There is little heat here about Ens rationis; that crack-brain'd knave has
evanished, together with his Cousin-germain M. Sinclars dearly beloved Forma
substantialis materialis. For ought I know, they have got in to his Nihil
spatiale, to erect a College of Fanatic Philosophers.

I Am now to examine his Epistle to the Reader, where he complains
exceedingly of Envy, because the Masters of this University would not take his
word for the novelty of his inventions: Nevertheless he must grant (if he will
be ingenuous) that they have done him a courtesy, in causing him prefix a more
modest Title to his Book, then his Edict carries.

He wrongs M. Boil egregiously, in causing him say generally, that Archimedes's
Demonstrations have more of Geometrical subtility then usefulness; whereas he
says only (in the Preface to his Hydrostatical Paradoxes) that many of his
Hydrostatical Propositions have more of Geometrical subtility then usefulness.
It were nonsense to speak so of Demonstrations, seeing their only use is to
prove the thing in question: which if they do, they cannot be called useless;
and if they do it not, they cannot be called Demonstrations.

Our Author now compares his method with that of Archimedes's forsooth. He is
more speculative, our Author is more practical. So may a Trone-lord say:
Archimedes was more speculative in his Staticks, and he more practical. Next
Archimedes's Demonstrations are Geometrical, and his Physical. That is to say,
Archimedes's reasons are sure and solid, and his are conjectures: And then
Archimedes's Demonstrations are but for the use of a few, and these for the use
of all. He might truly have added, And for all uses, except to convince; which
is the proper use of a Demonstration. As for his last comparison, Archimedes
was more wise then to illustrat that in his Book, which any mean man might do,
and was already demonstrated. But our Author needs not imagine, that a rational
man will venture any surprising Demonstration to the world, without practicing
it, if he can: yet there was no necessity that he should swel his Book with it.
I say the like of Stevinus, in whose Demonstrations, I am not afraid our
Philosopher show any defect, nevertheless that he be pleased to speak at random.

He begins now to tell the strange things he has invented. And first, he
says, that he considers the pressure of the water with the pressure of the
air jointly. Can our Author be so ignorant, that he knows not the arise of the
Toricellian experiment? Was it not from the consideration of Pumps and other
Hydrostatical machines, that they had no effect above 33. or 34. foot? Was it
not considered here by Galilaeus, that water pressed water no further then its
own level; and it was probable, the weight of the Air might press it up the
rest of the way (seeing it was not much) which it ascended in the Pump? Upon
this account, he projected the experiment first in water, (where was considered
the pressure of Water and Air jointly) and afterward Toricellius perfected it
in Quicksilver, judging rationally, that the great weight of the fluid by
shortning the tube, would facilitat the experiment. In M. Boyls continuation of
Physico-Mechanical Experiments, Exper. 13. 14. 15. Does he not consider the
pressure of both together? Yea, is there any intelligent man who now speaks of
a Pump, or any Hydrostatical engine, without considering both these pressures
together?

All these counterposings, which he speaks of, have been tried by M. Boil, and
also many more; to wit, oil of Turpentine, and oil of Tartar, etc. but if our
Author please, he may try it yet with Ale, Beer, Urine, etc. and all these shall
be new Experiments. He should have been more general in these trials, and more
particular in the mysteries and secrets of the Art which he has discovered,
and none else can get notice of. Archimedes asserts the weights of all fluids
in general, and consequently of the Air, if it be a fluid, which the Learned
never yet denied: Yea, Archimedes's Co^mentator Rivaltus (who died long before
the Toricellian experiment) mentions the Air and its weight.

That assertion of M. Boil is true at present, and will constantly be so,
suppose every man alive print such Volums as our Author has done. However, the
learned Doctor Wallace has published a Book not long ago, notwithstanding all
our Authors invention; in which he deduceth more then ever our Author shall know
of the Hydrostaticks, as consectaries from one proposition.

Now, Reader, I stay no longer here to consider my Adversaries indiscreet
railings and provocations; for this were unworthy both of you and me: But that
you may know, that I am a man of my word, I proceed to the survey of his works,
as I promised in my Preface. And I am not a little encouraged to this, by the
hope of gaining as many Guinies, as may help that pitiful poverty, wherewith he
upbraideth me.

But lest he think that the Problem which his Brother proposes concerning the
bringing up from the bottom of the Sea, any weight that can be sunk therein,
has bougled me, I think fit to give thee here three several answers thereto.

First then, for effectuating that which is there proposed, you shall take the
new invention, called, The Dyving Ark, one so large that it requires a greater
weight to sink it down, then the Pondera demersa: which being sunk down near to
the Pondera demersa, the Dyver must first bind them to the Dyving Ark, and then
loose away the weight which did sink it: Now the Pondera demersa, being ex
hypothesi, lighter then the weight which was sufficient to keep the Ark at the
bottom, must of necessity be pressed up with the Ark by the water: and the
nearer it comes to the brim, the motion will be the swifter, not only for the
acceleration of the motion, but also because the Air dilateth it self, and (as
I determinat in my Examination of this dyvink Ark) the Ark is pressed upward
with as much force, as the quantity of water equaling the included Air, would
cause by its weight in the Air. But if the Inventer will take my word upon it,
his Ark must be stronger then a Wine glass, and without holes in the bottom:
nay, it must not have a Glass window of a foot in square, at least not near the
bottom. And if the Pondera demersa be great, when he has done his utmost, in
case the bottom of the new Invention get out, you may have supply from the old
Hydrostaticks: Thus,

You shall take at a low water, some great strong tuns banded with iron, so many
of them, that being all full of water, they are heavier then the Pondera
demersa in the water; that is to say, that the weight of all these tuns full of
water, may weigh more then the Pondera demersa, having rebated from their
weight, the weight of their quantity of water. These tuns being all emptied and
exactly closed, and iron chains or strong ropes tied to their iron bands, let
the Dyver go down in his Bell, and bind these chains or ropes (all the tuns may
be fastened to one chain) to the Pondera demersa, as near as may be; and the
rising water shall lift the Pondera demersa from the ground; which being once
done, they are easily drawn any where. If the Pondera strike on the ground, at
the next low water stent the chains as much as ye can.

I suppose any man who tries these ways, will be best pleased with this, which
has been known these many ages: seeing it is far easier to multiply tuns, then
to make a vast bulk of an Ark, with a bottom proportionably strong, to resist
the pressure of the water, and to be troubled with a weight sufficient to
demerge the same. These two Answers I have got from my two brethren the
inferior Bedals, who are as fertile in affording satisfactory answers, as my
Adversaries Brother is in starting subtle questions. If it be objected against
the last of these two Methods, that it can only be practiced where the sea
ebbeth and flows, I give you a third.

Take two ships (any of which is sufficient to raise the Pondera demersa) the
one deep loadned with stones, or any such thing, the other altogether empty.
Bind the loadned ship as near as may be to the Pondera demersa (which may be
easily done by the help of the Dyving Bell) and then liver her into the other
which was empty: This livered ship shall raise the Pondera demersa from the
ground, which afterward may be easily drawn any where. And if perchance they
strike on the ground in the drawing, let them be bound again to the new loadned
vessel, doing as formerly. This method, I suppose, you will find in Vitruvius,
who is a very old Writer; and yet if M. Sinclar had given it, it is like, he
would have listed it amongst his new Inventions, as he did Riccioli's erroneous
argument against the motion of the Earth.

Hitherto I have been employed in parreing those thrusts which M. Sinclar gives
in at me, through all the Postscript, and part of the Preface to his
Hydrostaticks: It is now high time for me to prepare an assault for him, this
being a part of my Province: and in forming it, I shall make use of no weapon,
but Reason: hoping from it, better success, then my Adversary has had; and the
rather, because he is so great a stranger to it.

The first shall be upon his Hydrostaticks, because that began the debate. The
second upon his Ars nova and magna, because of the reproaches my Masters have
sustained for their just censure of it. And the last assault shall be upon his
Tyrocinia, which indeed is more blameless then the rest, being freest from
errors, and more consonant to its title; yet albeit it had no name prefixed,
it could not but sufficiently discover the Tyro and the Great and New Artist,
to be all one. All this shall be done in the proper language of each Book, that
every work, and its examination, may be understood by the same Reader: And so I
begin with the Hydrostaticks.

AN EXAMINATION OF M. SINCLAR'S Hydrostaticks.
Non equidem hoc fludeo, bullatis ut mea nugi^
Pagina turgescat, dare pondus idonea fumo.
Secreti loquimur: --
Pers. THat I had sufficient reason to quarrel the offer of thirty new and
unheard of Hydrostatical Theorems, shall appear from the examination of this
Treatise; whereof all that is true, (for a considerable part of it is false and
ridiculous) is the same with the doctrine of Archimedes and Stevinus, in the
following Propositions: only our Authors doctrine is more loose, and less
precise.

As for what he has written concerning the Bensil of fluids, generally
applied, is false; seeing no Bensil has hitherto been perceived in any fluid,
except Air. And seeing the doctrine of the spring of the Air, is called by most
of Authors, and particularly by M. Sinclar himself, Aerostaticks: I think not
my self obliged to reduce it to the writings of Archimedes and Stevinus, who
wrote only Hydrostaticks properly so called: yet in that subject also, (where
he speaks truth) I shall in its due place trace him in Aerostatical Writers
extant before him.

In the review of this Tractat, I shall, for my hires sake, begin with the
Theorems; and afterward take notice of a few things in the Observations and
Experiments.

. 1. The Theorems reviewed, whereof a great part are proven false, others
ridiculous, and the rest not new.
I Shall here at once discover the falsity and ridiculousness of a considerable
part of our Authors Theorems, and reduce the rest to these following
Propositions of Archimedes and Stevinus.

Archimedis Positio 1.
Ponatur humidi eam esse naturam, ut, partibus ipsius aequaliter jacentibus and
continuatis inter sese, minus pressa a magis pressa expellatur. Vnaquaeque
autem pars ejus premitur humido supra ipsam existente ad perpendiculum, si
humidum sit descendens in aliquo aut ab alio aliquo pressum.

Prop. 2.
Omnis humidi consistentis atque manentis superficies Sphaerica est, cujus
centrum est idem quod centrum terrae.

Prop. 5.
Solidarum magnitudinum quaecunque levior humido fuerit demissa in humidum
manens, usque eo demergetur, ut tanta moles humidi, quanta est partis demersae,
eandem quam tota magnitudo gravitatem habeat.

Prop. 6.
Solidae magnitudines humido leviores in humidum impulsae, sursum feruntur
tanta vi, quanto humidum molem habens magnitudini aequalem, gravius est ipsa
magnitudine.

Prop. 7.
Solidae magnitudines humido graviores demissae in humidum, ferentur deorsum,
donec descendant: Et erunt in humido tanto leviores, quanta est gravitas humidi
molem habentis solidae magnitudini aequalem.

Stevini Postul. 3.
Pondus a quo vas minus alte deprimitur, levius; quo altius, gravius; quo aeque
alte, aequipondium esse.

Prop. 5.
Corpus solidum materiae levioris quam aqu^ cui innatat, pondere aequale est
tantae aquae moli, quanta suae parti demergitur.

Prop. 8.
Corpus solidum in aqua levius est quam in aere, pondere aquae magnitudine sibi
aequalis.

Prop. 10.
Aquae fundo horizonti parallelo tantum insidet pondus, quantum est aquae
columnae cujus basis fundo, altitudo perpendiculari ab aquae superficie summa
ad imam demissae aequalis sit.

Now, Reader, consider well these Propositions: my Authors Theorems; and my
Censure, which is this.

His first two are no Theorems; but only Suppositions. And the third, a sort of
a definition, or rather, aliquid gratis dictum.

The fourth, as he wordeth it, is false: for a broad fluid counterpoyseth more
then a narrower; seeing a cylinder of Mercury one inch thick and twenty-nine
inches high, counterpoyseth a cylinder of Air of the same thickness, and of the
altitude of the Atmosphere: and one two inches thick with the former height,
counterpoyseth four times as much Air. As he explicateth it, it is true, and
the same with Archimedes's second Proposition; for the Demonstration holds,
suppose ye divide the fluid by several pipes, if they have intercourse.

Here he makes a mystery of a very easy thing: for one pillar of water being
ten times thicker then another of the same height, and consequently an hundred
times heavier, has no more effect then the other; for because of its base, it
has an hundred times as much resistance. And it is most clear, that if the
resistance be proportional to the pressure, the effect must constantly be the
same.

His fifth, is a part of Archimedes's first position.

His sixth also; for Archimedes's expulsion hindered with equal resistance on
all sides, he calls, Pressure on every side. I suppose he will hardly affirm,
that this lateral pressure was not known before him; seeing Stevinus does
demonstrat, how much it is upon any plain howsoever inclining, in his Prop. 11.
12. 13. which our Author cannot do yet; at least, there is nothing in his Book
either so subtle or useful.

His seventh is the same with the last part of Stevinus's third Postulatum.

The eight is manifestly false, (if fluids have a Bensil, as he supposes,
Prop. 17. 19.) which I demonstrat from his own figure thus. The first foot E
having one degree of weight, and the second foot I having equal quantity or
dimension, and being lower then E, must have more weight; (according to his
17.) let it therefore have 1 degrees of weight: then the weight of both these
must be 2. Now the third foot N, being of equal quantity with I, and lower,
must (according to his 17.) have more gravity then it has; (to wit, 1) let it
therefore have 2. degrees; and then the weight of all three is 4 degrees: but
1. 2, 4, are not in Arithmetical progression; and therefore the Theorem is
false.

I must take notice, that if our Author had understood so much as the terms of
Art; he would have said, The pressures of fluids are in direct proportion with
their profundities. His inference there concerning a Geometrical progression is
false; for there are many Geometrical progressions more then 1, 2, 4, 8, etc.
And it may be in many several progressions, albeit it neither be in
Arithmetical nor Geometrical progression. And, suppose he had not contradicted
himself, his Theorem is evident from the 10. of Stevinus: For, according to it,
the weights or pressures of fluids are equal to the weights of respective
Cylinders upon the same, or equal bases; but the weights of such Cylinders are
in proportion with their quantities, which is the same with the proportion of
their altitudes.

The ninth and tenth (as he explicateth himself) are only this, That fluids
press upon bodies within themselves, and press up bodies lighter then
themselves in specie; which is the same with his 6. and 13. The first of which
we have examined already: and the other we leave to its own place. But what
ground he has for his sensible and insensible gravity, I shall discuss in the
examination of his Ars magna and nova, which is all built upon this wild notion.

His eleventh is manifestly false, as I shall afterward demonstrat from his own
principles: for the Cylinder acquireth only a greater base, (our Author must
understand that an Horizontal surface is the base, and sustains the pressure)
and consequently a greater resistance, which makes the same weight of less
effect. It is evident that a weight of lead cannot press two foot in square, so
much as one: yea the pressures of the same weight are always caeteris paribus
in reciprocal proportion with the surfaces they press; as it is known by all
Mathematicians, except only such pitiful ones, as our Author.

The twelfth is evidently false; for, if ye take a bladder, or any tender
vessel half full of water, and put the sides of it together, the fluid shall be
moved from the unequal pressure of the vertical surface.

The one half of the thirteenth is a part, but a very small one, of Archimedes's
seventh, and eigth: The other half is also a small parcel of Archimedes's sixth.

His fourteenth is so much as he understands of Archimedes's fifth, and
Stevinus's fifth.

The fifteenth, seventeenth and nineteenth are false; unless the fluid have a
spring, or be heterogeneous; none of which he has made out: but if it were
made out, the thing is obious, and noticed by M. Boil in the thirty-sixth
Experiment; yet only in the Air, which is known to have a spring.

His sixteenth is ridiculous; seeing we see daily fishes, little particles of
earth, horse hairs, and many other such bodies betwixt the surface and bottom
of the water. Yea by adding a sufficient quantity of lead to a body lighter in
specie then water, it may be made practicable: and is demonstrat both by
Archimedes and Stevinus, supposing the water homogeneous; the contrair of
which, our Author has not yet made out. And more, even a body considerably
heavier in specie then water, beaten out thin and broad, especially if it be
concave below, may be suspended for a considerable time betwixt the surface and
bottom of the water, providing it be laid parallel to the Horizon. But passing
by all this, his method is unpracticable, and supposes, without proving any
thing, that water can suffer any degree of compression; and stones, lead, with
other bodies, none at all.

His eighteenth is the same with Archimede's seventh, and Stevinus's eighth.

His twentieth is the same with his seventh, otherwise he grants it not
exactly true.

His twentyone (as he wordeth it) is most manifest from that Statical
demonstration I mentioned: For seeing pressures of the same weight are in
reciprocal proportion with their resistances, and the resistances or resisting
surfaces can be diminished in infinitum; it is evident that the least weight
can produce any pressure, whether the heavy body be fluid or solid. But he
explicateth himself otherwise, relating to the spring of fluids, which is not
yet proven in any fluid, save Air; and besides this, the Theorem is ridiculous,
seeing the spring of any part (where all are equally pressed) is equal to the
spring of the whole: for one pound weight presses one foot as much, as two
pound presses two; and even so in any spring.

His 22. and 23. are made manifest by Pecquet in his fourth Experiment, and M.
Boil in his 19. Physico-Mechanical Experiment, yea throughout all that book and
many others, constantly calling the weight and spring of the Air diverse, and
yet bringing them both in for that same effect.

The 24. is ridiculous; seeing it is true and obvious in all things, if there be
no penetration of bodies.

The 25. is evidently false, seeing waters upon the tops of hills support less,
and in valleys more. Yea Doctor Wallace shows in his Mechanics, page 728.
that the Mercury both in M. Boyls Baroscop, and his, fell sometimes at Oxford
below 28. inches, and other times above thirty, and in the page 740. he
mentions unquestionable experiments of 34. 52. and 55. inches. The contrair
of this Theorem is also evident from many of our Authors own experiments, if
any man think them worthy the looking over. And suppose he had hit right, this
is nothing but the old Toricellian Experiment.

His 26. is imperfect; first, seeing he speaks only of fluids to be pressed
up, it being also true in all other bodies. Secondly, he does not determine how
far the sphere of activity reaches; and yet all this is easily done and
demonstrat from Stevinus his 10. For the body is pressed up, till it together
with the fluid betwixt it and the bottom (not regarding what else interveen,
but reckoning all for fluid) be equal in weight with a column of fluid, whose
height is the same with the height of the fluid, and its base the same with the
base of the former fluids portion, or equal to it: and besides all these, this
is not different from M. Boyls eleventh Paradox.

His 27. is to say, that a pound of wool weighs as much, as a pound of lead.

His 28. is the same with that which he would say in the 4. and is true also in
solids; if ye speak only of columns: For two unequal columns of the same hight
and matter press equally, seeing their resistances are proportional with their
weights. In fluids (as I said already) it is the same with Archimedes's Second.

His 29. might have been more general, to wit, That there can be no motion in
fluids, without an unequal pressure: And then it had been the same with
Archimedes's first position.

His 30. is also a part of Archimedes's first position. For seeing pressure is
judged only by expulsion the effect of it; and the expulsion is always caused
where the least resistance is, which may be in a crooked line: wherefore then
is not pressure also in crooked lines?

His 31. is the 10 of Stevinus. Here again he justleth with that great
difficulty, which I discussed in the 4. and tells there is no way to answer,
but his.

In his 32. the Pondus and Potentia, are to say in plain Scots, a pressure and
a resistance. He has told in his 5. that in all fluids there was a pressure;
but now it comes in his head, that a man may fancy a pressure without a
resistance; and therefore he must guard against that. I suppose here, that his
definition of the Staticks is new; otherwise the Tron-lords are the greatest
professors of it.

His 33. is to say, that there must be a motion, when the pressure is greater
then the resistance; which is yet a part of Archimedes's first position, and
never doubted of by the greatest ignorants.

. II. The Authors last Theorem, for its good service, examined by it self.
NOw let us examine his last Theorem, which certainly should be the utmost
reach of his wit; and therefore I will examine it more narrowly.

First, let his two fluids in aquilibrio be, Water the one, and Quicksilver
the other, The natural weight of Water being 1. the natural weight of
Quicksilver is 14. Therefore according to his Theorem; as 1. the weight of the
one is to 14. the weight of the other, so is the height of the one, to wit,
Water, to the height of the other, to wit, Quicksilver: and therefore the
Quicksilver should be 14. times higher then Water, which I leave to be
determined by experience. He should have said, as the natural weight of the
second, is to the natural weight of the first: Or rather, that their altitudes
are in reciprocal proportion with their weights, or in direct proportion with
their levities.

Secondly, then in his progress, he says, That by what proportion the one
liquor is naturally heavier or lighter then the other, by that same proportion
the one Cylinder is higher or lower then the other: here insinuating, that the
weights and levities of two bodies are in the same proportion; and yet their
proportions are reciprocal, and that is to say, just contrair: or otherwise, he
must take the heights proportional with the weights, and the lowness with the
levities; which are both false. At last, when he comes to his example, he makes
the heights proportional with the levities, which I grant to be his meaning;
but this shows an intolerably confused wit.

Thirdly, even this being granted, I shall demonstrat, that it does contradict
almost all his Theorems. And to that purpose, I assume these two Postulata.

Post. 1. Fluids which have their weights or pressures proportional to their
profundities, can have no Bensil: For if they have a Bensil, their pressure is
not proportional to their profundities, (as I did demonstrat at his 8. Theor.)
which is against the hypothesis.

Post. 2. Quicksilver or water, have their weights and pressures in proportion
with their altitudes. At least, so far as any man yet has made trial; as M.
Boil witnesses in the first Appendix to his Paradoxes: yea, our Author
affirms it of all fluids, in his 8. Theor. and many places of his
Experiments. The demonstration follows.

Here upon the surface of the Earth, let the height of a Cylinder of Mercury be
A, its weight, or the weight of the Cylinder of Air counterpoysing it B, the
height of this Cylinder of Air C. Also let the same Cylinder of Mercury be
lifted up some distance from the Earth, and the Mercury will fall, so that the
Cylinder of Mercury is now lower, whose height we call D, and weight, or the
weight of its counterpoysing aerial Cylinder E, the weight of this aerial
Cylinder F; let the proportion betwixt the weights of Mercury and Air be as G
unto H. By our second postulatum, A is unto D, as B is unto E; and by this 34.
Theorem, H is unto G, as A is unto C: and also H is unto G, as D is unto F; and
therefore A is unto C, as D is unto F; and permutando, A is unto D, as C is
unto F; but A is unto D, as B is unto E; And therefore B is unto E, as C is
unto F; and consequently (by the first Postulatum) the Air has no Bensil;
which is contrair to many of his Theorems, and all his Experiments.

This destroys all his methods of measuring the height of the Air, Clouds, and
Atmosphere, both here and in his Ars magna and nova. He might have known this
mistake many years ago; for M. Boil rejects this proportion betwixt the
altitudes of the Air and of the Quicksilver in his 36. Physico-Mechanical
Experiment, upon the same account. This lets our Author see, that if fluids
have no Bensil, his Theorem was obvious, and known to all.

. III. The Authors great skill in Dioptricks, examined.
IN his third Observation, he makes himself exceedingly ridiculous. For,
first, he shows hot how much the Telescop required, should magnify.

Secondly, he shows not how far the Telescop should be drawn out for this
effect; for that draught which serves for a distinct and clear sight, will not
serve exactly to project an Image; seeing sight requires always parallel, or
diverging rays, and the projection of an Image, converging.

Thirdly, he seems to attribute the magnifying of Telescops to their length
and goodness of the glasses; and yet there may be the best glasses imaginable
placed in their due distance in a tube of 50. foot long, and not do so much as
an ordinar tube of 5. inches; and yet both the glasses may do wonders with
others which give them their due charge.

Fourthly, he requires both the glasses to be very good, and there is no
excellency required but in the object glass.

Fifthly, he speaks of the Image, as if it were both near to the Tube, and far
from it; and yet it has one determinat place, the draught of the Tube never
being altered, which he never once mentioned.

Sixthly, he speaks of the Image of the Sun, that it is the more distinct, the
nearer the glass; and yet this brightness near the glass, is nothing but a
confused concurse of rays.

Seventhly, when he has observed his inches, he reduces them not to degrees,
minutes, or seconds, etc. for the Suns motion is not reckoned in inches.

Lastly, suppose he had done all these things aright; this method has been
ordinarily practiced above these thirty years: Let him look Hevelij
Selenographia, Scheineri Rosa Vrsina, and Doctor Wallace in the end of his
Arithmetica infinitorum.

It is here to be observed, that these Authors by such observations designed
not to render the Suns motion sensible to the eye. (which our Author values so
much, and by some here was formerly called ridiculous) but only to observe its
spots together with their motion, or else its eclipse: noticing only by the
way, that swift motion of the Suns Image, which was troublesome, and
constrained them often to alter the position of their Telescop.

. IV. Our Authors new Diving Ark, put to trial.
THere is nothing in which our Author is more mistaken, then in his Diving Ark;
for in all his discourse, he not only contradicts himself, (which is ordinar,
and no great matter) but also the general doctrine of the Hydrostaticks. I shall
therefore, to undeceive his Reader, demonstrat, That his Dyving Ark sustains
precisely as much pressure under water, as if it were hung in the Air with as
much water in it, as now it has of Air, rebating only a small matter which the
compressed Air in the Ark weighs. I do it thus.

In his own figure, page 179. let PQ be the sufface of the water within the
Ark, PY the distance of that surface from the upper horizontal surface, NY the
distance of the top of the Ark from the upper surface. According to his 7.
Theorem, the pressure is equal at P and at 4; and therefore according to his 8.
Theor. seeing the water has no sensible spring, the pressure at N without the
Ark is to the pressure at P, as IN to YP; therefore the pressure at PQ,
overcomes the pressure without the Ark at EH, by the pressure of a column of
water, whose base is PQ, and the altitude HQ; but the pressure at EH within the
Ark, wants only the weight of the column of Air PQHE, to make up the pressure
at PQ; therefore the pressure within at EH, exceeds the pressure without at
EH, by the weight or pressure of a column of water, whose base is PQ, and
altitude QH, abating the weight of the column of Air PQHE; Which wa^ the
conclusion to be demonstrated.

I demonstrat this conclusion, supposing no man within the Ark; but if a man be
there, it holds only of the Air about him, taking the man to be equal in weight
with so much water. I would gladly know if our Author now would affirm, that,
suppose the Ark were no stronger in the sides then a wine glass, yet it might
go down 40. fathom without hazard, and that it may have a glass window a foot
in square, and holes in the top, wherein ye may put your little finger: Yet I
shall help him in one particular; There is more hazard in the first three
fathoms, for the bursting or leeking of the Ark, then in the next three
hundred, seeing the space filled with Air grows less. Are these the great
matters, which our practical Mathematicians invent, whilst others are nibling
at petty demonstrations?

. V. The honorable M. Boil vindicated from our Authors ignorant censure, in
his Exper. 17.
I Resolved only (having considered the extraordinary pains it would take to
examine all the nonsense, contradictions, absurdities, and superfluities in
his Experiments and Observations, which almost every page is filled with) to
take notice of these he mentioned in his Edict: but seeing him so bold, as (in
his 17. Experiment) to insult over that learned Gentleman M. Boil, I must, by
permission of more learned Pens, which this great man's vindication does
deserve, undertake to demonstrat the truth of what M. Boil affirms: that is
to say, That the water REF (see the Authors fig. 24.) weighed in the Air, is of
the same weight exactly, which it has weighed in the water, according to M.
Boyls method. I do it thus.

By my former Demonstration, before the water EFR enter the glass, the glass
PR, is as much pressed upward in the water, as it would be pressed downward in
the Air by its fill of water, rebating the weight of the Air now within it:
Therefore the weight which keeps the glass PR, in aequilibric in the water,
must be the same with the weight of its fill of water in the Air, substracting
the said weight of Air. Now when the water OF enters, the glass PR is as much
pressed upward in the water, as it would be pressed downward in the Air by EPF,
full of water, rebating the weight of the Air EPF, which is the same with the
former: and seeing at first the pressure of the glass upward, was equal to the
weight of all PR, full of water rebating such a weight, and now the pressure is
only equivalent to the weight of the water EPF, rebating the same weight; the
pressure of it is now diminished by the weight of the water ERF: but the
pressure is likewise diminished by the weight put in the scale O; and therefore
that weight is equal to the weight of the water ERF, in the Air; Which was the
conclusion in question.

All that our Author speaks against this, is to no purpose. First, he says,
that tho lead casts the balance; but that cannot be, seeing the lead was
there, before the balance was casten. He concludes, That water does press in
water, but not weigh in water: I will not call this nonsense, but only retort,
that upon the same account, Air will not weigh in Air; and yet I believe, he
thinks, that he has weighed Air in its self. It is like, he may say, that this
is done by the Toricellian tube, where the air is exhausted: so might M. Boil
have said, that is in a glass buble, where the water is exhausted: And I may
also say of this whole Hydrostatical doctrine, that it is exhausted also, and
can be no longer, without prejudice, kept back from its grave.

THis waterish doctrine has past off with more credit then it deserved, having
gasped out its last by virtue of that noble name, The Honorable Robert Boil. I
doubt not, Reader, but by this time thou art made weary by it; and so am I.
Wherefore unwilling to return, and rake up its ashes, to thy further annoyance
and mine, I shall go forward to the Ars nova and magna, and quickly show thee
what novelty and greatness is there, without any prefacing; having no other
testimony for it, then what is due to the rest of its fellow-works.

EXAMEN ARTIS NOVAE ET MAGNAE GEORGII SINCLARI.
CAP. I. Tres primi Libri Dialogorum Philosophicorum, and duo de Instrumentis
Hydragogicis examinantur.
. I. Hic rejicitur Authoris Theorema primum.
LIb. 1. 2. and 3. de Baroscopij phaenomenis agitur: quod Baroscopij vocabulum,
sicut and quaedam alia, se primum excogitasse gloriatur Author, Regiamque
Societatem plagij accusat, acsi ea e suis Manuscriptis compilaverit; licet res
ipsae jampridem extiterint.

Dial. 1. lib. 1. Varia proponuntur theoremata, quorum primum (quod tantummodo
divisio est, quam membrorum definitiones sequuntur) sie se habet. Quod
corporafluida, uti Aqua, Aer and Hydrargyrus, duplicem videantur habere
gravitatem, unam Sensibilem, aliam Insensibilem. Eam appello (inquit)
gravitatem Sensibilem, quam sentio, dum verbi causa, amphoram aquae plenam, a
terra manu allevo and sustollo; quod quidem omnium aliorum corporum gravium,
etiam est proprium. Gravitas Insensibilis, fluidorum solummodo proprium, est
illa vis and potentia qua corporaseipsis leviora sursum pellunt, etc. Virtute
hujus, ait Author sub finem Sect. 2. Circumsusum hunc aerem aequipondium
efficere cum Hydrargyro, vel aqua, adminiculo tubi in forman Cylindri redacta.
Sed haec definitio nullatenus convenit isti potentiae, qua aer cum aqua tubi
constituit aequipondium, nam virtute ejus, aer aquam (quae est corpus gravius)
in tubo sursum pellit. Nec convenit aquae; nam haec in tubo, corpus levius viz.
aerem deorsum premit aut pellit. Sidicatur, quod aqua tubi aerem prius quidem
deorsum premit, sed sic premendo, eundem etiam necessario sursum pellit in
locum cadentis aquae: Respondebitur, Obeandem rationem, lapidi cadenti
gravitatem istam insensibilem similiter competere; quam tamen, supra assertum
est, fluidorum esse propriam.

Theorema tertium Sect. 5. est falsum; nempe, Aqua and id genus alia corpora
fluida in libra naturali pendentia, gradatim insensibilem deperdunt gravitatem,
prout gradatim reclinatur tubus vel Siphonis crus horizontem versus. Hoc
fundamentum est totius doctrinae, lib. 1. and 2. Dialogorum Philosophicorum,
and duobus libris de instrumentis Hydragogicis, traditae; praeterea, id passim
fere praesupponitur in plerisque corporum fluidorum phaenomenis, per reliqua
authoris opera solvendis. Qualis sit illa doctrina, hujus Theorematis eversione
apparebit.

. II. Theorema praedictum fundamentale de sluidorum gravitate Insensibili
evertitur.
JUxta nostri authoris doctrinam, praesertim lib. 1. de Instr. Hydr. dial. 2.
and lib. 2. dial. Philos. Dial. 3. Sect. 2. Hydrargyti cylindrus 29. digitis
altus aequiponderat cylindro aeris eandem cum ipso basin habenti and
altitudinem eandem cum Atmosphaera. Hinc, in ordine ad sequentis propositionis
demonstrationem, hoc colligo postulatum.

Postul. 1. Gravitatem insensibilem esse eam, qua Hydrargyri v. g. Cylindrus
dictae aeris columnae aequiponderat: and proinde, quo major est haec aeris
columna, eo major est etiam Hydrargyri gravitas insensibilis; ita ut, si una
aeris columna, alterius sit dupla, tripla, etc. erunt item cylindrorum
hydrargyri illis aequiponderantium gravitates insensibiles una alterius dupla,
tripla, etc.

Alterum postulatum deducitur e lib. 2. dial. 1. Sect. 10. and lib. 2. dial. 2.
dial. Philos. Sect. 5. ubi praeter alia, haec habet verba. Nam inde infer
licet, si divina providentia aeris altitudo augeretur; cylindri mercurialis
altitudinem in Baroscopio similiter, servata nimirum proportione, majorem
evadere. Et si eadem providentia, ejus altitudo minueretur, minorem etiam
Hydrargyri altitudinem fore. Hinc inquam colligitur postulatum 2. quod sic se
habet.

Postul. 2. Cylindrorum hydrargyri aequales bases habentium, gravitates
insensibiles sunt in directa altitudinem proportione. Nam cylindrorum
hydrargyri aequales bases habentium, duplo altior, aeris aut aquae duplo
aequiponderat, and triplus triplo, etc. Quod etiam patet ex Sect. 8. and 9.
Dial. 1. lib. 1. Dialog. Phil.

Nunc sequitur propositio demonstranda Theoremati praedicto contradictoria.

Sisint duo tubi 29. digitis hydrargyri repleti, aeque longi, and aeque crassi,
superiori orificio occlusi, quorum alter sit ad horizontem rectus, viz. tubus
DF, and alter ad horizontem Fig. 1.
reclinatus; viz. tubus DB; Dico utrumque tubum aequalem habere gravitatem
insensibilem.

Producatur cylindrus DB usque ad KH, ut sit ejusdem altitudinis cum DF,
ducatur etiam QB ad angulos rectos cum DK, and CH, quae aequalis erit basi DG,
propter aequalem cylindrorum crassitudinem. His factis.

Est insensibilis gravitas cylindri DF, ad insensibilem gravitatem cylindri DH;
ut DG, ad DC, ceu QB, ad AB. Etest insensibilis gravitas cylindri DH, ad
insensibilem gravitatem cylindri DB; ut DK ad DE, seu, ut AB ad QB. Ergo ex
aequalitate ordinatae, Erit insensibilis gravitas cylindri DF, ad insensibilem
gravitatem cylindri DB; ut QB ad QB: h. e. sunt aequales. Quod erat Them.

. III. Causa erroris in praecedenti Theoremate ab Authore commissi detegitur.
QUoniam hoc theoremate fretus, in utroque volumine, ubicunque de fluidis fir
sermo, passim fere hallucinatur Author; non ab re duxi, erroris in hoc
theoremate fabricando originem detegere, quae est haec. Observavit, quod idem
tubus eadem mole hydrargyri aut aquae repletus, versus horizontem reclinatus,
aequipondium cum aere non co^stituat, sicuti fecerat, dum fuit erectus: inde
putavit ille, ejusdem hydrargyri pressuram in subjectum era debiliorem esse in
situ obliquo, quam in recto: nequaquam animadvertens eandem vim aut pressuram
manner posse aequalem, licet ob incrementum resistentiae de novo adveniens,
minus quam antea efficacem: ut res se habet in hoc casu. Nam hydrargyrus tubi
dum est erectus, premit in basin cylindri aerei circularem, suae basi circulari
aequalem: cum vero tubus est reclinatus, idem hydrargyrus premit in basin
cylindri aerei Ellipticam basi tubi circulari majorem, ideoque in majorem aeris
cylindrum, quam tubo existente erecto. Ac proinde non mirum, si eadem pressura
cylindri hydrargyri, tubo existente reclinato, non possit adaequare
resistentiam majoris cylindri aerei ad constituendum aequipondium, sicuti
resistentiam minoris cylindri aerei sibi aequiponderantis adaequavit, dum fuit
tubus erectus.

Novi objici solere, fluidum magis inniti interioribus tubi reclinati partibus,
quam erecti; ac proinde non aeque premere in subjectum era, in utroque situ.
Sed Respondetur, hoc argumentum nihil facere contra praecedentem
Demonstrationem; nam quanto magis premuntur parts tubi reclinati interiores
circa CB, quam totidem parts erecti; tanto minus inde premuntur parts
interiores circa DA, quam totidem tubi erecti parts: (quae omnes semper in
eadem altitudine aequaliter premuntur.) Et consequenter, totus tubi mercurius
simul sumptus, aequaliter innititur tubo, in utroque situ: seu quod idem est,
quanto debilitatur gravitas, seu vis deorsum pellens cylindri mercurialis, ob
reclinationem lateris CB, tanto etiam debilitatur resistentia, seu vis sursum
pellens mercurij stagnantis, ob inclinationem lateris DA: ut optime illustrat
D. Wallisius in sua Mechanica, page 717.

Per hydrargyri gravitatem insensibilem, nihil aliud quam pressuram, quod ad
aequipondium cum aere externo, nunc magis nunc minus efficacem, ob resistentiam
nunc minorem nunc majorem intellexit hic auctor: sed quia nunc majoris nunc
minoris in hac pressura efficaciae rationem ignoravit, quando scilicet tanta
sit, quanta ad constituendum aequipondium sufficit, quando non; ideo Gravitatis
insensibilis formidabile nomen commentus est egregius hic vocum non rerum
novarum artifex.

. IV. Septem absurda praeter supra refutatos errores in praedictis Dialogorum
Philosophicorum libris, notantur.
PRaeter duorum librorum Artis novae and magnae ineluctabile fatum, praedicti
theorematis ruina, labuntur duo libri de instrumentis Hydragogicis, tum quoad
theoriam, tum quoad praxes circa non ens, (Gravitatem scilicet insensibilem)
plane chimaericas: quos igitur absque ulteriori examine missos sacio, quibusdam
tantummodo absurdis ibidem obiter notaris.

Primum absurdum committit Author sibimet contradicendo, dum lib. 1. de instr.
hydrarg. Dial. 2. sect. 3. haec verba habet: Tubo situm horizontalem habente;
ut ABC, totum mercurij pondus interioribus tubi lateribus innititur: proindeque
nullum potest habere conatum exeundi aperto orificio A, -- quare nequit
hydrargyrus illius tubi, utrumlibet extremorum A vel O urgere, id est,
horizontaliter moveri, sed deorsum solum idque juxta lineas a terrae centro
rectas ductas. Haec inquam contradicunt tum primae Archimedis positioni, tum
etiam Authoris theoremati, sect. 7. dial. 1. lib. 1. dial. Philos. viz.
Corporafluida, utiaer, aqua and hydrargyrus quaquaversum, uniformiter, and ex
omni part aequaliter urgent and premunt. Etiam experientiae; nam aperto
utroque tubi orificio, effluet hydrargyrus; quod fieri non posset, nisi
utrumque ejus extremum mercurius urgeret.

Secundum absurdum est quod occurrit in fine sect. 10. Dial. 1. lib. 2. de
instr. hydrarg. Non improbabile hinc deducimus argumentum ad probandum maris
summum, montium vertices altitudine adaequare, ubi aquarum fontes reperiuntur.
Videtur auctor altissimae rupis Forthdnae Bass dictae (ut nihil de alijs
loquar) perquam oblitus, dum haec scriberet, in cujus summo vertice plusquam
50. ulnis supra maris summum, Fons aquae ducis habetur. Simile est illud
problema, lib. 2. Dial. Philos. 1. sect. 12. quo docetur, open Baroscopij
investigare montiumne cacumina, an maris summum sit altius, aequalemne habeant
altitudinem.

Tertium absurdum, est problema illud, lib. 2. dial. 1. Philos. quo ex diversis
hydrargyri in Baroscopio altitudinibus, and altitudine montis aut pyramidis,
per regulam Trium, Atmosphaerae altitudinem esse 6876. passuum, totiusque aeris
quantitateni secundum reliquas ejus dimensiones colligit and determinat; nam
secundum hanc praxin evidens est, aerem ab imo ad Atmosphaerae summum,
aequaliter esse densum and gravem; alias proportio non tenebit: Et tamen lib.
6. Dial. Philos. 2. sect. 7. ascribit auctor aeri claterium, item lib. 1. Dial.
Philos. 3. sect. 9. asserit parts aeris inferiores multo majori compressioni
subesse, quam superiores; and per consequens, quo terrae propiores, eo
compressiores.

Quartum absurdum est in sect. 1. Dial. 2. ejusdem libri, viz. determinatio
morae cometarum supra horizontem absque consideratione declinationis, per solam
a terra distantiam; quasi ratione solius dista^tiae majoris, eo majorem haberet
cometa moram supra horizontem, and ratione solius distantiae minoris, eo
minore^: cum cometa intra octingenta milliaria ad terram, absque ullo occasu,
motu primi mobilis, circumvolvi possit, (etiam supposito terrae ambitu, quem
ponit Author 21600. milliarium) nempe si existat in axe mundi, vel eo circiter:
and 1. contra, e stellis fixis quaedam sunt, quae nullam omnino habent moram
supra horizontem, and aliae quae non ultra unam, duas, vel tres horas a nobis
conspiciuntur, etiamsi luna sint multo altiores.

Authoris imbccillitatem miseratus, regulam sequentem, qua suorum cometarum
supra horizontem sensibilem moras computet, construxi. Sinus altitud. pol. bor.
= a Sinus altit. aequat. = b Cos. declin. verae = c Ejusdem sin. = d
Semidiamet. terrae = e Distant. Cometae = f Sinus totus = r


Reg. Si declinatio sit australis, erit semper cosinus arcus semidiurn^ supra
horizontem sensibilem ^; At si haec radio major sit, nunquam oritur cometa.

Si vero declinatio fuerit borealis, and ^, erit ejusde^ arcus semidiurni
cosinus ^: Et si haec radio major sit; non oritur cometa.

At si declinatio sit borealis, and ^; arcus semidiurnus supra horizontem
sensibilem superabit quadrantem, eritque sinus excessus, quo dictus arcus
quadrantem superat ^; Et si haec radio major sit, cometa non occidit.

Et tandem, si declinatio sit borealis, and ^, erit dictus arous praecise
quadrans.

Quintum absurdum, est assertio quam ibidem habet, viz. Nos juxta terrae
superficiem ad 70. vel 80. milliaria prospicere posse: Cum cuilibet in
Elementis, Euclidis versato, ex Prop. 36. lib. 3. and prdicto terrae ambitu,
demonstratu facillimum sit, hominis octo pedibus alti prospectum ad quatuor
milliaria non extendi.

Ut ad unguem solvere possit hoc problema vel ipse Dromo, hanc a me habeat
regulam generalem.

Sit terrae diamet. = a

Hominis altit. =b

Srit semidiam, horiz. sensib. = ^.

Hinc posito terrae ambitu milliarium 21600. and hominis altitudine 8. ped.
Erit semidiameter horizontis sensibilis, milliar. 3'32. quam proxime.

Sextum absurdum, est contradictio inter Authoris scripta; nam scribens de
lagenae descensu in mare profundum, lib. 2. Dial. Philos. 4. sect. 10. sic ait,
Necesse est, quum quo altior est aqua, eo validius and fortius evadit ejus
elaterium: seu, quod idem est, pressura. FRANC. Fortiusne similiter evadit
incarcerati aeris elaterium? ALEX. Haud dubie: semper tamen manet aquae
elaterio debilius. Et Dial. 5. sect. 6. ejusd. lib. istis aperte contradicit;
ubi enim de quodam Baroscopij intra campanam urinatoriam aquae immersam
phaenomeno, and accuratissimo inter aquam ambientem, incarceratumque, aerem,
aequipondio, verba fecisset, addit: Verbo, incarceratus campanae aer, ea 34.
pedibus demersa, eidemmet subest elaterij gradui, cui aqua proxima, etc.

Septimum abfurdum, idque peccans adversus elementa Geometrica, tale est, lib.
4. Dial. Philos. 1. sect. 8. circa sinem, dum ostendit duo plana aenea rotunda
diametri 3. digit. pondere praecise 100. librarum, pati separationem, quia
cylindrus aereus, cujus pressura uniuntur, 100. libris est gravis; addit, Si
duplo minoris forent diametri, tum 50. pondo sufficerent: Si duplo majoris
forent diametri priore mensura, non minus 200. libris est appendendum. Hic
evidenter supponit noster Author, circulos inter se esse in simplici
proportione diametrorum: quod falsissimum est: nam ex Prop. 2. lib. 12. Elem.
Eucl. Circuli inter se sunt, quemadmodum quadrata a diametris, and ex Prop. 20.
lib. 6. El. Polygona similia duplicatam habent: eam inter se rationem, quam
latus homologum ad latus homologum: Ergo circuli sunt in duplicata ratione
diametrorum: Consequenter, si corpus aeneum planum and rotundum diametri 3.
digit. ad seipsum a simili separandum, pondus praecise 100. librarum requirat,
tunc planum aec^^e crassum duplo minoris diametri, requi^^t tantum 25. libras;
and planum duplo majoris diametri requiret 400. libras.

Similiter errat lib. 2. Dial. Philos. 3. sect. 9. dum ait, Cylindrum aereum
trium ^^guorum in diametro, 100. libris esse gravem-Volam manus totidem
supportare. Tergum hominis proni, sextuplum. Nam sic facit volam (novem ad
minimum digitos quadratos continentem) circulo trium digitorum in diametro
aequalem: Et quod ad tergum hominis proni, pedi quadrato seu 144. digi^is
quadratis ad minimum aequale, attinet; imo ex suppositione, quod quadratum
trium digitorum, 100. tantum aerus libras supportet, (quot ipse circulus
aequalis diametri posse, locis citatis affirmatur) secundum duplicatam laterum
rationem, 1600. libras sustentabit; and tamen juxta Authoris nostri praxin
Geometricam, 600. tantummodo libras supportat.

CAP. II. Reliqui Dialogorum Philosophicorum libri leviter perstringuntur.
LIb. 4. de Vacuitate prolixe satis tractatur, de quo lectorem Philosophicum
appello, siquid in eo, de vacui existentia, praesertim in Baroscopio post
hydrargyri delapsum, positive nedum solid determinatum, indial. 2. speciatim,
aut alibi reperiat: Anne sibimet hac de re contradixerit Author, affirmando in
hujus libri dial. 3. sect. 8. Aliquod corpus spatium hydrargyri delapsi in
Baroscopio occupare: and dicendo, sect. 3. Dial. 2. ejusd. lib. Satis
improbabile esse supremam tubi partem aethere repleri; Cum nihil per Aethera
intelligat Cartesius, quam corpus aere subtilius. Numne etiam recte
assignaverit Author vulgarem opinionem, scil. Naturam penitus ab inanitate
abhorrere, pro fundamento sententiae aethera astruentis; cum satis constet,
talis corporis necessitatem, ex sententia Cartesij, ab identitate Corporis and
Spatij unice dependere; nequaquam vero ab ulla naturae Exhorrescentia aut
Appetitu, quem solis Viventibus attribuit.

Adhaec, lectorem Philosophicum appello, de rationibus, lib. 2. dial. Philos.
2. pro Vacuo disseminato: quantum ijs insit ponderis. Number etiam Deusingio,
spatiola inter parts aeris disseminata probanti esse aliquid, propter ipsorum
trinam dimensionem, repugnantiam sapiant distinctiones, lib. 4. dial. Philos.
3. sect. 2. adhibitae, scil. Dimensionum, in Reales and Spatiales: Alicujus, in
Aliquid reale and Spatiale; Nihili, in nihil reale and Spatiale? Numne hinc
etiam sequatur, (quod alibi asseritur) Spatium esse nihil; Corpusque esse in
spatio, idem esse, ac Corpus esse in Nihilo?

Librum quintum de Antliae Phaenomenis missum facio: Libri etiam sexti
tentamina ad Motum perpetuum puerilia; Libros item de Instrumentis
Hydrag^gicis, quos cap. 1.. 1. and 2. funditus eversos cuivis est in propatulo.

Sequitur liber de Hygroscopio and Chronoscopio; de illo, praeter vocabulum,
alia nonnulla ab ipso, alium quendam mutuatum esse veretur Author. Et tamen rem
ipsam a Baptista Porta, si non etiam ab alijs, se habere fatetur. Ea quae de
Chronoscopio, Capite sequenti castigabuntur.

CAP. III. Probatur universa Authoris doctrina de Pendulo esse falsa.
DIal. 3. sect. 1. de Pendulo, haec habet verba: Fateor hoc opus eo difsicilius
and laboriosius fore nobis, quod neminem adhuc viderimus, quorum dicta vel
scripta consuleremus, and quorum vestigijs, si opus foret, insisteremus. Ideo
sect. 3. Nostrum appellat Chronoscopium, licet non recens excogiratum. Authori
credo, artificium enim sapit artificem; nam ne vel unam veritatem de Pendulo
demonstratam continet, sed merits est elrorum fasciculus; ut in progressu
patebit. Interim, quam maxim observanda est Authoris nostri fiducia inanis,
qui, absque open Geometrica, Motus phenomenon aggreditur. Sed ad rem ipsam
redeamus.

Normam ex aere vel ferro, multo plus amplitudinis quam crassitudinis parari
jubet: in cujus altero extremo fiat foraminulum, per quod ingressus claviculus
suspensum radium sustentet, ut videre est in figura Sect. 2. Vult etiam normam
esse 60. digitis longam, and totidem uncijs gravem. Page 555. Dein praecognita
quaedam tradit, unde conclusionem quandam deducit, and hinc propositiones suas
de Penduli Phaenomenis.

. I. Praecognita ad propositiones de pendulo, examini subjiciuntur.
DIal. 4. Sect. 3. distinguit Author in pendulo, motum perpendicularem and
circularem, and rursus in hoc, sect. 7. motum perpendicularem and horizontalem.
Dividit etiam gravitatem in perpendicularem and circularem: Ratione illius
(inquit) placide quiescit pendulum, finitis vibrationibus in perpendiculo AB,
cum appetitu tamen naturali ^endendi deorsum sublato claviculo centrali. (vide
Authoris figuram) Circularem gravitatem subdividit in circularem descendentem,
and ascendentem; virtute prioris, ait pendulum ferri deorsum in semicirculo a
puncto H ad B: virtute posterioris sursum ferri a B ad R.

Quod ad distinctiones has, lectorem advertere velim, quomodo ulla gravitas
dicatur ascendens, cum ipse Author, lib. 1. dial. Phil. 1. fect. 6. sic
definiat, Gravitas est potentia intrinseca, qua aptum natum est corpus far
deorsum. Insuper, si pro qualibet motus determinatione, varias gravitatis
species pro demonstrationum basi essingere liceat, novas in infinitum
excogitabit quilibet, v. g. Gravitatem Horizontalem, Spiralem, Hyperbolicam,
Parabolicam, Ellipticam, gravitatem Cissoidalem, etc. nam per istarum figurarum
tubos potest aqua deorsum sursumve ferri.

En quas ridiculas comminiscitur Gravitatis distinctiones, pro qualibet motus
determinatione, de qua dicturus erat: figmentis eum uti necesse est, qui ad
proprietates motus explicandas se accingit, solidis, praesertim Geometricis
principijs nudus: Post haec, in ordine ad propositiones sequentes, quaedam
Scienda, partim absurda, partim sibi repugnantia, prmittit; quorum

Primum habetur Dial. 4. sect. 4. Radium scil. aeneum AB placide quiescentem,
habere solummodo gravitatem perpendicularem.

Secundum est, Radium AB ad H usque elevatum, tum gravitatem perpendicularem,
tum circularem habere: priorem, quia extracto claviculo A, positoque plano ad
terrae centrum inclinante, super quod descenderet, eo indubie progrederetur,
quemadmodum lapis de tecto aedificij devolveretur, semel demissus. Posteriorem
habet, quia sublato digito radium in H supportante, confestim ad perpendiculum
AB deorsum ruit.

Tertium, Radium AB ad summam altitudinem G elevatum, omnem suam gravitatem
perpendicularem amisisse, atque sic solam circularem habere. Rationem prioris
hanc assignat, Quia nullum habet appetitum radius movendi se horizontaliter.
Ridiculum and falsum est, dicere radium AG non habere appetitum recta movendi
deorsum, quia non habet appetirum movendi horizontaliter: Hinc enim sequeretur,
(contra hujus sectionis positionem primam) radium AB placide quiescentem,
nullam habere gravitatem perpendicularem; nam non habet appetitum se movendi
horizontaliter.

Insuper ibidem scribit, Dimidium gravitatis radij ejusdem ad summam
altitudinem AG elevati, claviculo suspendi: Hinc infero, Extracto claviculo,
positoque plano ad terrae centrum inclinante, super quod descenderet, eo
indubie progrederetur quemadmodum lapis de tecto aedificij devolveretur, semel
demissus: (alias claviculus nullam supportaret gravitatem) Ergo secundum ipsum
authorem in Sciendo secundo huj. Sect. Radius AG habet gravitatem
perpendicularem: quod negavit author in Sciendo tertio.

A praecedentibus Sciendis sibi invicem contradicentibus, infert Author Sect.
5. conclusionem hanc: Radium aneum, quo altius elevatur, eo magis gravitatem
lucrari circularem: atque ex consequenti, eo magis amittere gravitatem
perpendicularem: and e contrario, quo magis deprimitur, eo magis gravitatem
circularem amittere, and ex consequenti eo magis gravitatem perpendicularem
lucrari. Quomodo hoc probatum sit, Authoris verba (etiam admissa ejus
distinctione gravitatis fictitia) manifestabunt: Inter probandum, hac etiam
utitur ratione. Ideo nequit pendulum AF (in fig. page 555.) plus gravitatis
perpendicularis, quantum ad motum recta deorsum, habere, quam sunt unciae Radij
inter 2 and A, and ratio est, quomam meo digito ejus extremum F: supportanti
tot radij unciae innituntur, quot sunt digiti inter 2 and C, qui sunt
propemodum quatuor, and ex consequenti radius sic elevatus minus gravat
claviculum, quatuor uncijs, quam radius perpendicularis AC; Quid multis?
Claviculus supportat uncias radij AF: quinquaginta sex, digitus vero quatuor.

Hinc contra authorem infero. Ergo digitus similiter supportabit 60. uncias
radij AD, (quia tot sunt digiti inter A and C) and claviculus supportabit
nullas, (quia totus radius ex suppositione continet tantum 60) quod est
gravissimum absurdum: and etiam contradictorium Sciendo 4. sect. 4. Item isti
quod habetur Dial. 5. sect. 1. lin. 9. Quarto, claviculum 30. solum uncias
penduli, ad summam altitudinem AD elevati sustinere; and digitum, cui alterum
radij extremum D innititur, totidem supportare, summatim 60.

. II. Propositio prima de Pendulo ostenditur ridicula esse, vel falsa.
EX praedictis Dial. 4. sect. 6. propositionem hanc primam demonstrare conatur;
viz. Progressum diminutionis vibrationum penduli, esse juxta sinuum
proportionem, id est, singulas vibrationes alternatim se invicem breviores
esse, eadem proportione, qua inaequales divisiones semidiametri AC, sunt se
invicem ampliores. Et Sect. 7. Hinc clarissime ostenditur quomodo penduli
vibrationes sunt proportionales ad sinus, nam posito, quod a summa altitudine
demissum, ad S usque vibraret, oportet provehatur horizontaliter inter N and
MR, in prima vibratione. In secunda ex MR ad O. In tertia ex O ad P. In quarta
ex P ad Q, and ita deinceps: sed illarum divisionum decrementum est ipsorum
sinuum, ut patet, conferendo eas cum semidiametri divisionibus AC. Et addit:
Penduli vibrationes diminui cum proportione ad sinus, quatenus ejus motus est
Hortzontalis; non autem quatenus est perpendicularts, alias forent conformes
etiam inaequalibus divisionibus semicirculi BCD, cui experientia, test oculo,
contradicit.

Vel hic intelligit author (dum de proportione sinuum loquitur) relationem quam
habent sinus ar cuum aequidifferentium, ut apparet ex ejus figura; vel nihil
solidi: cum sinus omnem inter se habere possint proportionem: and si relationem
intelligat jam dictam, erunt arcus decrementorum omnium vibrationum inter se
oequales, quod ipse fatetur experientiae contradicere: quodque absurdum ipse
secuturum infert, si vibrationes dicerentur diminui, cum proportione ad sinus,
quatenus ejus motus est perpendicularis; cum tamen per easdem vibrationes
consideratas ut motus Horizontales, describantur sinus recti, and per easdem
consideratas ut motus perpendiculares, describantur sinus versi: and per easdem
prout considerantur distantes a linea horizontali, describantur cosinus arcuum
vibrationum.

. III. Propositio secunda de Pendulo rejicitur.
PRaecedenti propositioni falsae aut ridiculae confisus, hanc secundam
demonstrare tentat. Scil, Omnes vibrationes penduli esse Synchronicas. Quae
quoniam priori hactenus eversae innititur, cum caeteris pariter est rejicienda;
observato obiter unico petitionis principij levi vitio, quod in ejus
demonstratione, pro more solito, committitur.

Arguit enim author ab incremento gravitatis circularis descendentis ad
incrementum velocitatis: quam Gravitatem, ibidem sciendum ait reipsa idem esse,
nempe respectu penduli motus, cum velocitate: and hinc est, ut quot uncias
gravitatis acquirit pendulum ex E ad K elevatum, tot revera gradus velocitatis
acquirantur; quibus penduli motus efficitur velocior. Hoc est, (per authoris
Sciendum jam dictum) quot uncias velocitatis acquirit pendulum, tot revera
gradus velocitatis acquiruntur.

. IV. Rejicitur reliqua authoris doctrina Dialogo 5. tradita, de hactenus
dictis, and caeteris penduli Phaenomenis.
DIal. 5. reliqua Chronoscopij Phenomenon proponit explicanda: ubi Sect. 1.
modum computandi incrementum gravitatis penduli, inter ascendendum, primum
aggreditur. Ubi notandum est, quod Dial. 4. sect. 6. lin. 14. ad probandum
progressum diminutionis vibrationum penduli esse juxta sinuum proportionem, hoc
medio usus fuerat: Quia cadem proportione diminuitur radij gravitas ex C ad K;
vel L vibrantis, qua inaequales divisiones semidiametri CA evadunt se mutuo
ampliores. Et ibidem dixerat, incrementum illud gravitatis, quod acquirit
pendulum inter ascendendum, esse proportionale ad sinus. Haec, ut dicebam, ad
praxin reducere conatur, Sect. 1. docendo methodum supputandi numerum unciarum
radij aenei penduli 60. uncijs gravis, quas supportat claviculus centralis, and
quas digitus, pro singulis penduli elevationibus. Haec sunt ejus verba. Sed
quomodo definite nosti claviculum supportare 35 uncias penduli AM, and uncias
40. penduli AL? (Vide fig. page 564.) ALEX. Extend circini mucrones inter 8
and C, and sumpto hujus distantiae dimidio, applicetur alterum circini extremum
puncto M, atque oppositum in puncto N terminari invenies. Docet hoc, claviculum
tanto plus de gravitate penduli AM sustinere, quam penduli AD, quanto distantia
AN est major AX, quae est digitorum 5.

Quomodo haec cohaereant, judicet lector: locis citatis, indefinite loquitur de
incremento, and etiam de decremento gravitatis Penduli inter ascendendum. Sibi
quoque adversatur, nam loco prius citato, dicit incrementum gravitatis inter
ascendendum esse proportionale ad sinus; and tamen illud per dimidia sinuum
versorum hic loci supputat. Sed si very penduli, h. e. globi filo appensi
gravitatem pro quavis elevatione congrue computare velit author, hac regula
sequenti utatur. Si sit penduli longitudo = r Gravitas globi dum in linea
perpendiculari quiescit = b Sinus elevationis penduli = a Erit globi gravitas
in elevatione data = ^


Hanc gravitatis computand methodum sequuntur praedicta and etiam reliqua
penduli Phenomenon ab Authore demonstranda. Scil. sect. 4. Penduli vibrationes
juxta sinuum proportionem diminui. Sect. 5. Eas esse Synchronicas. Sect. 6.
Incrementum velocitatis penduli inter descendendum esse ad sinus proportionale.
Sect. 7. Pendulum tam cito quadrantem circuli percurrere, quam corpus ejusdem
gravitatis and figurae semidiametrum. Sect. 8. Incrementum velocitatis penduli
esse non tantum proportionale ad sinus, verumetiam esse juxta ordinem numerorum
quadratorum, ab unitate initorum, in spatijs post aequalia tempora confectis.
Sequentibus sectionibus, adducit argumentum Riccioli, quasi suum, ab incremento
velocitatis corporum descendentium, adversus Copernici sententiam de motu
Telluris, tanquam invictissimum.

Quod ad primum, pari efficacitate id probat, qua antea: atque insuper hic loci
novae and falsae nititur Hypothesi, nimirum, Quod nullae aliae possint
excogitari divisiones, quibus proportionales dici possunt vibrationes, quam
arcus and sinus; Cum tamen omnes lineae possunt infinitis diversis rationibus
in parts inaequales dividi.

Demonstratio secundi and tertij phaenomeni, novae and falsae nititur
hypothesi: viz. Phaenomeno Sectionis septimae: quam, praeterquam quod quivis
experientiae adversari comperiat; falsam esse, ex duobus postulatis sequentibus
hic demonstrabitur.

Postul. 1. Duos globos ejusdem ponderis and magnitudinis, integram diametrum
perpendicu larem AB circuli ADBC, and quamvis ejusdem circuli chordam diametro
perpendiculari conterminam, aequali tempore percurrere. Fig. 2.


Hoc extra omnem contraversiam est positum, and a Galilaeo notatum, System.
Cosm. dial. 4. page 335. secundum impressionem Lugdunensem.

Postul. 2. Omnes ejusdem penduli vibrationes esse Synchronicas. Hoc est ipsius
Authoris.

Hinc contra Authorem demonstraturus sum, Duos globos ejusdem magnitudinis and
gravitatis, seu (quod idem est) eundem, circuli semidiametrum GB, and
quadrantem DEB, aequali tempore non percurrere. Sumatur arcus EB indefinite
parvus, ita ut non differat a sua chorda EN, faciendo differentiam omni
quantitate assignabili minorem: Ergo, cum (per Postul. 2.) globus idem
quadrantem DEB, and arcum EB, aequali tempore percurrat: aequali etiam tempore
percurret quadrantem DEB, and chordam EN: sed aequali tempore percurrit chordam
EN, and Diametrum AB, per Postul. 1. Ergo, aequali tempore percurret quadrantem
DEB, and diametrum AB; sed (juxta hunc Authorem) aequali tempore percurrit
quadrantem DEB, and semidiametrum GB; Ergo, aequali tempore percurrit integrum
diametrum AB, and semidiametrum GB. Quod est absurdum. Ergo, globus non
percurrit circuli quadrantem, and semidiametrum, aequali tempore. (contra quam
volebat hic author) Quod erat them.

Demonstratio quinti phaenomeni, viz. Incrementum velocitatis penduli esse
juxta ordinem numerorum quadratorum, est, ut reliquae, parenti similis;
oftendit enim mirabilem centralis claviculi influxum in penduli motum, pro
singulis momentis ad finem usque; ejusque efficientiam in penduli velocitatem
cum proportione ad sinus: at hoc leve! Innititur praeterea haec dicta
demonstratio Phaenomeno quarto, quod falsum esse jam demonstravimus.

Praeter errores supra refutatos, authoris nostri ignorantiam phaenomeni istius
in pendulo, quod jampridem omnibus tritum est ac vulgar, ob nimiam ejus
jactantiam and insolentiam, absque nota praetereundam non esse censeo.
Phenomenon est hoc.

Si sunt duo gravia aequalia and similia, B and D, filis AB, and CD appensa:
Tempus vibrationis penduli AB est ad tempus vibrationis penduli CD, in
subduplicata Fig. 3.
ratione AB ad CD; seu in ratione AB ad G mediam inter AB and CD
Proportionalem. Quod in gratiam authoris nostri sic demonstratur.

Sint AB = AE, CD = CF, Tempus vibrationis penduli AB = M, Tempus vibrationis
penduli CD = N. M est tempus quo grave B cadit ab E, and N est tempus quo grave
D vel idem B cadit ab F: and ideo, ^, ^. Ergo, ^. Quod erat them.

Hinc in gratiam authoris, hanc etiam regulam construxi. Vnius penduli
longitudo sit = a Alterius longitudo = b Prioris tempus vibrationis = c Erit
alterius tempus vibrationis = ^


Proprietatem hanc penduli, quod nostrum appellat, eum penitus latuisse, ex
dial. 6. de Chronosc. sect. 12. omnibus conspicuum est. Si unquam audiverit,
ratio cur eam scriptis suis non inseruerit, facile assignari potest haec;
proportionum ignarus subduplicatam rationem non intellexit: quod ex scriptis
ejus praesertim Hydrostaticis, ubi proportionem Directam and Reciprocam ubique
confundit, clare cernitur.

Dialogum quintum claudit argumento, contra Copernici sententiam, ab incremento
motus gravium desumpto; de quo quasi invictissimo Thrasonem agit; and licet
primus omnium eo usus fuerit Ricciolus, ejus tamen nulla facta hic mentio.
Dicitur hic, Necessariam esse connexionem inter motum terrae vertiginosum, and
incrementum velocitatis descendentium apparens solum: Quod incumbit probandum.
Asseritur item, Copernicanos ad unum omnes, incrementum reale velocitatis
negare: Quod falsissimum est. Quid ponderis huic argumento insit, extra omnem
contraversiam, adversus Ricciolum non ita pridem posuere Stephanus de Angelis,
and Andreas Tacquet, uterque licet Pontificius: quorum rationibus tandem ille
succumbere coactus est, ut manifestum est ex Transact. Philos. page 870. and
alibi; quare actum agere supersedeo.

Nihilominus authorem monitum volo, argumentum hoc falsa suffulciri hypothesi,
scil. Lineam curvam in qua descendit grave cadens, esse circularem: quam
praedictus Stephanus quandam esse Spiralem demonstrat, cujus proprietas est
haec. Quod rectae (in Riccioli and authoris figura page 578.) sumptae ad
libitum, HQ, IR, semper sunt in duplicata ratione angulorum HAD, IAD. Et
nunquam ad Circulum appropinquat, nisi grave ad terrae centrum spatio sex
horarum decidat, quod in casu Riccioli and authoris nostri fit spatio 21. 53.
Imo data at non concessa Riccioli suppositione, quod praedicta linea sit
circularis, nullatenus tamen inde tollitur incrementum velocitatis reale: Quod
si hac de re dubitare pergat noster author, primo rogatu satisfaciet e
Pedellis, alter.

Ego interea, ne caeteris magnis quidem illis artis revera parvae immorando
nugis, nimia lectori creetur nausea, ad examen Tyrociniorum Mathematicorum
vcrbo expediendum memet accingo: in quo, ut ex cauda catum dignoscat lector,
sufficiat sequentes annotasse errores.

TYROCINIORUM MATHEMATICORUM EXAMEN.
DIcit itaque (1) noster Tyro (modo hoc sit insigniendus nomine, quem ne vel
prima Matheseos elementa primoribus degustasse labris certo certius est) page
26. Horas planetarias distingui per circulos; quas per lineas mixtas fieri
norunt Gnomonici omnes.

(2.) Asserit page 50. Sub circulis polaribus, Gnomonum extremitates in
horologijs horizontalibus, ut semel ab Aequatore digressus est Sol, Parabolas
describere: Cum tamen in horologio horizontali describatur Parabola, solummodo
dum Sol est in Tropico proximo: Et extra hunc (nisi in Aequatore) semper
describantur Hyperbolae.

(3.) Page 52. dicit, Gnomones and stylos suis extremitatibus describere
Ellipses, in zona frigida. Quod verum tantummodo est, cum Sol non occidit; nam
cum occidit, semper describitur Hyperbola, nisi in Aequatore: Et cum media
nocte horizontem radit, semper describitur Parabola.

Ne amplius noster hic Tyro, sub Polaribus aut terrarum alibi, in sectionibus
Conicis sciaterico horizontali, aut cuivis alij inscribendis erret: has regulas
generales observet.

Reg. 1. Vbique terrarum, quando Sol occidit, describitur semper Hyperbola in
plano horizontali, nisi Sol fuerit in Aequatore, and tunc describitur linea
recta.

Reg. 2. Quando Sol non occidit, semper describitur Ellipsis; nisi idem fuerit
horizon cum Aequatore, and tunc describitur Circulus.

Reg. 3. Quando Sol horizontem lambit, describitur Parabola.

Not. Quod hic dicitur de horizontali, de quovis alio plano super quod Sol
occidit, non occidit, aut tantum lambit, intelligendum esse.

(4.) Page 100. Dum distantiam duorum locorum, quorum alter sub aequatore sit
positus, inquirit; Proportionis terminos sic statuit. Vt est radius totus ad
complementum differentiae longitudinis; ita complementum latitudinis datae ad
complementum distantiae quaesitae. Egregie hallucinatur tum in vocabulis artis,
nam, non radius totus, sed sinus totus, vel simpliciter radius dicere debuit:
tum in ipsa art, nam proportio sic se habet. Vt radius, ad sinum complementi
differentiae longitudinis; ita sinus complementi latitudinis datae, ad sinum
complementi distantiae quaesitae.

(5.) Denique ubi loquitur page 120. de Echo taciturna, dicit, In quolibet
speculi Elliptici puncto non potest exaudiri hujusmodi echo, sed in ipso tantum
puncto concursus. (radiorum scil. soni reflexi) Sed in speculo Elliptico nullum
tale punctum concursus agnoscunt Mathematici; nam in Ellipsi duo sunt foci, in
quorum uno debet statui corpus sonorum, and in altero auris audientis.

Qua front, Methodum suam Echometricam, in praefatione, Geometricam designarit
author, cum non nudae figurae Geometricae, verum demonstrationes methodum
Geometricam constituant, lectori dijudicandum relinquo.

Atque jam habes, Candide and Erudite Lector, animadversiones hasce leves, in
nugivenduli nostri Scioli egregia and erudita opuscula scombris and thuri jure
merito aeternum consecranda; quas a me invito, Ardelionis istius insolentia,
impudentia and arrogantia extorserunt: quibus virtutibus fretus and inflatus,
non tantum in varios exteros, viros eruditos and celebres, rixatricis and
furiosae mulierculae in morem debacchatus est; sed etiam, ut est os homini
osseum, and frons plusquam serrea, varijs suis compatriotis, nominatim
Professori primario inclytae Academiae Glasguensis, quam Salgucensem Art. nov.
page 296.
vocat, (viro, quem norunt omnes summo animi candore, vitae integritate, multa
and omnigena eruditione, praecipue vero linguarum trium and omnium Orientalium
peritia praeditum, insignem and ornatum) insolenter and impune hucusque
insultare ausus est Art. nov. page 472.
Quare nullus dubito, quin meos conatus aequi bonique consulturus, and veniam
mihi daturus sis, sicubi tibi visus fuerim paulo acerbius adversarium
tractasse, cujus insulsa petulantia, and insignis procacitas, vel psam
mansuetudine^, satyram scripsisse cogeret. Interea, ut relaxetur tibi animus ab
aegritudine, aut indignatione, quam censeo non potuisse non contrahere, modo
pensiculatius cogitaverit, quantam and qualem ignominiae notam patriae suae
inurere, quem fucum and frandem literato orbi facere conatus sit famosus meus
antagonista, puerilium, ridicularum, and trivialium tricarum miseram and misere
consutam farraginem sub adeo amplis and speciosis titulis praelo committendo.
Interea, inquam, ut relaxetur tuus animus a praedicta aegritudine, ne
dedigneris tuos oculos convertere in sequentia Tentamina Geometrica, quae sat
scio, fatebere aeque virum and veram Mathesin sapere, ac quae a me ad examinis
incudem modo revocata sunt, nauci hominem, supinam inscitiam, crassam and
stupendam ignorantiam, tum Matheseos, tum naturalis Philosophiae, alta and
clara voce singulis pronunciant and proclamant: Quae denique examini subjicere,
modo capiat, aut ad Graecas Calendas capere possit, nostro per me licebit
adversario. Interim tu ijs utere, fruere, and Vale.

TENTAMINA QUAEDAM GEOMETRICA DE Motu Penduli and Projectorum.
I. SInt rectae AE, DB, horizonti parallelae; sitque tempus (quo descendit
grave in recta CD) Fig. 4.
^, and ^, ^, ^: Esset tempus (quo descendit idem grave in recta AB) ^.

II. Et posita ^ in D; foret velocitas in ^. Haec facile eliciuntur ex
Galilaei, and aliorum de motu demonstrationibus.

III. Sint deinde ^, ^, ^, ^; ponitur enim AG ipsi FE perpendicularis.
Descendat itaque grave per rectam AB, cujus velocitas in B sit ^: descendat
quoque idem grave per rectas AF, FD; erit ejus velocitas in ^. Hoc ex
antecedente nullo negotio deducitur; modo animadvertatur mobilis, quod in
diversis rectis movetur, impetum seu velocitatem mutari in rectarum occursu,
ita ut velocitas in prima linea sit ad velocitatem in secunda, in ratione radij
ad cosinum inclinationis mutuae rectarum. Ut in figura, cum motus perficitur in
diversis rectis AF, FD; velocitas, quam acquirit grave descendens in F, mutatur
in aliam in FD, quae priore minor est in ratione FG, ad FA: Atque hoc verum est
in omni motu, sive aequali, sive quovis modo accelerato vel retardato.

IV. Hinc igitur colligimus motuum praescriptas velocitates variari tantum
propter linearum inclinationes, in quibus diriguntur. Et proinde si nullae
tales sint inclinationes, nullae etiam sunt velocitatum ab ordinatis
differentiae: atque in lineis curvis nullae tales sunt inclinationes, and ideo
in lineis curvis mobilia eadem velocitate incedunt, qua in lineis rectis. Hisce
in genere pensitatis, dico grave eadem velocitate moveri, sive in linea curva,
sive in recta descendat; nam eruditis hactenus innotescit, grave eadem
velocitate moveri, sive in recta horizonti perpendiculari, sive in recta eidem
inclinata descendat. Non arduum foret, hoc in penduli descensu Geometrice
demonstrare per hujus tertiam, ab exhaustione Archimedea: sed prolixior est
haec summi Geometrae methodus, quam permittit instituti brevitas. Novi hanc
doctrinam Galilaei experimentis non congruere, dum asfirmat mobile citius
descendere per arcum circuli, quam per ejusdem chordam; and citius per duas
chordas, quam per unam: Item (quod hinc emergit) breviores penduli vibrationes
tardius persici, quam ejusdem longiores. Sed vereor Galilaeum deceptum esse a
gravium elaterio motum praecipitante, quod hic summopere advertendum est, and
seorsim considerandum. Utcunque sit, super hac hypothesi, de tempore quo
perficitur penduli vibratio inquiramus.

V. Sit igitut AHF circuli quadrans, ex hujus puncto C demittatur pendulum.
Ducatur radio and horizonti AH parallela EG, and huic perpendicularis CD:
pendulum in G eandem habet velocitatem vel impetum, quam habuisset in D, si ex
Fig. 5.
C demissum fuisset. Quaestio nunc est quam cito descendit a C in G? Sit ^, ^,
^, ^, ^. Erit tempus, quo pendulum descendit ex C in ^

VI. Altitudines penduli vibrationum, seu ipsarum sinus versi, sunt quam
proxime in subduplicata ratione quantitatum harmonice continue proportionalium:
atque hinc videtur sequi corporis gravis per centrum terrae vibrationes esse in
eadem ratione.

VII. Affirmant non pauci in projectorum jactu perpendiculari aequales impetus
sub eadem altitudine tam ascendenti quam descendenti mobili inesse: quod mihi
nequaquam arridet: cum hinc clare sequatur, motum projectorum, exclusa
gravitate, esse aequabilem: and gravis vibrationes per centrum terrae omnes
inter se esse aequales, atque motum hunc in perpetuum duraturum: imo ipsius
penduli vibrationes aequales and perpetuae forent.

VIII. Motus projectorum, exclusa gravitate, videtur aequaliter retardatus; nam
unius medij homogenei, quale hic supponimus nostrum aerem, una semper est
resistentia; quod impedimentum de novo semper adveniens motum producit
aequaliter retardatum.

IX. Propositum nunc sit inquirere, qualis sit linea a motu projectorum
descripta, secundum nostram hypothesin composita ex uno motu aequaliter
retardato and altero gravitatis aequaliter accelerato. Sit igitur linea recta
VK, in qua perficeretur motus projecti exclusa gravitate, and Fig. 6.
recta AK (eidem VK perpendicularis) tempus in quo motus perficitur. Tempore AB
sit projecti ob gravitatem descensus BF; ducatur nunc parabola AFI, verticem
habens A, and compleatur rectangulum AKVX, fiatque parabola XYK, cujus vertex
K. Sit tandem curva a motu projecti descripta VTRPL; sintque datae rectae ^, ^,
^, ^; rectae vero indefinitae sint ^, ^: sintque ^, latus rectum parabolae ^,
latus rectum parabolae ^. Manifestum est tempus ^, ^, ^; and proinde ^, ^, ^
and ideo ^, ^, ^: Open harum trium aequationum, ablatis quantitabus r, l, x, fit
^. Fiat nunc ^, and ^ emergetque sequens aequatio ^ and ad tollenda signa
radicalia, utramque aequationis partem in se multiplicando, and radicem
quadratam extrahendo ^ Unde innotescit curvam VTRL esse parabolam, cujus
constructio est satis expedita, cum V sit ejusdem vertex, and V b ipsius
diameter, factis ^, and rectis V a, a b, ipsis ST, SV, parallelis: hinc
innotescit V b (cum detur angulus VOP) quae sit ^; and proinde parabolae latus
rectum est ^. Ex praedictis facile colligitur rectam VK tangere parabolam in V,
and KL eandem tangere in L.

X. Si detur recta ^, ejusque elevatio supra horizontem PVL: oportet ita
elevare machinam US, ut projectum decidat in P quoniam OP perpendicularis est
ad horizontem, datur angulus OPV, cujus finus ^, sitque anguli ignoti OVP sinus
^, and anguli VOP sinus ^, sinus totus ^, item ^; open harum trium aequationum,
and prioris quae quantitatis g valorem exhibuit, auferantur quantitates ignotae
x, c, g; and ostendet ultima aequatio restans post ablatas dictas quantitates
valorem ipsius v sinus quaesiti.

XI. Hinc quoque deducitur. Si grave ascendens perpendiculariter tempore k
perficiat z, and tempore s perficiat t, tempore n perficere ^ Hac ratione adhuc
projectum perpendiculari jactu in eadem altitudine, tam ascendens quam
descendens eundem habet impetum; and praeterea ex una altitudine velocius
moveretur, and ex alia tardius; quae duo sunt absurda summopere evitanda: at
videntur provenire potius a recepto Mathematicorum experimento, nimirum, quod
gravium descensus sint in duplicata ratione temporum, quam a nostro commento de
projectorum motu aequaliter retardato. Sit enim tempus AB, quo projecti
ascensus fiat BY; item tempora AC, AK, AD, eorumque ascensus respectivi CG,
Fig. 7.
KM, DO; ita ut generetur curva AGN, cujus vertex G. Satis probabile est AGN
esse Geometricam quandam and uniformem curvam, cum accelerationes and
retardationes gradatim and successive fiant; at multorum experientia testatur
GMN esse parabolam ab axe GC, and propterea GIA esset etiam ejusdem parabolae
pars altera; quod tamen non videtur rationi congruere. Nos potius existimamus
AGN esse quandam hyperbolam (vel saltem hyperboliformem) ita ut AC sit minor
quam CN, cujus diameter ducitur a G ad punctum medium rectae AN: hac enim
ratione, GO in parvis descensibus, quales fere hucusque tantum sunt observati,
parum differt a curva parabolica; at ex magnis altitudinibus, cum motus
acceleratus accedit quam proxime ad aequabilem, considerabilis forte accedet
dissimilitudo; tunc enim hyperbolae curva vix differens ab ejusdem asymptota
recta, motum quam proxime aequabilem repraesentabit. Qualiscunque sit curva
AGN, haec est una ejus proprietas: exclusa gravitate, sint temporum AB, AC, AK,
AD, respectivi ascensus BH, CF, KP, DE; eritque AHFPE parabola: ducta GQ curvam
tangente in puncto G, fiant arbitrarie AB, GL aequales; erit ML aequalis rectae
IH, and figura GLM aequalis figurae AIH.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 56. l. 12. pro sit, lege sit. p. 57. l. 2. pro altitudinem, lege
altitudinum. p. 62. l. 9. pro hydrarg. lege Hydrag. p. 63. l. penult. dele 1.
p. 72. l. 9. pro far, lege ferri. page 75. l. 4. and 9. dele: and l. 12.
dele. p. 83. l. 3. pro integrum, lege integram.

geometric figures


