To Both Houses of Parliament.
FRiends, many Warnings have you had, time after time, from those that love the
Lord, and the prosperity and good of all men, that you would not go about to
limit the Consciences of People, but that in matters of Religion and Worship
all might be left free, to worship the Lord as by Truth they are persuaded in
their hearts, and not to use Violence to any on the account of Religion and
Worship; Therefore from the Lord I warn (...), not to meddle with the Hearts
nor Consciences of People, let him have (...) Supremacy there; and by you let
the Sword of Justice be laid upon the ^^^^^doers, and be ye a praise to them
that do well, for that is your place: There^^^^, as you tender the Glory of
God, the Good of the Nations, and your Souls ^^^^nal Peace, go not about to
limit the Lord, nor his Spirit in his People, that (...) should not be led
thereby; neither do you endeavor to make the King to ^^^ak his Word, which he
has often solemnly promised, and has showed his (...)d affection unto you to
fulfill the same: for if you go about to make him ^^^^k his Word, herein you
will not honor him, but rather dishonor him, ^^d bring Reproach upon your
selves. Therefore this further know, that if (...) go on, and will not let
People alone in matters of Worship, the Hand of the (...) will certainly turn
against you, and in his Fury will he plead with you, ^he line of Confusion will
he spread over you; which if you let the Con(...)ces of People alone, then will
you have a good Esteem in the hearts of all (...)est People, and by it the
Peace of the Nation may be prolonged: for there nothing outwardly so much
prized by People, as the Liberty of their Consciences (...) ^atters of
Religion; having that, Tribute, Taxes and Customs are not so much (...)ed at:
But if you will go on, endeavoring by Laws to contract People to (...)way of
Worship, and leave not the Conscience free, you will be the cause of (...)dling
the Lord's Wrath against you, and of bringing Desolation upon you; (...) you
are set as in a slippery place, therefore take heed unto the Light in our
Hearts and Consciences, which lets you see many times something in you that is
contrary to God; that so by that you may be led to make Laws according (...)
God's Witness in every man; Then will you be strong, for the Lord will be as
your side, and his Witness in the hearts of People will plead for you: but on
the contrary, If you reject the Counsel of the Lord, which by his living
Witness in your Consciences you may receive; which if you turn from, and go
(...) in Cruelty, the Lord's Hand will turn against you, and you will cut you
off this sore displeasure: Therefore mind to glorify the Lord, and to honor
the King in this matter, or else your Enemies will be many; therefore let the
Consciences of People alone. And thus in short have I cleared my Conscience in
the sight of God, as concerning you, whether you hear or forbear.

From one who desires the Prosperity of all men who love Truth, Righteousness
and Peace.

THOMAS GREEN.
This 27th of the 12th month, 1662.

