A SERMON PREACHED IN THE Cathedral Church OF DURHAM, UPON The Revival of the
Ancient Laudable Practice of that, and some other Cathedrals, in having Sermons
on Wednesdays and Fridays, During ADVENT and LENT.

By D. G. D. D. D. D.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXVI.

To the Right Revenend Father in God, the Right Honorable NATHANAEL Lord
Bishop of DURHAM, and Clerk of the Closet to His Majesty.
MY LORD,
YOU were pleased in your Visitation of our Cathedral Church this last Summer,
to recommend to my Self and Brethren, the revival of an Ancient Religious
Custom of Sermons on Wednesdays and Fridays in Advent and Lent.

With which Pious Motion we have not only readily complied, but laid out our
endeavors to prepare the People of this City to concur, that we might be
secured of a Congregation, and that this Undertaking might be performed in the
best Decorum and most to Edification. Which having proved, God be thanked, very
successful, I thought my self obliged in this most public manner to give the
World an Account of it, that other Diocesses, as they need not disdain in other
things to follow the Example of Durham, so they might in this be encouraged by
our happy success to imitate that Godly Practice, for the Precedent of which
they owe very much to your Lordship.

The Magistrates, and People of best Quality in this City, do by their Presence
intimate how much they are gratified that their Cathedral should first restore
this Religious Course, which was in use here in the memory of some of our Body,
and has been at York ever since the return of the Monarchy, and we have reason
to believe has been observed in most if not all Cathedrals, before the Great
Rebellion.

And whatsoever measures Cathedrals and Churches in remote parts may now take
upon so seasonable and considerable an Instance, there are just grounds of
believing that some great Churches in this Country, where Afternoon and
Weekday Lectures have been usual, will change them by this regular practice,
into a course of Advent and Lent, and Festival Sermons. I hear already of one
very noted Corporation, which upon the very Fame of ours is about that design,
which if others would be persuaded to follow, it must be looked on as a
considerable Reformation.

For surely, My Lord, if Preachers faithfully and prudently discharge their
province, and preach de tempore; such a Course of Sermons will preach up the
Church of England as much as some Lectures have preached it down: Nor can there
be any better expedient to prevent ill effects of that Liberty, which has been
taken by Preachers in the choice of Subjects, and preaching as well as praying,
according to their own Fancies and Humors: A thing diametrically opposite to
the design of the Church, and which I shall (as in Duty bound) always oppose
within the Circuit of my Jurisdiction.

I am not willing to give your Lordship further trouble, but I dare not slip
this fair occasion to declare to the World, That I think my self obliged to
your Lordship in an extraordinary manner for sundry noble Favors and Acts of
great Goodness toward me, especially since my late undeserved Promotion, among
which none make such deep Impression on my Soul as your present Concurrence and
Countenance in the discharge of my Offices, and honest Zeal for the House and
Service of God.

Begging the Continuance of your Lordships Kindness (which I shall do all that
in me lies to secure) together with your Benediction on my Person and
Endeavors, I do subscribe my self with great Sincerity and Respect,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and most D. G.

TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE City of Durham.
BY the fullness of the Assemblies which have been in our Cathedral at our
Wednesday and Friday Sermons, lately Re-established, during Advent and Lent; it
is Evident that such a course of Preaching is not only a very reasonable and
well-advised Determination of our Diocesan, but that the Attendance thereon is
a thing very Practicable and Suitable to the temper of the Place and People.

The observation of which, has put me upon the Resolution of Printing what I
Preached to you on the first Wednesday in Advent, that your good Affection to
Primitive Order, and forwardness to submit to the directions of your Superiors,
might meet with that Justice which is due to so commendable an Example, and
might be improved to excite others to the imitation of it. And that those
Arguments which were used with good success to such of you, as were present,
being brought to the Eye of those that were lawfully, and necessarily absent,
might Contribute to the fixing of all Persons in their future respects, to so
Edifying a Practice; and prevail with you all, when ever your Affairs will
permit, to repair to the Church; as the Magistrates and chief People of the
Town have with good appearance of Devotion already done. And I cannot believe,
that a Duty, that carries with it such substantial Reasons, and is backed
moreover with such sufficient Precedents will ever be either neglected or
opposed by any that mean honestly, after it is once brought to your
consideration, in such a manner as I have here endeavored.

What I aim at farther, is to engage you to Embrace the Weekly Opportunities of
Practicing in a Devout Reception of the Holy Sacrament, that Christian
Knowledge, wherein you are now more frequently Instructed; and in the most
solemn manner, at the two great Festivals of Christmas and Easter, to the more
Holy Observation of which, this extraordinary frequency of Sermons is designed
as Preparation. Such Young People especially, as never before have Received the
Holy Communion, ought I conceive to choose one of these times, as most proper
for their first approaches thereto, by reason of these means of Instruction and
Devotion, which always ought, and now do preceed them.

I am apt in charity to believe that your Affection to these seasons thus
revived, was occasioned by your most steadfast resolutions for Weekly Communion,
and Daily Prayers. And I have no less ground to hope that on the other hand,
the Religious Observation of these opportunities of Grace and Piety offered us,
will increase Peoples Affection for frequent Communion, as well as dispose them
with such real profit, and advantage to Communicate, that the benefit of a
Weekly Sacrament may be conspicuous in the Lives and Conversations of the
People of this City. And that will not only silence all those who presume to
open their Mouths against so Christian, and necessary a Duty; but also
effectually convince them of their sin, in opposing a clear Ordinance, and the
last Command of their Dying Savior, that they may become perfect Proselytes,
and make amends by their future example, and fervent Zeal, for the injury they
have done to Virtue and Religion, by hindering the most Efficacious means that
ever were Instituted, for the begetting and increasing both of the one and the
other.

The Consideration of this I recommend to the thoughts of such as believe that,
which to me has ever been the greatest of Paradoxes, namely, That obedience to
an express command of our Savior in the frequent Commemoration of his Death,
the greatest Respect that we can pay to the Holy Sacrament should be a means of
bringing it into contempt. A mighty unaccountable conceit, which I cannot but
admire, should ever enter (as I find it often does) into the Heads of Men,
otherwise of parts and understanding; but surely, this fancy is no Evidence of
their Parts, more than of their Devotion.

And I do as seriously recommend to the consideration of all such as do often
Participate of Christ's Body and Blood, the necessity of approaching there with
due Care, Reverence, and Devotion; and their obligation to live so exemplarily
and suitably to so great an Honor and Privilege, as may remove these
Stumbling Blocks which have been by profane or careless Christians laid in the
way of Men, who have sometimes perhaps without ill meaning, not only talked,
but writ; and sometimes possibly Preached against frequent Communion, to their
own Discredit, as well as Dishonor to the Sacrament.

The chief reason of this distinct and particular Address to you the Citizens
and Inhabitants living nigh the Cathedral, is because it was not possible for
me, in the compass of the time allotted for my Discourse in the Pulpit, to
comprehend all those things that were requisite to be touched on, at the
restoring so Ancient a Custom, after so long a Revolution of time.

And for the ensuing Discourse, the plainness and familiarity of it, will I
hope, evince that there was no other intent in committing it to the Press, but
only to do good to such Readers, as that Method and Style is most proper and
suitable to. And for the sake of that honest design of promoting your Spiritual
welfare, I hope you will pardon the Prolixity of both; and kindly accept of the
Christian intentions and pains I have taken in this, or any other part of my
Ministerial Office of late, or heretofore.

I shall lay before you at present, no more Arguments to convince you how great
your Obligation is to continue your Diligence, in repairing to Service and
Sermon on the appointed days; and I wish I could live to have the like occasion
to praise you for increasing that diligence in your attendance upon the
Sacrament, in your proper persons when you have no just impediment, and taking
care that there may be some Representative of your Family when you have;
contenting my self with the honest motives which I have already used, and
leaving the further success to God.

A SERMON PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF DURHAM, ON DECEMBER the 2d. 1685.
Being the first Wednesday in Advent.
ROMANS XIII. 11. And that knowing the time, etc. unto the end of the, etc.
THE late Restoration of the weekly Sacrament, in this and other Cathedrals,
may very well be attended on, by the present Religious and laudable Custom
which we are now reviving, i. e. Sermons twice a Week (on Wednesdays and
Fridays) during Advent and Lent: That the Instruction from the Pulpit may be
proportionable to the Devotion of those Seasons, which ought among all good
Christians to be extraordinary; they being peculiarly destined by the Church to
works of Piety, and very particularly to the exercises of Repentance, to
dispose and fit us for the due Celebration of those great and high Festivities,
our Saviors Birth and Resurrection; which our Holy Mother does warn us not to
rush on, with so little care, as we do on ordinary Festivals, by assigning to
the one Four, and to the other no less than Six weeks preparation.

An holy practice, which was in use in this very Cathedral, and, it is not
difficult to prove, in many others before the Rebellion of Forty one, and has
been observed in the Metropolitical Church of York, ever since the Restoration.

If all Religious and Commendable Customs, which the Church did once enjoy, and
still wishes for, were not immediately restored after so dismal a time of
Violence, Sacrilege and Confusion, it ought to be no great matter of
Admiration.

It may rather afford some cause of wonder, that for the first Twenty years
there should be made any Progress at all toward restoring such good Customs,
whereof some men could hardly endure the very name. 'Twas well that we could be
permitted at first to enjoy a Christmas without an Advent, and an Easter
without a Lent, the Holy Festivals themselves, without the seasons allotted for
preparation. When the Holy Sacrament had not been administered in most places
for Fifteen years together, it ought to be esteemed a mighty matter to have it
Administered once a Month in a Cathedral. And when the generality had expunged
out of their Calendar, the very titles of our highest Festivals, and trained up
their Children in that evil way, it could not but be difficult to persuade
people to embrace any thing that related unto them.

But Blessed be the name of the Eternal God, these two or three last years have
not only produced an advantageous Revolution for all Christendom, which should
fill all the Churches thereof with Te Deums, but particularly for our own
Church and Kingdom, by frustrating those fears and jealousies, which had almost
intoxicated the Nation, and did occasion that terrible Rebellion which nothing
less than the goodness of God, and Conduct of such a Prince could so happily
have suppressed; nay, by raising in some Respects our established Government
and Religion, when some apprehended we should have lost both.

Insomuch that I Will make bold to say, and deliver my Conscience, It is like to
be the fault of the People rather than the Prince, if both do not flourish more
than they have done in former Ages.

For if God gives us the Grace, according to the liberty granted us by an
Indulgent Sovereign, to live up to the height of our established Religion, in
such sort, that it may once appear with due Luster; Priests becoming generally
Exemplary for Holiness, and diligent in their Office, by keeping close to the
Rules of the Common Prayer Book, and above all, laying out their endeavors in
training up the young generation in such sound Principles of Loyalty and
Religion, as to give (at last) an infallible demonstration, That an exact
obedience to our Mother, is the surest and most expeditious course to produce
the best Christians, and best Subjects; we may be (by Gods Blessing) fixed on
so sure a foundation, as that none of our Adversaries on either hand will be
able either to undermine or overthrow us.

A Digression, but very necessary to obviate that Hereditary Disease of the
People of England (which God deliver us from) an aptitude not only to
entertain, but to augment Fears and Jealousies, and to Torment themselves, and
disturb the World with them, when they have little, and sometimes no Cause at
all, as much as when they have a great One.

Our two most Reverend Metropolitans, and other Fathers of the Church, as well
as our own Right Reverend Diocesan, seem to have well considered the bettering
of our Circumstances, by obliging us not only to more frequent Communion, but
putting us in a way to communicate, especially at the two great Festivals
before mentioned, with greater Profit, more Devotion, through Examination and
due Preparation.

To all which pious Christian ends and purposes, a Course of Sermons in Lent
and Advent, prudently contrived, according to the Religious Example of our
Forefathers, and Commands of Authority at present, may in all probability so
much contribute, that I fear those will deserve much Blame, who shall not
heartily concur with so Edifying a design and employment. But the number of
those will be, I trust, very few, if any at all; for as the Members of our
Cathedral have readily complied with our Bishops motion: so it is hoped that
the People of the several Parishes of this City, will as willingly comply with
ours, namely, to come themselves, when their Callings and necessary Affairs
will give them leave; or else to send some, one at least of their Families, to
partake of this Christian and well designed method of Devotion and Instruction,
whereunto I do in the Name of God invite them by this honest and well meant
Address, preparatory to the Subject I have chosen to discourse on, which is
part of one of the Scriptures proper to the Season, and which I now come to
handle.

It is, you see, the burden of the Peoples Prayers to God, as well as of the
Churches Advice to the Congregation, To cast away the works of Darkness, and to
put on the armor of Light, which is also implied in the words of my Text;
whereby we are Exhorted to arise from sleep, on consideration of the
unseasonableness and unsuitableness of a drowsy stupid Condition, in respect
both of our State and Duty. Our Salvation is nearer than when we believed; the
night is far spent, the day is at hand.

Two things we may take notice of in the verse. An Exhortation, and the Reason
of that Exhortation. The Exhortation is, To arise from Sleep. The Reason or
Ground from whence this Exhortation is drawn, is the season or opportunity;
Seeing our Salvation is nearer than when we believed.

In handling these words, I shall make the last in my Text, the first in my
Discourse, and begin with the Season or Opportunity.

You see plainly this Exhortation [To arise from Sleep] to be a necessary
Consequent from the Antecedent Proposition, [Our Salvation is nearer than when
we believed.] And when this is proved, we must not deny the Conclusion, but
rise from Sleep. And that considering the Season, it is high time so to do. I
begin with the first Proposition, Our Salvation, etc. and here we must

1. Enquire of the true meaning of the Words. 2. How it avails to bring in the
Conclusion.
Some Commentators expound the Word, Nearer, in the Gorrhan.
Text, by being more due to us; Our Salvation is nearer, i. e. more due to us
for our good Works, than when we first believed, having no good Works.

Which is thus far true, That whosoever believes in the Merits of our Savior
Jesus Christ, and justifies this his Faith by a holy Life, Salvation is nearer
him than when he first believed; he draws nearer and nearer to God, by Works of
Religion and Charity, with Sincerity performed; But that still not by way of
Debt, good Works being an Antecedent of our Salvation, but not the Cause.

Others make this Speech of St. Paul to be relative Cornel. a Lapid. Erasm:
between the times of the Law and the Gospel: Our Salvation is nearer since
Christ's Coming than before; For before, they were in the Night of Ignorance,
under the dark Cloud of Ceremonies, which the bright Morning Star Christ Jesus
dispelled at his Rising; Abolishing all the Pharisaical Traditions, purging
Judaical Errors, and freeing them from their sins. And this Opinion in it self
carries a Truth, but not the whole Truth.

There being a Threefold Coming of our Savior into the World.

1. To Suffer. 2. To Convert. 3. To Judge.
By every one of which he may be said to be nearer us.

By the First, when he came into the World to take our Nature upon him, that he
might be capable to suffer for us, he may be said to be nearer us, because he
was manifested more plainly, and made himself more sensibly known unto us: And
to this Coming this latter Opinion has Relation.

And this is the Coming which we have in our eye, and for which we are
preparing: And as our Right Honorable and Reverend Diocesan has provided that
this Advent shall be the most Religious Advent that has been kept in this
Church these Five and Forty Years; I shall take care, by Gods Assistance, as
much as in me lies, (and I desire you all in Gods Name to join with me herein),
that the approaching Feasts may be the most Holy Christmas.

Our Savior's Second Coming is, when out of his Mercy he descends to any
particular Soul, to turn him from his evil ways, and to regenerate him by the
Spirit to a new Life: And by this also he may be said to be nearer unto us. For
an Infidel is far from God, and so from Salvation: The first Act of his
Conversion is his first Step toward God; and his progress in a good Life, is
his direct Journey to Heaven. And to this the former Opinion is most properly
applicable.

But there is also a Third Coming of our Savior, i. e. To Judgment. According
to which St. Chrysostom and the Fathers do for the most part interpret these
Words. There is a last great Judgment at the end of the World, of which we know
neither the Day nor the Hour, yet indefinitely, that it approaches we all know
and believe, and should often consider: And there is also a particular Judgment
which every soul receives before it enters Heavens Gates. And good Profiicents
in the works of Piety and Charity, as they approach every day nearer and nearer
to the end of this Life; so also to the beginning of that Life, in which they
shall receive their Reward, through the Mercy of Christ, according to their
Works, that is, Eternal Happiness.

And of this, this Text is especially to be understood; which our Apostle uses
as an Argument to incite and stir up the Romans to Works of Charity and
Godliness The validity of which Argument, how it prevails to conclude the
forsaking of sin, or our own arising from sleep, I shall briefly show you in
the next Place.

Our End, our time of Dissolution, is nearer than when we believed, Therefore
it is high time to arise from sleep.

Were it not dastardly Cowardice for a Soldier after a long Fight, to give over
and yield at the last Battle, well promoted on with hope of Victory? So it is
vile cowardice in a Christian Soldier to lose the Victory, only by not
fighting, being urged to it with an assurance of Conquest.

The carnal Soldiers fight but in hope, but the spiritual in Faith and
Confidence: Man seldom conquers his Enemies but by Death or Wounds; but a
Christian repels Satan only by resisting him, Resist the Devil, and he will
fly from thee, says St. James.

If therefore the assurance of Victory cannot raise his Spirit to Battle,
methinks the easiness of the Combat should encourage him; and if none of these
can move him, the Crown that is set before him, must needs draw him on.

Will any refuse Gold, refuse a Crown? Behold ye Romans, (might St. Paul have
said) the happiness of your Estate; your Battle is almost finished; your
Victory is certain; your Crown ready to be set upon your Head; Turpissimum in
extremo Actu deficere; it is base to fail in the last Act. Arise therefore in
the Name of God, arise from sleep, forsake your sins, for your Salvation is
nearer than when you believed.

There is no man having a Temporal Estate to fall to him after the expiration
of some Years, but does more and more rejoice in it, when he comes nearer to
the Possession of it; and should we not do thus much for our eternal Salvation?
Behold the date of this Life is almost expired, with many if not most of us,
and we are not probably, if we consider the course of Nature, far from that
dreadful Moment, etc. It does behove us to arise therefore from sleep, to
awaken and lift up our eyes toward Heaven, where there is a better Inheritance
of Eternal Bliss prepared by Christ Jesus for all those that diligently wait
for him.

Our Life is a Race and Course from Earth to Heaven; it were double shame for
him that runs, to sit down when he sees the Stage: No Traveller will faint
when he sees the City before him; and shall we lie drowzing in our sins, when
we see Heaven-Gates open before us, ready to receive us all that strive to
enter? No, no; let us arise then, if it be but for mere shame, and suffer not
the just Rebuke of the Galatians to fall upon us; You began well, but why did
you not go on? Who hindered you? It is the end that shall be rewarded; he and
only he that continues to the end, shall be saved. The Philosopher observes,
that those Motions which are swiftest in the beginning, and slow toward the
end, are violent Motions from some Terrene extrinsical Principle; but voluntary
Motions begin slowly, and grow more strong still toward the end, having their
cause within them. And such must a Christians Progress be, not forced but free,
still pressing forward to the Mark; the nearer to the Mark, the more care in
his course.

And now we that are every day nearer the mark, should be sure to mend our
pace; for we know the season, our end, our time may be sudden, and we may the
very next moment be called to an Account for our sins. Shall we then not watch
and pray, etc.? a good season: Who knows whether he may live to see the next
day, the next hour, the next moment? and if we neglect the first opportunity,
God alone knows whether he may ever grant us a second: Those of this City I am
sure ought to be alarmed in a particular manner upon this Account; it has
pleased God to visit many this last Year past, with sudden death, and cut off
many persons, some in the midst of their days; God grant it may not be the fate
of sundry others to be so cut off, and in the midst of their sins.

The most certain way to prevent such fears, is to follow this days advice,
namely, To arise and look about us; which if we do, we shall soon find it is
high Noon, high Time to awake out of our sleep, and set about our work; for
every one of us, I fear the best, slumbers, if not sleeps; the night will
shortly come wherein no man shall work, as we are told in the Gospel. There
cannot be therefore a greater Act of Wisdom, than to follow our Saviors Advice
in due season, and walk while we have the light, lest darkness come upon us,
Joh. 12. 35. By no means neglecting the Counsel of St. Paul, to do good while
we have opportunity, Gal. 6. 10. Seeing our Salvation draws near, let us
arise from sleep, and that now considering the season, it being high time so to
do: And so I come to the last Proposition, the Consequent and Conclusion drawn
from the former,

[To arise from Sleep.]

Before I can show you what that is, I must distinguish betwixt the several
kinds of sleep. The first sleep, which is the sleep of nature, is sometimes
taken for the sleep of Death figuratively, 1 These. 4. 13. I would not have you
ignorant, Brethren, concerning those that are asleep, i. e. dead: Sometimes
properly, for the Ligation of the senses, or rest of the animal Faculties, Joh.
11. 12. If he sleep, he shall do well.

The 3d. sort of sleep, the sleep of sin, is the sleep meant in the Text, and
the same of which the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and
arise from the dead. Of this sleep the Wiseman complains, Pro. 6. 9. How long
will thou sleep, O sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep? And which
is the sleep which the Apostle here means, from which it is high time to arise;
it is high time to arise from this sleep, i. e. to shake off our sins, and walk
honestly as in the day (as our Apostle expresses it); not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying, but
putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, and making no provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof.

Which manner of Proof is drawn from the Analogy and Likeness that sin has
with sleep; For as sleep inhibits all senses and other faculties of the soul
from executing their several functions; the Eye from seeing, the Ear from
hearing, and the Understanding from judging, the Will from wishing, and the
whole Man from acting, which while we watch are employed in their several
Offices:

So the spiritual Senses and Motions of our mind, Faith and Charity, are
smothered in the dead-sleep of sin, and lose their very Essence and Being; for
Faith cannot be without Charity, nor Charity without Operation or Working,
neither is there any working in sleep.

Would any one then approve his Faith, and be accounted faithful? Let him show
me his Faith by his Works, and here take his beginning; let him first rise from
sleep, i. e. Repent. It Is certain those that sleep in sin, can never do the
works of Faith.

But who those are that may be most properly termed thus to sleep in sin, ought
to be my next endeavor to show you: And here, not insisting on, or
particularizing the greatest and soundest sleepers, my time allotted will not
permit me to reach them; viz. Heathens, Jews, Atheists, Heretics (and
Schismatics) who may be truly said to sleep in utramque aurem, soundly without
the least interruption, their whole Life indeed being but one entire act of
sleep; I shall rather enquire within the Church among Professors of our own
Religion, for some of those sleepers my Text aims at, where it is notorious we
may find too great a number, who can thus sleep, even at Noonday, resist the
force of the Gospel, the most powerful methods to reduce sinners; nay, become
daily worse men, more and more vile, lewd and stupid, to the reproach of
Christianity, in the very midst of the Glorious Light of the most purely
Reformed Church in the whole World in point of Doctrine, Discipline, and
Worship.

It Is certain every unregenerate Man, every impenitent Sinner, whosoever is
under the power of any Lust of Flesh or Spirit, every one that is not awakened
into so serious a sense of his Duty, as sincerely and faithfully to oppose sin,
and to pursue virtue, faithfully using the means which God affords him to
mortify his corrupt Nature (whereof a devout respect to this season of Advent,
may be an especial one) and to revive and strengthen Grace in his Soul, is I
say such a Sleeper, a sound sleeper in sin and security, even upon the very
brink of Destruction; a Sleeper that ought to be awakened and warned of his
danger. And if nothing else will do it, I beseech God to rouse him up by the
Thunder of his Spirit, and to drag him to repentance by the terrors of his
Judgments, if he will by no means be drawn by the Cords of his Love.

And here I must more particularly apply my self to such a sinner, by
considering him under a double capacity, either as an old hardened sinner, or a
young Proficient in vice; as one that has been from his youth to the hoary
head habituated to a course of Sin and Impiety, or else as one that is newly
entered into those ways that lead to the Chambers of Death, and ready to
sacrifice to the Devil the very prime and flower of his youth.

And here the old Man is first obliged to awake from sleep, and rouse himself
up out of his Impenitency. He who has one foot already in the Grave, should
greedily catch at so fair an occasion, and lay hold on that eternal Life, which
is yet, notwithstanding all his past provocations, graciously offered him: And
faithfully and wisely employ and improve these few last minutes in Devotion and
the exercises of Repentance, remembering that he is just ready to launch forth
into the Ocean of Eternity.

And that upon the right use of the last Hours, his everlasting happiness does
depend; and that that one hour spent as it ought (here in this World) may
secure that for him which hereafter he cannot do unto all Eternity.

As the Tree falls (let us seasonably consider) so it lies. And, The Grave
(which is in a manner ready open to receive the old Man) is no place for
Repentance. The hoary Head, which is a Crown of Glory, when it is found in the
way of Righteousness (and a mighty Aggravation of sin when it is met with in
the way of vice) ought to be a serious Monitor, and does loudly call upon old
men to Repent. Let them remember that they must repent now or never; their
youth, their middle Age is gone, and their last days only remain, which it
infinitely concerns them to manage well, having spent the rest, or else they
must perish in sin and wickedness, and their Ruin will be inevitable. As they
have been laden with sin and iniquity in this life, let them assure themselves,
that without a speedy and hearty Conversion unto God, they will in the other
World be certainly laden with punishment. Let them above others take care how
they sleep any longer, lest they awake no more. If they resist this present
Call, their Ears may never hear another. Death (they may assure themselves) how
far soever the young man puts the evil days from him, is near them, even at the
very door, and so is Judgment likewise, both which ought to strike them with
all their Terrors. If this does not suffice to awaken the old man, dead in
Trespasses and Sins, I shall only mind him, That he above all others ought to
have the sound of the last Trump always in his Ears, surgite mortui, arise ye
dead.

The young man in the heat of his youth, and the midst of all his extravagance,
has sundry and great obligations to improve this season to reform his Life, and
enter into the ways of Wisdom, which, as the Wise Man tells us, are ways of
pleasantness, and paths of peace. As the old Man must dye, so let me be his
Monitor, That he may dye, and be hurried away to Hell in the midst of his sins:
many sad and lamentable examples whereof God sets daily before our eyes.

Let the young man know, that though he rejoice in his youth, and his heart cheer
him in the days of his youth, and he walk in the ways of his heart, and in the
sight of his eyes; that for all these things God will bring him into Judgment.
As the Taper of an old Man is expiring by the course of Nature, so is that of
the young man as liable violently to be puffed out. As the one vanishes, so is
the other often driven off the Stage of this World. And the number of those
that are suddenly snatched away in the midst of their heady and unadvised
Courses, do far exceed those who finish their Course, and arrive to the usual
Age of Man, to David's Threescore years and Ten.

Besides these and many more discouragements to be wicked, common to youth in
the Age of Giddiness and Sin, while their natural Lusts and Corruptions are
predominant, There are as many and great Invitations to Goodness and Virtue,
and to remember their Creator in the days of their youth. Nothing does so
indear us to God, as early Piety. As there is nothing more offensive to him
(and more preposterous in it self) than to spend the Candle of our youth (our
Health and Strength) in the Service of the Devil, and to put at last the very
Snuff upon Gods Altar. St. John attained the Name of the Beloved Disciple, and
had the Honor to lean in the very Bosom of his Savior, because he gave to God
the first fruits of his strength and younger years; and dedicated to his
Redeemer the faculties of his Soul, as well as the Members of his Body, while
they were untainted and undefiled by sin. No worse Reception might the youth of
this or any Age have with the Savior of the World, the Fountain of all
Goodness, the Author of all Blessings, if they would but seasonably break off
from the Chains of their Corrupt Nature and youthful Lusts (the very bands of
Satan, and original of all their Misery) and devote themselves to his Service,
which is perfect freedom here in this Life, and whose enjoyment in the Life to
come is accompanied with fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for evermore.

Having dispatched what I propounded to discourse on, give me leave a little
farther to improve what I have said, by applying the same more particularly to
our newbegun undertaking; which faithfully performed by the Preachers, and
gladly embraced by the People, may prove much to the Honor of God, and their
own Edification: by restoring the decayed Devotion of these Holy Seasons, and
the lost Reputation of our greatest Festivals: Which are not raised to their
just Credit and Esteem, 'till we judge them well deserving, and worthy of what
the Church designs them, namely, of a preceding time of Preparation.

It Is probable that the contempt of Lent carried away the greatest part of the
Devotion of Easter; and the non-observance of the present season called Advent,
occasioned much of the Extravagancy (and Debauchery I fear sometimes) of
Christmas.

If we are firm Friends to the Church, let us be hearty Lovers of its
Festivals; (the best and most forcible Witnesses of Ancient Truth) And if we
are indeed hearty Lovers of its Festivals, let us not be Enemies to those Means
and Methods which the Church judges helpful to the due observation of them.

The Seasons of Advent and Lent (as well as the days of Christmas) have a
choice Collect or Prayer added to their Ordinary Devotions; a particular mark
of Respect, more than you will find, upon Examination, paid to any other Season
of the year: And which ought to be very Admonitory and Instructive to us all.

It is, surely, commendable in all Christian people to endeavor (as well as
they are able) to keep pace with their Mother the Church; and consequently when
the Church increases her Devotions in Public, (as she does at this Instant)
for her Children to enlarge their private and more particular Exercises in the
Closet: And when both do thus Religiously exceed, it is very accountable in
Ministers to add to their Labors, (as we do at this time) by quickening People
to the diligent Discharge of the present duties incumbent on them; and
instructing them, in the right manner, how to perform them to their Spiritual
Advantage.

It must be confessed, That there has been a lamentable abuse even of Sermons;
and the multiplicity of them (as the matter has been ordered) has in some sort
proved a grievance; (for some have been set up purposely to fight against the
Church.) As the Pulpit has been used oftentimes (possibly to this very day) to
insinuate Sedition, and Disaffection to our Governors and Government: So has
it been, God knows, (and we know by sad experience) oftentimes mischievously
employed even to sound out Rebellion: Insomuch that a right Regulation of the
Pulpit, in such sort that it may neither justle with the Altar, nor justle out
the best sort of Preaching, Catechizing, and Instructing of the Youth and
Ignorant, has long been, and still is a very desirable Felicity, and such as
in all probability might much tend to our Establishment and Growth in Loyalty
and Religion.

But there is no ground of fear (Brethren) that such a manner of Preaching as
the Church of England allows of, and exhorts to, (whose very Characteristick is
Loyalty and Allegiance) can be any ways injurious to Christian Duty. And that
Preaching in Advent (to prepare People for the Christian and Holy Observation
of Christmas), and throughout the Season of Lent (to dispose for the devout and
affectionate Celebration of the Feast of our Lords Resurrection) has been
approved of, all along from the Reformation in our own Church, as well as by
the Ancient Church and Christians, is very easy to demonstrate.

Tho possibly at this present time we may not be able to discover many
Cathedrals which retain this Ancient Religious Practice; yet it is more than
probable, if we look back no farther than the devout Days of our Religious
Prince King Edward the Sixth, whilst the Flame of that Apostolic Zeal, which
happily delivered us out of a miserable State of deplorable Darkness and
Ignorance, was in being, and reigned in the Breasts of a sufficient Number of
devout People, to make daily Communion, the practice of that Age, necessary,
not only in Cathedrals, but in sundry other places; we shall scarce find any
Cathedral, or considerable Church that wanted them; which we may the more
easily be induced to believe, since our two Metropolitical Churches had them
home to our Great Rebellion, that swept away all sound and truly Orthodox
Sermons, Services, and Sacraments, and the Clergy and Revenue with them.

It Is not very likely that the Church of England (which was never agitated by a
spirit of Opposition and Contradiction, nor ever rejected good things, merely
because the Papists practiced them) would wholly reject this wholesome and
edifying Course, that had so great Footsteps in Antiquity, and which carried
with it so high a Respect to our Saviors Coming into the World, and Rising
from the Dead, (two special Works of our Redemption), which constitute the
Foundation Articles of our Christianity; and not honor the Time of Advent, no
nor so much as Lent, with Preaching twice a Week; which in the times of St.
Augustine and others, enjoyed Sermons as well as Sacraments daily.

A Practice so Ancient and Justifiable, That neither the Romanists at home,
(before they forced us from them) or others abroad in other Nations since, ever
dared let fall to the Ground, more than they do the daily Celebration of a
pretended Sacrament (tho it has nothing of the Nature, carrying with it all
the Contradictions imaginable, to Reason and the Holy Scripture) lest they
might not appear what they highly (but falsely) pretend to be, viz. strict
Observers of Antiquity.

A Practice (we may be sure) in it self so Reasonable and Pious, That had it
not been the Practice of our own Cathedral (as some alive can Witness, and we
need go no farther than the Members of our own Body for Testimony) it would
have been very commendable and desirable to have made it so; That this Holy
Season, called Advent, (which is to Christmas, in some respects, as Lent is to
Easter) may want no Help, Opportunity or Invitation, for the Exercise of all
that Devotion which can be justly desired by a devout Soul; And which the
Church supposes, and hints to us in her particular choice of Prayers, and
Scriptures, home to Christmas from Advent Sunday.

Advent Sunday is the beginning of our Ecclesiastic Year, or our Churches
Course of Services; and the Church measures her seasons by the Motion of her
Savior, rather than that of the Sun; for you will find if you examine your
Common Prayer Books, by the Order of the Collects, Epistles, and Gospels, that
Advent Sunday is ranked there, as the First Sunday, and the Feast of St. Andrew
(which happens always near Advent Sunday, and sometimes falls on it), as the
first Festival in the Year. Which among other matters may at this instant be an
Incentive to Devotion. Whoever desires to end well in any Enterprise, should
make it his Business to begin well.

The very season you see, does even in this respect also very particularly
Invite us to be Devout.

What kind of Devotions (to conclude) are most incumbent on us, at this time,
and most proper for the Exercise of a Christian, you may best Learn now, as at
all other times, from the Choice and Order of the Church. In the Sunday
Services you have set forth unto you the several comings of our Savior Christ;
his coming in the Flesh; his coming in the Spirit; his coming in the Ministry;
and his coming to Judgment: Let some of those employ your thoughts, and be the
Subject of your Meditations, more or less, at least on the Sundays.

The Epistle for Advent Sunday, which gives us our first Alarm (and out of
which I have for the same reason chosen my Text), together with our admirable
Collect peculiarly added to the Devotions of the whole season [Almighty God
give us Grace to cast away the Works of Darkness, etc.] do invite us to the
strict Exercise of Repentance, to labor to mortify our Corrupt Lusts; and to
exercise (as much as in us lies) Christian Grace and Virtue.

And let this be your Endeavor all the Week after; at least, upon these two
Days, which by our New Order, are designed for Sermons, and which have always
been esteemed the most proper Days of the Week for Penitential Exercises: The
last of which (i. e. Friday), is reckoned up among the Fasting-days of the
Church; and so commanded to be throughout the whole Year, (unless it fall on
Christmas Day). And if the former (i. e. Wednesday) be made so likewise for the
future (as Devout Christians have often made it), it will be a very Laudable
Practice, and suitable to our present design and undertaking.

And it will moreover give Devout Souls a fair occasion to Sympathize with the
poor Persecuted Reformed Christians of the Kingdom of France, whose sad
condition I conceive we ought in especial manner to Recommend to God in our
Prayers; a Tribute we owe to their Misery, whilst they are laboring under so
Barbarous a Persecution.

Whosoever is fully bent to Exercise this Duty in the most effectual manner,
and heartily desires to improve all occasions, and means to advance on in
Repentance in general; needs not be importuned to apply himself to Fasting:
Since as it gains time for the exercise of Repentance, so it always disposes
for the more spiritual performance of the Duty.

The Church does not Impose upon us throughout Advent, (as it does throughout
Lent), the duty of Fasting and Abstinence, (for which to some (it is like) it
will be the more grateful;) for the Devotions of Advent are, I conceive, rather
of a mixed nature; partly Eucharistical, and partly Penitential. But if any
Devout and welldisposed Christian (who shall find it Commodious for his Soul)
will employ his Exercises of Repentance and Prayer with Fasting, and as a
Freewil-Offering to his Savior (for the Memory of whose coming in the Flesh,
we are all making Preparation), voluntarily add one day every Week to this
Commendable Religious Duty, more than the Church Imposes on us; and not only
Repent; but Fast and Pray Devoutly in the private Closet, to increase his
Penitence; as well as attend to a Sermon here in the Public Church, [on all
these Days which are now singled out by Authority, for Days of more than
ordinary Assemblies] it will be no mighty work of Supererogation, and a fit
preparation for the Approaching Festivals. The Joy whereof will be increased,
and rendered more grateful by some preceding Godly Sorrow, which is inseparable
from the Genuine Exercise of that true Repentance which we daily pray that we
may exercise, in our incomparable Collect proper for the Season: whch will
serve as an excellent pattern, whereby we may Regulate our Devotions; and
wherewith I shall conclude my Sermon:

Almighty God, Give us Grace that we may cast away the works of Darkness, and
put upon us the Armor of Light, now in the Time, etc. FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books newly Published and Printed for Robert Clavel, at
the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Perfect Copy of all Summons of the Nobility to the Great Councils and
Parliaments of this Realm, from the XLIX. of King Henry the third, until these
present Times, With Catalogues of such Noblemen as have been summoned to
Parliament in right of their Wives, and of such other Noblemen as derive their
Titles of Honor from their Heirs-Female from whom they are descended; and of
such Noblemens eldest Sons, as have been summoned to Parliament by some of
their Fathers Titles. Extracted from Public Records, by Sir William Dugdale,
Knight, Garter Principal King of Arms.

An Historical Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes, from Scripture,
Reason, and the Opinion and Practice of the Jews, Gentiles and Christians in
all Ages. Designed to Supply the Omissions, Answer the Objections, and Rectify
the Mistakes of Mr. Selden's History of Tithes. Part I.

An Historical Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes. Which is further
proved by Scripture and Antiquity, and illustrated by the Solemn Consecration
and great Convenience of them. With an Answer to the Objections of other
Authors against them. Part II. By Tho. Comber, D. D. Precentor of York.

A Discourse concerning Excommunication. By Tho. Comber D. D. Precentor of York.

Counsel and Directions Divine and Moral: In plain and Familiar Letters of
Advice from a Divine of the Church of England, to a Young Gentleman, his
Nephew, soon after his Admission into a College in OXFORD.

A Treatise of Spousals or Matrimonial Contracts, wherein all the Questions
relating to that Subject, are ingeniously Debated and Resolved by the late
Famous and Learned Mr. Henry Swinborne, Author of the Treatise of Wills and
Testaments.

Summa Logicae partim ex optimis quibusque Autoribus, tum Antiquis, tum
Recentioribus, Collecta maxim autem ex usu, and ad usum, Comparata and
Exemplis omnium Genemur abunde.

The Order of the Installation of Henry Duke of Norfolk, Henry Earl of
Peterborow, and Laurence Earl of Rochester, Knights and Companions of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, in the Royal Chapel of St. George at Windsor, July
22. 1685.


