A Modest Plea For the Due REGULATION OF THE PRESS, In Answer to several
REASON^ lately Printed against it. Humbly submitted to the Judgment of
Authority.

Quae est pejor mors animae, quam libertas erroris? August. in Epist. 166. By
FRANCIS GREGORY, D. D. and Rector of Hambleden in the County of Bucks.

LONDON, Printed for R. Sare, at Greys-Inn-Gate in Holborn. M DC XC VIII.

A MODEST PLEA For the Due REGULATION OF THE PRESS, etc.
SECT. I.
Good Reader,
IT is not long since I accidentally met with a Printed Paper, Entitled, A
Letter to a Member of Parliament, showing that a Restraint on the Press is
inconsistent with the Protestant Religion, and dangerous to the Liberties of
the Nation. This Title at the first view did startle and make me wonder; for I
could not imagine how the Contents of this Letter could possibly justify such
an Inscription.

But whether this Letter were really sent, or only pretended, and by whom, I
cannot tell; for the Writer of it thought it an act of Prudence to conceal his
Name, as well as his Opinion. But if he be not one of the worst sort of
Heretics, I mean a Socinian, it is his great misfortune, and no small fault,
that he has given his Reader just cause to think him so. For,

1. This Author treats our Common People with extraordinary Civilities, he
pleads for the full liberty of every Man's Conscience; and tells us, that every
Man has as much right to Communicate his Thoughts to his Neighbor, as to
think them himself; he tells us, that every Man is to judge for himself, even in
the controverted Points of Religion, as well as the ablest Divines of our
Church. Nor can we wonder that a Socinian should thus flatter the Vulgar; for
they, who design to instill their Opinions into the Heads of Men, are concerned
in Policy by fair words and courtship first to insinuate themselves into their
Hearts.

2. This Author treats the Church of England with incivility and scurrilous
Language; he loads its Governors with several Calumnies, which are no way
deserved; he calls them, Imposers upon the Consciences of Men, Tyrants, Lords
of the Peoples Faith; but it is not my business to wipe off his unjust
Reproaches, but to answer his groundless Arguments. But however, it is not
strange that a Socinian should thus bespatter the Clergy of our Church, to
render us odious to the People, because they know that our Divines are the most
able Men to defend those great Articles of our Creed, which they oppose; and to
confute those detestable Doctrines, which they promote, but will never be able
to maintain, so long as the Church of England shall continue as well stored
with learned Men, as now it is. But in the mean time, they make it their
business to disparage and vilify our Divines, in hopes that our People,
disesteeming our Persons, may show the less regard to what we plead in defense
of Truth.

3. This Author shows himself yet more manifestly to be a Socinian, because
according to the known Practice of that sort of Men, he highly magnifies Humane
Reason, exalting it far above its proper Sphere, advancing it to that sublime
and sacred Office, which, as now it is, it can never discharge.

For in that Preliminary Discourse, which he premiseth as an Introduction to
the main Body and Substance of his Letter, he tells us, that God has given
Man, His Reason, which is his only light, not only to discover that there is a
Religion, but to distinguish the True from the many false Ones. He tell us
again, p. 15. That God has given Men no other Guide, but their Reason, to
bring them to happiness; and yet again, p 17. he says, That the Peoples common
Notions are the Tests and Standards of all Truths.

Now, my own Reason, such as it is, tells me, that all these Assertions are as
false, as bold and daring; for, what greater Encomiums could have been given to
Humane Reason, were we still in the state of Innocence? though in that state
the Reason of Man might shine, like the Sun in its full glory, not a Cloud
interposing; yet by, and since, the fall of Adam, the Common Reason of Mankind
is become like the Moon lying under, though not a Total, yet a very great
Eclipse. Solomon, the wisest of Men, has left our Reason no better Title than
this; the Candle of the Lord. It Is not Prove. xx. ^^.
styled a blazing Torch, but a Candle, which is but a diminutive light, and so
much the less, because it is full of Snuff, it is clouded with mists and fogs of
ignorance; and in nothing more, than in matters of Religion.

True it is, that this little light of Nature, being well attended to, is
enough to discover to us some Truths, which are a sufficient ground for natural
Religion; the Reason of Man, exercising it self in contemplating the Works of
Creation and Providence, is enough to convince him, that there is a God, and
that this God ought to be worshipped; but there are some other Truths,
absolutely necessary to Salvation, which the most improved Reason of Man,
without some other help, could never have discovered. In all Cases, the Reason
of Man is, lumen sine quo non, a light, without which we can discern no Truth
at all; but yet it is not a light, by which we can discern every Truth, which
does concern us. Our Lord has truly said; The light of the Body is the Eye,
and Matthew. vi. 2^.
yet this Eye, be it never so clear and strong, without the help of some other
Light beside it is own, can see very little or nothing; so here, the light of
the Soul is its Reason, and yet this Reason, without some other assistances, in
matters of Religion can discern but very little.

There were amongst the Heathens many sober, virtuous, and industrious
Moralists, Men of raised Intellectuals, Men of excellent Parts both Natural and
Acquired; and yet as to the Matters of Religion, they showed themselves mere
Romans i. 21.
Sots and Dunces; they became, as St. Paul says, vain in their imaginations.
They exceedingly doted in their Notions concerning the Nature, Will, and
Worship of God; there are several religious and necessary Truths, whereunto
their own Reason, though much improved, was, not only a perfect Stranger, but a
professed Adversary; the Doctrine of the Creation stands opposed by that known
Maxim, which their Reason entertained as an undoubted Truth, ex nihilo nihil
fit, out of nothing, nothing is or can be made. And as for the great Doctrine
of the Resurrection, Men of Reason looked upon it, as ^rig. adv. Celsus, l. 5.
^. 24.
Celsus speaks in Origin, (...), as a thing impossible, and abominable, and
according to these Notions they took St. Paul, who preached this glorious, but
difficult Doctrine, to be no better than a vain babbler.

But whence might this gross Ignorance of theirs arise? How came it to pass,
that Men so acute and lucky in searching and finding out many secret Mysteries
both of Art and Nature, should be so dull and unhappy, as not to apprehend the
Mysteries of Religion? Doubtless the Reason must needs be this; their own
Understandings, though exercised to their utmost Ability, could not inform them
better for want of some other and clearer Light. And what was their Case, would
have been ours, had not God enlightened and blessed the Christian Church with
Divine Revelation.

But withal, this great Blessing of Divine Revelation does not exclude, but
require the very utmost Exercise of human Reason; for we must employ, not only
our Eyes or Tongues, but our Understandings in reading the Word of God; it must
be our great Endeavor by the use of all proper means, to find out the true
Meaning of what we read; and when upon good Grounds we are satisfied that the
right Sense of such or such a Text is this or that; though the Matter therein
delivered be above the reach of our Reason, yet the same Reason will oblige us
to believe it as an undoubted Truth, because that God, who cannot lie, has so
revealed it. And this, I think, is all, which humane Reason has to do in
Matters of Faith and Worship, unless it be to oblige us to the Practice of what
we know and believe.

Joh. viii. 12.
To conclude this Subject, our Lord says of himself, I am the light of the
world, the same thing he said to his Apostles too, ye are the light of the
world, so they were not only by their Matt. v. 14.
Holy Example, but by their Holy Doctrine too. Why else does the Apostle mention
the Glorious Light of the Gospel? The Light of Reason is but as the Light of a
Glow*worm; the Light of the Law is but as the Light of a Star; but the Light of
the Gospel is as the Light of the Sun, a very glorious Light indeed.

Now, if this be true, if Christ himself, if the Apostles of Christ, if the
Gospel of Christ be so many Lights differing in Number, had not this Author
strangely forgot himself and his Bible, when he told the World in his printed
Paper, that the Reason of Man is the Light, nay, the only Light, which God has
given him to distinguish the true Religion from the false ones; and again, that
God has given to Men no other Guide, but their Reason, to bring them to
Happiness; and yet a third time, that the People's common Notions are the Tests
and Standards of all Truths. If these three Propositions be true, or any one of
them, I do confess, that the small Light of my own Reason has not yet enabled
me to discern any difference betwixt the clearest Truths, and the grossest
Errors. And verily the exposing such notorious Falsehoods to the view of the
World by the help of the Press, is a very strong Argument, why its Liberty
should be restrained. But to go on.

SECT. II.
THE main Arguments, which this Author pleads for an universal Freedom of the
Press, are drawn from these two Topics; First, From the great Usefulness of
Printing, which has been so very beneficial to the Christian Church. Secondly,
From several great Inconveniences, which, as he says, would follow, were the
Press once more restrained and limited.

I. This Author pleads the great Usefulness of Printing, as an Argument that
the Press should be unlimited. To which I answer Two ways.

1. By way of Concession; we do easily grant that the Invention of Printing
has proved very beneficial to the Christian Church: It Is this, which has
diffused the knowledge of useful Arts and Sciences, and all sorts of humane
Learning: It Is this, which has furnished our Libraries with vast Numbers of
excellent Books: It Is this, which has furnished our Churches and our Families
with great Store of Bibles; and we easily grant, what this Author asserts, that
to this Art of Printing we owe, under God, the happy and quick Progress of the
Reformation.

But 2. By way of denial, we cannot grant that the usefulness of the Press is a
good Argument, that its Liberty should be unlimited. For notwithstanding these
great Advantages, which both Religon and Learning have reaped from this curious
Art of Printing, may not it, as well as many other things, very useful in their
own Nature, be so abused and perverted, as to become Instrumental to the great
Detriment of Mankind? It Is an old Rule, corruption optimi pessima; the better
things are when well used, the worse they grow, when corrupted. The Sword is an
excellent Instrument, when it defends the guiltless, but it proves an unhappy
Tool, when it murders the Innocent. Physic, duly administered by a Learned
Physician, may preserve a Life; but being misapplied by an ignorant Mountebank,
it tends to destroy it.

It Is certain that the Art of Printing has done a great deal of good, and we
are to bless God for it; but withal, it is as certain, that it has done, and
still may do a great deal of Mischief, and we are to lament it. When the Press
tends to promote Religion and Virtue, it is well employed, and ought to be
encouraged; but when the Press tends to promote Vice and Irreligion, it ought
to be discountenanced and restrained. It Is evident that the Press has been
used to publish a great Numbers of such Papers, as tend to debauch the Lives,
and corrupt the Judgments of Men; such are our obscene Poems, our profane and
wanton Stage Plays, where Vice is not only represented but so promoted, that we
may justly fear, that as all their Spectators lose their Time; so many of them
may lose their Innocence too. For since the Hearts of Men are so prone to evil,
and become so like to tinder, apt to take Fire from every little Spark, it is
hard to see those Vices, which are pleasing to Flesh and Blood, represented
upon a public Stage, and yet not be infected by them.

And as these are very like to debauch their Spectator's Morals, so are there
many other printed Papers as like to corrupt their Reader's Judgments. Such are
those many Volumes printed in Defense of Popery; and which is worse, such are
those Books printed in the Defense of Arianism, Socinianism, and other Heresies
justly condemned by the Catholic Church in the first and purest Ages of
Christianity.

It Is reported that our modern Socinians have already perverted a considerable
Number of Men, not only by their personal Insinuations, but by their printed
Papers; and it is very probable, that they may yet make many more Proselytes to
their dangerous Opinion, if the Press be still permitted to publish whatever
they think fit to write. For their Books contain Arguments so plausible, so
seemingly strong, that they may pass for clear Evidences and Demonstrations
amongst the unlearned Multitude, who are in no capacity to discover the
Fallacies that lie in them. Now, since the Press may as well do harm as good,
it is very reasonable that it should be well regulated to promote that good, and
prevent that harm; it is very fit that no new Books should be published, till
they have been first supervised and allowed.

But to whom ought the Care of this be committed? Doubtless to Men of
Integrity, Learning and Judgment; to Men, who are able, at first view, to
distinguish Vice from Virtue, and Truth from Error; and with such Men is the
Church of England stored; Men of such Parts and Piety, that we cannot without
breach of Charity, so much as once suspect, that they would, to gratify any
Party, stifle any Book, which might tend to the advantage of the Christian
Church, or the common benefit of Mankind.

Notwithstanding this, our Author thought fit to tell his Friend, the
Parliament Man, that of all other Persons, the Clergymen of our Church, are
the most unfit to be trusted with the Regulation of the Press; and for that, he
gives this Reason; namely, because they would allow no Books to be published,
save only such as tend to establish their own Opinions; that is, in plain
English, they would permit no Books to be printed, which tend to subvert the
fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith; and for that, Who can justly blame
them?

That the Articles of the Church of England are Sound and Orthodox, has been
proved over and over by such Scripture Arguments, as Priests and Jesuits,
Arians and Socinians, or any other Heretic, never yet could, nor ever can
overthrow; and if any Books, which contradict them, be offered to the Press,
it is fit they should be stifled in the Birth; and if they chance to be brought
forth by stealth, it is fit they should immediately be cast into the Flames,
that being the quickest way to cleanse them from that Dross that is in them.

But however, to prevent as much as may be, the further increase of dangerous
Books, which by good Words, fair Speeches, and seeming Arguments may do much
Mischief amongst the illiterate Vulgar; it is very necessary, that all Writings
offered to the Press about Matters of Religion, should carefully be examined by
Conscientious and Judicious Divines; and that no general Liberty should be
allowed to Men of all Sects to write, and to Printers to publish whatever they
please.

There are amongst us in this unhappy Age, Heretics of Tit. i. 11.
several denominations, of whom St. Paul says, Their mouths must be stopped;
and for that he gives a very just Reason, when he tells us, They subvert whole
houses, teaching things which they ought not. Now, if there ought to be a
Muzzle clapped upon the Heretics mouth, there is far greater Reason that there
should be a restraint upon his Pen and Press. For it is impossible that any
Heretic should do so much Mischief with his Tongue, as he may by his Writings;
words only spoke and heard are transient; but words written and printed are
permanent; an heretical Tongue can do no harm but by a personal Conference, but
an heretical Pen may do much Mischief to Men at a distance; the wrong that may
be done by heretical Discourse alone, can reach but the present Age; but
heretical Books may injure and poison the Souls of Men in after Ages. And since
there are too many such Books published amongst us, it is the great Concern,
and should be the great Care of our Governors, to see that there be no more,
lest if their Number increase without control, they may by degrees,
considering the ignorance, instability, and credulity of Men, subvert the Faith
of the Son of God, and endanger the Souls of Men. But,

SECT. III.
2. THIS Author argues for an unlimited Liberty of the Press, not only for its
own great Usefulness, but from the Consideration of several grand
Inconveniences, which, as he says, would follow, should the Press chance to be
restrained; and the first which he names, is this.

First. The restraint of the Press tends to make Men blindly submit to the
Religion they chance to be educated in, and to take it up without any trial. To
this I answer thus;

This Argument may hold in Popish Kingdoms, where the People for want of means,
cannot; and, for fear of their Inquisitors, dare not examine the Principles and
Practices of the Roman Religion. But the same Argument pleaded in, and against
the Church of England, is of no Force; for it proceeds upon a false Ground, and
has a Fallacy in it; for here is, non causa pro causa; the restraint of the
Press is here assigned as the Cause, or at least the great Occasion, that Men
take up their Religion upon Trust, though indeed it be not so.

The matter of this Charge is true, and as it cannot be denied, so it is much
to be lamented, that great Numbers of Men, even amongst us, do indeed take up
their Religion barely on Trust. Protestants they are, but why are they such?
only because it was the Religion of their Parents, that wherein they were
trained up from their Childhood; it is the Religion established by our Laws,
generally professed in our Nation, and preached in our Churches. These, I fear,
are the only Motives, upon which the far greatest Part of Men do, by a blind
and implicit Faith, take up their Religion.

There is a vast multitude of Men, who are constrained thus to take up their
Religion upon trust, by an invincible Necessity; Men, who were never blessed with
a liberal Education, never taught to read; Men so dull and stupid, that they
cannot apprehend, much less remember the Strength of an Argument; and surely
Persons under such ill Circumstances, are in no Capacity to judge for
themselves, but must rely upon the Judgment of their Teachers, and upon their
Credit and Authority, take up some Religion or other, or else they can take up
none at all; and this is the great unhappiness of many Thousands, I fear, even
in the Church of England.

But besides these, there is another sort of Men bred up in the Principles of
Learning; Men of complete Knowledge and good Ability to judge betwixt Vice and
Virtue, Truth and Falsehood; and how frequently, how earnestly, do we 1 Thessalonians.
v. 21. 1 John* iv. 1.
exhort such Men from our Pulpits, to prove all things, to try the Spirits; but,
alas! it is much to be feared, that we lose our Labor, that Men will not spare
any time, nor take any pains to examine their Religion, but rather take it up at
a venture just as they find it.

Now, if a Man takes up his Religion upon trust, when he need not do so, he
runs himself both into sin and danger; a sin it certainly is, because a breach
of those fore*named Commands; and a great danger it is, because instead of a
Juno, he may embrace a Cloud; instead of a true Religon, he may close with a
false one.

But where lies the Fault? Upon whom, or what, must this sin be charged? Sure
I am, that in this case a restraint upon the Press is innocent, and cannot be
justly blamed; For, were not Men obliged to examine the Matters of their
Religion long before the Art of Printing was invented? And was not the neglect
of this Duty a sin in former Ages, when there was not so much as one Press in
all the World? And if so, How could the trial of Religions depend upon the
Press in those early days, when as yet it had no being?

And because the true Christian Faith is the same in all the Ages of the Church
since the Apostles days, we must measure our own Religion by the same Rules, by
which the Primitive Saints measured theirs, and what were they? Not the
voluminous Writings of Men, which the Press has now brought forth, but the
sacred Oracles of God. This is the Course, to which the Prophet directs us; To
the law, and to the Testimony. This Course did the Bereans take, when to
examine the Doctrines even of the Apostles themselves, They searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so; and for their doing so they are
highly commended.

And indeed the Scripture is the lapis Lydius, the Touchstone, the Canon, the
only Authentic Rule of Manners, Faith, and religious Worship; a Rule so plain
and easy in all necessary points, that in order to the trial of our Religion
we have no absolute need of any Book but Gods, though other good Books do well
toward the better understanding of some passages in this.

It Is the great Privilege of our Church that we have this Rule of Scripture in
such great Quantities, that every Man, who can and will, may, at an easy rate,
have it in his custody, and thereby examine his Religion, when he pleases. Nor
can we justly blame the restraint of the Press, so long as it is permitted to
Print our Bibles, and prohibited to publish no Man's Book, but such only, as
are contrary to Gods.

Indeed, were the Press in England restrained, as it is in Popish Kingdoms,
from printing the Bible in our Vulgar Tongue, this Authors Argument would have
had much strength in it; but since it is otherwise; since we have the
Scriptures, those Tests and Standards of our Religion, preached in our Public
Churches, and easily to be had and read, as often as we please, in our private
Families, this Author's Argument against the Restraint of the Press is invalid
and unconcluding; for it does not prove that, for which he pleads it. But to
proceed.

SECT. IV.
II. THE Second Allegation, which this Author urges, as a grand inconvenience,
against the Restraint of the Press, is this; Such a Restraint, says he,
deprives Men of the most proper and best means to discover truth. To which I
answer thus;

There is a very close Connection betwixt this Argument and the former; a
Connection as between an Antecedent and a Consequent; or between the Premises
and the Conclusion. In the former Argument he mentions the examination of
Religions; and in this, as the end and consequence of that, the discovery of
Truth; for to what purpose should any Religion be impartially examined, were it
not to discover, whether it be true or false. And for this reason, the same
answer, which I have given to the former Argument, might serve well enough for
this; for since the restraint of the Press does not, as I have there proved,
prevent the due Examination of Religion, it cannot prevent the discovery of
Truth.

But that so it does, our Author is very positive; yea, and he tells us by what
means it does so, namely, By hindering Men from seeing and examining the
different Opinions, and the Arguments alleged for them. But let this Author
tell us, how this can be true; can a Restraint of the Press for time to come
hinder any Man from seeing and examining the different Opinions of Men, and
their Arguments for them! Are there not already great numbers of printed Books,
exposed to common Sale, wherein the different Opinions of Men about matters of
Religion are thoroughly discussed! May not every Man, that will and can,
sufficiently inform himself by Books already extant what Arguments have been
pleaded by all Sects of Christians in the defense of their respective
Professions? And since the Press has already brought forth such a numerous
issue of this kind, methinks every future birth of the same sort would be but a
Superfetation. I am persuaded, that should all the Presses in the Christian
world be absolutely forbidden to print any more New Books of Controversy, and
Polemick Divinity, it would be no injury to the Catholic Church, nor to any
one Member of it; for, nihil dici potest, quod non dictum est prius; Prints
indeed may be new, but Arguments, either for old Truths, or against old Errors,
can hardly be so.

But when all is done, Religious Truths cannot be discovered by Humane
Arguments any further than those Arguments are grounded upon the infallible
word of God. It Is a Rule in Mathematics: Rectum est index sui and Obliqui. He,
that would discover the Rectitude or Obliquity of a Line, must bring it to, and
compare it with such a Rule, as is already found to be exactly straight. So in
our present Case, he, who would discover the truth or falsehood of any Opinion
in matters of Religion, must apply them to, and judge them by that infallible
Rule, which St. James very deservedly Styles, The Jam. i. 18.
word of Truth.

And this Rule, in all Points necessary to Salvation, is so plain and easy,
that every Man, who has not lost the use of common Reason, may thereby judge
for himself. There are indeed in the word of God, as the Apostle says, Some
things 2 Pet. iii. 1
hard to be understood; but in what Texts do these difficulties lie? St. Austin
answers, Non quoad ea, quae sunt necessaria saluti, Ep. 3. T. 2. ^
etc. The Scriptures are not difficult in any of those Points, which are
necessary to Man's Salvation. So thought St. Chrysostom, who thus demands;
(...); Orig. in laz T. 1. p. 244
what Man is there, to whom all the necessary Truths of the Gospel are not clear
and manifest? He says elsewhere; (...). In Mat. Ho^ 1. p. 5.
The Husbandman, the Servant, the Widow, the Boy, Persons of very mean
Capacities may easily understand what the Scriptures teach about such Points,
as are Fundamental.

That this was the Doctrine of the Primitive Church before St. Chrysostom's
time, is evident from that Testimony of Irenaeus; Iren* l. 2. c ^
Universae Scripturae and Propheticae and Evangelicae in aperto, and sine
ambiguitate, and similiter ab omnibus audiri possunt. The whole Scripture, the
Prophets, the Evangelists, in such Points as most concern us, are so plain,
express, and open, that all sorts of Men may equally apprehend them.

Now, if a Man may discover the truth of all those Doctrines, which are
necessary to Salvation, by Scripture Rules; if his Faith be grounded on them,
and his Practice be suitable to them; what hazard would that Man run, should he
never see the different Opinions of Men about them, nor weigh their Arguments
against them? Suppose a Man being well informed by the express word of God, do
steadfastly believe the Resurrection of the dead; what were this Man the worse,
should he never see nor examine the reasonings of Pagans and Sadducees against
this great Article of our Creed. Suppose a Man be convinced, as well he may be,
by such Texts of Scripture, as cannot, with any tolerable Sense, be otherwise
interpeted, that our Blessed Savior is truly God, and truly Man; What need
such a Person to see the Opinions, and weigh the Arguments of Arians and
Socinians against this fundamental Point of our Christian Faith?

To him, whose Belief is already grounded upon the infallible Word of God being
rightly understood, the sight of different Opinions, and the Arguments for them
signifies nothing; such a Man does not need the confutation of heretical
Cavils to confirm that Faith of his, which is already bottomed upon a Rock,
which is immovable. And as the sight of different Opinions, and the
examination of Arguments pleaded for them, is not needful to confirm a strong
and well grounded Faith; so it is dangerous, and tends to impair, and shake a
weak one. For, well meaning Christians, bred up in the true Religion, being of
too easy Belief, of slender Judgments, and not well acquainted with the Word
of God, may probably be perverted by heretical Books, as being unable to
discern the Fallacies contained in them, and to cite such Texts as might
confute them.

But here it may be demanded, Who must judge, whether such or such an Opinion
be justified or condemned by such or such a Text? I answer, where Texts are
plain and obvious, every discreet and intelligent Person may judge for himself;
but when Texts are somewhat abstruse and difficult, when knotty Questions and
Controversies are raised about them, then the Judge must be no single Person;
no, nor any small Party of Men, who are biased, prejudiced, and wedded to
their own Opinion, but the Judge must be the Catholic Church; I mean, its
Representative in the four first general Councils, which consisted of Men not
over-awed by Authority, nor tempted by Interest; but Men as Religious, as they
were Learned, as well Versed in Holy Writ, as able Interpreters of Scripture,
as any sort of Men, born since those early days. And this, I think, to be the
greatest human Authority to warrant the Sense of such and such Texts, and prove
the Doctrins grounded on them.

Now, Since we of the Church of England are blessed with the free use of our
Bibles; and favored with the judgment of the best Expositors about the sense
of those Texts, which tend most to determine those Disputes, which have arose
betwixt Protestants and Papists, betwixt Trinitarians and Anti-Trinitarians, we
can have no need, of any search for Truth, to consult the printed Papers of
this Age, many of which do tend to promote Error much rather than discover
Truth. And verily when the Licenser of Books does reject and suppress Heretical
Papers, he does good service both to God and Men; and if such Papers chance to
Steal the Press, they ought to be treated like other Thieves, who, to prevent
their doing any future mischiefs, are Apprehended, Condemned, and Executed. And
so I quit this Argument, and proceed to the next.

SECT. V.
3. THIS Authors third Allegation against the restraint of the Press runs thus,
The Restraint of the Press hinders Truth from having any great influence on the
minds of Men, which is owing chiefly to examination; because that which does
not convince the Understanding, will have but little, or no effect upon the
Will. I answer thus.

What this Author does here assert in relation to the influence of the
Understanding upon the Will and Affections is true in general; nor can it be
justly denied that a strict examination of Religion is the proper means to
convince the Understanding of its Truth.

But although the subject matter of this Allegation be true in the general; yet
here it is misapplied and very impertinent to the Case now in hand. For this
Argument, as the former did, does proceed upon a false Hypothesis; for it
supposes that if the Press should chance to be restrained for time to come,
Men would be deprived of all sufficient means for the due examination of their
Religion.

It Is St. Paul's Command, Prove all things. It Is St. John's Command, Try the
Spirits, whether they are of God. These Commands must needs suppose, that in
those days there was a certain Rule, by which Religions might be tried* and the
same Rule, in its full force and virtue, is standing still. Tell me then, are
our Bibles out of Print, or taken from us? Have we no Catechisms, no Systems of
Divinity left amongst us? Nay, are there not Books of Controversies exposed to
Sale in our Cities, greater Towns, and both our Universities? Nay more, are
there not Popish and Socinian Catechisms to be had in England? Do not these
Books already Extant, contain the strongest Arguments, which the most learned
Men of all Parties were able to urge in favor of their respective Opinions?
And may not Men by weighing these Reasons, which are already made public, give
a judgment which Religion is true, and which is false, as well as by any new
Papers yet to be printed?

But although there be a great variety of Books, which may help to guide us in
our searching after Truth; yet I must still mind my Reader that the Scripture
is the only Adequate and Authentic Rule, whereby the Truth or falsehood of any
Religion must be determined. And certain it is, that those Convictions of Man's
Understanding, which arise from the Immediate word of God, are like to have a
more powerful influence upon the Will and Affections, than any other
Convictions arising from any such Arguments, as are no more than the Dictates
and Collections of humane Reason, which is fallible, and may deceive us,
whereas the word of God, well understood, cannot do so. And this, I think, is a
sufficient answer to this Authors third Allegation.

SECT. VI.
4. THE Fourth is this, The Restraint of the Press is that, which tends to make
Men hold the Truth, if they chance to light on any, Guilty; and the Reason,
which he gives is this; Because that will not be accepted, if it be not the
effect of an impartial Examination. To which I answer thus.

I cannot pass by this without observing that this Author has hitherto much
harped upon the same thing, and has hitherto bottomed all his Arguments upon
the same Ground, and a very slippery one too; he has proposed his Allegations
as distinct in their Number, but in their Proof, there is little or no
difference to be found.

For he tells; First, That the Restraint of the Press tends to make Men blindly
submit to the Religion they chance to be educated in. Secondly, That it
deprives Men of the most proper and best means to discover Truth. Thirdly, That
it hinders Truth from having any great influence upon the minds of Men.
Fourthly, That it tends to make Men hold the Truth, if they chance to light on
any, guiltily.

These indeed are very considerable Objections against the Restraint of the
Press, were they true; But how does our Author prove them so to be? To prove
them all, he has yet made use but of one medium, and that a false one too; for
it is nothing else but a groundless supposition that Men would want due means
for the examination of their Religion, were the Press any whit restrained. I
say, any whit; for we do not plead for a total Restraint, but for a just and
due Regulation. And were the Press so regulated, yet would it not be attended
with any of these ill Consequences, with which this Author is pleased to charge
it; for since Men have sufficient means for the trial of their Religion, if
they do it not, their fin and folly must be imputed, not to the Restraint of
the Press, but to their own Ignorance or Negligence; for, as some cannot, so
others will not. But our Author goes on, and so must we.

SECT. VII.
5. THis Author's fifth Allegation against the Restraint of the Press takes up
more than three Pages, but the full Substance of it is this; It prevents Acts
of Charity to the Souls of Men, it invades the natural Rights of mankind, and
destroys the common Ties of humanity; so he.

This is Dogmatically and Magisterially delivered, and since it is such ^
grievous Charge, it had need be very well proved; And how does our Author make
it out? He tells us That all Men are obliged, especially in Matters of
Religion, to communicate to one another what they think is the Truth, and the
Reasons by which they endeavor to prove it: To which I answer thus.

That we are indeed concerned, not only to profess a Religion, but promote it
too; I think, that he, who has one jot thereof, will never deny. We are bound
by several Obligations to instruct and teach our Neighbor in the Principles of
that Religion, which we own our selves. St. Paul ^ Thessalonians. v. 11.
commands it, Edify one another; and so again, Teach and admonish one another.
We are engaged by the frequent Commands of God, and that eternal Law of
Charity, in our Capacities, and as occasion is offered, to propagate our
Religion; to plant it where it is not, and to water it where it is.

But then methinks, before we do this, we should, not only think, as this
Author says, but secure our selves and others too, that the Religion which we
advance in the World, be indeed the Religion of God; we must be sure that we
plant not Weeds instead of Flowers, that we sow not Tares instead of Wheat. For
to promote a Religion, which may possibly be false, were a desperate Venture
indeed, and he that does it, hazards the Honor of God, and the Souls of Men.

I find that our blessed Savior and his Apostles taught no Doctrine, but what
they were sure of; We speak that we Joh. iii. 11. 1 John iii* 9.
know, says our Lord; and thus St. John, We know that we are of the Truth.
Certainly, whosoever undertakes, and is obliged to instruct another in matters
of Religion, had need be very well informed himself.

For if our Directions should chance to prove wrong, What Excuse could we make?
Suppose we instill into the minds of Men Error and Heresy instead of Truth,
What were this but to ruin the Souls of Men, though we might think to save
them? It Is true, our good Intention and Ignorance may excuse such an ill Act, a
tanto, but though such a mistake may somewhat extenuate the Fault, yet can it
no way lessen the fatal Consequence that does attend it. Suppose a Physician,
who really intends to cure his Patient, by a mistake of his Remedy, should
chance to kill him, the poor Patient, who dies only by a mistake, suffers as
great an injury, as if his Physician had poisoned him knowingly, and with
design. It Is indeed an Act of Charity to instruct the Ignorant, and lead the
Blind; but withal, the Man who undertakes it, must have Eyes in his own Head,
lest if the blind lead the blind, they both fall into, and perish in the Ditch.
Certain it is, we are much engaged very strictly to sift the Grounds of that
Religion, which we are to propagate in the World, and teach our Neighbors,
lest otherwise, through our own mistake, and his confidence, we become guilty
of cruel Charity, and prove instrumental to damn that Person whom we should
endeavor, as far as we can, to save.

And as it is a dangerous thing for private Persons to promote any false
Religion, though they themselves being mistaken, do think it true; so to permit
other Men to publish heretical Doctrins cannot be the Duty of those Persons,
who have Authority, and should have Zeal, to prevent it. To restrain this
unchristian Liberty of the Tongue, Pen, and Press, is not, as this Author does
boldly assert, To invade the natural Rights of mankind, nor to destroy the
common Ties of humanity. For if it be a Man's natural Right to persuade his
Neighbor, either by his Tongue or his Pen, to entertain an Opinion really
heretical, whether he thinks it so or not; it is also his natural Right to draw
him into Sin; for if he prevail* that will be finis operis, though not
operantis; it will be the issue of the Act, though it were not the intention of
the Agent.

We cannot doubt but that St. Paul very well understood what natural Right
every Man has to use his Tongue, and in what cases he ought to do it, and
thereby to communicate his Thoughts to his Neighbors; but suppose a Man's
Thoughts be wild, and his Opinions heretical, must he be left at Liberty to
impart such Thoughts, and vent such Opinions, even as he pleases? See what St.
Paul says concerning Heretics, Their mouths must be stopped; i. e. they must
Tit. i. 11.
not be permitted by personal Conferences to communicate their ill Opinions to
inform, or, which is all one, to corrupt the Judgments of other Men; so thought
St. Paul. Now, he who pleads for an universal Liberty, as the natural Right of
all Mankind, to communicate to other Men, whatever they think to be a Truth,
whether it be so or not; must censure St. Paul as a Man, either ignorant, or
else an invader of Men's natural Right, since he so positively declares that
some Men's Mouths must be stopped.

And in order to this, the same Apostle gave Bishop Titus Tit. iii. 10.
this Direction, A man that is an heretic, after the first and second
admonition, reject; i. e. excommunicate him, cast him out of the Church; and
certainly, if the Person of an obstinate Heretic must be rejected, his Books
may not be admitted; 2 Timothy ii. 17.
for, as to his Person, his Breath is infectious. His words eat like a Canker;
and as to his Writings, there is in his Ink more Poisons than one.

Now, since there are so many heretical Pens at work amongst us, there is great
need now, if ever, that some spiritual Argus should attend and watch the Press,
lest more venomous Doctrins should steal from thence to infect and kill the
Souls of Men. And this, I think, is a sufficient Answer to this Author's fifth
Allegation.

SECT. VIII.
6. THis Author's sixth Allegation against the Restraint of the Press is this;
There is no medium between Men's judging for themselves, and giving up their
Judgments to others. We grant it, but what then? His Inference is this, If the
first be their Duty, the Press ought not to be restrained; But why not? His
Reason is again the same, because it debars Men from seeing those Allegations,
by which they are to inform their Judgments: That Is his Argument, to which I
answer thus:

We must distinguish betwixt Man and Man, betwixt such as can judge for
themselves, and such as cannot, where the Scripture is express, the Words
plain, and the Sense easy; every Man who has a competent use of Reason, and
can read his Bible, may judge for himself. But when several Interpretations are
given of any Texts, when Doubts are raised, when Arguments are produced to
defend both Parts of a Contradiction; there is a vast number of Men, who are no
more able to judge which is true, and which is false, than a blind Man is to
distinguish betwixt a good Color and a bad one.

It Is the great unhappiness of such Persons, that in matters of Controversy
they cannot rely upon their own weak Reason; but must either suspend their
Judgments, or else give it up to the Conduct of some other Person, and who is
so fit to be trusted with it, as their own Ministers? provided they be* as
every Minister should be, Men of Piety and Parts, able to satisfy Doubts,
remove Scruples, and convince Gainsayers.

But if Men give up their Reason to the Clergy, this Author, who vilifieth our
Clergy as much as possible he can, gives our People an intimation, that by so
doing, they make us, the Lords of their Faith; But how does that follow?
suppose two Persons are engaged in a doubtful Controversy about an Estate
claimed by both, these Persons being of themselves unable to determine the
Case, appeal to the King's Judges, but do they thereby make those Judges the
Lords of that Estate which is contended for? surely no, the Judge does no more
than according to Evidence and Law, declare to which Person that Estate does
justly belong.

So it is in our present Case, several Parties of Men lay Claim to Truth as
theirs, and produce Evidences for it: Now, a Man unable to satisfy himself
which side Truth is to be found, consults his Minister, who, by Evidence of
Scripture, which in this case is the only Law, assures his Neighbor the Truth
lies here or there.

And indeed that the Minister is the most proper Judge in Controversies
relating to Religion, we cannot doubt, if we dare believe the Prophet, who
says, The Priest's lips should preserve Mal. ii. 7.
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger
of the Lord of Hosts. This Text does not constitute us, nor do we pretend to be
Lords of our People's Faith; but as the Apostle speaks, Helpers to the Truth.
We do not require any weak Believer's assent to any one Article of Faith,
whereunto God requires it not, though the Church of Rome does so: And how
unjustly then, without Modesty or Truth, does this Man stigmatize us, as Lords
of our People's Faith?

But beside those weak Christians, who in controverted Points cannot judge for
themselves, there are some other of clearer Heads, and more improved
Understandings that can; and for their sakes this Author says, that the Press
ought not to be restrained, and his Reason is this; Because the Restraint of
the Press debars them from seeing those Allegations by which they are to
confirm their Judgments.

This Argument, in effect, has already been offered once and again, and has
as often been replied to; but for the greater satisfaction of my Reader, I
shall again consider and enlarge my Answer to it, and this it is: Not knowing
and intelligent Christian, who is well able to judge for himself, can want any
new Allegations from the Press to confirm his Judgments in any disputed Points
of Faith or Worship, because we have already sufficient Rules to judge by* For,

1. We have the Scripture preached in our public Churches, and if we please,
we may read and consider them in our private Families and Closets.

And here I do again affirm that all matters of revealed Religion must be
examined, proved, and determined by the written Word of God. This is the only
sure balance to weigh, and touch*stone to try all Matters of Faith and Worship.
To ^h. v. 39.
this our Lord sent his hearers, Search the Scriptures; and again, How read
thou? And, which is remarkable, the ignorance ^uke x. 26. ^att. xxii. 29.
of Scripture did he make the only occasion and ground of Error in Points of
Faith; so he told the Sadducees, Ye err, but why? not knowing the Scriptures;
by which our Lord himself proved that great Doctrine of the Resurrection, which
they denied. And when our Lord would prove himself to be a greater Person than
David, he did it by that ^sal. cx. 1.
Text, The Lord said unto my Lord, etc. This course took our blessed Savior,
and so did his Apostles too, and so must we; we must take the Scripture for our
Guide in Matters of Religion, for that is the only and infallible Rule and
unalterable Standard, to measure all the Doctrines and Practices which such or
such a Church does teach, recommend or require from us.

But if it shall be again demanded, who must be the Judge, whether amongst
different Interpretations of Holy Writ this or that be the true one; whether in
controverted Points such or such a Text do certainly warrant such or such a
Doctrine, as is grounded thereon, I answer again.

2. We have the united Judgment and Decrees of several Councils; those, I mean,
that were convened in the first and purest times, before the Superstitions and
Idolatries of Rome had crept in by degrees through carelessness, vice, and
ignorance, and overspread the Church.

The grand Controversy, now on foot amongst us, concerns the Divinity of
Christ, the Personality and Deity of the Holy Ghost; that Christ, in the most
strict and proper Sense of that Notion, is truly God; that the Holy Ghost is a
Person, and a Divine Person, we affirm; but our Socinians, who are the spawn of
old Arius, make bold to deny. To justify our Doctrine we cite such and such
Texts; and to establish their Opinions, as well as they can, they do the same
thing; as for the Scripture, which we produce to prove the Doctrine of the
Trinity, because humane Reason cannot comprehend it, they do either question
the Authority of such Texts, or else they wrest them to such an intolerable
Sense, as every sober Man's Reason may justly abhor. Now, the Question is, Who
must judge betwixt us and them? Who must determine, whether the Scripture be on
their side, or ours? I answer,

That Heterodox Opinion, now much contended for, which we call Socinian, did
appear under some other Names, very early in the Christian Church: In the first
Age the Godhead of Christ was denied by the Jews, and particularly by Ebion; in
the Third Century by one Theodatus, Artemon, and Beryllus, and Sabellius; in
the Fourth Century, by Arius, Eunomius, and some others. And in the same Age,
the Personality and Divinity of the Holy Ghost was denied by Macedonius and
some others, who were there branded by a particular Name, and called, (...),
Oppugners of the Holy Ghost.

These Heterodox Opinions beginning to spread and disturb the Peace of the
Christian Church, and some other ill Opinions arising too, several General
Councils were summoned by several Christian Emperors; the Nicene Council, by
Constantine the Great, whose main work was to examine the Opinion of Arius; the
Council of Constantinople, called by Theodosius the First, to debate the
Opinion of Macedonius; the Council of Ephesus, called by Theodosius the Second,
to consider the Opinion of Nestorius; and the Council of Chalcedon summoned by
the Emperor Martian, to consult about the Opinion of Eutyches.

These Councils consisting of some Hundreds of Bishops, having the Glory of God
in their Hearts, the Settlement of the Church in their Eyes, and the Bible in
their Hands, did after a mature deliberation, pronounce the Opinions of these
Men to be contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the obstinate defenders
of them to be Heretics. And certainly the determinations of these General
Councils, which were made up of Persons exemplary for their Piety, and eminent
for their Learning, who resolved on nothing without mature Advice and
Deliberation, are of as great Authority, and afford as much Satisfaction in
Matters of Religion, as any thing of Man can be or do. For the Truths of God,
once taught the World by Christ and his Apostles, being unchangeable for ever;
and our Bibles, which are the only Rule to measure Religions by, continuing one
and the same for ever; that, which was an Error in those early days, must needs
be an Error still; and that, which was a Truth then, must needs be a Truth now.
And if we cannot think of any more proper means for the right understanding of
Scripture, and the discovery of Truth and Error, than the deliberate and
unanimous Judgment of so many hundred pious, learned, and unbiassed Men
assembled together; then certainly the determinations of those ancient Councils
are very considerable Evidences for Truth, and against Error. And the rather,
because they consisted of such Persons, who, besides their eminent Piety and
Learning, had the great Advantage of living nearer the Apostles age, and
thereby were the better able to inform themselves and us, what was certainly
believed and done in the very infancy of the Christian Church.

SECT. IX.
3. THE Writings of the Ancient Fathers, those especially that lived within the
first six Centuries, wherever they agree, and are not since corrupted or
maimed by the Frauds and Forgeries of the Roman Church, are of singular use in
this Matter too.

That Ignatius, Clemens, Origin, Athanasius, Cyril, Nazianzene, Basil,
Chrysostom, Hierom, Austin, and many others both in the Eastern and Western
Churches, were indeed Persons of great Piety and excellent Parts, our
Socinians, without breach of Modesty, cannot deny. And although some of these
great Names, in some particular Matters, had their peculiar mistakes, and
showed themselves to be but Men; yet in all Points where we find an unanimous
Consent amongst them, we are to have so much Veneration for their Authority, as
not easily to suspect or contradict it.

True it is, if we take these Fathers singly, Man by Man, where we find any of
them alone in their Opinions, as Origin in reference to the Punishments of
Hell; and St. Austin in reference to Infants that die unbaptised; we are not in
this case much more obliged to accept their Judgment, than the Judgment of some
single Person yet alive. But if we take All the Fathers, who lived within six
hundred Years after Christ, together and in a lump, where we find them One in
Judgment; they are enough to make a wiser Council than any has been since
their time; they are enough to inform us what is Error, and what is Truth. But,

SECT. X.
4. BEcause Learned Men, whose Fortunes are Mean, cannot purchase; and
unlearned Men, whose Intellectuals are weak, cannot read and understand the
voluminous Writings of the Fathers; we have several Systems of Divinity,
Confessions of Faith, short Abridgments of Christian Religion, which are,
especially to unlearned Persons, great helps in this matter too.

And here methinks those ancient Creeds of the Apostles, Nice, and Athanasius,
which are so generally received by the Church of God, are of great Authority to
settle our Judgment in the main and most necessary Points of Faith. Besides, we
have many Choice and Excellent Catechisms, composed by Men that were Pious,
Judicious, acquainted with Scriptures, well versed in the Primitive Councils
and Fathers. These short Catechisms, compiled by Persons of singular
Endowments, and approved by the Church, are little less than contracted Bibles,
containing in them whatever Man is obliged to know, and delivering enough in
easy Terms to inform us in Matters of Practice, to secure us from Errors, and
confirm our Judgments in all the great Points of Faith.

In short, the substance of my Answer to this Argument is this; since we have
the written Word of God to be our Rule, and since this Word, in some material
Cases, according to the different Fancies and Interests of Men, has different
Interpretations given concerning its true Sense and Meaning; it is our safest
way, for our better Satisfaction, to betake our selves to the most able,
faithful and unbiassed Judges; and they are the most ancient Councils, and the
Primitive Fathers, whose Judgments are declared in our several Creeds, in other
public Confessions of Faith, and Orthodox Catechisms set forth or approved by
the Church of God.

And since we are very well stored with these excellent Helps, I do once more
conclude that no Man, whether learned or unlearned, can need any new Arguments
from the Press to confirm his Judgment in Matters of Religion.

SECT. XI.
7. THis Author's seventh Allegation against the Restraint of the Press runs
thus. If it be unlawful to let the Press continue free, lest it furnish Men
with the Reasons of one Party as well as the other, it must be as unlawful to
examine those Reasons. To this I answer thus;

We must distinguish between Party and Party; between one, who is Orthodox, and
one who is Heretical; this distinction being premised, I shall resolve this
Hypothetical Proposition into these two Categorical ones. That it is not lawful
for many Orthodox Christians to Examine those Reasons, which Heretics may urge
in defense of their ill Opinions. And therefore that the Press should not be
permitted to furnish such Christians with any such Reasons,

It Is notoriously known that there are amongst us vast numbers of Persons, who
are of weak Judgments, not firmly established in their Faith, not able to
distinguish Truth from Falsehood in a fallacious Argument, and therefore are apt
to be Tossed up and down by every wind of doctrine: now, for such Men to peep
into Heretical Books, cannot be lawful, because they do thereby run themselves
into a very dangerous Temptation.

Matthew. vii. 1^
Our Lord has left us this Caution, Beware of false Prophets; it seems they
are dangerous Men; so we are told again and again: They creep into houses, and
there find success, for, 2 Timothy iii. 6* 2 Timothy ii. 18 Tit. i. 11.
They lead Captive silly women; and again, They overthrow the faith of some;
nay, They subvert whole houses; it seems that Heresy is a contagious Disease,
apt to overrun whole Families.

And doubtless this Poison may be conveyed in a piece of Paper as successfully,
as any other way; this infection may be received as well by the Eye from a
Book, as by the Ear from a Tongue; for when unlearned Men meet with Socinian
Arguments, drawn either from Humane Reason, or abused Scripture, since they
themselves cannot confute them; they are apt to yield up their own Reason, and
give up those Truths for lost, which they are not able to defend.

And I think that it will be no breach of Charity, if I tell my Reader that I
am verily persuaded, that the great Reason, why this Author pleads so many
Arguments, though no good ones, for the unlimited liberty of the Press, is
this; namely, that our Socinians may without control publish their Books full
of subtle, but fallacious Arguments to Surprise and Captivate the Judgments of
illiterate and undiscerning Men. We know, that in the late Reign an Universal
Liberty of Conscience was pleaded for, and granted by a Declaration upon a
design to bring in Popery; so now an universal Liberty of the Press is
contended for by those Men, whose design it is to introduce Socinianism, the
very worst of Heresies, for it totally subverts the very Foundation of our
Christian Faith and Hope.

Indeed, to my best observation, this Author has not, in his whole Letter, so
much as once named Socinian, nor dropped one plain word in favor of it; but
yet, Latet anguis in herba; This was very prudently done to prevent Suspicion;
but if he be not a Man of that sort, why does he tell us, that if the Press
must be Regulated, it must be done by some Layman; for which he can have no
substantial Reason, save only this, namely, because from a Clergyman no
Socinian Book can ever expect an Imprimatur. But this, (...) only by the way,

In short, the substance of my Answer to this Allegation is this, It Is not
lawful for Men of weak Understandings to mind subtle Arguments contained in
Heretical Books, lest thereby they might be ensnared; and for that Reason, the
Press should not be permitted to publish any such Books, unless security could
be given that they should never come into Vulgar hands.

SECT. XII.
8. THIS Authors Eighth Allegation against the Restraint of the Press is this.
The Press ought not to be Restrained, because the Reformation is wholly owing
to it. I answer,

There is no liberty denied to any English Press to publish any Book, which
tends to help the Devotions, to reform the Lives, or confirm the Judgments of
Men in the true Faith of Christ; but as for the Established Religion of our
Church in matters of Faith, and Worship, it is so well refined already from the
dregs of Popery and Superstition, that we do not need another Luther, nor the
help of any Press to reform and make it better. He that would reform our
Religion in any of its substantial Parts, must reform the Scriptures too; for
our Church teaches no other Doctrines in the great Points of Faith and Worship
than Christ and his Apostles taught the World, if we may believe those Sacred
Writings, which they have left us. But since I have already, under another Head
given a sufficient answer to this Allegation. I need not here say any more
about it.

SECT. XIII.
9. THE Ninth Allegation, which this Author urges against the Restraint of the
Press, is this; Our Divines condemn the Popish Clergy for not suffering their
Laity to read Protestant Authors; We do so, and very justly too, but what then?
The Inference, which he intends, must be this; Our Protestant Clergy must be
Condemned for not suffering our Laity to Read Socinian Books, and for watching
the Press to prevent it.

To this I answer thus; this Inference is, a Non Sequitur, it is wild and
extravagant; for there is a great difference in the Case: the prohibition of
Books may be an Act either to be blamed or commended according as the Books
prohibited are either really good or really bad; to forbid Men the use of such
Books, as tend to the benefit of Mankind, the advantage of True Religion, and
the Salvation of Souls, is an Act Impious and Tyrannical. And this is the known
Practice of the Roman Church, which forbids Laymen to Read the Bible, and the
Writings of such Protestant Authors as teach nothing but what the Scriptures
teach, and for this do we very justly Condemn them.

But on the other Hand, to forbid injudicious Men the use of such Books, as
tend to promote Errors and Heresies, to distract their Readers Judgment, and
rather to shake their Faith than to confirm it, is an Act laudable, Charitable,
and necessary for the Age we live in, for those Predictions of Christ and his
Apostles; false Prophets shall arise; and again, false Matthew. xxiv. ^ 2 Pet.
ii. 1*
Teachers shall be among you, are fulfilled in these times; for there are
amongst us Romish Priests and Jesuits; yea and some far more dangerous than
they: I mean, our Socinians, who cannot corrupt so many Souls by their Personal
Conferences, as they may by their Books. And is it not high time to watch the
Press, lest any thing steal from thence, which may Poison the Heads of unwary
Men? Or must the Press be permitted freely to spread that destructive Heresy,
which has been long since Condemned by the Catholic Church and its
Representatives met in General Councils?

But here this Author, to justify his own Opinion, Cites a learned Divine of
our own Church, and borrows this Passage from him, They that have a good Cause,
will not fright Men from considering what their Adversaries say against them,
nor forbid them to Read their Books, but rather encourage them so to do, that
they may see the difference between Truth and Error, Reason and Sophistry with
their own Eyes, etc. That we may see how little service this Passage does our
Author, let us view it again. They who have a good Cause, but who are they? We
cannot doubt, but this good Man meant the Church of England, of which he
himself was a very worthy Minister; but what says he of this Church of Ours?
It will not fright Men from considering, etc. but what Men? This eminent Divine
was the Lecturer of Gray's Inn, where his Auditory did chiefly consist of such
Persons, as had been blessed with a learned Education, and might Charitably be
presumed to be well skilled in the Law of God as well as in the Law of Man.

Now, that this judicious Divine of ours did mean, that the Church of England
would rather encourage than forbid Persons so qualified to read and Examine the
Books of our Adversaries as well as our own; to me seems evident from that
reason which he subjoyns as the only end of an impartial Examination, namely
this, That they may see the difference between Truth and Error, Reason and
Sophistry, with their own Eyes; This Expression does plainly import the Persons
fit to Read Books of Controversy in matters of Religion are only such as have
Eyes of their own, i. e. clear Heads, enlightened Understandings, able to
discern Truth from Falsehood.

And verily could the Books of our Socinians be confined within the Libraries
of learned and judicious Men, whether of the Clergy, or of the Laity: could
they be surely kept from purblind Eyes and weak Judgments; that unlimited
liberty of the Press, which this Author does so earnestly contend for, were the
more allowable. But since this can never be, since Heretical Books are and ever
will be exposed to common Sale; though the Church of Rome does ill in
restraining their Laity from the use of good Books; yet the Church of England
would do very well in restraining the Press from putting ill ones into the
Hands of unskilful Men, where they would be more dangerous than edge-Tools in
the Hand of a Child, who knows not how to use them. And so much in answer to
this Objection.

SECT. XIV.
10. THIS Author begins his Tenth Allegation thus: I cannot see how they, that
are for tying Men to that Interpretation of Scripture, which a Licenser shall
approve, and therefore put it in his power to hinder all others from being
published, can with any Justice condemn the Popish Clergy for not Licensing the
Bible it self for the Laity to Read. I answer,

Here are two Suppositions, both which are either impertinent to us, or false
in themselves; if the Church of England be not the Persons here charged, the
Charge is impertinent; but if they be, it is false. For,

1. The Church of England does tie none of her Members to that Interpretation
of Scripture, which such or such a Licenser of hers shall approve.

It Is well known that we have many Interpretations of the Scripture, which
never were under the Inspection of any English Licenser; the Expositions of the
Fathers, Schoolmen, and many other Divines are brought us from beyond the Seas,
and the free choice and use of them is allowed us by our Church. And if such
Books chance to be Reprinted here in England, the care of the Edition is
committed, not to the Licenser of Books to judge of their matters, but to the
Composer and Corrector of the Press to see to their Forms, Character, and exact
truth of Printing.

Now, if this be so, as indeed it is; if we are allowed to consult various
Interpreters of our Bibles, if we may take our Choice of such or such
Expositors, and use what Editions we please; why should this undeserved
imputation be cast upon the Church of England, as if she tied all her Sons to
such Interpretations of the Holy Scripture, as her own Licensers shall
Authorize?

2. The Church of England does not give her Licensers a Despotick, Arbitrary,
and Absolute Power to reject every Book, every Interpretation of Scripture,
which does not please them.

It Is certain that our Licensers do not act by any immediate and independent
Power of their own; but as Delegates and Substitutes by an Authority derived
from their Superiors, and if any of them shall either allow any Book, which
tends to mischief; or suppress any Book, which tends to common good, they do
abuse their Power, exceed their Commission, and must answer for it.

But is the miscarriage of some few Licensers an Argument that they should all
be laid aside? Some Kings have proved cruel Tyrants. Some Judges have been
corrupted, and must we therefore have neither King nor Judge? Sure I am that in
this Age of ours we do sufficiently need a discreet and able Judge of Books: and
the Test and Censure of such a Judge no Man need fear more than our Socinian
Writers; for they, being no great Friends to the Scripture, are very odd
Interpreters of it, not through Ignorance, but design; I will not say, through
Rancor and Malice; but I will say, through Partiality and Prejudice. For,
because the beginning of St. John's Gospel, and several Expressions in St.
Paul's Epistles, being rightly understood, and in the sense of the Catholic
Church, do totally overthrow their dangerous Hypothesis; they fix upon those
Texts such Interpretations as are childish, absurd, and even ridiculous; such,
as none of the Fathers, Schoolmen; or Critics, so far as I can find, did even
think of. And what an ill Cause do these Men manage, who endeavor with
handfuls of dirt to stop the Mouths of those Witnesses, who, being permitted to
speak their own sense, do so loudly proclaim their united Testimonies against
them?

And methinks this one Consideration, were there no more, is enough to justify
our Church in appointing some fit Persons to be the Judges of Books, and the
Interpretations of Scripture offered to the Press; and the rather, because if
any Licenser should out of any by*respect, or for any sinister end, Stifle any
Papers, which deserve to see the light; the injured Authors may appeal from the
Licenser to the Vice-Chancellors in either of our Universities, or to the Lord
Bishop of London, or to his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; so that
the fate of Books does not ultimately depend upon the pleasure or sole Judgment
of a Licenser.

Now, Those two forenamed Suppositions, upon which this Author bottoms this
Tenth Allegation, proving false, the Superstructure, which he builds upon them,
falls to the Ground, and there I leave it.

SECT. XV.
11. THE next Allegation against the Restraint of the Press this Author thrusts
into the Mouths of other Men, and makes them say what perhaps he himself does
not think: namely this. It Is no small presumption that the Clergy themselves
are Conscious of the falseness of their Religion. How! the Clergy, what! the
whole Clergy? Are ten thousand of us at once presumed to be Hypocrites,
Juglers, and gross Dissemblers with God and Man? We, who teach Men that a false
Religion leads toward Hell, do we know our own to be false, and yet embrace it
still? The Martyrs of England in Queen Mary's days died for the same Religion,
which we now profess, and were they also Conscious that this Religion is false,
and yet in the defense of it shed their blood?

Certainly this Presumption is not small, but very strange; it is a great breach
as well of Charity as of Truth; for, if the Scriptures be true, and who dares
suspect them? We are abundantly convinced that our Religion cannot be false;
and why then should any Man presume that we have indeed other thoughts
concerning it? The Reason here given is this; Because the Clergy dare not
suffer their Religion to undergo a fair Trial, but do what they can to Stifle
all the Reasons that can be urged against it. But, Sir, Pray tell us, can any
sound Reason be ever urged against a Religion, such as ours is, Instituted by
Christ, Taught by his Apostles, Embraced by the Primitive Church, and Sealed by
the Blood of thousands of Martyrs.

But it is not strange to hear Men speak against the very best of things or
Persons; for our Lord told his Apostles, Matthew v. 11.
Men shall revile you, and say all manner of evil against you. Thus were their
Persons treated; yea, and their Doctrine too. Act. xiii 45* Ps. cxxxix. 20.
The Jews spoke against those things, which were spoken by Paul. Nay, the
Psalmist tells his God, They speak against thee; and what wonder then if they
speak against his Religion too? But what do they speak? That, which this Author
styles Reason, is but Pretense and Sophistry; and were such Pretenses, though
never so plausible, yet being fallacious, buried in perpetual Oblivion, and
stifled for ever, what harm were in it? What one single Soul would be the worse?

But our Author replieth, that when there is a Contest between Men of two
different Opinions, they have not fair Play, if their respective Reasons be not
heard equally on both sides; we grant it, what Seneca says, is true*

Qui statuit aliquid, part inaudita altera,
Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit.
Well, the main Parties, now contending, are the Church of England, and our
Socinians, and have not these Men very often been heard already? their Opinion,
and their Arguments for it, being much the same with those of the Old Arians,
have been frequently debated, all their Witnesses have been heard, all their
Evidences have been maturely Considered, Baffled, and Overthrown, and Condemned
by several Councils, by many pious and learned Fathers, by a great number of
worthy Divines, by Papists, by Protestants, by Calvinists, by Lutherans, by all
sorts of Christians; but themselves.

Now, when a Cause Condemned by several able and impartial Judges, at several
times, and in several places, is, by a Bill of Revival, renewed and brought
upon the Stage again with the self- same Witnesses, and the self- same
Evidence; if the Proper Judges, to free themselves and others from a great deal
of needless trouble, should reject and cast it out of the Court without any
further Hearing, I think there would be no foul play in doing so.

But we have not treated our modern Socinians thus; For did any of them ever
desire a personal Conference with any of our Learned Divines, and was rejected?
Did any of them ever provoke the professors of Divinity in either of our
Universities, to a public Disputation, and was refused? Are not their Writings
and ours to be seen, and had in many Shops in London, Oxford, Cambridge, and
other great Towns and Cities? Have they not received our printed Answers to
their printed Objections? If they have, Why should this Author complain for
want of fair Play? Why should he unworthily tell the World, that we dare not
suffer our Religion to undergo a fair Trial, for fear it should prove False?

No, we do not doubt the Truth of our Religion, nor the Ability of our Church
to defend it; but our Lord tells, False Matt. xxiv. 1 2 Pet. ii. 2.
Prophets shall deceive many; and St. Peter says, They shall bring in damnable
Doctrines; and yet he tells us, Many shall follow their pernicious ways. These
Texts do make us jealous that many weak, easy, and credulous Men may be
corrupted by the Sophistry and Fallacies of Socinian Arguments, which, for that
Reason should not be published.

But, may our Author reply, and in effect he does so, What danger can there be
in publishing such Arguments, since, if they be false, we have great store of
Divines able to confute them? We have so, and bless God for it; But what then?
Must we permit the Souls of Men to be poisoned, because we abound with
Sovereign Antidotes? Must we permit the Church our Mother, or her Sons who are
our Brethren to receive Wounds in their Heads, because we have Balsam enough to
Cure them? We would take a better course than so, and follow the old Rule,
venienti occurrite morbo, prevent the Poison, and then we need not use any
Antidotes; prevent the Wound, and then there is no need of Plasters; so here,
if we can, by a due Regulation of the Press, prevent the spreading of erroneous
Doctrines, there will be no need of Confutations.

But if Men of restless Spirits be still permitted to disturb the Peace of our
Church, and stagger the Faith of weak Believers, by publishing Arguments, which
only seem to be plausible, against the Fundamental Articles of our Creed, we
shall be concerned to spend more time, and blot more Paper, in returning just
Answers to them; we must not quit the Field, so long as there are Enemies in
it. And so I pass from this Paragraph to the next.

SECT. XVI.
12. THis Paragraph begins thus; It may be objected, says he, (and very
justly, say we) that by such a Latitude, People may be seduced into false
Religions, or into Heresies and Schisms. The Truth hereof, this Author does not
deny; but though it should be so, yet he insinuates, that there would be but
very little or no Danger in it; for, thus he tell us, If two Persons profess
two different Religions, the one a True, the other a False one; yet if they
have been equally sincere in their Examination, they are equally in the way to
Heaven. This Assertion, were it true, would be very comfortable to all sober
Jews, Turks, and Pagans, who have been serious in examining the Grounds of
their respective Religions; and yet I cannot think them equally in the way to
Heaven with all such Christians, as have done as much. And it is easy to
believe, that those Christians, who, after an impartial search into
Scripture-Truths, do own the Divinity of Christ and the Holy Ghost as
fundamental Articles of our Faith, are in a much fairer Capacity of Salvation,
than our Socinians, who, after all their Examinations, embrace a Doctrine
contrary to the Faith of the Catholic Pet. ii. 2.
Church, even denying the Lord that bought them; a Doctrine, which St. Peter
styles, Damnable.

^phes. iv. 54
St. Paul tells us, There is one Faith, one true Religion, and no more; and
this one true Religion is the only right Path, which leads toward Heaven; and
he, who is mistaken in the Choice of his Religion, is like a Traveller, who,
after all his enquiries, mistakes his way; and if he continue under that
mistake, he has little hopes to attain his desired Journey's end.

But to justify this strange Paradox, this Author subjoyns this Reason; two
such Persons, the one after a due examination, professing a true Religion; the
other a false one, are equally in the way to Heaven, because in following their
Reason, they both have done what God requires. That Is his Argument, but there is
a fallacy in it; for, does not God require, and does not Reason oblige us, in
order to our Salvation, to obey one Command as well as another? One Command is
this, prove all things; another immediately follows, hold fast that which is
good. Now, if one Man obey the first of these Commands only, and another obey
them both, they do not equally do what God requires, nor consequently are they
equally in the way to Heaven.

And this is the Case of two Persons, who, after an equal Examination, hold two
different Religions, the one a True, and the other a False one; the Obedience
of the one is only, secundum quid, he obeys but this single Command, prove
all things; but the other obeys this and that too, hold fast that which is
good, which a False Religion can never be. And if so, How can two such Persons
be in an equal Capacity of Salvation, except a wrong way do as directly lead to
Heaven as the right one?

There is another Assertion in the same Paragraph, which I cannot pass over
without some Reflections upon it, and it is this; The perverse holding of
Religion; i. e. taking it up on trust, whether it be true or false, is Heresy.
This definition of Heresy is to me a new one, and repugnant to many old ones,
which I have met with.

It is true, the different Opinions of the old Philosophers, whether True or
False, are indifferently styled by Epiphanius, (...), the Heresies of the
Philosophers. But in Epiph. Haer. 8.
Matters of Religion, this word, Heresy, is very seldom, if ever, used in any
Sense, but a bad one; the Evangelist mentions the Sect, in the Greek, (...),
the Heresy of the Pharisees and the Sadducees, an Expression, which does no
way commend them. Nor did the Jews intend the credit of the Christian Religion,
when they called it, this Sect, or as it is in the Original, (...), this
Heresy. And as for the Pagans, many of them had as bad an Opinion of it, and
styled it, (...), an Atheistical Heresy; so ^^seb. Hist. ^. c. 18.
Eusebius.

Sure it is, the word is now generally used in an ill Sense, and does
necessarily imply nothing else, but an unsoundness and tenacity of Opinion,
about Matters of Religion; accordingly ^ll. Constitut. ^t. 12. ^nc. Carthag.
^n. 25. ^ertull. de ^irg. Velandis.
the old Canon Law of the Greek Church defines an Heretic thus; (...), one that
is not right in his Judgment. The Council of Carthage describes them thus;
(...), Heretics are they, who have wrong apprehensions about the Christian
Faith. Tertullian, defines Heresy thus, quodcunque adversus veritatem sapit,
whatsoever makes against, not the Laws of God, but his Truth; accordingly an
Heretic, in the Language of Hesychius, is this, (...), one that chooses some
Opinion besides, or against the Truth.

These Definitions of Ancient Divines inform us what their Thoughts were
concerning Heresy; namely, that it was nothing else but an Opinion held
against some Truth. But this late Author is of another mind, for he tells us,
That the taking up a Religion on trust, though the true one, is Heresy, and
according as Men are more or less partial in examining, they are more or less
heretical. But if this be so, then must the Nature and Essence of Truth depend
on the bare act of Examination, which cannot be, because Truth will remain
Truth, whether it be examined or not; the strictest Examination does not
constitute Truth, but only makes it evident.

Indeed he, who takes up a true Religion barely upon trust, may be to blame;
but his Fault is not Heresy, but Negligence and Disobedience; it is not, as
Heresy is, an Error in point of Judgment, but a Sin in point of Practice;
it is not the Violation of a Doctrine, but the Transgression of a Command. So
that whatever Title we may give such a Man, we cannot justly brand him with the
Name of Heretic.

But yet our Author, from these foregoing Premises, infers this as an
Epiphonema, or granted Conclusion; so that it is not, what a Man professes;
but, how, that justifies or condemns him before God; No. Is the what excluded?
And is the, how, all? Suppose a Man profess the Religion of Mahomet with the
greatest Devotion that can be, would not the what condemn him, or would the how
excuse him? Suppose a Jew with the highest Reverence should have offered up a
Swine instead of a Lamb, would not the what, the matter of his Sacrifice,
notwithstanding its exactest manner, have rendered it abominable? The Truth is,
God considers both the what and the how, the substance of his Worship, and its
circumstances too; and if so, Why does this Man tell us, it is not the what, but
the how?

And now being wearied with pursuing this Author through so many impertinent
Allegations against the Restraint of the Press, I shall take my leave of him
when I have propounded two Arguments against that unlimited Liberty of the
Press, for which he is so zealous an Advocate, and and that, I fear, upon an
ill Design; and my first Argument is this.

1. Since this unlimited Liberty of the Press would certainly be, as this
Author himself does not deny, an inlet to Schisms, Heresies, and a great
variety of Opinions and Practices in Matters of Religion; the allowance of it
can never consist with that Command of God, contend earnestly Jude 3.
for the Faith once delivered to the Saints.

This Text supposes that the true Faith, or which is all one, the true
Religion, is but one; and that for that one, we are to Contend, and that
Earnestly too: Now, to allow an unlimited Liberty to the Press, which will open
a wide Gap to introduce false Religions, is so far from a contending for the
one true Faith, that it is indeed a contending against it; and therefore such
an allowance is a direct breach of this Command.

2. Since this unlimited Liberty of the Press would certainly prove an inlet
to Schisms, Heresies, and false Religions, the allowance of it would be
contradictory to the Judgment and Practice of the universal Church in all Ages.

It is true, the Church of Christ in all Ages had not the use of a Press, but
if the late Art of Printing, without any due Restraint should prove a means to
introduce an inundation of Heresies; the allowance of such a Liberty, and those
numerous Errors, with which it would be attended, would be diametrically
opposite to the Judgment and Practice of the Catholic Church from one
Generation to another.

Now, the Question which relates to the Case in hand, is this; How did the
Primitive Saints deal with those Men, who differed in Opinion from the received
Doctrine of the Catholic Church? They followed St. Paul's Rule, 2 Timothy 2. 25.
In meekness instruct those that oppose themselves; they did so, they used all
gentle and rational means to reduce them; but when this would not do, What
course took they then? Did they indulge them? Did they give them an universal
Liberty of Conscience? Surely no; and to prove this, three Things shall be
showed. First, That an unlimited Toleration of all Opinions and Practices in
the Matters of Religion, is contrary to the Judgment and Practice of particular
Learned Men in the Primitive Church.

Tertull. ad Scapulam.
Tertullian, indeed tells us, Non Religionis est cogere Religionem, quae
sponte-suscipi debeat, non vi; the owning of any Religion ought to be free, not
forced; and it is best, that it should be so; but lest this Expression should be
made use Pamel. in Locum. Tertull. in Scorp.
of, as Pamelius words it, ad sectarum licentiam, as a License to Heretics; the
same Tertullian says elsewhere, ad officium Haereticos compelli, non inlici
dignum est; it is fit the Heretics should be compelled, not allured, to do
what becomes them.

Hieroymus ^ Gal. 5. 9.
St. Hierom says of Heresy, scintilla statim, ut apparuerit, extinguenda est,
the very first spark of it should not be cherished, but extinguished; and how
far he was from countenancing ill Opinions, is evident from his Epistle to
Riparius, where he calls his opposing the Heresies of those times, Christi
bellum, the War of Christ. And Fevardentius Fevard. in renaei Praefa
tells us, Gloriatur Hieronymus se haereticis nunquam pepercisse, St. Hierom
glories, that he never spared any Heretics.

That great Man St. Austin, who was very tender of punishing Men for their
Opinions, did yet write several Epistles to the Governors of several
Provinces, which bear this Inscription, De moderate coercendis Haereticis,
wherein he does beseech them to Restrain Heretics, not by Capital Punishments,
but by some gentler Corrections. That Sentence, which Dulcitius pronounced
against the Donatists, St. Austin thought too severe, and so do we; August. in
E 61.
noveritis vos debitae morti dandos, know that ye must die, as ye deserve; such
sanguinary Courses are very improper means to reduce Heretics; they are
inconsistent with our Lord's Designs, and cannot be reconciled to that Command
of his, Compel them to come in, that my Luke xiv. 23.
house may be filled; the Compulsion, here required, must be such, as tends to
recover Men, not to destroy them; and certainly to send them out of the World
by bloody Laws, were a strange way of bringing them into the Church. That
Expression of St. Paul will never warrant such a course, Galathians 5. 12. I
would they were even cut off, which trouble you. He does not wish they were
killed with the Sword, but only cut off from the Church by Excommunication.

But although sanguinary Laws may not be executed, unless it be in case of
professed Atheism, gross Idolatry, or downright Blasphemy, yet for the
restraint of other Opinions and Practices, which corrupt the Doctrine, and
disturb the Peace of the Catholic Church, some gentler Punishments have been
used, and in St. Austin's Judgment, still ought to be.

In short, all those Learned and Pious Men, who were so renowned in former
Ages, Athanasius, great St. Basil, Irenaeus, and many others, have declared to
all succeeding Generations, that they did not approve of a general Toleration
of all Opinions and Practices in the Matters of Religion. For, why else did
they write so vehemently against the ill Opinions of Arius, Eutyches,
Nestorius, and other Heretics, concerning whom Cyril of Jerusalem gave ^yril.
Hierosol. ^atech. 6.
every Orthodox Christian this Advice (...), abhor them, avoid them, do not so
much as once salute them; so he.

2. It Is certain that an universal Liberty of Conscience, an unlimited
Toleration of all Opinions and Practices in the Matters of Religion, is
directly contrary to the Decrees and Canons of ancient Councils, and that we
may see in a few Instances; as,

1. The Decrees and Canons of Councils did not leave Men to the Liberty of
their own Consciences, as to the use of both the Sacraments.

The Council of Carthage established this Canon in reference ^ono. Carthag.
^ant. 122.
to Baptism, (...), whosoever demeth that little Infants, newly born, ought to
be baptized, let him be accursed, or excommunicated.

And as to the other blessed Sacrament, there is a Canon, ascribed to the
Apostles themselves, which runs thus, (...). Apost. Can.
All Christians, who come to the Public Assemblies, and there hear the
Scriptures; but stay not to receive the Holy Communion, ought to be
Excommucated, and so thought the Council of Antioch: (...). Conc. Antioc Can. 2.
They, who turn their Backs upon the Holy Communion, ought to be cast out of the
Church. And the Council of Sardica, as Zonaras tells us, did, by a Canon of
theirs, Excommunicate all Persons, who abstained from the Holy Sacrament: (...)
for three Lords Days together.

2. The Decrees and Canons of Councils did not leave Men to the liberty of
their own Consciences, as to the observation of the Lords day.

Concerning this the Council of Laodicea thus Decreed, (...) Conc. Laod. Can.
^9.
no Christian ought to act like a Jew; and rest upon the Saturday; but to prefer
our Lords days, and rest in them; and as for such as should transgress this
Canon, the Council passed this Sentence upon them; (...), let them be accursed
of Christ: nor was it left as a thing Arbitrary for Men commonly to Fast upon
the Sunday, if a Clergyman did it, (...)* Apost. Can. 66.
let him be deposed or degraded; if a Layman did it, (...), let him be
Excommunicated; so say the Apostles Canons.

3. The Decrees and Canons of Councils did not leave Men to the liberty of
their own Consciences, as to the use of Public Churches, and the frequenting
of Sacred Assemblies held therein.

The Heretic Eustathius, in the fourth Century, despising Public Churches,
taught his Followers to Pray and perform other Acts of Divine Service in
private Conventicles. Against this Practice the Council of Gangra Established
their Canons. Conc. Gangz. Can. 5. and 6.
(...) and again, (...), etc. If any Man teach, that the Church and Solemn
Assemblies met therein, are to be despised, and if any Man shall set up Private
meetings for the Worship of God without License from his Bishop, let him be
accursed.

These Canons, and many more to the like effect, are undeniable Evidences, that
the Councils of the Primitive Church were far enough from being favorers of a
general Toleration of all Opinions and Practices in Matters of Religion.

3. It Is certain that an Universal Toleration of all Opinions and Practices in
matters of Religion is contrary to the Judgment and Practice even of the Roman
Church itself. What their judgment is in this case, we are informed from the
Learned Men of their Communion; Lorinus, one of their Jesuits, intimates his
Opinion, as well as his Authors, when Lorinus in Act. 10. v. 30.
he says, Haereticos recte Clemens exterminandos praecipit: Clemens did justly
command Heretics to be rooted out. Thomas Aquinas, their angelical Doctor,
delivers his Opinion Aqu. 2. 2. qu. 11. Art. 3.
concerning Heretics very roundly thus; Non solum ab Ecclesia per
Excommunicationem separandos, sed etiam per mortem a mundo excludendos;
Heretics deserve not only to be excluded from the Church by Excommunication;
but also from the World by Death. Bellarmine, their most illustrious Cardinal,
spends a whole Chapter in proving, that Heretics, posse ac deberi temporalibus
poenis, atque etiam ipsa morte mulctari; that incorrigeable Heretics not only
may, but must, suffer Temporal Punishments, yea and Death itself. But there is
no Man, that speaks more fully to this, Maldonat. in Luc. 9. v. 55.
than Maldonate, another Jesuit, who expressly says, Comburendi tanquam
proditores, and transfugae discedentes Haeretici: Heretics, who depart from
the Church, are to be burnt, as so many Traitors and Renegadoes.

And whom he means by these Heretics, he elsewhere tells us, Calvinistos and
Lutheranos Haereticos esse quis non videt? Maldonat. in Matthew. 13. v. 26.
nullus nunquam Haereticus fuit, nullus Haereticus esse potest, si illi
Haeretici non sunt: who does not know, that Calvinists and Lutherans,
Protestants of both Denominations, are Heretics? If they are not, no Man ever
was, nor can be, such; It Is boldly spoken, but never was, never will be proved.

And it is worth our Observation, that the same Jesuit has left the Kings of
the Christian Church this advice; Admoneo Maldonat. in Matthew. c. 13. 26.
non licere illis istas, quas vocant, Conscientiae libertates nimium nostro
tempore usitatas Haereticis dare. I put Princes in mind, that it is not lawful
for any of them to grant Heretics, i. e. Protestants, any Liberty of
Conscience, of which he complains as a thing too often done.

These instances are enough to teach us what are the Principles of the Roman
Church, whereunto their Practice has been so suitable that it may be a matter
of dispute, whether Rome Pagan, or Rome Papal has shed the greater quantity of
Christian blood. And certainly, their Persecuting, Impopoverishing,
Imprisoning, Tormenting, Banishing, and Massacring so many Thousands, in
England, Scotland, Ireland, France, and other places, barely upon the score of
Religion, are very sorry Arguments, that they do really like any Toleration,
what Hand so ever the Men of that Religion may have in ours.

4. It Is certain that an unlimited Toleration of all Opinions and Practices in
the matters of Religion is directly contrary to the Commands and Edicts of good
Kings both in the Jewish and Christian Church.

1. The good Kings of Israel and Judah did not permit all their Subjects to do,
what they pleased, in the matters of their Religion. We cannot doubt, but there
were in those days many Men of erroneous Judgments, who thought they did well,
when they Worshipped God by an Image. Cor. viii* 7.
St. Paul mentions, (...), the Conscience of the Idol, i. e. a false Opinion,
that there was some thing of Divinity in it, and accordingly did such Men
Sacrifice to it.

But was this Opinion and Practice allowed by any of their religious Kings,
because it was suitable to the mistaken Consciences of some of their Subjects?
did Hezekiah, did Josiah, nay did Jehu, grant a Public Indulgence for the
Worship of Idols, because many both Laics and Priests were for it? It was so
far from this, that, although a great number of their Subjects were too much
inclined, and had been too long accustomed to it, they took care to root it out.

2. Nor was such an Universal Tolleration of all Religions ever known in former
Ages in the Christian Church, since the Religion of Christ was owned by Kings
and Emperors.

Its true, Socrates tells us, that the good Emperor Theodosius did bear with
the Novatians, but he bore with none besides; what he said to Demophilus, an
Arrian Bishop, we Socr. l. 5. c. 7.
have from the same Historian. (...), I command thee to quit the Christian
Churches.

It Is also true, that the good Emperor Constantine the Great did once sign a
Royal Edict for such a Toleration, the sum Eus. Hist. l. 10. cap. 5.
of which is thus Recorded by Eusebius, (...). i. e. Let us give both to the
Christians and to all others the Eus. de Vit. Constable. l. 2. c. 56.
free Choice of their Religion. And hereunto he added this Charge; (...)* Let no
Man disturb his Neighbor in point of Religion, but let every one do as his
Soul desires.

This, indeed was Constantine's Act, and a wise Act it was, and all that could
then be done, considering in what Circumstances he then stood; for, Constantine
and Licinius were then Co-Emperors; Constantine favored the Christian
Religion, Licinius favored the Pagan Worship: Heathenism was the Religion then
Established by Law, Christianity was under Hatches; the Pagan Religion did not
need a Toleration, the Christian did.

In such a juncture of time as this, it was very worthily done of Constantine
to get the consent of his Colleague Licinius to a General Toleration of all
Religions, that so the Christian might be Comprehended in it; and such a
present Toleration did he procure in order to a future Establishment of the
Christian Faith.

And that this was indeed his present Design is Evident from what he afterward
did; for, when he became the sole Emperor, and was well settled in the Throne,
he made it his great business to suppress all false Religions, and Establish
that of Christ; Eusebius tells us, that there was sent out by him a Law. (...),
Eusebius. de vita Constable. l. 2. c. 45.
Restraining the abominable Idolatries, that had hitherto been practiced in
Cities and Countries; and again (...), the Law Commanded that none should dare
to set up any Eusebius. de vita Constable. l. 4, c. 23.
Images. The same Historian says, (...), by his Command the Gates of Idol
Temples were shut up: Nay* another Historian tells us that he did, Socr. l. 1.
c. 18.
(...), quite pluck down the Temples of Venus.

And as he had no kindness for any ill Religions without the Christian Church,
so did he give no Countenance to any Sects and ill Opinions, which arose within
it. That he Banished Arius, though Baronius denies it, we have the Authority of
Sozomen, who says, (...). Soz. l. 2. c. 16.
Arius was called back from Banishment not long after the Council of Nice: and
how he dealt with other Heretics, the same Historian informs us, (...) Soz. l.
2. c, 32.
By a Law he Commanded that the Oratories of Heretics should be took from them,
and that they should hold no Assemblies either in Public or Private places*

And as this good* Emperor took care to root out all false Worship, and to
suppress ill Opinions, so did he by his Royal Authority promote the true
Service of God. To that end, he set forth a Law for the observation of the Eus.
de vita Constable. l. 4. c. 18,
Lords day. So Eusebius tells us, (...), or as the same Historian says in
another place, (...). He Exhorted, nay, by a Law he required the universality
of his Subjects to cease from all their worldly business upon the Lord's days,
that therein they might attend the Exercises of Religion.

Certainly these and the like proceedings of his are infallible Evidences, that
although this good Emperor did once, in Christian Policy, and for an excellent
end, Sign a Royal Edict for a General Toleration of all Religions; yet, when it
might be otherwise, he did not like it.

This Example of Constantine was followed by succeeding Justin. in Ep, de fide
Orthodoxa.
*Emperors, (...), says Justinian; we Condemn every Heresy, and lest the Books
of Heretics should transmit their ill Opinions to Posterity, Theodosius and
Valentinian did Command by a Law, Balsam. in Coll. Constable. Ex l. 1. Co^.
(...), that their Writings should be cast into the Flames. We Read, that they
were debarred from the common Privileges of Orthodox Christians, (...) (...),
says the Civil Law, and it Blastaris Synt* lit. A.
instances in several particulars, (...), We decree that Heretics shall be
incapable of any Public Employment, whether Military or Civil; nor might they
be admitted as Witnesses in their Courts of Judicature, (...), Blast. Syntag.
Alphab. lit. A.
Let not an Heretick's Testimony be received against an Orthodox Christian: nay
more, (...)* No Heretic shall Inherit Idem ibid.
the Estate of his Father. In short, we find Heretics Deposed, Degraded,
Banished, and sometimes Fined; Witness that Law of Theodosius, mentioned by the
Council of Carthage, which Enacted, that in some Cases, Heretics Council.
Carth. Can. 96.
should pay, as the Canon words it, (...), Ten Pounds of Gold.

Now, we do not Write this with any design to encourage the Governors of our
Church or State to exercise any Severity toward our sober and peaceable
Dissenters, who differ from us only in the Circumstantials of our Religion; but
we mention these things to confirm our present Argument; and to show, that our
present unlimited Toleration of all Opinions and Practices in Matters of
Religion, is quite contrary to the Judgment, Usages, and Laws of the Ancient
Church, who punished such as held and taught Heterodox Opinions, and would not
be otherwise reclaimed.

5. It Is certain that an unlimited Toleration of all Opinions and Practices in
Matters of Religion is directly contrary to the Divine Law, to the Will of God
revealed in his written Word.

The Jewish Church was never permitted to teach and do, what they pleased,
about the things of God; they were not allowed to serve their Maker, as they
Listed; they were obliged to Sacrifice when, where, and what they were
Commanded. It was not left to them, as a matter of Choice, whether they would
Circumcise their Infants, or not; no, the Law was this, the Uncircumcised Man
child shall be cut off. Nor were they left to their own Liberty, whether they
would come to Jerusalem to eat the Passover, or not; no, the Text says of good
Josiah, The King commanded all the people, saying, keep the Passover. We do not
find any indulgence in matters of Religion granted to the Jewish Church by
Almighty God, or any of their good Kings.

And as there is no such thing to be found in the Law or the Prophets; so there
is very little or nothing to be met with in the whole Gospel, that gives any
Countenance to such a Practice; the main place, which seems to look that way,
is in the Parable of the Tares; of which it is said, Let them grow until the
Harvest, what means our Matthew. 13. 30.
Lord by this? Is it indeed his pleasure, that ill Men, and ill Opinions,
should be indulged and countenanced in his Church? St. Chrysostom gives us
another Interpretation Chrysostom. in locum.
of our Savior's words, (...), our Lord does here forbid us to kill and slay*
Heretics; but is there no difference betwixt a Sword and a Rod? Is a Bridle
and a Halter the same thing? The Heretic must not be destroyed, but may he not
be restrained? St. Chrysostom answers thus, (...), etc. (...), our Lord does
not here forbid to curb Heretics, to stop their Mouths, to check their
boldness, dissolve their Conventicles, etc. as he goes on.

Tit. 1. 11.
Of the same mind was St. Paul, who says, Their Mouths must be stopped; but
how can that be done, if there may be no Penal Laws? And if an Universal
Liberty of Conscience in Opinion and Practice about matters of Religion be
indeed agreeable to the Gospel of Christ, what 1 Cor. 4. 21, Chrysostom. in.
locum.
meant St. Paul by that demand of his, Shall I come to you with a Rod? (...),
shall I bring a Rod to whip and scourge you? So St. Chrysostom.

And since St. Paul, who well knew the Mind of Christ, did, upon just occasion,
make use of his Apostolical Rod to punish, not only Immoralities in Life, but
Errors in Judgment too; we may thence infer, that an unlimited Toleration of
all Opinions in Matters of Religion has no manner of Countenance from the Law
of Christ; we read, that St. Paul made use of this Rod, to strike Elymas blind;
and why he Act. viii. 10.
did so, that Expression intimates, Will thou not cease to pervert the right
ways of the Lord? It was for his opposing the Gospel, and that in all
probability arose from the Error of his Judgment. But the Case is yet more
plain in the Example of Hymenaeus and Alexander, of whom St. Paul says, I have
delivered them to 1 Timothy i. 20.
Satan; a severe Punishment, sure futuri judicii praejudicium, it is a
fore*stalling the dreadful Judgment of God. So Tertullian. But why did St. Paul
inflict it? He gives this Reason, Concerning faith they have made shipwreck; 1 Timothy i. 19.
or as he elsewhere expresses it, They have erred concerning 2 Timothy ii. 18.
the Truth. It was for their ill Opinion about one Article of our Creed.

These Instances are enough to show that a Toleration of all Opinions and
Practices in Matters of Religion was never thought to be lawful, and
consequently such an unlimited Liberty of the Press, as tends to bring in, and
spread Errors and Heresies, ought not to be allowed.

And now I shall take my leave of my Reader, when I have admonished him, that
in all this Discourse, I plead for the Regulation of the Press, as to such
Books only, as concern Morality, Faith, and Religious Worship, of which, our
Learned Ecclesiastical Governors are the most proper Judges. But as to Policy
and State Affairs, they fall under the Cognizance of the Civil Magistrate,
whose Province it is, and whose Care it should be, to prevent the publishing of
all such Pamphlets as tend to promote popular Tumults, Sedition, Treason, and
Rebellion. And had this been carefully done some Years ago, it might have
happily prevented those dreadful Confusions, under which our Church and State
now do, and still are too like to groan.

Farewell.
FINIS.
BOOKS printed for Richard Sare at Gray's Inn Gate in Holborn.
THE Fables of Aesop, with Morals and Reflections. Fol. Erasmus Colloquies, in
English Octavo. Quevedo's Visions. Octavo. These Three by Sir Roger L'Estrange.

The Genuine Epistles of St. Barnabas, St. Ignatius, St. Clement, St. Polycarp,
the Shepherd of Hermas, etc. translated and published in English. Octavo. A
Practical Discourse concerning Swearing. Octavo. The Authority of Christian
Princes over Ecclesiastical Synods, in Answer to a Letter to a Convocation Man.
Octavo. Sermons upon several Occasions. Quarto. These by Dr. Wake.

Epictetus's Morals with Simplicius's Comment. Octavo. A Sermon preached upon
the Death of the Queen. Both by Mr. George Stanhope.

The Doctrine of a God and Providence vindicated and asserted. Octavo.
Discourses on several Divine Subjects. Octavo. These Two by Thomas Gregory
Lecturer of Fulham.

Dr. Gregory's Divine Antidote, in Answer to an heretical Pamphlet, entitled,
An End to the Socinian Controversy. Octav. Complete sets consisting of 8
Volumes of Letters, writ by a Turkish Spy, who lived 45 Years at Paris
undiscovered, giving an Account of the principal Affairs of Europe. Twelves.
Human Prudence, or the Art by which a Man may raise himself and Fortune to
Grandeur. Twelves. Moral Maxims and Reflections; written in French by the Duke
of Roachfoucault, now Englished. Twelves. The Art both of Writing and Judging
of History, with Reflections upon ancient and modern Historians. Twelves. An
Essay upon Reason, by Sir George Mackenzie. Twelves. Death made Comfortable, or
the way to die well, by Mr. Kettlewell. Twelves. The Parson's Counselor, or
the Law of Tithes; by Sir Simon Degg. Octavo. The unlawfulness of Bonds of
Resignation. Octavo. An Answer to all the Excuses and Pretenses which Men
ordinarily make for their not coming to the Holy Sacrament, Octavo. Price 3 d.
By a Divine of the Church of England. Remarks on a Book, entitled, Prince
Arthur, an Heroic Poem; by Mr. Dennis. Octavo. Fortune in her Wits; or, the
Hour of all Men: written in Spanish by Don Fran de Quevedo, translated into
English. Octav. Price 1 s. 6 d. A Gentleman's Religion in Three Parts; the
first contains the Principles of Natural Religion; the second and third, the
Doctrines of Christianity, both as to Faith and Practice, with an Appendix,
wherein it is proved, that nothing contrary to our Reason, can possibly be the
object of our Belief; but that it is no just Exception against some of the
Doctrines of Christianity that they are above our Reason. Twelves. Examen de
Ingenios, or the Trial of Wits; discovering the great difference of Wits among
Men, and what sort of Learning suits best with each Genius; published
originally in Spanish by Dr. Juan Huartes, and made English from the most
Correct Edition, by Mr. Bellamy; useful for all Fathers, Masters, Tutors, etc A
Complete List of the Royal Navy.

