MAHOMET the Fourth, the present and Thirteenth EMPEROR of the TURKS. 1683.


A LATE VOYAGE TO Constantinople: CONTAINING An exact DESCRIPTION of the
Propontis and Hellespont, with the Dardanels, and what else is remarkable in
those Seas; as also of the City of Constantinople, wherein is particularly
described the Grand Seraglio and chief Mosquees.

LIKEWISE An Account of the Ancient and present State of the GREEK CHVRCH; WITH
The Religion and Manner of Worship of the TVRKS, their Ecclesiastical
Government, their Courts of Justice, and civil Employments.

Illustrated with curious and exact Draughts of the Hellespont, Propontis,
Constantinople, the Seraglio, Sancta Sophia, and other chief Mosquees, with the
several Postures of the Turks during Prayer-time; in Fourteen Copper Plates.
The exactness whereof is attested by several famous Travelers.

The like never done before.

Published by Command of the French King, by Monsieur William Joseph Grelot.

Made English by I. Philips.

London, Printed by John Playford, and are to be sold by Henry Bonwicke at the
Red-Lyon in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THough many Travelers have written Books on this Subject, yet I assure thee
none ever came into the world with more Authority than that of this Author. He
had the general Approbation of the Learned Travelers of France, some whereof,
(and those of most note) were pleased publicly to testify to the World the
faithfulness and exactness of the Author in his Descriptions, and Delineations;
so that with Monsieur Galand, when you have your eye upon the Draughts in this
Book, you may fancy you see the Originals themselves. The King of France was so
pleased with these Draughts, that he commanded the Author to make them public,
and gave him his Letters Patents, strictly forbidding any to invade his
propriety, by copying them after him.

Monsieur Grelott has chiefly herein avoided what has been often repeated by
other Travelers, and set down such remarkable things as were omitted by them,
so that you will find many things in this Book (besides his excellent Draughts)
very worthy observation, not to be found any where else.

The discoursive part is very pleasant, as well as learned, intermingled with
many pretty stories; from which (if you delight in Books of this kind) you
cannot but receive much satisfaction; which is the desire of

Your Servant, J. P.

THE AUTHOR'S EPISTLE TO HIS Most Christian Majesty.
TO THE KING.
SIRE,
ONe would believe that a Traveller who returns from the East should not
present to your Majesty other than Pearls and Diamonds. Nor should I my self
have been so presumptuous, as only to lay at your feet some few Draughts which
I have drawn during my being abroad, had not those favorable Glances which you
were pleased to cast upon them, emboldened me to make them a public Offering
to your goodness. Sir, I know well that such a poor present as this is
altogether unworthy of so great a Monarch, to whose acceptance not all Persia
nor the Indies can afford any thing considerable. However seeing that Prince
who thought the whole Universe below his thoughts, vouc^saf'd to accept the
Feathers of a dead Bird, which could not be brought him alive, I am in hopes
that your Majesty, nol ^ss exalted for your indulgent goodness, than for the
Grandeur of your Actions above Alexander, will permit me to give you a Prospect
of those places which you know how to subdue when ever you are pleased to
employ your Victorious Arms in such a Glorious enterprise. Doubtless, Sir, the
Inhabitants of those Cities, which these Sketches represent, full of the far
extending Fame of Lewis the Great, would esteem themselves happy to live under
the easy Dominion of a Sovereign, whom they have reason to look upon as the
first and greatest Monarch of the Universe. Your Majesty would be there most
assuredly acknowledged with all submission imaginable, and I at the same time
should be overjoyed to have discovered through my pains whatever is at this day
most observable and most worthy your protection. It being the only aim, which
I always proposed to my self, to make known to the world that I am with a most
profound respect,

SIRE, Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most faithful Subject,
and Servant, GRELOT.

TO THE READER.
SO many Relations of the Levant have been published to the World, and the
curious have been so well satisfied in what concerns that part of the Earth,
that a man does but expose him self to censure, who shall presume to believe he
makes any thing now public that is not already sufficiently known. So that all
the modern relations of the Eastern Travelers being no more than repetitions,
I deferred some years after my return to publish what I had done, for no other
reason, than to preserve the Ideas of the most remarkable things which I had
seen in my Travells. I observed in all the Relations which I read, that the
chiefest part of the remarks which I had made, were almost the same with what
several famous Travelers had done before me, and that therefore I should run
the hazard of being looked upon as a Copier, or a Plagiarie from others. But at
length finding that none of all the numerous Relations which have appeared in
the world have afforded so much as one Draught or faithful Plate of what is
here described, I resolved for the satisfaction of several that have honored
me with their friendship, to cause some of the Platforms and Draughts which I
had taken in the East to be Engraved. And I make no question but all the
Figures, which make the best part of this book, and upon which the whole
discourse is grounded, will suffice to satisfy those who have not had the
leisure or desire to read what other Taavellers have written; as also those who
have already read in some Relations the description of the same places, who not
being able by means of the discourse to apprehend the design of the Building,
would perhaps be glad to have before their eyes the faithful Draughts of the
Platforms, Elevations and out-lines of all thos^ beautiful Piles, of which they
have heard such high reports. By the means of these Plates all sorts of persons
in a short time may without hazard, and to advantage satisfy their curiosity.
They will be able to understand more of Constantinople after they have perused
the few leaves of this small Volume, than from those who at a great expense of
Money and pains have in large Folio's delivered to public view, notions quite
contrary to truth. I do not say that so many famous Travelers who have viewed
the East before me, and put forth so great a number of Relations, have wanted
language or expression to embellish their Writings* They are all worthy praise
for what they have done, nor do I believe that any Traveller would willingly at
the expense of his reputation impose upon his Readers. Yet this is certain,
that large Volumes in Writing do not always give that satisfaction to the
apprehension, as the draught of the same thing faithfully and exactly made and
Engraved, which explains several doubts not to be easily resolved by words
alone.

Which was the reason that I resolved to describe nothing without an addition
of the Draught at the same time, as being like the Seal affixed to Letters
Patents to make them more Authentic. Besides, that the most famous Travelers
in Paris have done me the favor to give me their attestations of the fidelity
and exactness of the Draughts.

Their approbations made several persons of great Learning and high quality
desirous to see them; among whom, some having done me the favor to inform our
Great Monarch what I had done, His Majesty was not only pleased to do me the
honor to take a view of some of my Draughts, but was also pleased to command
me to go on and to bring them to him perfect.

After such an Approbation, I hope no persons will take it amiss, that without
putting 'em to the trouble of stirring out of their Closets, I show them so
great a part of the Glories of the East. From whence it happens that the
Cities, the Inhabitants, the Edifices, ^hanging their Nature, come of their own
ac^ord to surrender themselves up to your view, and to inform you in your own
studies, by my means of their most noble Ornaments, more amply and
perspicuously than if your selves had made an examination upon the place. Not
that I question your abilities or fidelity, but that you would have been no
less wise than others, who not caring to expose themselves to the dangers that
accompany attempts of this nature in Turkey, you would have returned home
again, content with the sight alone of what you could not obtain the
delineation. All Travelers will assure ye, that the perils and hazards are
very great to those that make attempts of this nature; no less than the risc of
life, or Religion; dangers which you are no way forced to adventure upon, while
your Information comes easy, at the expenses of another man's Travels.

I begin with the Rarities belonging to Constantinople, the Inletts into that
City, otherwise called the Hellespont and Dardanells, together with the
Propontis. Next follows the Beautiful situation of the Haven, the Grand
Serraglio, the famous Temple of Sancta Sophia, with the Draughts of its
Platform, inside and outside, the great difficulty a Christian has to get
entrance into this Mosquee, may assure you of the exactness of the Draughts,
besides that my habit, beard, and knowledge of the Language gave me frequent
access to places were others could not have admission, which failing I made the
best use of my wits, and forced my way with presents; so that those places were
to be very well guarded indeed, that I could not come at, as well to draw, as
when I had done, to compare my Draughts afterward with the Original.

To these I have added the Figures of the three fairest Mosquees in
Constantinople, and the Postures which the Turks observe at their Prayers. It Is
true, I have here made public but a few of what I have Collected together
during my six years Travells; yet if these shall be so successful as to please
the public, I make no question but to produce a larger number of other parts
of the Eastern world where I have been. To which purpose I hope the Ingenious
will give that encouragement to this small Essay, as that the rest may follow.
And indeed it may in some measure deserve to be the more taken notice of, in
regard of the honorable approbations of so many learned men that accompany it.
Who have not only favored me with the following Attestations, but some of them
have also done me the Honor to assure His Majesty of my fidelity and
exactness, at what time he was pleased to ask me whether I had added nothing of
my own invention.

THE ATTESTATIONS OF Several famous Travelers into the Eastern Parts, touching
the exactness of the Draughts and Delineations of Monsieur Grelot.
The Attestation of Monsieur Merchant, Director of the Royal Garden of Plants.
I Do certify that all the Draughts which the Sieur Grelot has taken of the
Mosquees and other Edi^^ces, are very exact, and conformable to what I have
seen upon the place.

Merchant.

The Attestation of Monsieur Blondel, Marshal of the Camp in the Kings Armies,
and Mathematick Master to Monsieur the Dauphin.
I Could hardly believe, considering how difficult a thing it is to obtain
leave to take the Draughts of some ^laces in the East, that any person could
have drawn ^uch Platforms, Elevations and Out-lines, so exactly as those which
are done by Monsieur Grelot, as well in this Book as in other places; but in
regard all the Sketches and Draughts which he has taken in his Travells appear
to me to be so exact, according to the best remembrance of what I have seen, I
thought my self obliged to testify so much to all those that shall see them,
that they need not fear to give credit to them, as being most faithfully done.

Blondel.

The Attestation of Monsieur Bernier, Doctor in Physic.
IT were to be wished, that all who had Traveled into Foreign Countries, had
made as good use of their time as Monsieur Grelot, the Designs which he has
made public in this book, and others which he has showed me of other parts
where I have been, sufficiently demonstrate what an exact observer he has been
of things most worthy remark; such as are the Platforms and Delineations of
those places to which it is no easy thing to get access. And therefore
beleiving my self obliged to do him that Justice which he deserves, I do assure
the world, that all the Representations of the Draughts which he has made, are
all exactly conformable to what I remember of the places themselves.

F. Bernier.

The Attestation of Mr. Covel an English Gentleman.
MR. William Joseph Grelot, whom I familiarly knew, while we both resided in
Constantinople, showed me at Paris certain Draughts, delineated with his own
hand, of the Cities of Constantinople, Galata, Scutari; as also of Sancta
Sophia, and some other Mosquees erected by the Turkish Emperors. Therefore
that I may not be wanting in the duty of a friend, or asserting the truth, I am
bound to confess, that I know not well how sufficiently to extol the
Ingenuity, Industry and Diligence of the person; for I must acknowledge, that
all his Draughts, as far as I am able to judge, are most exactly and accurately
done. All which I attest,

John Covel.

The Attestation of Monsieur Galand, Antiquarie and Interpreter of the Eastern
Languages.
I Should be very unjust, should I refuse Monsieur Grelot my approbation of
those excellent Delineations which he is now making public to the world. He
has so well represented to the life those places which I have seen in
Constantinople, in the Archipelago, in Cyprus, and in Syria, that casting my
eyes upon his delineations of some other places where I have not been, I am apt
to believe that I see the Originals themselves.

Galand.

A LATE VOYAGE TO CONSTANTINOPLE.
FOR a Gentleman to travel to Constantinople, and to view the adjacent
Countries, is certainly one of the most pleasing Diversions that may be, and
which furnishes a man with Observations the most admirable, while he beholds
what Nature offers to his Eyes the most charming that can be imagined, in the
delectable situation of Places, and what Time has left, in beautiful Ruins, of
the Magnificence and Grandeur of the Eastern Emperors.

They who have this Curiosity, whether with an intention to pass farther, or to
set up their Hercules Pillars in this City, are first to understand where most
conveniently to take Shipping; which is most usually to be done either at
Marseilles, Ligorn, or Venice, unless they design to travel by Land. Above all
things let them be sure to provide Money for their Expenses, and Bills of
Exchange for a Supply; without which, there is nothing to be done. And while a
Man stays a Shipboard, he will find no false Latin in a good warm Coat, a good
Quilt and Coverlet, a Glass of brisk Wine, a Case of good Waters, and some
change of fresh Diet. For all which Accommodations, they who desire not to be
troubled with so much Luggage, may agree to be supplied by the Master of the
Ship, which may be done for twenty five or thirty Crowns at most.

The first place through which there is a necessity to sail, is the Straight of
the Dardanels, hither you arrive by steering several Courses, after you have
left behind you, as well upon the right as left hand, those Islands which are
called Cyclades and Sporades, as being scattered up and down in that part of
the Egean Sea which bears the name of Archipelago, by the Seamen vulgarly
styled the Arches. I shall say nothing of all those Islands, though I have both
seen and taken the Draughts of most of them, it being my design to speak only
of what relates to Constantinople, to which the Dardanels are as it were the
Gates that give an Entrance.

Of the Hellespont and the Dardanels.
THis famous Straight, Fig. 1.
which is otherwise called the Hellespont, lies in the 37 th degree and 42
minutes of Northern Latitude, and of Longitude about the 55 th. It extends not
in length above ten or twelve Leagues at most. At the Entrance it is in breadth
a good League and a half. To the Westward upon the left hand as ye enter, you
behold the Country of Thrace, which is a part of Europe, divided by the
Hellespont from Troas, a Province of Asia, that lies to the East. To the North
lies the Propontis, and to the South the Egean Sea with the Archipelago.

At the Entrance of this Straight, upon the right hand, the Sygean Promontory
runs out into the Sea by the name of Cape Ianisary, near to which stands a
little Village inhabited by Christian Greeks. The Turks call it Giaourkioi, or
the Village of the Infidels; it being the name which they generally give to all
places where there are no Mosquees. It is situated near to the place where
stood in former times the famous City of Sygeum, and by the People of the
Country is called Troiaki, or Little Troy. Here a Traveller may take in store
of good Refreshments and excellent Provision, as Hens, Eggs, Partridge, Rice,
Butter, Melons, Fruit, and all so very cheap, that you may buy a Quarter of a
hundred of Eggs for four or five Aspers, which is no more than two Sols and six
Blanks of French Money; 10 Sols make an English Shilling, and 12 Blanks a Sols.
and a dozen of Hens or Pullets for half a Piaster, which is not above 30 Sols
French. The Water also is there very good and well tasted; but that is not all;
for the Island of Tenedos that produces most excellent Muscadine Wines is not
above a League distance, and where you may have it for little or nothing, a
whole Hogshead for a Crown. From the top of this Cape or Promontory you may
take a full prospect of all the lovely Country of Troas, together with the
Rivers of Xanthus or Scamander, and Simois, both taking their Sources and
falling from the famous Mountain Id^. Both which Rivers are much more beholding
for their Reputation to the ancient Poets, than to the bulk of their own
Streams, as being no bigger than that of the Gobelins at Paris. Sometimes in
the Summer they are quite dried up; but at other times both uniting on the
place where Troy stood, and there surrounding a great Marsh or Fen, they glide
away under a wooden Bridge, supported with Stone Pillars, and so empty
themselves into the Hellespont some half a League above this Cape, not far from
the new Castle of Asia.

The Turks who never were addicted themselves to Liberal Arts, have made it
their business rather to ruin and pull down the Monuments of Antiquity, than to
erect new and sumptuous Fabrics according to the strict Rules of Architecture.
So that it is no wonder, while they so openly profess their ignorance in this
particular, that there should appear so much deformity and irregularity in this
new Castle of Asia, and that which is opposite to it in Europe, or that there
is to be seen the same defect in all their other Castles and Fortresses which
they have occasion to build. This Castle is seated upon a Tongue of Land
pointing out into the Sea, upon a square Platform composed of four large Panes
of Walls, flanked at the four Corners with Towers; of which, those two next the
Sea are square, with a sort of Redoubt only upon one side; the other two toward
the Land are quite round. Between these four Towers there are five others, of
which, four are also square, and one round, which defend the Walls, but neither
in thickness, bigness, or distance, one like the other. As for those which are
washed by the Sea, they are furnished with Portholes that lie level with the
surface of the Water, as also with their Curtins and Platforms. I told above
forty of these well provided with Cannon, always mounted and continually
charged, ready to play upon any Enemy that will run the hazard of adventuring
into the Harbor by force.

But notwithstanding all this Expense and Cost bestowed upon these Castles,
there is no such necessity for a Royal Navy to fear the force of that Battery,
should a good occasion present it self to try the utmost of its Fury. For all
the Cannons which are within, are mounted only upon Stones or great pieces of
square Timber, without Frames or Carriages. So that being once discharged, they
will require a long time to charge and mount 'em again. In which interval of
Time, it would be no diffcult thing with two or three thundering Broadsides to
lay the inconsiderable Wall of the Castle level with the Earth, it not being
above three foot in thickness, or beat it about the Ears of the Soldiers and
Cannoneers. By which means the Castles so made useless, would soon be taken by
Storm or Surrender. The way to this Castle is from the North, (and joins at the
end of a Street to a very fair Mosquee which stands on the South side not far
from the Shore) from whence you may very plainly discern the Duomo and the
Tower of the Temple.

Between this new Castle which the Turks call Natoli-inghi-issar, and Cape
Ianisary, there lies to the North-east, a small Village or Borough, which
carries the name of Inghi-issar-kioi, that is to say, the Borough of Newcastle.
There is nothing considerable that belongs to it, only the prospect of eight
Windmills that stand all arow as you walk to the Sygean Promontory. Every one
of these Mills are turned by eight Vanes, as is usual all over Turkey: Which is
certainly done, to the end the Mills may have greater force to bruise and grind
the Husk of the Grain, which causes the Flower to yield very little Bran, and
is the reason also that the Bread which the Turks eat is nothing so white as
ours, because there passes so much of the thin-ground Bran through the Bolter
among the Flower.

And here now might I take occasion to talk of Achilles, and several others of
the Grecian Captains that were interred upon this Promontory, as also to make a
description of the Ruins of the so much renowned Ilium, of which the
unfortunate Remains are to be discovered not only upon Cape Sygeum, but also in
the Sea it self, and the Island of Tenedos. But because several Travelers have
prevented me, I shall say no more than only this: That if we consider how long
it has been since the Ruin of this great City of Troy, and the prodigious
quantity of Pillars and other Marble Pieces which the Christian and Turkish
Emperors residing in Constantinople made use of out of these Ruinous Heaps for
Materials to build their Churches, Mosquees, Palaces, Baths, and other public
Structures, and then consider likewise the vast Remains that still are left
behind in broken pieces of Corinthian Architecture, we may certainly affirm,
that Troy was one of the fairest, richest, and largest Cities of its time. It Is
true, that the greatest part of those Ruins which now are to be seen, may be
thought to be later than the Destruction of the Grecian Flames, in regard that
the Roman Emperors, and Augustus among the rest, sent several Colonies to
renew the Pristine Glory of their Foster City, out of kindness to the first
Original of the Roman Grandeur; but we are not thence to conclude, that it ever
arrived at that Pomp and Magnificence wherein it flourished in the days of the
Unfortunate Priam. Nor was that Restoration of any long continuance, seeing
that in Lucan's time it was the same that now it is above sixteen hundred Years
ago, as he himself testifies in the following Lines.

Iam Sylvae steriles, and putres Robore trunci
Assaraci pressere Domos, and Templa Deorum
Iam lassa Radice tenent, ac tota teguntur
Pergama dumetis.
Now barren Woods and Oaks with Age decayed,
Assaracus's Palaces o'respread,
The God's own Temples by their Roots fast bound,
With Pergamum, lie covered under ground.
In short, the place where formerly stood that famous City, is now overgrown
with Bushes and Brambles, spreading themselves among the Ruins that lie upon
the descent of the Hill, which seems to have been the chiefest and best
inhabited part of ancient Troy. This place is distant from the Sea, where in
ancient Times was the Haven which belonged to Troy, about a good League of bad
way among Briers and Thorns. If any Traveller should be so happy as to meet in
any of the Tombs which he shall find as he goes along, or in any other part of
the Ruins of this great City, a certain Greek Manuscript, entitled* (...) The
Golden Compendium, or the ancient Book of the Kikanides, he would highly oblige
the Commonwealth of Learning, by making it public to the World. For a certain
Author assures us, that this Book lies buried in a certain Tomb within the City
of Troy, together with the Bones of her first King Kicanis. For my own part I
never could find it, and therefore left the search of it to some other person
more fortunate than my self. And indeed I must confess, that I never beheld the
Ruins of Troy, which I have done now four times over, but still it perplexes
me, that I could never yet be able to discover the least Inscription or
Monument of Antiquity, which might afford me the least light into any
particular of its being taken, or its ancient Splendor, but that I was still
forced to go away with the same Exclamation of the Greek Poet: (...) Alas!
alas! the unfortunate Foundation of the heretofore most happy Asian Land.

Seldom any person goes to view the Ruins of Troy, but he also crosses over to
the Island of Tenedos, which lies just opposite against it. This Island is very
pleasant and delectable to those that love good Wine, and delight in Hawking or
Shooting, for there is great store of Wild-fowl, and plenty of Muscadel, and
other excellent Wines.

The Harbor is not very considerable, only for small Turkish Vessels or
Saicques; but for Ships of any greater force or burden, it is no way fit to
receive them.

However as bad as the Harbor is, yet the Island might be of great use for the
erecting a strong Arsenal and a good Magazine, to put a curb upon the
Hellespont, the Propontis, and Thracian Bosphorus, and to preserve the Dominion
of the Archipelago.

During the stay which I made in this Island, two French Tartans came to an
Anchor in the Road. For the same fowl weather that had caused the Saicque or
Turkish Vessel, wherein I was a Passenger from Smyrna to Constantinople, to put
into Tenedos, obliged the Frenchmen to seek the same shelter. Stopping at this
Port, some of the French Officers came ashore to refresh themselves, and were
directed by a Greek that spoke Italian to the House where I was. They found me
sitting at Table with a young Turk, who was also a Passenger in the same Vessel
with my self, and not so scrupulous as others of his Religion in the business
of drinking Wine, especially when he met with so good, as was that of Tenedos.
However by reason of my Eastern Habit, my long Beard, and because I also
discoursed in Turshish with my Ioldache, or Fellow-traveller, the Frenchmen
little thought me to be their Countryman, and that I understood every word
they said. Thereupon they talked freely one to another, and at length
discoursing over their Cups, they began to fall upon the Turkish and Grecian
Women, as well in Tenedos, as in all the other Islands of the Archipelago.

For a while I said not a word to them, but kept talking on with my Turk: 'Till
at last quite tired with hearing their extravagant Raillery occasioned by the
Wine, I could forbear no longer. And therefore faigning my self a Turk, only
that I had been in France in the Train of Mustapha Aga, who was returned about
a year before, I told 'em in downright French, and like one that was somewhat
angry withal, That 'twas a sign they were Frenchmen, and had drank hard to
talk so boldly and impudently as they did, and to reproach and abuse our Women
even to our faces, and in our own Country. Know Gentlemen, said I, that both by
Reason and Custom they are much more reserved than yours. And though there may
be some who perhaps may think bad enough, yet there is such good Order taken
throughout this Empire, that they are deprived thereby of the opportunity to
act. They seldom stir out of Doors, and they seldom are seen at any public
Meetings or Assemblies. If sometimes they are permitted to go to their
Devotions, they walk with their Faces veiled, not daring to speak to any Man
they meet; whereas the French Ladies make no scruple to march alone with a
single Gallant, and admit him to tell Stories by their Bed-sides. And
therefore, continued I, be not so rash another time to make such hard Censures
upon such a ticklish point; for had I not a more than ordinary kindness for
your Nation, I would soon let you understand the Power I have to reform your
Judgments, and reduce ye from those wild and inconsiderate Errors into which
the Wine has plunged ye, and learn ye to descant so idly upon a Truth which ye
have so little examined.

Never were People more surpised than these persons were, so that I am apt to
believe, had not the Wine inspired 'em with more than ordinary Courage, the
threatening Language which I gave them would have caused them to have made have
back to their Vessels. However, I could perceive they sat very uneasy, 'till I
my self believing I had kept 'em long enough in suspense, delivered them out of
their bodily Fears, by first drinking the King's Health, and then informing
them, that I was both their Countryman and Friend, and that the Turkish Habit
which I wore, was only such as I was forced to wear to gain me freer and more
easy passage in my Travels to and fro. And so the Frolic ended in a Glass or
two of Wine more, 'till we had emptied an Ocque of Muscadine, containing about
three Chiopins or French Quarts. The next night the Wind chopping about, we
weighed Anchor by break of day, and left the Island of Tenedos, of which I
shall make no farther description, in regard the Plate which I have made of it,
is too large for this Volume.

Having left Tenedos and doubled the Sygean Cape, we came between the two new
Castles of Europe and Asia. One I have already described, I shall now describe
the other. This new Castle upon Europe side, which the Turks call
Roumeli-inghi-issar, was built as well as the other opposite to it, by the
present Sultan Mahomet the Fourth, the 23 d Emperor of the Turks. This haughty
Potentate, being swelled up with his Conquests, as being but feebly attacked by
his neighboring Enemies, always believed, that the advantageous situation of
the Dardanels was such as rendered it an Enterprise impossible to break i^to
the Propontis, and that consequently the City of Constantinople was impregnably
secured on that side. He was persuaded, as were also his Ancestors, that this
same Straight of the Sea, which is the Gate of that Imperial City, was
sufficiently guarded and fortified by those two Castles, which the Turks
esteemed to be extremely strong. But having been given to understand to his
cost and damage, in the year 1656, and the year following, that a bold and
generous Captain stood in no fear of those Fortresses, and finding that those
two magnificent Piles, for the space of somewhat more than a Twelvemonth, had
rather served for Theaters, to behold the total defeat of the Ottoman Navy,
than as places of succor and defense against the Venetians, who fought the
said Navy within reach of their Cannon, and triumphed in their full view:
Fearing therefore a second loss of the same kind, he caused those new Castles
to be built at the entry of the Hellespont, according to the form and situation
described in the Draught. It will be necessary therefore, before I give any
farther description of those two Fortresses, that the Reader permit me to make
him a brief Relation of those two famous Actions, and the success of the
Christian Arms, so fatal at that time to the Mahometans. They are proper to the
subject of my Discourse, and I am the more obliged to make the Relation, as
being engaged in my acknowledgments to those two illustrious Persons, to whose
kindnesses and company in my Travels I was so peculiarly bound, as being highly
honored in their Affection. These were the Lords Mark and Ambrose Bembo, both
Gentlemen of Venice, who have always performed great Exploits, and daily add to
the Fame and Splendor of the noble and ancient Family of the Bembo's.

The first of these two noble Venetians was General of the Galleys of the
Commonwealth of Venice in this Expediton. The second is a young Gentleman his
Nephew, who at the Age of eighteen years, perceiving that the leisure of the
Republic in Peace could not afford him matter sufficient to exercise his active
Courage, generously quitted the pleasures of a sedentary Life, and betook
himself to five or six years travel over the Eastern World. And in these perils
and dangers he the more readily engaged himself, to the end, that upon his
return to his Country with mature Age and well-purchas'd Experience, he might
render himself the fitter for such Employments which the Senate might deem
worthy his merit. I had the happiness to meet him at Hispahan, returning from
the Indies, whence I also had the honor to enjoy his Company all the way into
Europe. In pursuance of which Journey, we came first into Syria to his most
illustrious Uncle Mark Bembo's Residence, then Embassado^r for the Republic,
and so at length arrived at Ve^^^^, where I was showed in the Palace of the
Bembo's the whole Expedition of the Dardanels, set forth in a large piece of
Painting, and rarely well done; and so from those who were there present, I had
this account.

In the heat of the War of Candy, Marcello Morosini General of the Men of War,
and Marco Bembo General of the Galleys of the Republic, with Monsieur the Prior
of Rochel, who commanded seven Galleys of Malta, having intelligence that the
Fleet of the Turks, consisting of sixty Galleys, thirty Men of War, forty five
Galiotes, eight Mahons, and several other light Vessels, was ready to set Sail
from Constantinople with recruits to the Camp before Candy, they boldly sailed
away to the Dardanels to hinder the Turks from coming forth, though they had no
more than twenty four Galleys, twenty eight Men of War, seven Galeasses, and
some few other smaller Vessels. There they came to an Anchor, and staid in
expectation of the Ottomans, for about a Month, who upon notice of their
arrival, durst not stir from Gallipoli. But at length, the Captain Basha
understanding that the Venetian Fleet was much inferior to him in number of
Men and strength of Ships, weary of being so long pent up within the Castles,
resolved to weigh, and by the favor of Wind and Tide to attack the Venetians,
and force his passage through their whole Body.

And now the Ottoman Fleet being come under the Protection of the Dardanel
Cannon, the Venetians impatient of so long a delay, made toward the Enemy, and
set upon them so furiously for a whole day together, and with that success,
that of all the great number of Turkish Vessels already mentioned, only
fourteen could possibly save themselves, who to avoid a general loss, were
forced to make use of all their Oars and Slaves to get under the Protection of
the two old Castles, the rest being all taken or sunk before their faces. True
it is that the General Marcello Morosini being too far engaged in pursuit of
the flying Ottomans, was killed with a Cannon Shot, having lost about three
hundred of his Men. But General Marco Bembo, according to his wonted Valor and
Prudence, resolved to take the advantage of this Success, and to revenge upon
the Island of Tenedos the loss of Morosini, whose place was soon after supplied
by Lazaro Mocenigo elected in his room. These two Generals therefore knowing
the important Situation of Tenedos to curb the Dardanels, and secure themselves
Masters of the Archipelago, presently laid Siege to it, and carried it in
fourteen days, and then fortified it, and furnished it with Provisions.

Nor is this the only time that the haughty Turks have been thus boldly
outbrav'd upon their own Coasts. They who have read the History of Venice, or
remember the War of Candy, can tell how frequently the Christian Arms have
defeated the Ottoman Fleets, and taken their Ships within sight, and within the
reach of these Castles. Among the rest, that exploit of General Delphino, in
the year 1654. may serve for another Example, which cannot be too often
repeated; besides, that my Obligations to the most eminent Cardinal Delfino his
Brother in some measure compel me to renew the Relation.

This illustrious General finding himself separated by a Storm from the rest of
his Fleet, with no more than four of his own Ships, met the next morning the
Ottoman Navy, composed of thirty four great Vessels, fourteen others of less
burden, two Corsairs, forty Galleys, and six Galeasses, with which he was
surrounded in an instant. This prodigious disproportion of Ships, Men, and
Force, was enough to have scared 'em into a present Surrender, and to have
daunted the Courage of any one but this undaunted Hero. However he was nothing
at all astonished; but on the other side encouraging his slender Squadron
either to overcome or dye, he defended himself with so much prowess, and was so
well seconded by Signior Iohn-Baptista de Sessa, and the rest of the Commanders
of his small number, that he sunk several Vessels of the Enemy, killed above
four thousand Turks, he boarded the Sultaness, and took her Colors from her,
and at length quitted himself with Honor from the throng of his Enemies, with
his four Vessels, and little loss of Men.

The famous Captain Georgio Maria would certainly have done the same, had he
been well seconded by those two Ships that were in his Company. But they
treacherously and basely deserted him, and left him to fight all alone to the
last drop, so that he deserved at one time the honor of having defended
himself without assistance, and the reputation singly to have encountered the
whole Ottoman Fleet. Another Venetian Corsair had set him a fair president
sometime before, who singly sustained the fury of the whole Ottoman Fleet in
the Channel of Chio, where they had surpised him, and yet got clear of them
all, after he had fought for five or six hours, and very much endamag'd the
Enemy.

But not to stop at any more of these Relations, of which an infinite number
might be brought, I shall proceed to the description of the two Fortresses of
the Hellespont, by which a shrewd conjecture may be made of the strength of
their other Militia.

These two Castles then being built after the two generous Exploits of Bembo
and Mocenigo, have no more reason to terrify a brave and resolute Commander,
than if they had never been erected.

They are seated one from the other at such a distance, that a Ship may easily
sail betwixt them both, without any great danger of their Culverins; they being
distant the one from the other more than a League. They are both commanded by
Hills, more especially that on Europe side, which is seated near to Cape Greco,
for its form altogether irregular. The compass of the Walls contains certain
Houses for the Aga and other Officers, with a Mosquee, of which the Domo and
Steeple appear very plain to be seen, as well as the other Edifices, as being
generally seated in the highest parts of the Fortification, from whence you
descend by large steps to the Platforms where the Guns are Planted, which lie
equal with the surface of the Water. Near to this Castle lies a small Village,
remarkable for nothing; together with five large Pilasters that serve to
underprop several conveyances of Water to the Fort.

You are no sooner past these two new Castles, but you come to that part of the
Sea which is called the Hellespont, or St. Georges Arm, into which they are the
Inlets. It has been always the Theater of famous Actions, which the better a
Man understands the Greek, Latin, and Modern History, with the greater delight
he calls this place to memory. It is a great satisfaction at one and the same
time, with one glance of the Eye to behold Europe and Asia so nearly joined
together, as if they had a desire to embrace and unite under one and the same
Conqueror, or that they did only separate there to open him a passage, and
facilitate his generous Enterprises.

From these new Castles which we have described, 'till ye come to the Old ones,
there is nothing to be set down worthy Observation at this present time.
Antiquity indeed beheld the shore adorned with several Cities and fair
Villages, whose names are now so utterly forgotten, that they are no where to
be found but in History. The People of the Country, as well Greeks as Turks,
are so miserably overwhelmed with Ignorance, that it is a vanity to ask them any
Questions concerning them, or to expect from them the least account of the
place where the unfortunate Hell was drowned, who losing her life in passing
this same Straight, at what time she fled from Colchis with her Brother Phryxus
with the famous Golden Fleece, bequeathed her Name and Life to the honor of
this narrow Arm of the Sea. They know nothing of the City of Arisbe, to which
Homer gives the Epithet of Divine, nor of the Promontory or Town of Raetion,
where the brave Ajax was entombed; being ignorant whether it were upon that
Cape where now stands the new Castle of Asia, or upon that same jetty of Land
near to the Mouth of Xanthus and Simois. So that you travel all this way,
whether by Sea or Land it is all one, without observing any thing remarkable;
and at length you arrive at the old Castles which the Turks call
Boghase-issari, or the Castles of the Throat.

The old Castle upon Asia side by the name of Natoli-iski-issar, is a square
Building flanked at the four corners with Towers, of which those that are next
the Sea are apiece also, but those that look toward the Land are round. In
the midst of this Castle is a large square Tower, upon whose Platform are
planted several Culverins. From this same Tower was made the fatal Shot that
took away the Life of Lazaro Mocenigo, at what time (after he had given a
second defeat to the Turks Fleet in the year 1657) he was designing in spite of
these Castles to have run up the Channel, and have fired Constantinople, had
not that unfortunate blow at the same time disappointed him in the pursuit of
so noble an Enterprise. Behind this Castle lies a large Village inhabited by
about three thousand People, whereof some few are Christians, the rest Turks
and Jews. This place is considerable for nothing but for the command of the
Passage where it lies, and the most part of the great Guns lie unmounted even
with the surface of the Water, like those in the new Castles. They are in
number twenty eight, and carry to the other side of the opposite shore large
Stone Balls, each weighing sixty pound, as likewise do those which are planted
on the other side in the European Castle, the Channel lying between these two
Castles not being above half a League broad.

The European Castle, which the Turks call Roumeli-iski-issar, is more
irregular, and not so strong as that upon the Asiatic side. It is placed upon
the descent of a Hill which commands it, and is composed of three great Towers
joined together in a Triangular form, resembling the shape of a Heart. These
Towers are environed with a circuit of Walls with certain half Towers, which
descend to the Harbor, where lie about thirty Cannons equal with the Water,
that carry the same Bullet with those on the other side; and they are planted
obliquely, lest by shooting straight forward the two Castles should mischief
one another. Most people believe, that these two Castles, and the two Towns
adjoining, are the Ruins of the two ancient Cities of Sestos and Abydos; but in
regard there are several that question the truth of it, and that it is a
difficult thing to prove it, unless some curious Traveller shall hereafter
discover something more convincing, I shall leave the matter undetermined. The
Franks or Europeans who travel into Turkey, call these two Castles the
Dardanels, for that Dardanus the Son of Jupiter by Electra the Daughter of
Atlas was the first King of this Country, who built therein a City, which he
called by his own name Dardanum, and the Country round about it Dardania.
Virgil will have this City to be the same with Troy, so called by Tros the
Grandchild of Dardanus, and Father of the fair Ganimed. Others assure us, that
the ancient Dardanum which was built upon the Hellespont where now the
Dardanels stand, retained its ancient name, and that the new City built upon
the Xanthus and Scamander, was first called Dardanum, afterward Troy or Ilium.
However it were, the Inhabitants of that ancient Dardanum did not much exceed
in Reputation those that now possess the Dardanels: For those formerly were
accounted Magicians, according to that of Columella; At si nulla valet Medicina
repellere Pestem,
Dardaniae veniant arts --
But if no Physic can repel the Plague,
Let then Dardanian arts be used --


Or else such as minded nothing but their Profit, according to that of another
Poet: Dardanius merces divendit carius emptas.
Dardanian Wares he sells, more dearly bought.


They who now inhabit those Castles are much of the same disposition, where, as
in several other parts of Greece you shall find several of those old kind of
Sorceresses which they call Striglais, who being addicted to all sorts of
mischief in their Infancy, and despairing of any other Allurements to purchase
their Love, put to sale the Affections of others, of which they falsely vaunt
themselves to be the Mistresses; or else they sell the satisfaction of their
Hatred. They make use of several sorts of Witchcraft, some they call Philtra,
to create Affection; others Ecthra, to procure Hatred; others Vaskarmiais or
Phtarmiais, that deal in all sorts of Fascinations and Enchantments. These old
Haggs practice after various manners, according to the mischief which they
design; and although they go to work but by night and in secret, for fear of
being apprehended by the Soubachi, and thrown into the Sea with a Stone about
their Necks, tied up in a Sack; yet I shall here set down one remarkable
passage, which was related to me by a person that lived upon the place
concerning one of these Witches that was taken in the fact.

This same Race of Circe, having a design to revenge themselves upon any one
that has perhaps but given them cross language in the Street, do it in this
manner. They rise about Midnight, and take three Flint Stones, over which they
mumble for about half an hour certain words, which they teach to none but their
Scholars. Which being done, they put the Stones in the Fire 'till they are red
hot, at what time they take 'em out again to light a little Wax Candle at each,
which they place upon the three feet of a three-legg'd Stool, in a kind of
imitation of the Trikirion of the Greek Bishops. This done, they lay the
three-legg'd Stool across upon their Heads, take up the three Flints, by this
time cold, and in this Equipage forth they go into the Street where the Party
lives, and being come to the first place where they find three ways to meet,
they throw the three Stones into the three different passages, believing, that
by the help of such words which they utter at the same time, that those
Fascinations will procure the mischief they intend. Beside these, they have
also a hundred other little Tricks, which they practice as well for the telling
of Fortunes, as for Witchcraft, to which, as the more rational Turks give
little or no credit, so are they much less worth mentioning here.

As for their Trading, the most part of the Merchants in the Towns belonging to
these two Castles, especially the Jews, are great gainers: For they buy cheap
out of the Christian and Turkish Vessels that pass through the Channel, and
sell again with considerable advantage, either upon the place, or else they
carry their Markets to other Towns and Villages upon the dry Land, where they
turn to good account. But as it is common with all Merchants to sell as dear as
they can, I shall say no more concerning the Inhabitants of the Dardanels, who
do no more than Castor in Martial: Omnia Castor emit; sic fiet ut omnia vendat.
Castor buys all, and so must all things ^ell.


I forgot to advertise the Reader, that when you come near these Castles by
Sea, you are bound to salute 'em, by giving 'em a certain number of Guns
proportionable to the Burden and Quality of your Ship. For the Saics, in which
I happened to be three times a Passenger to Constantinople, though no other
than great Boats, like those that pass between Roan and Paris, and which had no
other sort of Artillery besides two or three Pot-Guns, were however forced to
discharge them, without any return from the Castles. But as to other Vessels of
greater bulk and force, I shall relate what I have farther observed. When a
considerable Merchantman comes near either of the Castles, it behooves him to
give them at least three, if not five or seven Guns. But if it be a Man of War,
he must give seven at least, otherwise nine or eleven, to which the Castle
answers with one, three, or five, to which the Man of War returns three, five,
or seven; and so steers on her Course, if she be inward bound. But if they be
Ships that be outward bound, whether Merchants or sometimes Men of War, they
are forced to stay two or three days, 'till they have been duly searched and
examined. Which will not permit me to forbear one short Story wherein I had a
concern my self.

When Mustapha Aga, who was sent into France in the year 1669. had finished his
Embassy, the King sent him back to Constantinople attended by four Men of War
well appointed, who also carried Monsieur de Nointel to reside at the Port in
the room of Monsieur de la Haye-Vantelet. These four Men of War, under the
Command of Monsieur d' Aplemont, being arrived at Constantinople, rode there
six weeks at an Anchor; so that while the two French Ambassadors were
preparing the one for his reception, and the other providing for his departure,
the four Captains had the opportunity to pleasure a great many poor Slaves that
privately stole aboard in order to their Liberty. All that came were kindly
received, a number indeed so considerable, that might well oblige their Patrons
to complain to the Caimacan, or Governor of Constantinople. But in regard the
greatest part of these poor Slaves were people of no value, and only belonging
to some of the City Traders, and persons of mean condition, the Caimacan gave
the Complainants only soft answers, but did no more. For he knew that Monsieur
d' Aplemont, having formerly threatened, when he had but one Ship, to fire the
Seraglio and the City if he had not satisfaction given to his demands, was not
a person easily to be compelled to restore the Slaves he had taken, under the
protection of four stout Men of War. Nor had the Caimacan taken any farther
notice of what passed aboard the French, had he not been obliged to it by the
escape of Monsieur de Beau-jeu. This illustrious Knight of Malta, weary of
several years Captivity in the Castle of the seven Towers, where he was a Slave
to the Grand Signor, resolved to lay hold of the opportunity of the four Men of
War lying in the Road, and to free himself by a slight which the French Admiral
had promised to second. In short, he made a brisk and cunning escape out of the
Castle, but being too quick for the Shallop that was sent to receive him, for
fear of being pursued, and discovered by certain Dogs that barked after his
heels, he was constrained to take the Water, not without great danger; for a
Saic coming along, he received a good knock of the pate from one of the Oars,
which forced him to dive; and he had been certainly lost, had not the Turks
taken him for one of those very Creatures from which he fled. But at length the
Shallop took him up, and carried him aboard. The next morning the Aga of the
seven Towers understood his Prisoner was flown, and thereupon went and gave the
Caimacan immediate notice of it, who then thought it high time to send Post
away to the Dardanels to stop the four Men of War until they had restored
Monsieur Beaujeu. The Courier got thither before the King's Vessels were
passed, though they set sail almost at the same time that the Gally put forth;
so that when they came near the two old Castles, the Forts never stayed for a
Salute, but to prevent their kindness, saluted them first with two or three
great Guns laden with Ball as well as Powder from both sides of the Channel.

This was signal enough to the Men of War, that they were to pass no farther by
fair means. Whereupon they came to an Anchor, and immediately Monsieur d'
Aplemont the Admiral sent to the Aga of the Castles, whose Quarters are
generally upon Asia side, to demand the reason of his so uncivil Complements to
the French Fleet. The Aga returned for answer, That he had orders not to let
him stir any farther, unless he surrendered back the Body of Monsieur Beaujeu,
who was his Highnesses the Sultan's Slave; and with him likewise the Bodies of
three hundred Slaves more which he was carrying away, that had made their
escapes from several private persons, their Masters; to which purpose he
intended to send his Officers aboard him to make the same search which was
usually made of all Merchants Vessels in the Road, that set sail from
Constantinople. Monsieur d' Aplemont gave him to understand by his Interpreter,
that he had no Slaves aboard, for that all Men were born free; so that if he
should be so adventurous as to send any persons to search his Master's Ships,
he would hang them up at the Yards Arm in sight of his Castles; and that as to
what concerned the freedom of his passage, he did not much trouble his thoughts
about it. For that if the Courier which he would dispatch to Adrianople with
his own, if he pleased, did not bring him an Order for free passage, he would
give notice two days before he weighed Anchor, to the end he might have the
more time to prepare himself within his Forts against the fury of the French
Valor and Artillery.

This was an Answer very bold and haughty, considering the place where Monsieur
d' Aplemont lay. Nevertheless I verily believe he would have been as good as
his word. For during the time that the Messengers were absent, he employed his
Men in fitting and preparing all things ready, as well for the attack, as for
his own defense. But in thirteen days the Messenger returned, and brought from
Adrianople express Orders to the Aga of the Castles to let the French Vessels
pass, with all the persons that were aboard. At what time also the Grand Signor
sent away to the Caimacan of Constantinople a severe Command to cut off the
Head of the Aga of the seven Towers, to learn both him and his Successors for
the future to be more careful of the Prisoners of that Castle, especially when
they were of such great Quality as Monsieur Beaujeu. These Orders were quickly
obeyed; so that the King's Ships weighed Anchor the next day, and departed.

In this same part of this Straight it was, that Xerxes, enraged to see the
foaming and tempestuous Waves oppose his passage into Greece, caused the Sea to
be whipped, and afterward in disdain of its Power, joined both the Continents
together by a Bridge of Boats, and made the Sea as it were to groan under the
weight of the floating Burden.

However in the same place it was, that soon after the chafed Billows fully
revenged themselves for the injury done them. For breaking the Chains of the
Bridge with a violent storm, the Sea was in a short time filled with the Ruins,
and shattered pieces of that laborious piece of Humane Haughtiness. So that
Xerxes being soon after constrained to fly the same way, and finding his
vainglorious Triumph over the Hellespont utterly destroyed, was enforced to
betake himself disguised to a small Fisherboat to save his life, and rescue
himself from the general Massacre of his Army; so hard it was then for him to
get a small Skiff to avoid the Chains and Shackles of a victorious Enemy, who
but a little before had vaunted of his having shackl'd the Ocean, drank up
Rivers, and sailed over the dry Land, as it were to insult over Nature her self.

Some perhaps may say, that I tarry too long between Sestos and Abydos, and bid
me beware, lest out of a desire to entertain the Reader with such remarkable
passages as have renowned these Parts, I run the risco of Leander's misfortune:
for he, covetous to converse with his amiable Hero, was lost in this narrow
Bay, mistaking the steerage of his Arms. In the same manner the satisfaction
which I find in tracing over again the Representation of the same Places, and
calling to mind the several passages of Antiquity that happened there, may be
thought to have withdrawn me too far from my Subject. Wherefore I shall leave
Sestos and Abydos, and come now to Lampsacus, Lampsacus.
that lies not far from it. This City is not now in that splendid condition
wherein it flourished, at what time it was by Xerxes appointed to furnish
Themistocles with Wine for him and his Attendants; being at present no more
than a miserable Village, which retains nothing of its Antiquity, but the Hills
that environ it, still covered with some few Vines, whose Grapes are pleasing,
and the Wine which they afford most excellent, but not very plentiful.

The City of Magnesia, Magnesia.
the Metropolis of Lydia, which was also allotted to the same Grecian Captain,
for his provision of Bread, has much better preserved its ancient Magnificence,
being still very large, fair, rich, and in good Trade. But as for Myus in
Ionia, Myus.
the third City appointed to Themistocles for the substantial Food of himself
and his Followers, it has been a long time buried in its own Ruins.

On the left hand over against Lampsacus stands the City of Caligula, corruptly
called Gallipoli. Gallipoli.
This is a large City, and the Port very convenient and spacious. It appears
much above the Sea, and as most of the Sea-Towns of the Turkish Empire is
peopled with Christians, Jews, and Turks, who have every one their Churches,
Synagogues, and Mosquees, and corresponding very amicably together, maintain
themselves and their Families, either by Merchandise, or by their Handicraft
Trades.

Nor can I yet quit the Hellespont, without adding this farther for the benefit
of all Seamen, what they are to observe, and how to steer to avoid the dangers
of this passage. Upon the first entrance into this Straight, it behooves you to
steer first North and North and by East for the space of about a League to the
low Point upon the Eastern shore a little above the Mouth of Simois, which must
be avoided by reason of a Sand-bank that stretches toward the West. After
which, you must steer Northward, then North-east and by East for about eight
Leagues, as far as Gallipoli, to the West of which lies a large Bay, where you
ride in a safe Road secure from the Northern Winds, in twenty fathom Water. But
entering into this Port, you must take care of coming too near the South Coast
of Gallipoli, by reason of a Bank of Sand, and certain Rocks that lie hid under
Water; and for the same reason take the same care to avoid steering too near to
the North, and thus In medio tutissimus ibis; which is a Rule indeed to be
observed through the whole Hellespont.

A Description of the Propontis.
LEaving Gallipoli, Fig. I.
which is the last City seated upon the Hellespont, you enter the Propontis;
called the White Sea, or Sea of Marmara. It is called the Propontis, as being
by nature placed before the Black Sea, otherwise called the Pontus. The name of
the White Sea was given it by way of distinction from the Pontus Euxinus, to
which the frequent Shipwracks and continual foggy Weather there happening, have
bequeathed it the Denomination of the Black Sea; and the Isles of Marmara,
which lie about nine or ten Leagues up in this Gulf, have given it the name of
the Sea of Marmara.

The whole circuit of the Propontis, which is about a hundred and sixty
Leagues, lies enclosed within the 38 th and 41 th Degrees of Northern Latitude,
and within the 55 th and 58 th Degrees of Longitude, or thereabout. It may be
readily conjectured from this Situation, that it lies in a most temperate
Climate, which neither admits the bitter freezings of the North, nor is subject
to the stifling Southern heats. So that there is not hardly to be seen in any
other part of the World, so small a spot of Ground, whereon so many fair Cities
have been built, as upon the shore of this round Receptacle of salt Water. The
famous Cyzicum, the renowned Nice, the delightful Apamea, the charming
Nicomedia, the unfortunate Chalcedon, and several other Cities of great repute,
are sufficient Testimonies, that this celebated part of the World had omitted
nothing that might contribute to the Embelishment of her temperate Shore. All
these Cities lie upon the right hand to those Vessels that sail from Gallipoli
to Constantinople, while Europe on the Lar-board side shows you the Cities of
Rodosto, the new and ancient Perinthus or Heraclea, Selivrea, Bevado,
Grandpont, and some others not worthy Commendation. And in regard I have seen
all these Cities one after another in my several Travels, I shall say something
of every one in particular, in the same order as I have named them, and as they
are seated to the view of those that go to Constantinople.

The ancient City of Cyzicum, Cyzicum.
which is one of the first that appears to the right hand upon the Coast of
Asia, was famous for the Antiquity of its Foundation, which it derives from the
Argonauts, near five hundred years before the building of Rome; for its
situation, which was in a lovely Island joined to the Shore with two large
Bridges; for its lofty Towers and magnificent Buildings, for the most part all
of Marble: For three great Arsenals or Magazines carefully kept in repair, and
provided continually with plenty of all things necessary for the preservation
of the Inhabitants. The first was a Storehouse of Arms offensive and
defensive. The second, of all sorts of Tools, Household Furniture, and other
Necessaries, not only for the Inhabitants, but for all that were subject to the
Jurisdiction of the City. And the third contained the Granaries for Corn, and
other public Provisions for the common benefit. The Liberty also which this
City enjoyed, and which the Inhabitants always resolutely fought to maintain,
rendered it no less famous. It Is true, they lost it once out of their extreme
desire to preserve it; at what time not being able to endure the Insolence of
the Romans, they put some of them in Irons, and caused others to be whipped;
which so incensed Augustus, that he deprived them of their Liberty which they
held so dear, and which they had acquired during the War with the Mithridates.
But at length that noble Prince (overcome with the Submissions of the Citizens,
who to appease his Anger, finished the Temple which before they had began in
honor of him, though neglected during their Troubles) restored them their
former Liberty. In this City it was, that the Emperors Severus put Pescennius
Niger to death, for revolting against him in Egypt.

But of all those great advantages which formerly it enjoyed, there remains
nothing now but that of its situation, It is at present joined to the Continent
by an Isthmus about half a League broad, made out of the Ruins of those two
great Bridges which were formerly built over the Sea, and were two flight Shot
in length. Upon two sides of the Island, that is to say, to the North and to
the East, lie two fair Harbors, now utterly forsaken, as is also the City it
self, which has nothing that remains to testify its ancient Grandeur but
prodigious heaps of stately Buildings overturned one upon another. Yet among
these deplorable Ruins of its ancient Grandeur, there appears upon a pleasant
Hill a very fair Amphitheater of an Oval figure, sufficient to contain twelve
thousand Spectators. From this Amphitheater, and those other parts of the Hill
where you see all that remains of Cyzicum, you may discover the two bosoms of
Land that compose the Harbors. But all these Buildings are quite abandoned now
by all Human Resort, unless it be of Some few Travelers that are curious to
behold the Relics of Antiquity. So that now that place where the confused
noise of Number, and the din of People of various Trades and Occupations made
such a noise, as would not let the roaring of the Sea be heard, hears nothing
but the mournful cries of Owls and Ravens, and the doleful howlings of solitary
Beasts, that shelter themselves in their Nests and Dens among those once
stately Fabrics and Monuments of the ambition of the Cyzicenians.

As for the City of Nice, Nice.
which the Turks call Isnir, though it might not be thought perhaps one of the
most celebrated Cities in the World for the famous Council of three hundred and
eighteen Bishops there held in the year 325, during the Reign and in the
presence of the Great Constantine, under the Pontificate of St. Sylvester; yet
may it be so acknowledged by reason of its Foundations first laid by Antigonus
King of Asia, Son of Philip, who called it by his own name Antigonia,
afterward called Nicea by Lysimachus, according to the name of his Wife. This
City is almost apiece, placed upon a little Bosom of the Sea between two
Capes, in a fair Plain. About two Leagues to the North-east runs a long row or
chain of small Hills abounding in Wood, Wine, Fruits, and Fountains. The Walls
of it are about eight Miles in circuit, defended with large Towers for the most
part round, containing several Rooms. They were formerly surrounded with a
Terrass, like the Walls of some of the Cities in France; but the Turks taking
no care to repair them, they are now tumbled down, and fallen to decay in
several places. The City is large, beautified with very fair Streets, and
several Relics of Antiquity, as well Christian as Pagan; among the rest with a
stately Gate to the South-west, built all of Marble like a Triumphal Arch,
adorned with several Figures, which the Turks hav'd defaced, and several
Inscriptions as well Greek as Latin. There are also to be seen several very
curious pieces of Antiquity, as well in the City as in the Parts adjoining, of
which I took several Draughts; but having lost them, together with others, and
all the Money which I then had, through the unlucky accident of our Caravan's
meeting with the Arabs, as we traveled from this City to Aleppo; I must beg
the favor of the Reader to be content to share in my Misfortunes and my
Losses. At present there are not above ten thousand Inhabitants in Nicea,
counting as well the Christian Greeks, as Jews and Turks. They live altogether
upon the Trade which they drive in their Corn, Fruits, Cottons, Linen, and
other Commodities which they carry to Constantinople, from whence it is not
distant by Sea above fifty Leagues, or sixscore Miles by Land.

Among all the great number of Cities which have born the name of Apamea,
Apanea.
that which the Turks now call Montagniac is one, unless there be any that can
make it out to be the City of Nicopolis. But if we may rather believe the
ancient Inscriptions which are to be found upon the places, then we may
conclude that Montagniac is no other than Apamea. Monsieur Vaillant, a person
famous in the search of Antiquity, and whose company I had the happiness to
enjoy in this City, found a very fair Inscription upon a piece of square
Marble, whereon the name of Apamea was engraven. True it is, that this
Inscription might have been brought from some neighboring place. However, if
Montagniac be not Apamea, most certainly it is not far from the place where
Apamea stood. And therefore having nothing more of certainty my self, I shall
leave the farther discussion of this Dispute to the forementioned famous
Traveller, in those Relations which he gives us hopes will be made public, and
where we may likewise expect this Inscription among the rest.

The Situation of this little City is most pleasing, The Bay upon the Shore of
which it is built, is called Sinus Cianus, from the Ancient City of Cium, of
which the Ruins are yet to be seen; but now it bears no other name than that of
Montagniac; by means whereof this City drives a vast Trade with Constantinople,
in regard that the shortness of the way between it and Bursa, draws to it
almost all the Traffic of that great City and of almost all Bithynia, of which
Bursa is the Metropolis. From Montagniac to Bursa, Brusa, Brousa, or Bursia,
(for it is called by all these names) it is but five Leagues Journey through a
very pleasant Country, and passably well manured. There are in Montagniac about
five or six thousand Inhabitants, Greeks, Turks and Jews, who are all
Merchants, and live by the Traffic of their Commodities. The Country adjoining
to this City is very Fertile in all sorts of Fruits which are carried to the
Markets of Constantinople.

It is a difficult thing to find a Situation more advantageous than that of
Nicomedia. Nicomedia.
Certainly next to that of Constantinople, it claims the pre-eminence in that
respect above all other Cities. For it is seated at the bottom of a Bay which
bears its name, and covers the descent of a small Hill replenished with fruit
Trees Vines and Corn. A great number of Gardens belong to it, where grow most
excellent Fruits, and among the rest Melons, which are nothing inferior to
those of Cashan in Persia, that are esteemed the best in the World. The Curious
Traveller also who is desirous to have a Stock of Fair Inscriptions, may easily
satisfy his Curiosity in this City of Nicomedia. For there are hardly any of
the Streets or Church Yards, where he may not find some Fragments, and
sometimes such as are entire, both in Greek and Latin: And it is as true, that
this City has been always in high Repute, ever since it was enlarged by
Nicomede, King of Bithynia, who gave it the name of Nicomedia, instead of that
of Olbia, from the Nymph Olbia, who first laid the Foundations of it. Here it
was that Hannibal, after all his defeats, fled for Refuge to Prusias, King of
Bithynia; and where at length, that unfortunate Captain, fearing to be
surrendered up into the hands of the Carthaginians, whom he had ruined by his
ill Luck, or of the Romans who had sent to demand him from Prusias, ended his
days by Poison, which he always carried in the beazil of a Ring.

This City was one of the first that embraced the Christian Faith, for which
Reason the great number of Holy Martyrs that there generously suffered several
sorts of Deaths in defense of the Truth, have rendered it the more Illustrious.
St. Barba was one of that happy number, and of the same place, as also St.
Adrian, St. Pantaleon, St. Gorgon, whose Body we have in France, being brought
from Rome by one of the Nephews of Pepin, in the Year, 763. Near to this City
it was also, that the Great Constantine, being sixty six Years of Age, died of
a Fever in the Year, 340. Some Authors report, that this Emperor being fallen
into the Heresy of the Arians, which was condemned in his presence by the
Council of Nice, resolved to be rebaptized in the River of Jordan; to which
purpose being upon his Journey from Constantinople, he fell sick at Nicomedia,
where Eusebius the Bishop being infected with Arianism, rebaptized him into the
Arian Opinion.

The Bay of Nicomedia, is not above half a League in breadth, but in length
much more; On both sides of which runs a Ridge of small Hills, which
accompanying all along the windings and turnings of the Bay, render the Passage
by Water one of the most pleasant Recreations that can be desired. This City
which the Turks call Ismir, is very large and well peopled, containing above
thirty thousand Inhabitants, consisting of Greeks, Jews and Turks; several
Greek Churches and Fair Mosquees, many Caravansera's or Inns, and several
Bazars or Market places. The Trade of the Town consists in Silks, Cottons,
Wool, Linen, Fruits, Pot-making, Glass-houses, and other Commodities, which
render it a place of great Traffic. The most part of the great Saiques,
Kaiques, and other vessels belonging to the Merchants of Constantinople are
built at Nicomedia. But I must needs say their building for the Sea, is very
little better than their Architecture by Land. For though their Vessels are
built very large and Roomy, yet are they but ill Saylors, and therefore easily
taken. While I happened to be there, they were building two Saiq^es, that were
three Years before they were fitted. Which being done, they were carried to
Constantinople, to take in their Lading, and make their first Voyage. Their
bulk astonished the Constantinopolitans, seeing them so high built and so
large, there being no vessel in the Haven that appeared other than little Barks
to them. Presently they were moored in the Port of Courchiou, the Magazine of
this Place, with their Heads turned toward Mecca. Then came the Iman, or Priest
of that Quarter, as it were to consecrate the two new Vessels, or rather to
charm them by the Virtue of their accustomed Prayers against the misfortunes of
Shipwreck and Piracy. Being thus enchanted, they were laden; being laden, they
were again blessed by the Iman with a Tun of Benedictions and good wishes of a
happy and prosperous Voyage, and then set Sail for the Coast of Egypt; but they
were no sooner passed the Dardanells, and entered the Archipelago, when a
Corsaire of Malta made bold to shorten their Voyage, and to carry away the two
Wonders of Constantinople, Lading, Benedictions and all, to his own Port.

To the West of Nicomedia, on the North side of the Gulf, there rises a Spring
of Mineral water, to my thinking chiefly partaking of Alum, of which the Turks
and Greeks relate wonders. There is great resort to it from all Parts, for they
believe there is no distemper under the Sun which it does not cure. For my own
part, the only Curiosity of going to see it, had like to have cost me my Eyes^t
Issues from a Rock at the foot of a little Hill, from whence gliding along
toward the Bay, together with some other small streams, it waters a flat kind
of Green full of weeds and rushes; which is all Marshie in the Winter, but was
dry when I went over it. Here it was that walking over these Rushes, two Wasps
whose peace I had disturbed, in revenge made presently to my Eyes and very
angrily stung me under the Brows. The pain that I felt was extreme, and the
swelling so great that I could not open my Eyes in a Quarter of an hour, so
that if I had not had the good fortune to have had Monsieur Vaillant (as
skilful in Physic as Antiquity) in my Company, I know not whether I might not
rather have been put to have groped my way back to Constantinople, than hoped
to have seen Persia. But he was so happy as immediately to find out a certain
Herb, with the juice of which mixed with water, after he had well washed my
Eyes, he soon assuaged the pain, so that I went forward and took a view of that
same Celebrated Agiasma, or Holy Fountain. A little farther Westward, on the
Southside of the Bay, appears a little Langet of dry Land, just like a great
Heap of Earth, not above six Fathom in Breadth, and about half a quarter of a
League in length. At the farther end of which, toward the Land side, stands a
Mosquee, of which the Turks tell a pleasant Miracle. It happened, say they,
that upon a certain Festival among the Turks, a certain Dervich, or Mohammedan
Monk, who lived on the other side of the Bay to the North, according to his
Custom prepared himself very early to perform his Devotions, and say his usual
Mattins at the forementioned Mosquee. But the night before, a Storm having
robbed him of his little Boat and carried it quite away, and so not knowing how
to get over the Bay, he prayed to God to inspire him what to do in his sad
Condition. Well, his Prayer was heard, and thereupon Melek Gebrail, or the
Angel Gabriel, fails not to attend him; who bids him go to the Sea shore and
fill the Lappet of his Coat with as much sand as it would hold, which being
done, he bid him cast the sand before him as he went, and it should presently
harden into a path for him to walk upon the Water. The good Hermit followed the
Angels wholesome advice, but whether he had not taken sand enough, or whether
he did not strew enough upon the yielding waves, his Causey sank behind him,
nor could he go forward, for that he had spent all his sand. In this Extremity
the Dervich fell again to his Prayers and his Tears, which were so prevalent,
that Mahomet himself then took notice of him, and observing to what danger the
holy Mussel-man had exposed himself, that he might perform his devotions at the
Mosquee, obtained of God to advance a Langet of dry Land as far as where the
Dervich stood, on purpose to take him up, and to afford him a safe passage to
the Mosquee. Since which time this Langet of Land has remained as it stands to
perpetuate the memory of this Miracle.

Sailing out of the Gulf of Nicomedia, you enter into the Sea of Chalcedon, in
the amidst of which little Sea, not above ten Leagues in Circumference, you
meet with a great Watchtower, erected at the end of a Promontory, not far
distant from Chalcedon it self. Upon which Promontory also stands a House of
Pleasure belonging to the Grand Signor, known by the Name of Fanari-Kiosk. This
word Kiosc in the Turkish Language signifies a covered Gallery. For that as
well this same Kiosc here mentioned, as also all the rest that are to be seen
in Turkey, are only built of several Pillars erected upon a Square, supporting
Galleries that run from side to side, and are covered with a large low Roof in
the manner of a Pavillion.

The Situation of this Kiosc is very delectable, as being placed in the midst,
and in the highest part of a most beautiful Garden, the most regularly planted
of any that are to be seen in Turkey; the Alleys being straight, the Trees
planted at an equal distance, with several Beds and Borders of Flowers
Artificially drawn forth* (Whereas all the other Gardens belonging to the Grand
Signor, are only a Confusion of Trees growing as they were planted, without any
Order or neatness, like so many petty Wildernesses.) All these Alleys lead to
the Kiosc, which every way delights the Eye with a pleasing Prospect. For from
hence you may behold the greatest part of the City of Constantinople, the Grand
Serraglio, and Galata, which lies to the West of this Garden, at the distance
of about a good League. The Haven and City of Chalcedon lies upon the right
hand to the Northwest; the Islands of the Princes, and the Propontis face it to
the Southeast; the Entry of the Gulf of Nicomedia appears upon the left hand
to the South; and the lovely Fields of Bithynia, (upon the farthest Extent of
which this beautiful Structure presents it self to view,) spread themselves
from the back part of it beyond the reach of sight.

The Charming Situation whereof invited Sultan Solomon the Second to erect a
Palace of Pleasure in this place, that here he might with more freedom enjoy
his Amors, and wanton away his hours of leisure with his Sultanesses. In the
midst of this Structure, a fair ascent leads ye into a beautiful Sopha, or Room
of State, richly furnished with Quilts, Carpets, and Cushions of high value,
and encompassed with Balisters Embellished with Moresco Work. This Sopha is
four square, and placed almost in the middle of a large Concavity of the same
Form, wherein are several Artificial Waterworks continually supplied with
water, sufficient to bath in. This Potent Monarch, no less addicted to his
Amorous Enjoyments, than to the love of Martial Atchievments, was careful to
adorn this Structure with all the gay embellishments, that Ma^ometan
Architecture could invent, to consummate as well his own, as the divertisements
of the Sultanesses whom he best loved. Taking delight frequently to retire in
their Company from his Serraglio at Constantinople to this place, as not being
above a League from thence, where being arrived he gave himself up to enjoy
with more secrecy and less trouble, the Satisfaction of those pleasures which
an inordinate Passion could provoke him to, in a place so well accommodated for
his wanton purposes.

The watch Tower adjoining to this Kiosc is of great benefit to such Vessels as
Sail by night to Constantinople, of which there are a great Number; or to such
as come to an Anchor near to Chalcedon, which does not happen so frequently.

The Haven as also the City of Chalcedon Chalcedon.
are neither much frequented, unless it be by some Barks and Saics which go to
Constantinople to fetch Provisions that are wanting here. Formerly this City
was one of the most Famous that stood upon the Propontis. And it is said that
one Chalcedon a Shepherd, and Son of Saturn, first began to build some certain
Cottages upon the Banks of a small River that watered the adjoining Meadows, to
which he gave his own name. A long time after the Inhabitants of Chalcis in the
Island of Euboea, now called the Negropont, sent a Collony thither, continuing
the name which before it had, as being not much different from the Name of
their own City. The Megareans, not far from the Corinthian Isthmus, did the
like about the Year of the World 3290. But in regard that both the one and the
other, by their choice of Chalcedon, had overseen that noble Situation which
showed it self over against them, where now Constantinople stands, therefore it
was that the Oracle of Delphos adjudged them both to be blind, and that
Megabizu^ the Persian, and all that have come after him, have still to this day
confirmed the Sentence of the Oracle. For my part, I cannot but wonder that
among so many that have called them Blind, there is not one who has called them
Fools. Arrian, the Historian and their Neighbor, as being born in the City of
Nicomedia, relates, that those People having for some time neglected the
Worship of a Certain Deity, to which their Ancestors had Erected a Temple, were
visited with a noisome and shameful disease. For which not finding any other
remedy, they thought the readiest way to preserve the rest of the Body, would
be to cut off the part infected, though of never so great use to the whole.
This incensed Deity was certainly Venus, who had a most beautiful Temple in
Chalcedon, and the Distemper no doubt was one of those, of which she is
generally the Primary cause. The disease was doubtless very irksome, and the
remedy much worse, and doubtless it was their great misfortune, that they had
not so much as one of our Empericks to Plaster their Walls, as they do here at
London, with their Infallible Venereal Cures; for surely he would have been the
most acceptable person in the World to the Chalcedonian Ladies, who bemoaned
their Widowhoods, while yet their Husbands were alive.

However at present there remain no footsteps either of this Temple of Venus,
or of that of Apollo, which one Cocconas rendered Famous by the Oracles, which
(by slight of Invention) he made the bright-hair'd Deity deliver there as well
as at Delphos. This Cocconas envying the Cities of Delphos in Phocis, Claros in
Ionia, and Delos in the Egean Sea, which were become so renowned and wealthy by
means of the Oracles of Apollo, b^^hought himself at length of a way to bring
the Fortune-Telling God to his City, and to make him speak in his Temple. To
that intent he ob^ain'd to be elected one of Apollo's Priests, and in a short
time having got the knack of wrapping up his Answers in Ambiguous Terms, he so
raised the Fame of Chalcedonian Apollo, that he gained the Resort of all
Thrace, Bithynia, Phrygia, and all the neighboring Provinces.

But neither these Temples of Pagan Antiquity, nor those of the Primitive
Church, are now any more to be seen. The Ruined City is now contented only with
a small part of a Church formerly Dedicated to St. Euphemia, whither those few
Greeks that live in the City resort to perform their Religious Duties. And in
this Church it was that the fourth General and ecumenical Council was held. As
for any other pieces of Antiquity, there are only some few Tombs, and short
Inscriptions, and the fair Relics of a subterraneal Aquaduct. The Haven is
now no longer chained as formerly to guard the Entrance; and yet though it lies
open thus to all, not one jot for that the more frequented. In short Chalcedon,
to which Chrysopolis or Galata in former times was only a Haven for its
Galleys, and a Magazin for the Public Stores, retains at present nothing of its
Illustrious Antiquity, but the Name, being only a miserable Village containing
about a Thousand or twelve Hundred Houses, surrounded with heaps of Ancient
Ruins, and Monuments of Destruction. The Persians, Goths, Saracens, and Turks,
have all successively contributed to it is overthrow, it having felt the fatal
effects of all their Cruelties, and the too near Neighborhood of
Constantinople has been a Potent Obstacle to its Recovery. The Eastern
Emperors, who always since the time of Constantine the Great made
Constantinople the Seat of the Empire, made it their business to advance the
Splendour of that City with the Spoils as well of her Neighbors as her Enemies.
Of which number the Emperor Valens was one, who alone wasted Chalcedon more
than all her other Enemies. He threw down all her Walls, which were built of
fair large Stones, and a small matter would have urged him entirely to have
rased it, for that she had harbored his Enemy Procopius, and was suspected to
have strongly favored his Party. The Great Aquaduct also at Constantinople,
adjoining to the Solimanie, and the best part of that Mosquee, was Erected out
of the Ruins of this unfortunate City.

But this Road which I have described is never much regarded in going to
Constantinople; for all Vessels leave the beautiful Shores of Bithynia upon the
right hand, and keep Coasting for the most part upon the shore of Thrace.

So then leaving the Hellespont, the first City you meet with is Rodosto.
Rodosto.
A City well seated at the bottom of a small Bay, which gives it the
Convenience of an indifferent good Harbor. It is well peopled with about
fifteen thousand Inhabitants. The Trade which it drives with all Thrace, the
Propontis, and over all the Black Sea, causes it to be more frequented than any
other City upon that Coast, it is adorned with three or four large Mosquees,
and several other lesser ones, besides that the Greeks have also some Churches
in it, and the Jews two Synagogues. It lies stretched out in length upon the
Sea ^hoar, which brings it it is chiefest Commerce, being surrounded to the
Landward with several Gardens replenished with store of good fruit; though for
their way of manuring and ordering their Ground, it seems not to be much better
there, than in any other part of Turkey; the Mahometans being as little skilled
in Gardening as in Architecture. For though they have a great number of persons
that call themselves Bostangis or Gardiners they are much more beholding to
Nature for producing the Fruit, than to Art for Cultivating or dressing either
Plants or Trees.

They sow great store of Cotton, Cucumbers, ordinary Melons, water Melons, and
such kind of cooling Fruits, which are not however so kindly, as they that grow
about Nicomedia.

Leaving the little Bay of Rodosto, you meet with upon the left hand the
Ancient City of Perinthus. Perinthus.
This is almost the fortieth City in number that has born the Name of Heraclea:
and if among all the misfortunes that have befallen it, it had not still
preserved its name, you would hardly believe, beholding the deplorable
Condition to which it is reduced, that what remains could be the Ruins of that
once so loudly Celebrated Perinthus, which formerly gave Laws to the Proud
Byzantium it self, under whose Tyranny it now so heavily groans.

This City is Seated in 42 degrees 25 min. of Northern Latitude, round a
Promontory somewhat ascending, which on each side makes two indifferent good
Harbors; of which, that which lies to the North-East, is the biggest and most
secure, and consequently most frequented. But in regard there is no care taken
to cleanse it, and for that the Turks suffer it to be insensibly filled up with
the Rubbish that falls continually from the ruinous buildings, of which there
are several close adjoining to the shore, the Haven is now very much impaired,
and capable of receiving only Ordinary Barks and Turkish Saicks, of small
Burden; whereas in the Reign of the Emperor Severus, and long before and after
his Time, it afforded Commodious and safe Harbor to Royal Navies, and Ships of
the greatest burden then Built.

The Haven it self is almost Circular, and much resembling the Form of a
Horshooe, affording a most pleasing Prospect, though not altogether so
delightful, as that which extends it self from the Promontory upon the left
hand. From the upper part of this Promontory you discover the two Havens
belonging to Heraclea, between which it swells up into a fair ascent, and the
Sea of Marmora, which lies directly before it and the whole City; and besides,
the beautiful Fields which inviron it, contribute very much to the advantage of
its Situation. And certainly upon this place it was that the noble Amphitheater
of Heraclea was erected, which in the Records of Antiquity has obtained the
Renown of being one of the seven Wonders of the World. Some Ruins of it still
remain, and among the rest several Vaults or Cellars full of water which is
extremely fresh and clear, that now supply the want of Cisterns. From these
Reservatories it was without all question that the water was conveyed through
different Pipes, to the several Apartiments of the Amphitheater, where they had
occasion.

Neither was this the only considerable Structure in Heraclea. For besides the
stately Temples, the most delicate Bathing places, and other public Buildings,
there were also several Statues, pieces of rare and Exquisite Workmanship,
erected in the several Streets, in remembrance of those who had been any way
beneficial to the Commonwealth. The Statues themselves are now unhappily
broken to pieces, through the Barbarity of succeeding Ages. But their
Pedestals, together with the Inscriptions still to be Read, plainly demonstrate
the high gratitude of the Perinthians toward their Benefactors. Which as it
confirms the Generosity of the Ancient Heracleotes, so may we thence conclude
Heraclea and Perinthus to be the same. The Greek and Latin Inscriptions in
several parts of the City yet undefaced, and the apparent Relics of Antiquity
still extant, confirm that of the Poet, -- quae magna Perinthus
Ante fuit, priscum mutavit Heraclea nomen.
-- Which Great Perinthus was before,
But Heraclea now has changed the Name of yore.


There is hardly a street which does not show some Testimony of this Truth; in
regard that many of those Engraven Monuments are now made use of for Steps to
the common Habitations of the Citizens. But the most remarkable Inscription now
to be seen in Heraclea, remains upon a Stone that is Mortased into the wall of
the Great Church adjoining to the Street which leads to Adrianople. The words
are in Greek, and Dedicated to the good Fortune of the Emperor Severus. For he
it was that to be revenged upon the City of Byzantium, for taking the part of
Pescennius Niger, subdued it, and annexed it to the Territories of the
Perinthian Commonwealth, whose Rival for Dominion she had formerly been.

There is also another Inscription near to the same Church, in the House of the
Metropolitan, dedicated to the good Fortune of the Emperor Trajan, the Son of
Nerva.

The Metropolitans House adjoyns to the Church, to which he goes under a
Covert. In this same Passage, which also serves for a Portico to the said
Church, is to be seen the Tomb of an English Gentleman, who going to
Constantinople, fell sick of the Pestilence in the Island of Tenedos, and died
before he could arrive at Heraclea, where he was Interred in the Year 1627. as
appears by the Greek and Latin Epitaph upon his Tomb. There is no question to
be made, but that the Bishop and the Cadi shared the best part of that
unfortunate Gentleman's Viaticum, to obtain the favor of being Interred in a
place so secure as the Entry into the Church, a place the most Honorable and
decent in those parts, in regard that neither the Greeks nor any of the Eastern
Christians bury their dead in Churches.

This Cathedral Church of Heraclea is one of the fairest in all Greece. When I
say one of the fairest Churches of Greece, it is not to be imagined that I
extol it for a Pompous piece of Architecture. Only this it is that makes it so
remarkable, that it is a great pile wrought out of a large Pane of one part of
the Wall of the City and the Remains of an Ancient Building, which seems to
have been some Tower, over which they have raised a handsome Roof that covers
the Edifice. The inside is fair and decent, and much better ordered than the
Church belonging to the Patriarch of Constantinople. There are also several
other Churches in Heraclea, but not in so good repair as this, which is a kind
of Cathedral, and indeed the one half of them are altogether deserted and
utterly forsaken. When I came to Heraclea, I asked whether it were Holyday,
finding so many of the Shops shut up in several streets. But they told me, they
were the Houses of a great many rich Heracleotes, who were lately dead of the
Plague; or else of such as had forsaken their Houses and their Country some
Years before, unable to endure the Tyranny of the Turks, who continually vexed
them with new Impositions; adding farther, that if the Turks did not relax
their Cruelty, there would not in a short time be one Greek Inhabitant left in
Heraclea. In regard that since the late severe prohibitions against Wine over
all Turkey, the poor Greeks had not where withal to make money to pay their
Karache or Tribute, which they are obliged to have ready upon demand.

Nor is the Condition of all the other Cities of Turkey much different from
this, as being all very thinly inhabited; for besides that the Contagion, which
always ravages in one part or other of the Ottoman Empire, sweeps away vast
Numbers daily of the Grand Signor's Subjects, the Politics of that Prince are
not so clear-witted as to apprehend, that Polygamie, which he and his Laws
allow, is not sufficient to replenish an Empire, so vast as his, with People. A
little more Humanity and less Tyranny would be much more conducing to that
purpose, than all the Variety of Women in his Serraglio, and which his Basha's
and other Subjects also maintain. But they are so far from Humanity and
Moderation, that upon the least failor of exacted Tribute, there is no more
than a word and a blow: Cudgels, Chains and Imprisonment, are the only
kindnesses they must expect who are not prepared to satisfy the Collector's
demand. More than this, the Mahometans are so wedded to their opinion
concerning Predestination, that it will not permit them to erect Hospitals or
Almshouses either for the Cure of the sick, or any other public places where
the Infected, or such as come from Infected places, are usually obliged in
other Countries to keep their Quarantaines, before they are admitted to Trade
in public. On the other side, with them, a person no sooner dies of the Plague,
but they presently carry his Clothes and Goods to the Market, where he that
wants, purchases what he has occasion for, and many times loses his life e're
he has had the pleasure to enjoy his Bargain: Which though it be a misfortune
that frequently happens to several, yet the Turks never take any notice of it.
And as for the poor Greeks, though they are sufficiently sensible of the
mischief, yet the sottish Religion of their Masters will not permit them any
other kindness than to perish with them.

The present Trade of Heraclea is not very great; nor are the Vessels which
visit their Haven any other for the most part, than such as are driven in by
stress of weather; as happened to the Ship wherein I was a Passenger, which was
constrained to put into Harbor, by a furious Wind full North. But for such as
come to take in their Lading there, they are but few; and yet they have plenty
of Cotton, Olives, dry and green Fruits, Hides and Wool. I arrived at Heraclea
just at the time when they gathered their Cotton, which made me curious to see
in what manner they did it. It is well known that Cotton is the product of a
Seed black without and white within, about the bigness of a little Pea. This
they Sow in June, that it may come to perfection in September, or October at
farthest. In which time the plant grows up generally as high as an ordinary
Shrubb, bearing a leaf not much unlike that of Plantain. But whether it grow
much or little, it bears always several Cods full of Cotton, in the midst of
which lies the seed. Now when these Cods are fully ripe, they open like an
Emony flower, and discover the Cotton enclosed, which is separated from the
Seed by two little Rollers like those of a Gravers Printing Press, between
which the Cotton passes, leaving the Seed behind.

This City has been Honored by the death of several Martyrs, liberal of their
blood in defense of the Christian faith. Of which number were St. Felix,
Clement, and Philemon.

Between Heraclea and Constantinople, there is at present nothing remarkable;
only three or four Villages discover themselves upon the Coast of Thrace, which
might formerly perhaps have been places of note, as seems to appear by their
heaps of Ruined Houses. But at this time, were Selivrea, Bevados, Grand Pont,
and Sancto Stephano, all put together, they would not make an ordinary Town. So
that I shall say little more of this coast of Thrace; only since I have made
mention of Grand Pont, ^ cannot pass by a generous Action of Monsieur Vaillant,
Physician and Antiquarie to the King of France.

We embarked together at Smirna for Constantinople, in a Turkish Saick, that
stopped to unlade part of her Goods at Grand-pont, which the Turks call Boujouc
Tchesmega, or Boujouc Kupri. During the time that the Vessel stayed in the
Harbor, Monsieur Vaillant went ashore, to see what pieces of Antiquity he
could discover: And passing along through one of the public streets, he saw a
young Venetian, chained like a fugitive slave, to the end, that his Master
might come and have him again upon claim, or if he had no Master, that then
they who had stopped him might make their best advantage of him. This Venetian
had been made a slave during the War of Candy, and sold to a Turk in the
Country, by whom, as he afterward confessed, he had not been ill used. But
notwithstanding his Patrons mildness, that natural desire of Liberty, and to
return to his Native Country, which is fixed in all men, had over persuaded him
to seek out all the ways imaginable to free himself. Thereupon hearing of a new
Venetian Ambassador that was upon his way to Constantinople, he resolved to lay
hold of an opportunity that seemed to promise him so fairly. And indeed the
success of his first attempts were answerable to his wishes. For his Master,
conscious of the kindness and affection which he had showed him all along, had
not the least mistrust of him; and with that confidence sent him with a Letter
to Adrianople, which was about two days Journey from his House. The Venetian
was so just as to carry his Masters Letter to Adr^^^ople, but for the answer
his Master might fetch it himself. For he had a farther journey to go, which was
to Constantinople, whither he made all the have he could, and by the privatest
Roads, and the most by-ways he could find out. Nevertheless he could not Travel
with that secrecy, but that at length he was stopped. For it is the custom in
Turkey, to stop as a fugitive slave, any person that Travells alone in the
Country, or comes to any Village without Company, and not to let him pass if he
cannot produce a Letter from his Master to justify his being sent, or that he
has given him his Liberty. Neither of which the Venetian had to show that were
real, and which to counterfeit in Turkey is a thing extremely hazardous and
dangerous. Thereupon he was apprehended, and chained to a Post in the public
street, where he remained for three days together; notwithstanding all the
feigned excuses he could make. The poor Venetian was in a thousand doubts,
sometimes he feared lest his Master should hear of him, and then he knew the
severity of his punishment no less than five hundred drubs with a battoon upon
the soles of his feet, with a thousand other hardships, at the discretion of
his Patron. Sometimes he was afraid they would sell him to some other Master,
that would not be so kind to him as his other Patron had been. But in the midst
of these thoughts* the Arrival of Monsieur Vaillant proved his deliverance. For
as soon as the miserable Captive perceived him, he threw himself at Monsieur
Vaillants feet, imploring his compassion, and to relieve him from the
misfortune he was fallen into, either of being found out again by his former
Patron, or sold to a new Master, Thereupon Monsieur Vaillant commiserating the
lamentable condition of the miserable Captive, demanded him from the hands of
those that detained him, as one that was a friend to his Master, whom he
pretended to know, and called by a fictitious name; and to add the more credit
to what he said, he readily paid what money they who put the imbargo upon the
Venetian's heels demanded, and so carrying his purchase along with him to
Constantinople, there like a generous Christian gave him his full liberty
frankly and freely.

Having now taken a view of all the Propontic shore, it behooves us to speak
something of the Islands that are in the Propontis it self; of which the
largest, and those which you first meet with, are the Islands of Marmara. Isles
of Marmara.
They lie to the right, as you leave Galipoli, about ten Leagues off in the
Sea, steering, if you desire to make them North East and by East. In the Winter
some Vessels bear away to the South of these Islands, by reason of the South
and South-East Winds that blow hard at that Season; in the Summer they keep the
Channel directly for Constantinople. These Islands are Four in number, Two
large ones, One of a lesser extent, and the Other very small. They lie very
near one another, and are well peopled. The biggest of these Islands which is
the most Northerly, is about twelve Leagues in circumference, having for its
chief City Marmara, from whence it derives its name, together with several
other Villages, and among the rest Galioni and Crastio, with some few Convents
and Hermitages, inhabited by Caloyers or Religious Greeks, who pass their time
with great content in those quiet Retirements.

The largest next to Marmara, lying to the East is called Avezia, containing
one Borough of the same name, and two Villages, Aloni and Arabkioi, or the
Villages of the Arabians. The third Island, not so large as either of the
former, is called Coutalli, containing also a Borough of the same name; and the
fourth, which is the smallest of all, by the name of Gadaro, is not however
without several pleasant Habitations, and some few Religious houses of the
Caloyers. These four Islands are seated on a good Climate, lying in 38 degrees
and some 35 minutes of Northern Latitude, to the South-East of Heraclea,
abounding in Corn, Wine, Fruit, Pasturage, and Cattle, besides the convenience
of excellent Fishing, of which the Inhabitants however make little other
advantage than for their own use, in regard that Constantinople, and all the
other Cities seated upon the Propontis, are sufficiently stored by their own
Inhabitants, so that they have no occasion to be beholding to their Neighbors.

They who are bound from these Islands to Constantinople, must steer their
course North, and the contrary from Constantinople to Marmara. I have Sailed it
in less than Twelve Hours with a good Wind, though it be reckoned about Forty
Leagues.

At the extremity of the Propontis, Isles of the Princes.
before you bear up to Constantinople, you meet with a little cluster of
Islands, which the Turks call Papa Adasi; the Greeks, Papa donisia, or the
Isles of the Monks; the Europeans, the Islands of the Pope, or the Islands of
the Princes. These Islands would be most pleasing Summer Ritirements, and
Spring-Gardens for evening Recreations, were they in the hands of the
Christians, or they Masters of Constantinople; every one would there desire to
have his Country Habitation. For they lie not above three or four Leagues from
Constantinople, which is not above an hour and a half or two hours sail at the
most. The Europeans who live in Constantinople, as also those of Pera, and the
other Greeks, make these Islands, generally the Randevouzes for their
Recreation. But yet such is their unhappiness to be so near Neighbors to
Constantinople, that that which otherwise might prove to their advantage,
becomes the cause of their misfortune. For lying at so small distance from the
M^tropolis, when any of the Ianizaries, or Drunken Turks, have a mind to divert
themselves, they retire to these Islands, to the end they may have the more
liberty to troul about their Cups, without being taken notice of. For though
the Turks rarely drink Wine, yet they love to take their full swinge when they
can get a private convenience, not believing they have so much as tasted it,
unless they can feel the effects of it in their heads or their Stomachs three
days after. To this purpose away they go to these Islands, inhabited only by
Christian Greeks, with a design to bouze it about briskly, and when they are
got Drunk, they commit all the disorders that their inflamed heads can devise.
They swear at the poor Greeks, beat 'em, and seize for their own proper use,
(as Lords of the Manor) whatsoever they have a mind to. It Is true they seldom
kill any one, because Murder is so strictly and severely punished all over
Turkey, the Murderers being always hanged in the same place where the Murder is
committed: but they break into the poor peoples Gardens, and make more havoc
of the Vines, Plants and Fruit Trees, than so many Swine, not sparing what ever
comes in their way, so that the Poor creatures have no encouragement either to
till, plant or sow. Which is the reason that those fertile and delightful
Islands lie almost neglected and unmanur'd, like so many barren deserts. Only
the Caloyers plant about their Religious Houses sufficient for themselves, and
to entertain such Travelers as come to visit them; to whom they will also
permit the liberty of Eating Flesh in their Convents, so they bring it along
with them, though themselves are by their Order confined only to the Fruits of
the Earth and Fish; of which they have the convenience to make a plentiful
Provision.

The Coloyers are of the Order of St. Basil, as are also those of Mount Athos,
or the Holy Mountain: and indeed all the rest of the Caloyers all over Greece
are under the same Rules, and wear the same Habit: You shall not hear a word
among them of Reforming their first Institution. They have not changed any
thing of their Ancient manner of living or Habit. Their vestments are the same
as formerly. They have neither added nor diminished any thing to make any
distinction one from the other; but maugre the desolation of their livelyhoods,
and the long series of time, they have preserved their Constit^tions entire,
without suffering any alteration or deviation. They live a very retired life,
and very poorly; they never eat any flesh; and besides this continual
abstinence, they keep four Lents in the year, not reckoning in several other
Fasts and Vigils which the Greek Church most devoutly observes; in so much that
let them be what they will, Secular or Ecclesiastic, Rich or Poor, sick or in
health, though never so pressing necessity urge it, they dare not at those
times so much as taste either Butter, Fish or Eggs. The Armenians also forbid
the use of Oil; nor does any person so much as think of desiring a
Dispensation, which indeed would never be granted, unle^s they could allege
some invincible reason, and then they must also give a very con^iderable Alms
to the Church.

But although the great number of Fasts and Lents which the Eastern Christians,
as well as the Caloyers observe, causes them to spend three Quarters of the
year in a kind of mortifying hunger, yet is not all this their great Devotion
any obstruction, but that they can find a way to entertain those that visit
them in their Lents, with Ragou's and dainties no less various then delightful
to the Appetite: So true is the Italian Proverb, Trovata la Leg trovato ^'
inganno. The Law once known, you may easily find away to elude it. For though
they give ye no Wine, yet they supply that defect with Strong Water, Coffee,
Sherbet, and other made drinks as pleasing. They that scruple to eat Fish,
spread their Tables with Oysters, Periwincles, and such other kind of
Shel-fish, with Pottages, Caveare, Botargo, and other compositions made of Eggs
and Roes of Fish, much more delightful and pleasing to the Palate, than the
Fish themselves, and on which a good stomach may feed heartily without fear or
danger of troublesome Bones; and if the Armenians will not admit either Oil or
Butter in their Sauces, yet they make use of Almonds, Pistaches, Nuts and other
Fruits, and Kernells bruised in Morters, which being set over a Chafing Dish,
supply the want, and are much better than our Butter. In short, they who are
most bigoted to the observance of these Lents, make such a confusion of
feeding and fasting, that they think it no sin to be munching and exercising
their Grinders all day long between meals, provided they abstain from flesh,
fish, eggs, butter and oil.

The Description of Constantinople.
LEaving these Islands, Fig. II.
of which I shall say no more, because that others have bestowed great pains
upon them already, you begin to approach near Constantinople, which you behold
to the left hand; and to coast along by the Walls, which reach from the Castle
of the seven Towers to the Point of the Serraglio; after which you must steer
to the North-East, to double the point of the Serraglio, to avoid the continual
Current of the Waters of the Bosphorus, which fall with a wonderful impetuosity
out of the Black Sea into the Propontis, and which would infallibly cast the
Ship upon the A^ropolis, where the Point of the Serraglio stands. You then
leave the Serraglio upon the left hand, and the Vessel Sailing upon Scutari
side, passes very near a Rock, upon which is built a foursquare Tower,
environed with a Wall of the same form, well provided with great Guns. The
Turks call this Castle, or rather Tower, Khes-Calasi, or the Virgin's Castle;
the Europeans, though without any ground, Leanders Tower. In regard it does not
stand in that part where Leander wont to exercise his Arms for the sake of his
Mistress Hero, which was between the Dardanells, as has been said already.

This is certainly that part of the Universe above all others, where the eye
most deliciously feeds it self with a prospect every way delightful. There is
nothing can be beheld, nor conceived more charming to the sight, than this
approach to Constantinople. For my own part, when I arrived there the first
time, methought I was entering into an Enchanted Island. I found my self in the
midst of three great Arms of the Sea, of which the one flows from the
North-East, the other lies toward the North-West, and the third, to which both
those contribute their waters, discharges it self into the round Receptacle of
the Propontis. These three great Arms of the Sea, as far as you can see, employ
their Waves on both sides, to wash the shoars of several parcells of Land,
insensibly rising into a great number of Hills covered with Houses of pleasure,
Gardens and Kioscs. And the nearer these three great Arms of the Sea waft ye to
the City, the more increases the infinite number of Houses. They appear all
together one above another, in form of an Amphitheater, so that they all afford
the benefit of a most beautiful Prospect.

In the midst of those houses, variously Painted appears an incredible number
of Domo's, Cupola's, Steeples and Towers, much higher than the ordinary
Buildings. All those Domo's are covered with Lead, as also the Steeples, the
Spires of which are Gilded: And the verdure of the Cypress and other Trees,
abounding in a prodigious number of Gardens, contribute infinitely to the
pleasing confusion of various colors that charm the eyes of all that approach
near to the City. The multitude of Vessels that make as it were a Crown round
about the Port, without encumbring the middle, appears like a spacious Circle
of lofty Trees, deprived of their Leaves on purpose because they should not
hide those beautiful Objects that lie behind them. And the vast number of
Kaicks, Gondola's and little Boats, which is said to amount to above Sixteen
Thousand, which are continually in motion from all parts, some under Sail, some
Rowed with Oars, for the convenience of the Inhabitants, seems to represent to
the Spectators of so lovely an Amphitheater, the continual divertisement of a
Naval Combat. In short, when you are in the middle of the Harbor of this great
City, which way soever you turn your eye, you cannot but admire how favorable
Nature has been to it, in making choice of whatsoever she thought might conduce
to the Glory of its situation.

Seeing then it has such great advantages, and those peculiar to it self, we
need not wonder that Constantine the Great, so easily quitted the delights of
Rome, and Transported the Seat of his Empire to Byzantium, and that he called
it by his own name; nor indeed is there any other City so proper to command the
Universe. With one glance of her eye she beholds the two most lovely parts of
the whole, and in less than a quarter of an hour can send her Orders from the
one part of the World where she is seated, to the other. Which therefore seems
to make so near an approach to her lofty Towers on purpose to receive her
Commands, and submit to her Obedience. So that had Art and Nature consulted
together, to form a Place where Beauty and Plenty should equally contend, they
never could have been more successful, than in the adornment of that where
Constantinople stands.

The Soil produces all sorts of Fruits, as pleasing to the Eye, as delicious to
the taste, so that there is nothing to be desired either necessary, or
superabounding for the support of human life. Their Fresh and Salt Waters
furnish them with all sorts of Commodities, which it is possible for an Element
so advantageous to mankind to afford them. Fish, not to speak of Oysters, in so
great abundance stores their Markets, that I know not whether it may not be one
part of satisfaction to Curiosity for that very reason to view a City so well
furnished with provision: You shall see them frisking every moment above Water.
But whether to admire the Glory of that City, or to breath in the sweetness of
the Air, be more pleasant, is a question. The vast plenty of Fowl is not to be
imagined; yet the havoc which they make Mornings and Evenings among the
Gardens and neighboring Hills, sufficiently declare the fruitfulness of the
Climate in their production. Nor are they less stored with those Amphibious
winged Creatures, that live sometimes upon Land, sometimes in the Water, and
sometimes in the Air, to show that all those three Elements are at
Constantinople in their Highest perfection. Even the Fire it self, not enduring
to be confined within the smaller hearths of so fair a City, breaks forth
oft-times into most violent constagrations, as if become capable of jealousy,
and not being able to render it self sufficiently remarkable by its ordinary
uses, it rather chose to show it self dreadful by its effects, than to be the
only Element idl^ and inglorious in that City, while all the rest seem to have
their Thrones at Constantinople.

This Prodigality of Nature caused the Emperor Justinian, to believe that it
behooved men rather to abandon all the rest of the World to come and live at
Constantinople, than suffer so delightful a place to be one single day without
Inhabitants, as it has been the fate of several other great Cities. And upon
this consideration it was, that he changed it is name of Constantinople, and
gave it the Appellation of the Eternal City, as appears by that Law of his, si
qui quinta cap. de diverse. praed. urb. tit. 69. Neither is Constantinople the
only name which this City has born, nor yet the last; having had almost as
many Names as Masters; while all that have ruled within her Walls, either as
Kings or Tyrants, have all had their fancies to change her Name as well as her
Fortune. In the first place it was called Chrysoceras, or Horn of Gold. Perhaps
from that plenty and abundance which some of the Thracian Shepherds found upon
that Outlet of Land upon which it is Seated; or for the advantage of the place
by reason of its Situation, and the exterior Figure of it, which represents
the shape and substance of Amalthea's Horn, usually called the Horn of Plenty:
This fell out in the Year of the World 3286. which was within the 22 d.
Olympiad, in the Reigns of Rather Manasses
Ezechias and Numa Pompilius; six hundred fourscore and ten years before the
Birth of Christ. After this first erecting of certain Shepherds Cottages at
Chrysoceras, the number of Inhabitants, charmed with the Situation of the
Place, increased so fast, that in a little time it grew to be a considerable
Borough, to which they gave the name of Acropolis, or the City of the Point or
Promontory, and afterward that of Lygos. Nor was it long after that Byzis,
Byzas, Bysantus or Bysanta (for such is the variety among several Authors)
carrying thither a Collony of the Megarians, called it by his own name
Byzantium, which continued 'till the Reign of the Emperor Antonine, who
greatly added to the Buildings, and called it Antonina. It has also born the
name of Anthusa, afterward that of New Rome, 'till at length Constantine the
Great, (who Translated thither the seat of the Roman Empire,) enlarged it, and
to adorn it with a Magnificence becoming the honor which he had done it, added
his own, and called it Constantinian new Rome, which long name was afterward
abridg'd into that of Constantinople, or the City of Constantine.

Yet had not this new Constantinian Rome more auspicious beginnings of its
Grandeur than the Ancient Rome: For if we may believe Zozimus, who was none of
Constantines greatest Friends, and some other Authors, the rebuilding of
Constantinople was accompanied with more fatal and ill-boding Omens, than those
of which we read of the laying the Foundations of Rome. For those Authors
accuse the Emperor for having put his Wife Fausta and his Son Crispus to
death, and upon a slighter occasion than that upon which Romulus slew his
Brother Remus. But in regard these Accidents happened before Constantine became
a Christian, therefore the Greek Proverb may be said still to hold, (...), a
wiser than a wise man may err, seeing that it is as impossible for great men to
live without their defects, as for the Sun to shine without a spot in his
glorious Countenance: However it were, this last name has been of longest
continuance, as well among the Latins, as other Christians of Europe; but as
for the Turks and other People of Asia, Africa and Europe, they all give it the
name of Stamboll. Perhaps from the corruption of the words (...), to the City,
which was the answer, that the Greeks who lived near to Constantinople gave to
those that asked the question, whither go ye? But neither the Turks nor any
other of the Eastern People, can give any rational account of the Original of
the word: And therefore it will suffice to say, that this City is now known to
a great number of People by the name of Stamboll, which was formerly called
Constantinople.

So then this same Chrysoceras, Acropolis, Lygos, Bysantium, Antonina, Anthusa,
New Rome, Constantinople, the Eternal City, and Stamboll, which you please to
call it, is that famous City, now seated in the extreme part of all Thrace, in
41 degrees of Northern Latitude, and 57 degrees of Longitude. It possesses all
that Langet of Land, that advances toward the discharge of the Channel of the
Black Sea, (which is called the Thracian Bosphorus,) into the Propontis or Sea
of Marmara. And thence extending it self on both sides, forms a harbor the
most secure and commodious for shipping, and the most abounding in all sorts of
Fish, of any in the world. But now not to say any thing what this great City
formerly was, which others have sufficiently done before me, and for that all
that has been already written, is no more than what has been taken from the
obscure passages of certain ancient Authors; I shall only give a short account
of what it is at present, the Reader having the satisfaction of the Draught,
Fig. II. p. 57. which is as true a Representation of the Original, as the
bigness of the Volume would permit. This Peninsula upon which Constantinople is
seated, begins to forsake the Continent, and advance it self between two Seas,
where stands the Castle of the Seven Towers, and so runs on to the Serraglio,
and thence winding about toward the Continent again, makes a large half
Circle, which forms the Haven that belongs to the City, 'till you come to a
small River which discharges it self into it, and their mixing its own fresh
stream with the salt Water, renders the Haven, both pleasant and commodious.
Near to the Mouth of this little River, (where lies the Burying place belonging
to the Jews,) upon the back part of the City, runs almost in a direct line, a
double flat wall strengthened with several Square Towers, which reaches to the
Castle of the Seven Towers, so that the Figure of the City is a Triangular
Oxygone, resembling a Harp, or Cornucopia, the gibbous part of which lies next
to the firm Land, and the two Horns are washed by the Channel of the Black Sea.

The whole Circuit of Constantinople is about four Leagues. That is to say,
from the Seven Towers to the Point of the Serraglio, formerly called Acropolis,
may be reckoned more than a League and a half. From that Point of the Serraglio
to Aivansarai, which is a part of the Suburbs next to the Jews Burying place,
may be accounted above a League and a quarter, and from thence to the Seven
Towers somewhat more than a League.

This latter part of the City lies toward the Continent; but the other two are
washed on both sides by the Sea. This whole circuit is encompassed with a Wall,
Fortified on the out side with square and round Towers; on the inside, the
Houses of the City join to it: The City has Entrance at Eighteen Gates, of
which Five stand next to the Propontis, with their Sally-ports and descents;
Six toward the Court, with their descents and Sally-Ports in the same manner;
and Seven stand toward the Continent, where the Walls and Motes are double.
Which latter Walls were built by one Cyrus, who was formerly Governor of the
City, in the Reign of Theodosius the younger. This piece of work gave such
satisfaction to the people, that they made public rejoicings, and Eulogies in
honor of that same great Lord, and extolled him to a very high degree. Among
the rest, they said, that though it were true, that Constantine had built the
City, yet it was Cyrus that had enlarged and re-edify'd it; and more than all
this, they were about to have changed the Name of the City from that of
Constantinopolis, into that of Cyropolis. Which Theodosius observing, began to
grow jealous, and to recompense Cyrus for having so well fortified and
beautified the Town, he caused him to be shorn, and put into a Monastery, where
he died for very Grief.

The Castle of the Seven Towers which joins these Walls upon the Land side, to
those that look toward the Propontis, is the first building of remark in
Constantinople. It may be properly called the Bastile of Stamboll, in regard it
had the same Original, and serves now for the same use as the Bastile of Paris.
For formerly it was no more than one of the City Gates, composed of Four large
Towers. This Gate was called the Golden Gate, either because the Ornaments with
which it was embellished were gilt, or else because all the Triumphs and
Magnificence of Constantinople, at the time of solemn Entries and Receptions,
were always wont to pass through this same Gate. Among the number of all which
Pompous Entries was that which Pope John the first made, who was received with
all the pomp and spendour imaginable, not so much for that he was sent by
Theodoric, or Thierry King of Italy to the Emperor Justin the old, but for
that as he passed through this Golden Gate, the holy Prelate had restored a
Blind man to his Sight; and because he also took a Journey to Constantinople,
to reconcile the differences between the Catholics and the Arrians, whose Party
Theodoric upheld. At which interview between the Pope and the Emperor it was,
that Justin began the custom that has been observed ever since, for the
Emperors to receive at the hands of the Sovereign Pontiff, the Arms and
Ensigns of the Imperial dignity.

To the Four ancient Towers of this Gate, Mahomet the Second, who took the City
of Constantinople, added three more, to make it a Castle, wherein he and some
of his Successors kept the greatest part of their Trea^ure: But now it is no
more than an ^onourable Prison, where the Grand Signor shuts up his Slaves of
quality, and other Prisoners of State, who if any of them happen to be
Christians, they are permitted the liberty to have their Priests to say Mass in
a small Chapel belonging to the Prison, as also to give them the Sacrament
freely. Or if any of these Prisoners chance to be a Knight of Malta, or some
other person of Quality, they are likewise suffered to walk about the City, or
to go into the Country for some days, provided some Ambassador, or other
public Person, residing at Constantinople, will engage to the Aga of the Seven
Towers for his forthcoming, when the Aga shall have occasion to send for him.
This civility of the Turk is a great consolation to such as their misfortunes
have enclosed within the Seven Towers. Without which it would be a grievous
thing for a man to find himself shut up for no offense committed, and condemned
to perpetual Imprisonment, such as is that of the Seven Towers for a Knight of
Malta who is taken Roving upon the Sea: For as for those that are taken in War,
they are Released again upon the conclusion of Peace. In this Castle it was
that the unfortunate Prince Sultan Osman miserably ended his days in the year
1622. Hussein Bassa was also there strangled, and lies buried in a Tomb in the
Garden belonging to the Prison. And out of this Prison it was that Monsieur de
Beaujeu made his Escape, as we have already related, after he had endured
Sixteen years Imprisonment, and large sums offered for his Ransom, which would
not be taken.

Without the Walls of the Castle, near one of the Towers, which composed in
former times the Golden Gate, lie two large Sculptures of white Marble; the one
representing a man asleep, and resting his head upon his arm, and a Goddess
Descending from Heaven with a Taper in her hand. Which may perhaps be rightly
thought to be Endymion, and the Moon coming to visit him. The other, if I
mistake not, represents the Nine Muses with the Horse Pegasus. Yet neither the
one nor the other, tho pieces well enough wrought, are so exactly done, as to
oblige an Artist to say, as some of our^Travellers do, that we have nothing in
Europe that approaches near to the delicacy of those Pieces; or that there is
any such superexcellent design or spirit in the figures, which might deserve
any extraordinary present, either to the Caimacan or Aga; for leave to carry
them away.

Going by Sea from the Castle of the Seven Towers to the Serraglio, you meet
with a square Tower upon the left hand, that stands in the Sea, distant from
the City-wall about twenty paces. The Inhabitants of the Country call it
Belisarius's Tower. Affirming, that it was in this Tower, where that great and
famous Commander, for the recompense of all those signal services which he had
done the Emperor Justinian, in subduing his ene^ies as well in Asia and
Africa, as in Europe, being despoyl'd of all his Estate and Honors, and
reduced to the extremity of necessity, after he had endured putting out both
his eyes, was at length shut up, and forced for his subsistence, to hang out a
Bag from the Grate of his Chamber, and cry to the Passengers, give poor
Belisarius a Farthing, whom envy and no crime of his has deprived of his eyes.
Near to the place where stands this Tower, was formerly the Haven where
Theodosius, Arcadius and their Successors kept their Galleys. A little above
and over against which Haven, was formerly a large Piazza, in the midst of
which stands the famous Historical Pillar, the upper part whereof is still to
be seen; but the lower part is so surrounded with Houses built upon it, that
neither the Pedestal nor the Basis of the Pillar can be discovered. It is all
of Marble, encompassed with figures which are very good Workmanship,
representing a certain expedition of Arcadius. However they are not done by the
hand of so good an Artist, as the figures upon Trajans Column at Rome. Yet it
is much higher than that, and more room within, with a pair of Stairs quite up
to the top: But at present it is almost impossible to obtain the favor of going
up.

Nevertheless, there was a certain young Traveller, whom I will not name, more
fortunate than wise, who some years since had obtained the liberty to get up,
but when he was at the Top, he was so indiscreet as to show himself openly,
contrary to the cautions which were given him. More than that, nothing would
serve him but that he must write his name upon the top of the Pillar, and
flourish his Handkerchief at the end of his stick. All that walked the streets
of that quarter, and all that lived in the Neighborhood, were strangely
supriz'd to perceive, contrary to custom, a fellow mounted upon the Top of the
Pillar, but more especially when they perceived him to be a Frank, with a Hat
upon his head. Immediately all the street was full of people, and all that
quarter of the City in a Hubbub. Some ran in heaps together, out of curiosity
to behold that same new figure, believing it to be the soul of him that first
erected the Column, and that he was come to reassume the place which his
Statute had possessed before: Others incensed with jealousy, lest the Frank
should pry into their houses, and discover the privacies of their Wives, ran
out of their Habitations to see who 'twas that was so bold as to get up to the
top of the Pillar, believing the Frank ^ad taken his stand there, for his
better discovery of their Women, and to enable him the better to make his
choice.

With these imaginations, and exagitations of Passion, away they flew to the
Pillar, beseig'd the House that had given entrance to the Frank, and having
fetched him down with a vengeance, away they hall'd him to the house of the
Soubachi, or Commissary of that quarter. Not forgetting as they went along, to
mall him with their fists, and knock their Papouches or shoes about his ears.
Presently the Falaque and the Battoons were brought forth, and the poor Frank
had paid dear for his curiosity, at least fifty good drubbs upon the soles of
his feet, if his Ambassador, who was immediately advertised of the accident,
had not sent with all speed an Interpreter with a present to the Soubachi, and
to tell him withal, that the Frank who had ascended the Column, was a stranger,
who did not understand the custom of the Country, and therefore was not so
much to be blamed as the Turk who had given him admission: And that he ought to
take the imprudence of a stranger into consideration, and for the Ambassadors
sake to pardon a fault committed out of weakness and folly, not out of design.
The Rhetoric of the Present at length prevailed, so that the indiscreet Frank
was set at liberty, and the poor Porter of the Pillar received the payment in
full which the Frank should have had.

This Pillar is to be seen at a good distance out at Sea. But for the Haven
that lay over against it, there is now no sign remaining that ever there was
one; no more than of that other Haven, somewhat nearer the Serraglio, which
Julian the Apostate built and called by his own name, the Julian Harbor,
afterward Port Sophia, because it answered to the Piazza, where Sancta Sophia
was built.

As you approach nearer to the Port, still coasting along the walls next the
Propontis, you meet with nothing considerable to stop your Caic, or little
Vessel, till you come near the Serraglio Garden, of which I shall say the less,
for that the Reader, by casting his eye upon the Draught, Fig. 3. may discover
more clearly and without any trouble, all that concerns that outside of this
famous Palace, than a tedious relation in words; the inside being only known
to those that are enclosed within it.

Near to the place where stands the Kiosc appertaining to the Bostangis-Bachy,
there stands a Fountain to which the Greeks pay a most singular devotion all
the year long, especially upon the day of Christ's Transfiguration, at which
time they throng to this Fountain, which they call (...), or the Fountain of
Sanctification. There they wash themselves, cover themselves with the Sand that
lies about it, and make a long recital of the extraordinary virtues of that
wholesome water. The Greeks have a great number of these miraculous Fountains.
There is hardly a Village or great Town where you may not meet with one: And
where there are none, which passing through some vein of Metal, may be thought
to partake of some mineral quality, the Papa's or Greek Priests know how to
find out some Well or other near their Church, which they presently endow with
some admirable virtue, which if it be of no effect to those that drink it, yet
proves not a little profitable to themselves.

Near to this Fountain stands the Bostangis Bachi's or the chief Gardiner's
Kiosc. This Kiosc is a large covered Balcone, erected without the Walls of the
Serraglio, jutting out upon the Propontis, of which it overlooks a great part,
as also of the Thracian Bosphorus. The Turks take a great delight in these sort
of Buildings, there being few Serraglio's which have not several belonging to
them. Some in the middle of their Gardens, for the benefit of the fresh Air;
others by the Seaside, where there is any convenience; others upon the tops of
their houses like covered Platforms. These Kioscs are very proper to recreate
the musing humor of the Turks, who there place themselves upon a low Couch or
Sopha, with a Pipe of Tobacco, or some Flingeans or dishes of Coffee, and in
that posture they sit sometimes two or three hours in Company without any
discourse, or saying any thing one to another, but only some few broken half
words uttered between sip and sip as they take off their Liquor, which they
drink very hot and at several suppings. This Kiosc of the Bostangis-Bachi is
nothing so much frequented as the rest. For he being a person that manages the
fourth Employment in the Empire, has no leisure to take his pleasure, or the
fresh Air in his Kiosc, nor to delight himself with the charming prospect which
the situation of his Pavillion affords him. He has business enough to look
after the Grand Serraglio, and those other Houses of Pleasure belonging to the
Sultan, over all which he has the superintendency, he also takes care of the
Government of all the Towns and Villages that stand upon the shore of the
Bosphorus and Propontis, which are all under his jurisdiction. Out of the Kiosc
there is a passage into the Garden of the Serragl^o, descending through a
little door down a short pair of stairs that are built close by the waterside.

Leaving this Kiosc, the first thing you meet with, keeping still along by the
walls, that here encompass a part of the Serraglio, is a great number of
Cannons ready charged, and lying level with the water, to secure the Entrance
into the Serraglio, and the Haven, against any that would pretend to make a
forcible Entry. The biggest and most remarkable of these great Guns, is that
which made the last shot against the City of Bagdat, and constrained the City,
through the disorder it occasioned, to surrender to Sultan Amurath. It is
looked after with more care than the rest, as having a Chamber by it self to
distinguish it from the meaner sort. However these Cannons, tho they are always
laden, are seldom discharged, unless it be upon the first or second day of
Bairam Moon, at which time some are constrained to open their loud Throats to
give the Musselmen notice of the approach of their great Festival, and that
Ramazan being past, they are no longer obliged to fast. They are also
discharged upon some solemn Thanksgiving days, as when the Sultan has Conquered
some new Province. At other times they only serve to guard the Haven and the
Serraglio, except when any great Military Officer is condemned to be cast into
the Sea, and then they give him a single Gun, just as they pitch him into the
Water.

In the midst of these great Guns stands one of the four Gates of the
Serraglio, that is to say, the Gate which belongs to the Serraglio, called
Bostangi Capi. It is flanked with two great round Towers, covered each with its
proper Kiosc, shadowed with two great Cypress Trees, that grow without the
Serraglio by the Sea side. At the foot of these Towers stand two Bostangi
Sentinels, who are the Capigi's or Guards of the Gate; so that nothing can be
carried in or out, without their permission, who do not grant it easily, unless
it be to the Officers of the Serraglio: Besides, it is through this Gate that
the Sultanesses pass, when the Grand Signor carries them forth to accompany him
in his pastimes upon the Canal of the Black Sea, which he frequently does; or
when they go to the Serraglio at Scutari, which stands directly over against
this Gate. This is that part which was formerly called Acropolis, because it is
the extreme point of Land upon which Constantinople is situate. It now bears
the Name of the Point of the Serraglio, or Sarai Bourma.

Having doubled the Point of the Serraglio, and passed by a small Fountain
where the Ships take in fresh Water, you come to two other Kioscs, or close
Pavillions, which Sultan Solomon caused to be built by the Waterside to give
his Sultannesses the pleasure of beholding his Fleets as they Sailed in and
out, which in his Reign were more numerous and in better order than now they
are. The first of these Kioscs was for the Women, of which he had a good
Number. It is fomewhat higher raised than the other, and the passage to it from
the Serraglio is such as will not admit the persons passing to and fro to be
seen. It is built upon Arches all in Length, consisting of three fair Chambers,
every one adorned with several gilded Alcoves, furnished with their Sopha's or
low Couches, having their Minders, or Mattresses and Cushions belonging to
them, spread with rich Coverlets of painted Linen and Cloth of Tissue. These
Sopha's or Beds are placed near the Windows, wherein are Lattices, through
which the Women may see and not be seen; for should they be seen, it might be
as much prejudicial to the party discovered, as to him that made the discovery.

Yet all these Embellishments in the Sultannesses Kiosc, are nothing in
comparison to the great Hall or Room in the other Kiosc. There is nothing in
the World that can be thought to be more noble and magnificent; whether you
look upon the Marble, the Pillars, the Artificial Waterworks, the stately
Tapestries, the Galleries round about it, the charming Prospect which appears
on every side, or the costly gilded Fretwork of the Ceiling, which would almost
raise a man's thoughts to believe it something of Enchantment. I could never get
liberty to take a draught of it, by reason the Bostangi Bachi's coming was
still expected when I was there: and indeed I was not gone above twenty paces
from the Door of the Kiosc, but he came into the Garden, and having perceived
me, caused me to be sent for, and demanded of the person that was with me, what
I did there? who made answer, that in regard I had earnestly desired him to let
me see some small part of the infinite Grandeur of the Master of the World (a
Title they ordinarily give the Grand Signor) he had only given me liberty to
look into the Kiosc through the Keyhole of the Door. However if a man watch
his opportunity he may easily get admittance, giving only a small Present to
the Guards. So true is that in all places that Horace tells us, All ways are
safe, all Doors too open wide,
Where Silver undertakes to be the Guide.


Now in regard these sort of Buildings are not erected near the Seaside, but
only for the sake of those pleasures which the Water affords, there are always
tending near to these Kioscs five or six small Galleys, Kaics or other light
Vessels, which are still ready to receive the Grand Signor and his Train, when
he has a mind to take his pleasure upon the Channel. All which little Galleys
or Vessels are richly embellished with all sorts of Moresco work, and painted
on all sides. The very Oars and grapling Hooks have their share of Gilding and
Painting, and all to add to the delight and magnificence of the Grand Signor.

Leaving these Kioscs, the Walls that enclose the Serraglio begin to separate
from those of the City, and running up almost as far as the Church of Sancta
Sophia, they descend toward the Propontis, above the Bostangi Bachi's Kiosc: So
that the whole Circuit of the Serraglio is not above a Note, That in all places
of this Book the Leagues are French.
League and a quarter at most. Within which compass (wherein were contained all
the first Habitations of the City of Byzantium, formerly called Acropolis)
there is not only room to make a large City, but people sufficient to render it
very populous, if all those, who may be rather said to be imprisoned than to
live in this Palace, were suffer^d to unite together like Friends and
Neighbors. For being almost all of them of both Sexes in the flower of their
Age, and chosen out for their sound and vigorous Constitutions, there is hardly
one among all the Bostangi's, Capigi's, Achi's, and Halvagi's, that is to say,
Gardeners, Porters, Cooks, Confectioners, and other Officers, who might not in
a short time become Master of a considerable Family, were they allowed to join
themselves in lawful Wedlock to the Sultannesses, or Odalisques, who are their
Servants. But that same merciless and relentless Troop of a hundred balck
Eunuchs, will not permit the unhappy Virgins, nor the unfortunate Officers so
much as to look one upon another, much less to have any discourse together.
They are all under Guard and strict observance, the one in their Offices, the
other in their Apartments. The Sultannesses never stir without a Convoy of
these envious Cerberus's, and that not very often neither, and but few at a
time; and when they have got leave to take a little Air, all the Bostangi's and
other Officers that chance to meet 'em in their Walk, are obliged to get out of
the way, and prostrate themselves with their faces to the Earth. So that there
is scarce a man can say, he ever saw one of these Sultannesses of the Grand
Serraglio, in all the time that he lived in the Palace; that privilege being
only reserved for the Grand Signor himself, who will not permit any others to
share ^ith him; unless it be when he has a mind to honor a person that has
done him some signal piece of Service, and then he vouchsafes to give him one
of the Sultannesses (which perhaps he has done with all) in Marriage. A favor
which he bestowed some few years ago, upon the present Governor of
Constantinople.

By what I have already said, Fig. III.
it may be easily conceived that the Grand Serraglio is a Peninsula washed on
almost every side with the Sea, but encompassed round with a flat Wall
fortified with several round and square Towers that stand very near one to
another. On the greatest part of which Towers every Night is placed a Guard of
Azamoglans or Tribute Children, not yet capable of any higher employment, to
prevent any Disorders that might happen either within or without the Serraglio,
and to watch the breaking out of any Fires, which do frequent mischief to
Constantinople. This Wall encloses the Gardens belonging to the Serraglio, in
the midst of which are the Buildings, raised upon the highest part of the
Promontory, formerly called the Land of Demetrius.

Now it is not to be imagined, that the Gardens of the Serraglio are in any
manner to compare with that of the Thuilleries, Versailles, Fountainbleau, nor
with the Gardens of several private Gentlemen in France; nor is it to be
thought, that the Buildings which they enclose, can boast of any thing
comparable to the Louvre, the Escurial, or the Magnificent Palaces of many
Christian Princes; for there is nothing beautiful or regular that appears in
all the outside of the Building. So that if it vaunt it self over all the
Palaces of the Universe, it is only the Prospect which renders it the most
delightful Palace in the World. The Gardens observe no Order, being planted
with Cypress, Laurels, and other Trees, which are always Green, to shade the
Sultannesses (that walk under the protection of their verdure) from being seen
by those of Galata, and the neighboring parts. As for the Buildings that
compose the Body of the Serraglio, they are reared without any regular Order of
Architecture, without any Symmetry or Proportion; only a great heap of Lodgings
and Apartiments, rudely separated one from the other after the manner of so
many pitched Pavillions, and raised for the most part upon great Arches,
underneath and on each side of which, are the Offices, and Lodgings belonging
to the Officers; for the upper part is only for the Sultannesses. Therefore
into these lower Stories and Offices belonging to the Serraglio, it is lawful
for any man that pleases to enter without being questioned. Farther than that,
it is impossible to see or know what is done in any other part of the Palace,
more especially to give any exact relation touching the same: It being a Crime
which nothing can expiate but Death, or the loss of that which makes a man what
he is. Neither do I believe that any Traveller would be willing to pay so dear
for his Curiosity.

This his most Christian Majesty most perfectly understood, and therefore as I
had the honor to be discoursed by him three times concerning my Travels, one
time among the rest he asked me with a smile, whether I had not found out a way
to get into those private parts sometimes? I made him answer, No; For that had
I done it, it would have cost me tha^ which I esteemed above the whole Empire
of the Grand Signor. This sudden and unexpected reply, which might be
variously interpreted, put the King, Monsieur (the King's Brother) and all the
persons of Quality into such a laughter, that the Queen and the other Ladies,
not having much minded my last words, asked the reason why they all laughed so
heartily? Whereupon Mon^ieur, with his ordinary freedom told her, that his
Majesty having demanded of me, whether I had ever been in the private
Apartments belonging to the Sultannesses of the Serraglio, where none but the
Eunuchs are admitted, I had made him answer, No, for that it would have cost me
that which I valued more than all the Ottoman Empire. Therefore to explain my
self, and that I might go on with the Relation I was making of the inviolable
Order of the Serraglio, I put it off another way, interpreting my words, that I
would not quit the Christian Religion for the whole Empire of the Universe,
which they must ab^ure that enter into that part of the Serraglio, unless he
will sustain the irreparable damage of Turkish cruelty and Christian infamy at
the same time.

However notwithstanding it be a thing so difficult to be admitted into the
Women's Lodgings, if there be any young Traveller, who has a mind to venture
fairly to satisfy his Curiosity in this particular, his best way will be to
make some Jewish Woman his friend, especially one of those that often visit the
Sultannesses to sell them Trifles and Gewgaws. Such a one may be easily
overcome by a Present, (the Primum Mobile that does all things in Turkey, as
well as in other places) and then by her assistance, it is but putting himself
in Woman's Apparel, which is easy to be done, considering the Fashion of the
Jewish Habit, and a Vail over his Face, and so to follow the Female Jew as ^er
Servant or Slave, by which means he will not fail of Admission.

But as the danger is very great, so I would not advise any person to pay so
dear for the liberty of seeing that, which perhaps will not be worth his labor
when he has done it: For my part, I shall desire the Reader to content himself
with a faithful and exact description of what may be seen without any Risco or
hazard. And indeed a man may guess at the inside by the Gate it self, which has
nothing at all of Magnificence, resembling rather the Gate of some old
Monastery, or some Ancient Farm house, Fig. IV.
rather than the Gate of a Palace so famous as the Serraglio; and yet from this
Gate it is, that the Court of the Grand Signor derives its name. The Turkish
Grandees think themselves happy, in having the Liberty only of passing through
this Gate to the Divan. For at other times admission is forbid to all, unless
it be the Hachim Bachi, or chief Physician, and the Katib, who may be said to
be peculiar Chaplain to the Sultan.

An Explanation of Figure IV.
A. The Gate where stand the Capigi's or Porters of the Serraglio.

B. Two great Niches made in the fashion of Gates.

C. Four little round Towers which are like so many small round Chimneys; they
are only for Ornament, and to show that such a Gate gives entrance into a Royal
Palace.

D. The Gate through which the Grand Signor enters in to Sancta Sophia, when he
goes to his Devotions.

E. One of the Towers of Sancta Sophia, to the top of which the Muezins, or
Cryers, ascend, to give the people notice of Prayer time: The Doors of the
Galleries to these Minarets, or Towers, are always turned toward Koble, or the
Coast of Mecca, to the end THE GATE OR ENTRANCE INTO THE SERAGLIO.
that they who cannot come to the Mosquee, may know which way to turn, when
they say their Prayers at home.

F. An old Sepulcher made now a Receptacle for water, for the use of those who
have occasion to wash or drink.

A Description of Sancta Sophia.
THe Temple of Sancta Sophia stands so near to the Seraglio, that I cannot pass
by the Description of it in this place, it being the chief Mosquee in
Constantinople, and the Royal Chapel for the Grand Signor and his Retinue.

This famous Temple, of which the Greeks have all along so highly boasted, and
which Travelers have so often admired, is seated upon the highest and most
beautiful part of all Constantinople, viz. the uppermost part of the Promontory
of Acropolis. Some of the most Learned Greeks that live in Constantinople, of
which the number is not great, have often assured me, that they have read in
their Histories, that the great Constantine was the first Founder of Sancta
Sophia, having laid the Foundation of the structure some years before his
death. For this same pious Emperor having laid the Foundation of St. Peter's
in Rome, had resolved according to the model of that Temple to build another at
Constantinople, which he designed to have dedicated to the eternal and
uncreated wisdom of the Son of God; but death having prevented him before he
could finish the work, his son Constance, who succeeded him, went on with the
Building, after the same form and model which his father had began.

However the Platform and Ground work of the ancient Sophia was nothing like to
that which now we see. For it was proportional to the Groundwork of the
ancient St. Peter's Church, which it is well known was very like to that of St
Paul's in Rome, that is to say, a very long Church, with two Wings at the end
composing the figure of a Cross, the whole surrounded with great Ga^leries
supported with Pillars for the use of the Women, who formerly sat apart from
the men at Church. But whatever was the figure of the Ancient Sophia, certainly
it was Built in the same place where the present Sophia stands, or else very
near it: In regard that this place being the most beautiful and proper for an
edifice of that importance, it is not likely that it was built in any other
part. Unless it might be brought for an argument, because the Palace of
Constantine, and his successors, did not stand where now the Seraglio stands,
but at least a League distant, therefore the Me^ropolitan Church could not be
far from it. But to that it may be answered, Princes usually have their private
Chapels in their own Palaces, and never go to the Cathedral, but when the
necessity of the public solemnity requires a more extraordinary magnificence
and grandeur, or the pomp of a numerous cavalcade. And it may be truly said,
that there is no Nation under Heaven that so much affect vanity and luster as
the Greeks do. So that nowithstandin^ the slavery and extremity of misfortune
and misery, to which they a^e red^c'd, nothing remains to testify the Antiquity
of that Nation, but an insupportable pride and vainglory. On the other side it
may be said, that the Patriarchs retinue, which consisted of all Religious
persons, Priests and Churchmen, did not well agree with the Cou^tiers, there
was always some quarrel or other among them; so that either for pomp or
quietness sake, there was a necessity that the Palace and the Cathedral should
stand at a good distance asunder.

But whatsoever were the Ancient situation of this Church, in regard it was
only covered with wood, from thence it happened, that not only the Church, but
the City it self, has been defaced by several conflagrations, in the Reigns of
Theodosius the younger, and Justinian. The last of which Emperors took up a
resolution to rebuild it from the ground, either that he might raise an eternal
Monument to his Honor, or else to prevent any future casualties that might
happen either to the Church or City by fire. For he knew well that this Church
had been several times burnt, once by the malice of her enemies the Arrians, in
the Reign of Theodosius the great; another time through the fury of the enemies
of St. John Chrysostom, who set the Church on fire after they had enclosed all
those within it, that would not consent to the Patriarchs Banishment; which was
afterward consented to by Theodosius the younger. Justinian therefore rebuilt
it from the bottom to the top; and changing not only the Model but the
Materials, gave it that form which now graces the whole structure. He made not
the least use of so much as a stick of wood in the whole building, save only to
hang the Bells on, and in some few places where it was absolutely necessary.
Nevertheless the two great Gates (which he put at the entrance into the Church)
being of wood, (though otherwise rare Artful pieces of Workmanship, and such as
for their firmness and soliditie might have lasted many years, yet) were not
able to withstand another Conflagration, which happen^ed in the Reign of
Michael Curopalates, who though a person of a lewd life, yet failed not to put
up new Doors, which being all of Brass, not only served to resist the fury of
any future fire, but also to eternize his renown. To which purpose, he caused
to be put up in great Engraven Characters which are still to be read over the
said doors, these words, (...), with certain Greek Ciphers, Garlanded round
about with Labarum, or the mark of Christianity, denoting the year wherein he
finished that magnificent reparation of the doors of Sancta Sophia.

When this Church was finished by Justinian, he looked upon it to be so
beautiful, that believing his Temple surpassed the Temple of Solomon in
Magnificence, he would when he beheld it often repeat these words, (...), I
have outdone Solomon. Certainly that good Emperor was of opinion that the
Temple of Solomon was nothing in comparison with his. And perhaps he might well
think so, in regard that during the space of Seventeen years, which were spent
in the Building of that Church, all the Revenues of Egypt were set a part, to
defray the charges, which though not amounting to above Two Millions of Gold a
year, made up a sum very considerable for that time. Besides, he erected close
by the Church a most magnificent Monastery, and endowed it with large Revenues,
to the value of eight Hundred Thousand Crowns per Annum, for the maintenance of
Nine Hundred Priests, who were daily to perform Religious duties, together with
a great number of other Officer, who had continual care of the Repairs of the
Church. But how magnificent soever it were, considering what Sancta Sophia is
now, I cannot believe that ever it came near the famous Temple of Solomon, in
regard we do not find it equal neither in largeness nor sumptuousness of work,
to the Church of St. Peter's in Rome. However the Greeks at this day strenuously
maintain otherwise, and would make ye believe that St. Peter's in Rome is a mean
thing in comparison of Sancta Sophia. Though they who have seen both the one
and the other, and are not depraved or biased in their judgments, may easily
determine the contrary. Nevertheless having already given a brief account of
the first Foundations, and chiefest Repairs of this Church, I shall next give a
description of the Platform and Draught hereto annexed, by which a shrewd
conjecture may be given what it is now, and what formerly it was, as far as
concerns the body of the structure, after Justinian had Rebuilt it.

The whole body of the Church of Sancta Sophia Note that the measures* in this
Book are French.
wants but very little of a perfect square; it being in the inside, not above
Two and Forty Fathom in length, and Eight and Thirty in breadth, situate
however like all other Churches, East and West. The whole Platform represents a
Greek Cross, almost as broad as long, as it were enchas'd in a walled square
Churchyard. A certain excellent Architect, whose name was Anthemius, was the
Inventor of the Model; but he made no great progress in the structure, for
death prevented him, he dying soon after he had laid the first Foundation.
Which was the reason the work was neither carried on nor brought to perfection,
according to the Inventer of the first Architect. In short, he that has but
ordinary skill in Architecture, may plainly see, that the Groundwork and
superstructure of Sancta Sophia were the inventions of different persons. For
the Groundwork had extent sufficient allowed, but the body of the Building is
not answerable to it. So that History tells us what a deal of trouble and
labor it cost to bring the work to perfection. There was always some
considerable defect or other, so that when one side was built up the other side
either fell quite down, or else considerable riffts and gaps displayed
themselves in the walls. (So that the same ill fate may be said to have
attended Sancta Sophia, as befell St. Paul's in Rome, which before it was
finished threatened ruin to all the neighboring Houses.) Afterward they found
out means and ways to remedy all these defects: At what time one Isidorus the
younger, together with some other Architects, labored so successfully in
Repairing the Domo, and strengthening it by taking it down lower, and
buttressing it much more strongly than before, that he brought it to that
perfection which it has conserved to this day, notwithstanding the frequent
Earthquakes that have since thrown down other parts of the Church, such as
that which happened in the Reign of Justinian the I. to whom we are beholding
for the finishing this Church, and for the Body of the Civil Law, or the
Justinian Codex, this Earthquake overthrew all the eastern part of Sancta
Sophia, (which you find marked in the Platform with the letters A. B. C. H.)
and the Semi Domo, at what time the Cupola, which was above, with its fall
brake the Altar, the holy doors of the Sanctum Sanctorum, (marked a, a, a.)
together with the Ambon or Preachers Pulpit, which stood assuredly in the same
place, or else over against that of the Mufti, (which you find in the Platform
draught, pointed and marked with the letter C.) Justinian caused these Ruins to
be set up again, and to be strengthened with four Buttresses, two large, and
two lesser ones. The two largest of these Buttresses support two small Pillars
(marked d) which, like those that are opposite to them upon the western side,
near the doors, serve to support the semi-dome, one part of which leans upon
them, and the other upon four great Pillars marked D. and upon the Arch which
they sustain.

These four great Pillars, with the four Arches that join them together,
support the great Domo of the Church. All the world must acknowledge it to be a
bold piece of workmanship, and well made; for it is very large, containing
Eighteen Fathoms Diameter, and Three Fathoms in depth, letting in the light at
Twenty Four Windows, which however are very small and low. In the spaces
between the Windows are large portions of a Circle, which as they diminish,
terminate about the middle of the Domo, where they form the shape of a Rose,
which was formerly embellished with several figures in Mosaic work, as the
Twenty Four portions of a Circle that compose it also were. But the Turks have
now defaced them, and daubed 'em over with white Plaistring. From this part of
the top of the Church it was, that the usual vanity of the Greeks would make
you believe, that it was impossible for any man to look down to the Ground,
being so high, as they said, that the sight of those that stood below could
hardly reach it. True it is, that History tells us of another Domo that far
surpassed the present; but that, it seems to spare the curious the trouble and
the lost labor of staring upon it at such a distance where they could not
discover it, fell down it self to the ground, where it might be discerned with
more ease. It brake down with its fall several things, among the rest the
Emperor and the Patriarch's seats, which were plac^d at the two parts of the
Church marked with the letter c. However, as I have said, Justinian caused it
to be set up again, and to make it more light, as they that believe the Greeks
assure us, he caused it to be made all of pumice stone, with some light sort of
Mortar to cement the parts together. Could I have got up to the top to have
examined the truth, I would have done it with all my heart, but as things now
stand, no Christian is permitted to soar so high, unless he will be content to
leave his Preputium below, for fear of over charging the building, which
according to the opinion of the Turks, would certainly fall with the weight of
an Uncircumsised Christian. I leave it therefore to others to satisfy the
Readers Curiosity in that particular. But this I am sure of, that all the under
part of the Domo is lined all over with several Crosses trefoyld, and
flower-delis'd in Mosaic work, and that the outside is covered with Lead, with
a Gilded Crescent instead of a Pinnacle in the place were the Cross formerly
showed it self.

This Domo, of which the largeness and the place are marked in the following
Plate with a circle of points, covers the best part of that which may be called
the Body of the Church. For the Quire was enclosed from the eastern extremity
of this Circle, to the separation marked with a double line pointed at the
letters a a a, which show the place where stood the holy doors, and it extended
to the right and left hand as far as the two semi-circles marked H. H. The
entrance into the Church was from the west extremity of the same Circle, to the
Three doors of the middle at the letter I. Extending to the right and left hand
like the Quire, between the two letters, H. H. which show the two West
semi-circles opposite to those of the Quire. The space covered by the Domo, is
just the middle of the Greek Cross, which composes the figure of the Church.
The head of this Greek Cross toward the East contains the Quire and Sanctum
Sanctorum; the lower end toward the west, comprehends the entrance and doors
of the Church. The wings consist of two Parallelogram spaces, one of which runs
to the North, and the other to the South, marked in the Platform with the
directions f. G. Now in regard this Cross is as it were enchas'd in a square
that represents the walls of the Church, there appear also four other void
spaces at the four Corners of the Square, which are marked with the letter H.

An Explanation of Figure V.
The middle of the Church of Sancta Sophia covered with a large Domo.

A. The place were formerly stood the only Altar belonging to this Church.

a a a. The Doors of the Sanctum Sanctorum.

B. The Turks Mehrabe, which is to them instead of an Altar, toward which all
the Mahometans turn themselves when they pray; it is made like a Nich in a
wall, wherein they put the Alchoran; and is placed toward Mecka, where Mahomet
lies entombed, to which part of the world all the Mosquees are turned.

C. The Muftie's Mamber, or the place where he reads Prayers during Ramazan, or
Lent, and all the time of Bairam, or upon other solemn Festivals of the
Mahometans.

^. The Grand Signors entrance into the Mosquee.

^. The Grand Signors Closet where he hears divine Worship.

c. The places where formerly stood the Seats for the Patriarch and Emperor.

THE PLATFORM OF SANCTA SOPHIA.


D. Are the Four large Pillars which support the Domo.

d. Are Four little Pillars, which together with the Four large Pillars,
support six large Semi-Domes, of which Three appear toward the East, and Three
toward the West.

E. All these letters denote so many easy stair-cases, by which the Women went
up to the Galleries.

F. All these semicircular overtures, are so many windows that give light to
the Church.

f. The doors through which the Priests and Deacons went to perfume the Women's
Gallery.

G. These are four great Columns of speckl'd Egyptian Marble all of a piece,
each Four Foot in Diameter. These Four Columns sustain Six other lesser than
themselves, which form the Galleries above on each side of the Church.

H. These are Four Semi-Circles formed out of Four great Pillars, and two other
lesser, between which are two Columns of Porphyrie placed upon Pedestalls of
White Marble. These Two Columns support six other lesser belonging to the upper
Galleries, that sustain the Cupola above.

I. The great Gate or Door leading into the Church, having Four others that are
less and lower of each side.

K. The Stone work raised between the Four great Columns, and the Four great
Pillars which were formerly separate, but are now contiguous by reason of the
Brick-work, represented by little points belonging to this letter.

L. The great Vestibulum or Porch, into which you may enter at sixteen doors,
Nine to the East, Five to the West, One to the North, and One to the South.

M. The Four Steeples.

N. The first Portico or Vestibulum, formerly called the Nartex.

O. A great square Tower, which was formerly the Steeple where the Bells hung.

P. The pair of stairs that lead to the Cocks that belong to the great Cistern
under the Church. For all the under part of the Foundation is square and full
of water, that gently falls from the roof; which has made some to think that a
man may go by water through subterraneal passages from Sancta Sophia to the Sea.

Q. The outward Doors of the Church.

R. The Fountains where the Turks wash themselves before they go to prayers.

S. A Court belonging to some Officers of the Mosquee.

T. Their Chambers.

V. A great Vessel where they wash their linen and other clothes.

X. A little Chapel, formerly the Vestrey, like the Vestrey of St. Peter's, or
St. Stephens the Round in Rome. Now it is only a place where they keep Oats and
Hey for the convenience of the Grand Signors stables adjoining.

Having sufficiently described the Domo that covers the Cross, which forms the
middle part of Sancta Sophia, I now come to what is to be found round about
adjoining. The Eastern part of the Cross is a large semicircle covered with a
Demi-Dome, made like the back of an Oven. Round about this great semicircle
which is taken out of the breadth of the grand Domo are to be seen Three others
lesser, which are also covered with their half Cupola's, of which Two stand
upon the right and left hand, and the farthest of all in the midst. Under this
third semicircle stood formerly the Sanctum Sanctorum. The West part of this
Cross is the same with the East, formed out of a large semicircle, covered
with its semi-dome, and three others by the sides of it; with this exception,
that the middlemost, where stand the widest doors of the Church, does not
finish in a semicircle like that to the East, but is cut into right Angles,
and is covered with an Arch and not a Cupola.

The four smaller, semi-circles that appear upon the sides of the two large
ones, are formed in their extremities of one part of the four large Pillars
that support the grand Domo, marked in the Platform draught by the letter D.
and the other part of the four lesser Pillars, two of which toward the East
support the Semi-Dome that covers the Sanctum Sanctorum, and the other toward
the West sustain the Arch that turns it self over the three doors of the middle
of the Church. These Four little Pillars are marked in the Platform draught by
the letter d. Between these eight Pillars that form the four lesser
semi-circle^ abovementioned, stand eight Columns of Porphiry, two under each
semicircle. They sustain six others over them of the Women's Gallery, some of
which are more for ornament than use, as you may see in the following Draughts,
Fig. VIII. and IX. of the inside of the Church.

Behind every one of these semi-circles as well toward the East, as toward the
West, is a apiece space which might be called a Chapel, were it the
custom among the Greeks to have several Chapels in the same Church; but you
may call it a Tetragon, in regard of the figure of these four Tetragons which
is apiece. Neither of these have more than three little Windows, which
hardly suffice to let in a gloomie light. The four Corners of this Tetragon are
supported with four Pillars of speckl'd Marble, among which, those that are
next the four large Pillars that sustain the Domo are now contiguous, as being
united by a piece of Brickwork raised up for strengthening of those four great
Pillars, against the frequent Earthquakes that shake the Church. However this
Brick-work seems to be so ancient, as to make us believe it was rather raised
by the Greeks than by the Turks. It is marked in the Platform draughts by
points at the letter K.

Between these four Tetragons or apiece spaces, are two other spaces
somewhat oblong, one to the North and the other to the South. They are also
like the former sustained by four Pillars of speckl'd marble. But there is some
difference in the situation of these two Columns: For whereas the other Pillars
stand at the four Corners, these stand in the middle of the space, and making a
particular and very narrow Roof, which they support, divide as it were the
space into two parts. These four Columns, and the oblong space wherein they are
raised from the two Wings of the Greek Cross, upon the frame whereof the whole
Fabric is reared; and the four Tetragons are as it were the four spaces, that
would appear round about a Cross placed upon a Table in a square.

The Twenty Four Columns that support the Roofs of these six places which I
have described are all of the same thickness, the same bigness and of the same
Marble. But the four other Pillars, that appear upon each side of the Church,
between the two large Pillars of the grand Domo, are much higher and bigger,
though they are all of the same stone, and all of one piece. These four Pillars
support six others that belong to the Women's lower Gallery, which support the
second, as well upon the right as the left Wing of the Church, as you may see
in the Draughts of the inside of the Church. And thus all the Pillars that rise
from the Foundation of Sancta Sophia, are no more than Forty, that is to say,
twenty of a side. These Forty lower Columns support Sixty others in the Women's
Galleries above, so that all the Pillars in Sancta Sophia, as well above as
below, exceed not the number of a Hundred in the body of the Church, with four
of a middle size, and three small ones, which are over the doors, and make in
all a Hundred and Seven Pillars. All these Pillars are well turned, but their
Chapters do not answer at all to the beauty of their turning. For it is a hard
thing to distinguish of what Order they are, unless you will call it by the
name of the Grecian-Gothick.

The Sanctum Sanctorum was formerly confined within the space which is marked
with the letters a a a. and B. now the Greeks, who never say above one Mass in
a day in one Church, never had in Sancta Sophia, nor in any other of their
Churches, above one Altar which stands on that side which you will find marked
in the Platform draught with the letter A. This custom was also observed a long
time in the Latin Church, as well as in the Greek. But when the number of
Christians infinitely increased, the necessity of having more Priests augmented
the number also of Altars, and Sacrifices, to satifie the devotion of a great
number of people, that were not able to crowd together to hear one single
service in one place. This Altar is by the Greeks to this day called (...),
enclosed within a space which they call (...), and the Latins Sanctum
Sanctorum. This place is always the most Eastern part of the Church, and
terminated on the one side in a semicircle covered with a half Domo; on the
other side in an enclosure, which the Greeks called (...), or the stand of
Images. This enclosure was made of wood, richly carved and adorned with sundry
figures, having three doors, the middlemost being the biggest, and two others
that were less of each side. The middlemost was only for the Priest to go in
and out during the Sacrifice. The second on the right hand admitted only the
Deacon; and the other on the left was free for the other Officers. Between the
middlemost door and the two others stood the Images of our Lady, St. John the
Baptist, and over the Three doors were the figures of the Twelve Apostles. The
Images that stood upon this Eikonostation, were always in high veneration among
the Greeks above any other; they lighted up a great number of Tapers before
them, and frequently adored them with their Metaniai or Genuflections to the
Earth.

This is a brief account of the Sanctum Sanctorum, before the Turks turned the
Sancta Sophia into a Mosquee. But now the case is quite another thing. The
Altar was broken down by Mahomet, at what time (with the City) he took the
Church from the Christians, and dedicated it to his false Mahomet. Now in
regard the Turks in their Mosquees offer to God only the Sacrifice of
thanksgivings, there is nothing within their Churches which is particularly
sanctified, but the Mirabe or Maharab, which is a sort of large Niche in the
wall, where they put their Alkoran. That of Sancta Sophia, is all of Marble,
embellished with great store of Moresco work and Gilding. It is marked in the
Platform draught with the letter B. Neither is it placed directly in the middle
of the uppermost part of the Mosquee, for that being bilt by the Christians,
the situation was not convenient for the Turks, who when they pray are obliged
to turn always toward Koble, or that part where the City of Mecca stands. So
that seeing they could not alter the situation of the Church to the South-East,
which is the only point of the Compass the Turks adore, they have only mended
the situation of their Maharah, to turn it toward their beloved point, for the
better observation of the Musselmen. This Maharah is rivited into a little
counterwall, that reaches no farther than the first Windows, and at the hight
of the arch re^urns again to receive into its concavity, the ^ooks which the
Imans make use of when they read Prayers. This counter-wall is marked in the
Platform draught with two semi-circular lines at the East end of the Church,
where now this Maharah ^tands, and where was formerly the Synthronos of ^he
Patriarch of Constantinople.

Over against the place marked with the direction ^. as also the place opposite
to it, was formerly a ^assage through which the Priests went from the Vestry to
the Altar. But those two passages are now stopped up, and that which is marked
with ^he said Direction, is now made a Closet, Wainscoted Gilded, and spread
with rich Carpets, with a large Window all the length of the Closet, glazed and
lattis'd, where the Grand Signor hears Prayers, and pays his Devotions to his
false Prophet. He enters into it through a door which is near the Serraglio,
and which never opens but only ^o himself, being marked with the direction ^.
at which being entered, he assends through a little lattic'd Gallery into his
Closet, where he has a full view of all that are in the Mosquee, without being
^een by any. This Closet is marked in the Platform Draught, by the points next
to the direction ^. There are also other things marked in the Platform Drughts
with points, as the singing men's Terraces at the direction D. the M^fti's
Mamber at C. and the Preachers Pulpit at G.

Having sufficiently described the Cross and inner part of the Platform of
Sancta Sophia, I shall now describe the Compass of the Walls, which area square
building, enveloping the Cross that gives form to the Church. The Eastern part
toward the Serraglio had four doors formerly belonging to it, of which two are
now stopped up, the third is for the Grand Signors privacy alone, and the
fourth is public to all, and marked with the letter Q. Through this door you
descend twelve steps to enter into Sancta Sophia, in regard the Piazza of the
Serraglio is much higher than the Foundation of the Church. Between these two
last doors contiguous to the Walls stand the four Buttresses which Justinian
caused to be erected, to support the oriental Demi-dome, which being thrown
down by an Earthquake, and having broke down the Sanctum Sanctorum with the
fall, he caused it to be replac'd where it stands at the two extremities of
this oriental part. At the letter M. Stand two Towers, of which that on the
South Side is the biggest and lowest of all the four that stand at the four
Corners of Sancta Sophia, as being built in have, after that Mahomet II. had
changed the Church into a Mosquee; and was the first piece of Building which
the Turks ever erected in Constantinople.

The South and North part of Sancta Sophia differ very little, as having both
the one and the other, Five pair of stairs, Twelve Windows, and Two doors
apiece. Of the Five pair of stairs there are Two very large that ascend to the
top of the Church, and which were not only Built to accommodate the Women in
their going up to the Galleries, but also served to support the Doma of the
Church. They are marked in the Platform Draught with the letter E. The Three
other pair of stairs go no higher then into the Women's lower Gallery. And of
these, two pair are placed at the two Corners that make the square of the
Church, opening into the Churchyard, for the sake of the Women, who by that
means went and came without being seen of the Men. But the door to the middle
most pair is within the Church, as serving only for the use of the Priests and
Deacons, whose business it was to perfume the Women's Galleries, during Divine
service. The doors belonging ot the stairs within the Church, open only to the
Galleries above. The Twelve Windows in each of the fronts North and South are
very small, contained under four large Arches. The four doors which formerly
opened to the North and South are now stopped up, all but one to the South
marked with the letter Q.

All the West part of Sancta Sophia is taken up with two Vestibulums or
Portico's, and a little Court that lies before them. The biggest of these two
Portico's which join to the Church is double; that is to say, one above, and
another below. The lowermost is the true Portico to the Church, for that above
is only a Gallery belonging to the Gunaikeion. The inferior Portico opens with
Sixteen doors, Nine to the East, Five to the West, One to the North and another
to the South. All these doors are of Marble, and the folders are of Copper or
Brass, adorned with several flat Crosses, Trefoild or Flowerdeliz'd; from all
which the Turks have taken the thwart pieces, not believing that Christ, whom
they acknowledge to be a great Prophet, was ever Cr^cify'd himself in person,
but only that some Fantom or Apparition seemingly suffered in his stead. And
therefore they cannot endure to behold at the very entrance into the Mosquee,
such marks of Jewish cruelty, and Christian stupidity, in reference to the
Article of our Saviors passion. The space between the doors is lined all with
fair Marble of various colors, and bordered with Alablaster Garlands of
several sorts. Over all this Marble Embroidery, that reaches to the top of the
Gates, are several Figures and Crosses in Mosaic work, which the Turks have not
yet so much defaced, but that above the Three doresin the middle you may
discern the Picture of our Savior giving his blessing to an Emperor
prostrated at his feet, with a Panhagia, or our Lady on his Right hand, and the
Prodromos or John the Baptist upon his left. The upper part of the space
between these West doors of the Portico, is enlightened with three small
Windows, contained under an Arch; the lower part being full of small Terraces,
which I have not marked, in regard they are only of wood. At the two
extremities of this Portico, are two large entrances or Portalls, where are to
be seen several Pictures in Mosaic work, and other pieces of Carving upon the
Brazen Folders, and these words already recited, (...), with several Ciphers
denoting the year when the doors were set up. Then under each of these large
Portalls, are two lesser doors, that lead to the Women's Gallery up an easy pair
of stairs, marked with the letter E.

Going out of this Portico, at the West side, you enter into another Portico,
neither so long nor so large as the former. It was by the Greeks called Nartex,
marked in the Platform draught with the letter N. Now in regard this Nartex
served to no other use then to receive the Penitents and Catechumeni or
Proselytes, who were not admitted into the Church, till satisfaction given, or
before Baptism, we do not find the least appearance, that ever it had any
great cost bestowed upon it, being very plain, with a roof like the bone of a
Fish, and paved only with great pieces of Marble without any order or design.
Which is the reason that some believe, that this first Portico was not built at
the same time with the rest of the Church, because it hinders the sight of the
Front. But in regard we do not find by any probable conjecture, that there was
ever any other Front or Entrance into the Church, then what it still to be
seen, and for that it is a thing unlikely that they would have raised a Tower
not above Twenty paces from the main structure, and half a dozen open Arches at
the same distance, without closing up the whole with a wall, and some slight
covering instead of a Portico, we may well believe, this Portico to ^e as
ancient as the rest of the Church, as being built after the same manner and
form with the rest of the particular parts.

At the two extremities of this Portico stand two little doors marked in the
Platform Draught with the letter M. These are the doors of the Towers upon the
West part of the Church, through which the Muezins ascend when they go to call
the people to Church; and which had the Turks any Bells would serve for
Steeples. Round about the Tower upon the South side are several Fountains
under a Gallery, supported by Eight Pillars marked with the letter R. The west
part of this Nartex receives in the Light at thirteen Windows, and opens with
Three doors, of which Tw^ are very large for the use of the people, the other
^ery small, not far from the Tower marked with the letter O. This Tower was
formerly the Steeple belonging to the Church; now a useless vacuity, the Turks
having converted the Bells into the louder, and less pleasing Music of the
Cannon. The little door is only for the Muezins and other Officers of the
Mosquee, who have their Chambers round a small Court, marked in the Platform
Draught with the Directions S. and T. There is also in this Court belonging
altogether to the old Steeple, a place where you descend Thirty steps to fetch
water out of a large Cistern, which runs under all the body of the Church, and
discharges it self out of several Cocks marked in the Platform Draught with the
letter P. Near to thse steps, and toward the middle of the Court, stands a
large Vessel in which the Officers wash their Linen and other Habits. I have
also marked it with the letter V. not that it is a thing so much worth notice,
but that the Reader may observe the exactness and fidelity of the Draught, if
ever it be his chance to Travel to Constantinople. He will also find at the
direction. a small octogon Chapel, which serves now to no other use then to
lay the provision of Hay and Oats for the Sultans adjoining stables. It was
formerly the Vestry belonging to the Church, of which there is still some
likelihood remaining, there being a door out of this place into the Church,
which I have filled up with small Tittles, to show that it is now quite stopped
up. All this that I have said may be seen in the platform Draught, and
therefore I shall cease to tire the Reader with any farther topographical
description. As for the measure I have reduced it to the ^adom, called The
toise de charpentier is five Foot and a half The petit pied is some inchesless
than the Carpenters foot.
Toise de petit pied, by which the Reader may view and examine every thing
without any fear of being deceived, or making false conjectures, as being drawn
with all the exactness imaginable.

Having thus described the Platform, I come now to the elevation of the Church.
True it is, that all persons who till now have heard talk of the Church of
Sancta. Sophia, have been easily led to believe, that the out side and inside
of it was a Masterpiece of Architecture, and that the ornaments both without
and within do not give place to any of the stately and magnificent structures
in Europe; and all this not only upon the credit of the Greeks, who in all Ages
however have been looked upon as vain boasters, but also persuaded thereto by
several Travelers, who have made descriptions perhaps more pleasing to the
ear, than approaching to truth. But for my part not believing the Hyperboles of
Poetical fancies, and not finding the Historians of chiefest credit, who spoke
most highly in praise of this Astonishing pile, have gone any farther than big
words, which only fill the mind with false Idea's without having vouchsafed us
the least Line of a Description by way of Draught, or the least touch of Pencil
or Graver. I have therefore presumed to do more and say less, for the
satisfaction of the Reader, who is left to his own judgment, knowing that of
the Poet to be true, Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus.
Words passing through the ear far less convince,
Then what is obvious to the seeing sense.


The Northwest Prospect of Sancta Sophia.


An Explanation of Figure VI.
A. The Domo; (...). VI.
very much weather beaten, inform like a half Circle, having Twenty Four
Windows, supported with Four large Pillars, upon which it does not seem however
to rest.

B. Three of the four great Buttresses added to the Four large Pillars which
sustain the Dome, in every one of which a great pair of stairs run up, that
lead to the Women's Galleries.

C. The Women's second Galleries, the six Arches of which are stopped up, to
make them more firm, in regard of the frequent Earthquakes.

D. The Women's first Galleries, much longer and larger then the second, the
Walls of which like those of the Church are lined with Marble, the Roof like a
large Fish-bone, all enriched with Mosaic work, adorned with sixty Pillars of
speckled Egyptian Marble, resting upon Forty others much bigger, of the same
stone, which together with the Pilasters support the whole stuucture.

d. The stairs by which the Priests ascender with their Incense into the Women's
Gallery.

E. The upper Portico at the end wheneof were the Wiudows that looks to the
West, is that fair transparent stone, which some Travelers have taken for an
Onyan, but is no other then a very clear Marble, which are common in Persia.

F. The North entrance into the lower Portico, never open but upon grand
Festivalls, and during Ramazan. The Walls are lined with Marble of several
colors, over which are the Pictures of Christ, the Virgin, St. John Baptist,
and others, in Mosaic work, the Roof, Fish-bone work, embellished with Mosaic
work.

G. The first Portico or Nartex. formerly appointed for Penitents and
Proselytes, without any Ornament, at the end of which are two doors that lead
up to the Towers. It has only two principal entrances for the people, and a
small one in the middle, through which Officers of the Mosquee pass to ^ond fro.

H. This was the Steeple formerly for the Bells, now useless.

I. The entrance down to the Cistern under the Church.

K. The West door into the first Portico.

L. The Chains which the Turks fix to all places, for which they have more then
an ordinary respect, ^ Gardens and other places about the Mosquees, to prevent
Horses, Mules and other Beasts from getting in; and which the people being
bound to stoop as they pass under, puts them in mind of the respect and
reverence which they owe to the place.

M. Four little Towers, to the top of which the Muezins attend every day Five
and Six times, upon Frydays, and Seven times in Lent, to call the people to
Prayers.

N. The door of enclosure, containing the Sepulchers of Four Sultans.

O. A Cloister, round about which are Built several Chambers for the Officers
of the Mosquee.

P. Part of the Serraglio.

A Description of the Building and Elevation of Sancta Sophia.
WHich way soever you take a prospect of Sancta Sophia, of which the foregoing
Draught by a Prospect to the North and West, it appears always square, for that
the body of the Church would be perfectly so, were it but only four Fadom more
in breadth. At the four corners of the square, which is under the Domo, and
which is raised upon the four large inside Pillars, stand four large massy
Buttresses, admitting the light in at three Windows. In every one of which is
an easy pair of stairs leading up to the top of the Church, marked in this
plate with the letter B. Between which Butteresses run the Women's Galleries,
whither they also lead. Of which the upper are marked C. shorter and narower,
as terminating between the two large Buttresses. The other or the lowermost is
marked D, broader and longer, as having the same dimensions with the wings of
the Church. To the upper Gallery belong seven little Windows without, answering
to as many Arches which were formerly open in the inside of the Church, now by
the T^rks quite stopped up, as having no need of so many out-lets for their
Women, since they are not permitted to come to Church. Above the roof of the
upper Gynaikeion, runs a single Wall covered with an Arch, and receiving the
light in at Twelve ill-shap'd Windows; Seven of which are very small, and in a
right line to the very roof of the upper Gallery, and Five somewhat bigger in
the midst of the Seven below. All this is covered with a large Domo, on the top
of which marked A, stands a pinnacle of Brass gilded, with a Crescent of the
same at the top. Which manner of finishing is observed in all the public
Buildings among the Turks.

Under this Domo, on the west part of the Church is a Semi-Dome with Five
Windows, of which one is shut up. It appears at the side of two small Cupola's,
which have between them one large semicircular window parted into six Lights,
with a thwart piece of stone-work, which rests upon two small Columns that
support two others. Those two little Cupola's were only placed in that part for
ornament, for they have no overture into the inside of the Church, nor into
themselves, as not being hollow. Between these little Cupola's and the large
Buttresses there are two other SemiDomes, one of each side, having formerly six
Windows a piece. But the continual Earthquakes were the occasion that some of
them were stopped up. These two Demi-Domes upon the West side, with the two
that answer them upon the East side, cover the four Semi-circles of the Quire,
and the entrance into the Sophia marked in Fig. V. with the letter H.

A little below these three Semi-Domes runs a great Gallery with nine great
Windows, every one of which is parted with a thwart piece of stonework, and a
part of two little square Pillars, all of Marble, of which the Portico under it
has as many. It is marked with the letter E. and is supported with six
Buttresses, in the midst of which runs up a foursquare Tower marked H. it is
not above Fifty Fadom high, and was therefore the Steeple formerly belonging to
the Church; but could not contain very many nor very great Bells, in regard it
was no bigger. Under the Buttresses behind the Steeple, is a little Portico or
Nartex marked G. and near to it at the direction I, is a large door that leads
to the Cocks of the Cistern under the Church. The Trees adjoining shade a
little Court belonging to the Officers of the Mosquee, whose lesser Chambers
you may see at the letter O.

At the four corners of all the Building stand four Towers, all delicate pieces
of Workmanship, except that which stands behind the Mosquee, of which you see
no part in this Draught but only the Spire near to the letter A. They are
marked with the letter M. having above but one Gallery, which is as high as the
Windows of the great Domo, but they bear their Pinacles above that of the Domo.
Round about the two Minarets or Towers, upon the West side of the Church, are
the three principal entrances into them, marked in the Platform Fig. V. with
the letter E. but in this last plate with the letter K. in regard that in this
place there is but one to be seen. It is covered with a little Domo, at the
side whereof there is a little stone cut into steps, for those that ride to the
Mosquee, to alight, or to get up on Horseback. To the East of this Tower is to
be seen one of the Entrances into the large Portico, marked E. This is the
North entrance, where you descend by steps into the Church, by reason the
pavement of the street in that place is higher then the Pavement of the Church.
Within this entrance upon the left hand, as also at the other end of the
Portico, appear two little doors opening upon an easy pair of stairs that lead
to the upper Galleries. From this entrance into the grand Portico, there runns
a little Wall, that encloses the three North half Buttresses, and the space
between them makes a little long Court, planted with some few young Trees. This
wall ends at a little Octogon Chapel, which was formerly the Vestry, marked
with the direction in Fig. V. and in this Draught with the letters P. Q.
Between this little Chapel and the Tower behind it, is one of the entrances
into one of the upper Galleries marked in Fig. V. with the letter E. but not to
be seen in this latter plate, because this Chapel hides it in such a manner,
that it is not to be discovered, but as you enter, or stand just right against
it: Now in regard it was at this private and little frequented door that I
always went into the Church to take my Draughts and observations of Sancta
Sophia, I will recreate this tiresome description with the story of an accident
that befell me, at what time I was at the height of all my business.

The eager longing which we have to see, and enjoy what we desire, exposes us
to many hazards. For the gaining of that, we sacrifice oftentimes what is most
dear to us in the world. I met at Constantinople with two persons who had
orders from His most Christian Majesty to Travel the East, and to bring him
back upon their return the most exact Draughts and faithful relations of
whatever they could meet with that was most worthy observation. To this
purpose, as I was one day studiously reading their instructious, I found that
among other things, they were expressly commanded, if it might possibly be
accomplished, to take the Draught of the inside and outside of Sancta Sophia.
Now understanding that neither of these two Travelers had dared to expose
themselves to the danger, it came into my mind, perceiving they had left
Constantinople without adventring to pursue the Kings commands, that I might
perhaps have better success, if for the satisfaction of my Prince I should take
upon me to run a little more hazard then they were willing to undergo, that
were under the Kings Sallery, and honored with his commands.

Foreseeing therefore how dangerous a thing it was to take the Draughts and
measures of Sancta Sophia, and that neither my long habit, my long beard, nor
the Title and quality of Physician, which I took upon me, would stand me in any
stead, I had recourse to intreague and policy. For we do meet with some
persons, who by virtue of some engagements or other, do at length attain the
ends which they propose to themselves. To this purpose I addressed my self to a
certain Greek, who had all the good qualities of a person who sought nothing
more then to do kindnesses when opportunity offered. He was a Goldsmith by
Trade, which he followed less then the zealous affection which appeared in him
to excess, to do courtesies for his friends. He lived near the Church, which
made me believe he might be acquainted with some of the Officers belonging to
it. To him therefore having particularly imparted my design, he told me, he
would discourse the business to one of his Neighbors, and put me in farther
hopes, that he did not doubt but that when he went to carry home certain toys
which he was making for one of his Wives, he should accomplish my business over
two or three Flingeans or cups of Coffee, especially having had success, in
things of much more danger. I left with him a Venetian Sequin to drink, worth
seven or two French Crowns and a half.
Livers, ten Sous French, and promised him more if he could but get me the
liberty to take the Draughts and Measures of Sancta Sophia.

The next morning the Greek came to my Lodging at Galata, and carried me to
Constantinople to a person near his house, with whom I had certainly made a
better composition, had he drank as much Wine as he made use of Oil. He was the
chief Mu^tar Agasi, or Caudilafti, belonging to the Mosquee, that is to say,
the chief of those who are employed to look after the Lamps. Neither is the
Muctariat of this Mosquee a small Office. For as it is his business sometimes
to keep above two Thousand Lamps lighted at a time, especially all the Ramazan
nights, it behooves him to have his hands as clean as a Mohammedan, from all
other defilement but those of durty Gold; to which purpose he washes them every
moment, not being able to avoid the greasy kindnesses which the Oil will
sometimes drop upon his fingers. This good man, whom it was impossible to gain
by never so many Lamps full of Wine, in regard he was an old curmudgeon that
never drank any, told me at my first approaches, that his Goldsmith had
extremely surpised him, in acquainting him that I had a desire to take the
Draughts and measures of the inside of Sancta Sophia; that perhaps I was
ignorant, that the entrance into that holy place was open to none but
Mussullmen, and that there could not be a greater crime then to admit a Giaur
or infidel to take the Draughts and measures of that place as I designed. True
it was indeed, that having the care of the Lamps and the Galleries, he could
giye me entrance above and below, without any danger, provided it were not in
prayer time, but to stay three whole days as I desired, he could by no means
permit me, without the hazard of his own life, as well as of mine, should I be
discerned by any one during prayer time, or be surprised by any of the other
Officers who had keys as well as himself.

I understood by his canting what he drove at, and that there was a necessity
of some other then the usual key to open the Gallery doors. To this end I made
use of a neat Watch that I had bought by chance for three Venetian Sequins,
though it were worth above ^ix, and which I carried with me out of a design to
present him if he accomplished my purpose. This Watch I drew out, looked what
was a Clock, and then wound it up before his face. The bait took, the M^chtar
failed not to ask me to let him see it, and finding it pleased his fancy,
demanded of me if I would fell it. I answered the Watch Watch worth ten
Sequins, but since it pleased him, I would pesent it to him jaba or gratis, if
by his permission I might see the inside of Sancta Sophia, and stay there three
or four days at several times, that I would go in before Salem-namasi or before
day break Prayer, and that I would not stir out till after Accham-namasi or
Evening Prayer: which since he had the Keys himself, might be done without any
hazard to himself or me, so he let no body in besides my self.

The covetous fox, having his eyes dazzled with the sight of my Watch, cried
out, bre guidi kiafer choc ister sen bir sahat ichun. Ah Devil of an Infidel
you ask too much for your Watch. However he added, that seeing the earnest
desire I had, he willingly granted for his part what I demanded; but that not
being the only person that kept the Keys of the Galleries, therefore to make
sure work, it behooved me to speak to two Officers of the Mosquee, who as well
as himself had all the Keys of the same places; however he did not question
but that for some small matter he should prevail with them to my satisfaction,
and that he would give notice to the Goldsmith of his success.

The Greek either out of affection or interest seemed to be most passionately
concerned in my behalf, not giving himself any rest for soliciting the
Candilafti or Lamp-lighter to perform his promise, so that in few days he came
to me like one overjoyed, and told me that my business was effected, that I had
nothing to do but to go the next Morning, being Monday, and wait at the private
door of the Mosquee, which would not fail to fly open to me, by virtue of the
charms of my Watch and four Sequins more, which I was to give to the two other
Officers mentioned by the Muctar: who being satisfied, I might have liberty to
draw, take measures, and do what else I pleased, but dig up the Foundations of
the Mosquee.

I that had never paid less than five and twenty per cent for my Bills of
Exchange, that I might not fail of my time, and thought my Watch a sufficient
price for the satisfaction of my curiosity, was very loath to part with my four
Sequins, to the value of Ten Crowns; considering withal, that it was not a Mile
to the bottom of my Purse. Nevertheless after many contests in vain, seeing
those Adorers of Silver would not bate me a doit, alleging still the great
danger and hazard which they ran for my sake, I was persuaded to cross the
Cudgells, that I might see some thing in Constantinople, which was a raritie,
and which I was assured that no person but my self was ever before Master of:
Thereupon I went to the place appointed, and foreseeing that there would be
some want of a little refreshment in regard I was not going to keep the Turkish
Ramazan or Lent, but only to draw the Draught of the Church, I carried with me
a Bologna Sawsage, a Bottle of Wine, and a Loaf. Which had been sufficient to
have cost me my dear life, had they found me eating Bacon and drinking Wine,
the two abominations chiefly forbidden by their Law, and polluting with them
the holiest of all their Mosquees. Thus I spent the first day well enough
without any interruption in the Gallery. But the next day was not so calm. For
whilst the Turk^ were at their Devotions, I fell to my Sawsage and Wine, and by
that time they had done Praying, I had done eating; and was fallen very serious
again to my business. When lo, athwart the Pillars at the other end of the
Church in the Galleries, I perceived a tall long fellow stalking toward that
part where I was, who I found had let himself in at another door than that at
which my Introductor had let me in.

I was firmly of belief, seeing a white Turbant, and a person whom I knew not,
that my business was done, should it prove to be any other, than one of those
whom the Muctar had made of the conspiracy. I was in a strange Quandary;
sometimes I thought, because I was at my repast while the Turks were at
Prayers, that some person had spied me from below, as having perhaps had the
ill luck while the people in the Mosquee were pros^rated with their heads to
the earth, and kissing the Ground and crying out Alla hecher, to have too much
exalted mine out of my zeal to drink their healths, and to play upon my soft
Instrument to their loud Music. I was in a peck of troubles, and knew not what
to do in the condition wherein I was: besides that I knew not where to bestow
my papers, pencills and Bottle, for which I could find no excuse in the world.
It was a crime that neither stake nor fire could hardly have expiated, to find
a Giaur making figures, eating Pork, and drinking Wine, in the Turks Holy of
Holyes. I must confess I was never in such a Pannic dread in all my life, and
that I never saw the shape and likeness of death so exactly drawn before my
eyes in all my days.

However though I firmly believed my self to be a person no longer of this
world, yet that I might not be surpised with my Bottle and Sawsage, I hid them
together with my papers under a Carpet in a dark corner, with all the speed I
could, and so drawing forth my Rosary, and a certain book which I had about me,
written by Peter Gilius, I returned to my feat, and put my self into a posture
of one that had but newly said his Prayers. Every step the Turk made toward the
upper Portico, from whence I had been drawing the bottom of the Church, my
deadly fears augmented. But in regard he came but slowly on, I had time to
recollect my Spirits, to put on a good face, and confirm my self in those
resolutions I had always taken, which were rather to lose my Life a thousand
times, than my Praeputium once.

Thus feigning my self to be at my Prayers, I held my Book, which I had no
great maw to look in at that time, in my left hand, and my Rosary in my right
hand, with the Beads whereof I was fumbling, when the Turk approached me; and
instead of a Salamalek, or How do you do, cried, Bre guidi giaur ne uhlersen
bonda; Villain of an Infidel! what ma^' st thou here? I answered him, after I
had looked very seriously in my Book, and turned over two or three of my Beads
according to the Musselmen's manner: Sir, I am at my Prayers, stay a little
while I beseech ye. -- After which, having made a Genuflexion, together with
the sign of the Cross, I rose up to speak to him. Salamalekum Aga, said I, or
Good day to ye, Sir; then going on, You need not wonder, Sir, quoth I, to find a
Christian alone in the Galleries of Sancta Sophia; adding, he knew it was a
Church formerly built by the Christians, who had still a great Veneration for
it, and being one of those, that I had obtained permission to be let in, to the
end I might spend some few hours in Devotion and Prayer, and that I expected
him who had let me in, to come suddenly and let me out again.

The Turk, who was one of those who had shared my four Sequins, having heard
me, presently seren'd his tempestuous Countenance, not being able to forbear
laughing, to see in what a cold sweat he had put me (for he might easily read
my distemper THE SOUTH PROSPECT OF SANCTA SOPHIA.
in my looks), and to hear what a fine lie I had got already chewed for him.
Thereupon, he bid me be of good comfort, and cried, Courcmas Adam, Fear
nothing; I knew, said he, you were here; and so having showed him some of my
Draughts which he desired to see, he left me to take off the rest of my Bottle
to recruit my Spirits.

An Explanation of Figure VII.
A. The Turks Colophon, or Pinacle-head, being a Fig. VII. crescent of Brass or
Lead gilt.

B. Two of the four great Buttresses that support the Domo.

C. The Women's second Gallery.

D. The Women's lower Gallery.

d. The Stairs where the Priests and Deacons ascend with their Incense.

E. The upper Portico.

F. The South entrance into the lower Portico.

^. Buttresses that support the upper and lower Portico; under which is the
Nartex or Porch for the Penitents and Proselytes.

H. The Steeple where the Bells hung formerly.

I. The Entrance down to the Cisterns under the Church.

K. The two West Gates opening into the first Portico, and so into the Church.

L. The Chains which the Turks put before all the Doors of those places to
which they bear any respect, as before the Door marked with the Letter N.

M. The four Towers which the Turks have raised about the Temple instead of
Steeples, of which the biggest and lowest, marked M*, was the first that was
built in Constantinople.

O. A little Cloister with Chambers for some of the Officers of the Mosquee.

P. The Fountain where the Turks wash before they enter the Temple.

Q. The Window where the Sybil of Sancta Sophia sits, an Officer employed to
give Water to those that desire to drink.

R. S. The South enclosure, containing the Sepulchers of diverse Grand Signors.

T. The Tombs of several Grand Signors, their Wives and Children.

T*. The Sepulcher of Sultan Mahomet and his six and twenty Children.

*T. Sultan Mustapha's Tomb.

A Description of the South Prospect of Sancta Sophia.
HAving already described the North Prospect of St. Sophia, it will not be much
material to add the South Prospect, the Fronts of both being so very like. The
great Domo, weather-beaten with its Pinnacle, and Pinacle-head marked A, is the
same on both sides, having four and twenty Windows placed upon a Square,
supported with three large Buttresses marked B, surrounded with Galleries C and
D, accompanied with Semi-domes, and adorned with a Vestibulum and Portico's, as
at E. G. graced with four Towers marked M, and beautified with Gardens like the
other Mosquees. I shall therefore only add for the satisfaction of the Reader,
the most remarkable differences between the two Fronts, North and South.

To begin therefore at the Letter P. This Letter marks out several Fountains
under a small Gallery: For the Turks never enter the Mosquee (...) say their
Prayers, before they have washed every part of the Body, which they think has
committed any offense; believing that not only the least drop of Urine, or any
other Excrement, may defile them, but also the hearing of reproachful and
scandalous words, and what ever the voluptuous Senses entertain of wanton
pleasure; for which reason they always wash the principal inlets of sensual
Delight. And therefore they never build any Mosquee without the provision of
several Fountains, or some small Stream, for which they make an artificial
Chanel to bring it up to the Mosquee, for the convenience of the Musselmen
traveling upon the Road. And indeed there are always near their Mosquees two
sorts of Fountains, the one to wash in, the other to drink. To the first belong
certain Cocks, which are free for every one to turn, either to wash withal, or
drink; for the Water is always very clear, and very well tasted. To the second
belong certain neat Pots of Copper tinned, where attends a person employed for
that purpose to distribute to every one what he has occasion for, to quench his
thirst. Did the Turks but love the juice of the Grape as well as the Germans,
and were not Wine forbidden by their Law, it would have been a much greater
convenience, and an act of higher Charity to have erected so many Taverns near
the Tombs of the Dead, where the Living might have drank the Founders Health in
good Wine of freecost; than so many pitiful Water-Almshouses or Sebilkanas, of
which there are many adjoining to the Tombs of great Personages and Grand
Signors, where the people fuddle nothing but fair Water in memory of their
Benefactors; of which number is this adjoining to Sancta Sophia near the Letter
Q, upon the South side. This Sebilkana, or Waterfudling School, is one of the
most ancient in Constantinople, being erected by Sultan Mahomet, surnamed the
Leacher, for that he had by several Wives no less than six and twenty Children,
which Iye round about him in little Coffins in the Turbe or Sepulcher marked
T*. The other Sepulchers belong to so many other Grand Signors, all enclosed in
one Court, shaded with a great number of Trees.

An Explanation of Figure VIII.
. The Domo, Fi. VIII.
lined with Mosaic Figures, as marked in the Plate.

A. The place where formerly stood the Altar.

a. The Stairs which now ascend byassing, which formerly ascended straight
upright from one of the large oriental Pillars to the other, at the Extremities
of which stood the Emperors and Patriarchs Seats. They enclosed with a
Balustrade the compass of the Quire. But now the Turks have shaped them
otherwise, to turn them toward Koble, where the Mirabe or Mahumetan Altar
stands.

B. The Mirabe or Maharah, like a Nich in the Wall, where the Alcoran is kept.
On the right and left hand stand two large Candlesticks, and in each a Taper of
Wax.

C. The Mufti's Mamber or Chair, where he reads Prayer all Bairam, and upon
other solemn Festivals.

^. The Grand Signor's Closet, where he attends his Devotions.

^. The Gallery leading to the Closet.

D. Two low Terraces or Balcones for the Singers and Moderators of the peoples
Voices, which they call Belligler.

The inside of SANCTA SOPHIA ye East End.


E. The Preachers Pulpit, wherein there is a Sermon A-la-turquesca Wednesdays
and Fridays.

F. The Windows of the Church.

f. The Windows of the Domo's, low, and giving little light.

G. The Women's lower Gallery.

^. The Women's upper Gallery.

H. The Balisters that run round the Church above and below.

I. Four Pictures of Saints, over which is one of the Virgin Mary, garnished
under with Moresco Mosaic work, and all under the same Arch.

K. Four large Seraphims, with six Wings a piece.

L. The Picture of Christ's Face upon the Napkin, called Veronica.

M. Two large Angels, whose Wings cover their whole Bodies from head to foot.

N. A large Picture of our Lady sitting and holding Christ in her arms.

O. The three large Windows of the Quire, and Sanctum Sanctorum. In the Rounds
between the Windows are the names of eight great Prophets of the Turkish Law.

P. The mouth of the great Cistern under the Church, whence they fetch Water to
cool the Musselmen, when overheated with their Turkish Zeal.

The Pavement of the Church is all of Marble, wrought in diverse Compartiments,
covered with a Mat, and sundry Turkish Carpets laid over it.

The Description of the inside of Sancta Sophia, the East end.
TO show the Reader now, without any danger or hazard the inside of St. Sophia,
you are to understand, that as soon as you come to the entrance of the three
Doors in the middle, you have almost an entire prospect of the whole, or at
least of the principal part of what I am going to describe;

There was formerly but one Altar in this Church, where now there is none at
all. It was placed at the Letter A, and a little below there was a separation
of Wood gilded and adorned with Pictures, and opening with three Doors which
the Greeks call Hagiai Tirai, or The holy Doors, for that they belonged to the
Sanctum Sanctorum. The Quire for the Singers enclosed all that space contained
between the two small Pillars at the lower end of the Church (upon which that
separation called the Eikonostasion joined) and the two large Oriental Pillars
that sustained the Domo, against which the two Seats of the Emperor and
Patriarch were fixed, the one on the North, and the other on the South side.
Now for the sake of these two Seats, and the rest with which this place was
environed, therefore was it called Ambon, or The place of Seats. It was just
under the Oriental Semidome, having five Windows, but low, and giving little
light. All the Seats of this Ambon were taken away, when Mahomet the Second
turned the Church into a Mosquee. But the Mirabe or Turkish Altar is placed
where you see the Letter B, and instead of Seats, which the Turks never use,
there are only the Mufti's Mamber, or the Katib of the Mosquee's Desk, marked
C, and a Tebligh, or little low Balcone for the Singers, marked D. Over against
the Mufti's Mamber is the Grand Signor's Closet.

The Seats of the Ambon were formerly appointed for those that officiated at
the Quire. But the Preacher's Pulpit might be perhaps where the Turks have now
placed theirs. It stands in the midst of the North part of the Church, made
after a different manner from those in our Churches, for it is open before like
a large and very high Elbow Chair. He that preaches, ascends by means of a
short pair of Stairs before it, leaving his Shoes below; and being got up,
seats himself like a Tailor upon his Shopboard, and talks to the People, but
with very little motion of the body. This Pulpit stands at the Letter E; it is
all of white Marble, wrought in transparent work with Roses, and variety of
Moresco Ornament.

Behind, and over against this Pulpit, stand four large Pillars of speckl'd
Egyptian Marble forty foot high, and all of a piece, with so little difference
in the turning between the middle and the top, that it is no easy thing to
discern their diminution, which makes them appear to be all of one piece: But
their Chapters seem to be of a particular Order, which may be called the
Barbarian Greek. The Workman intended to have covered them with the Leaves of
Acanthus, or the Thistle called Brank Vrsin, but missed his design through his
ill imitation. It Is true, the delicacy of the Tool that carved them is to be
admired, as being almost all transparent; and it seems as if the Artist
intended to have intermixed between the Foliage some certain significant
Characters. The upper part of the Chapter, that forms the space between the
Arches, is of various colored Marble wrought in transparent work, with several
branches of Foliage and Flowers, and Garlands of Porphyry.

These four great Columns support six others belonging to the first Galleries,
some of which are rather for Ornament than Use. Those six Columns at the Letter
G, are much less than the four lowermost, and the Shape and Sculpture of their
Chapters is also different. The upper part of the Columns belonging to the
Women slower Gallery is very rich, and good work, branched with Flowers and
Foliage made of Jasper, Porphyry, Mother of Pearl, and other suchlike Stones of
great price. But it is impossible to distinguish or express all these
Embellishments by the Graver's Art upon a Copper Plate. Above these Ornaments
there runs a Gallery round about the Church, with its Balisters, in the
distance between every one of which stands so many Lamps, which are kept
burning all Night long during Ramazan, or the Season of Lent. This Balister is
the last piece of Building, which is lined with Marble within the Church. The
upper part was formerly all embellished with Figures in Mosaic work, as appears
by the Ruins of it in several places, the rest being now defaced by the Turks,
who cease not to blemish and destroy what remains, where they can come at it,
with long Poles, and then to daub the deformity over with white Plaster. Which
they have not done however so absolutely, but that several Figures appear
untouched out of their reach, as well in the first Galleries, as in the body of
the Church: For there are still to be seen two large Seraphims under the East
part of the Domo, four Saints, and a Virgin in the middle, under the Oriental
Arch, marked with the Letter I; two large Angels, and the Veronica or Napkin,
with the Picture of Christ's face upon it, at the Letters M and L, over the
Sanctum Sanctorum; and lastly, a large Picture of the Virgin Mary sitting in a
Throne, holding Christ upon her knees, who gives her his Blessing. This Picture
appears at the bottom of the Church near the Letter N, in the midst of a
Semidome inlaid with Mosaic work gilded, and illuminated with five small
Windows. These may be looked upon as a good Omen for the Christians, that by an
effect of Divine Providence, those Sculptures which covered the Sanctum
Sanctorum are still remaining entire to this day, though they stand in a place
very much frequented, and within the reach of Mischief, as being left there to
excite one day the Piety of the Christians for the recovery of the Church. Over
this Balcone runs the upper Balustrade marked O, but the lower Balustrade
terminates under the Angels at an Overture, which serves instead of a Door.

Over this upper Balustrade, under the Grand Domo, at the Letter g, were
formerly seven open Arches, which belonged to the Women's second Gallery; but
now those Arches are stopped up, only their place and form remains, in regard
the Turks, who never admit their Women into their Mosquees, have no occasion
for so many Galleries to accommodate their Piety; and have therefore appointed
those Galleries which formerly belonged to them, to the use of the Men. Over
these Arches thus stopped up, marked with the Letter F, are the Windows of the
two Fronts of the Body of the Church, though very ill contrived. The seven
lowermost are very small, but the five which are over them very large; but as
well the Glass-work of those Windows, as of all the rest of the Church, except
the six in the Sanctum Sanctorum, is only composed of round quarrels of Glass
set in plain Plaster, which is the reason that the whole Church is very dark
and gloomy, notwithstanding the great number of Windows, which are all low, and
such as afford but little light, and resemble rather the Vent-holes of a Cave,
than the Windows of a Church.

The spaces between the Windows are so many portions of Circles or Arches,
which as they diminish, terminate toward the middle of the Domo, where they
make the figure of a Rose inlaid with Mosaic work. From the middle, and the
parts about this Rose, marked with a, descend several Rods of Iron, at which
hangs a large Circle within about eight or ten foot of the Pavement, to which
are fixed a prodigious number of Lamps, Ostriches Eggs, and other Baubles; but
in regard it is no part of the Building, and for that it would have hindered
the prospect of the Church, I have left them out of the Plate.

An Explanation of Figure IX.
A. The great Door in the middle of the Church, Fig. IX.
with two other lesser; over which Doors within the Portico, are the Pictures
of Christ, the Virgin Mary, and St. John Baptist, with an Emperor prostra^e a^
their feet; athwart this Door may be seen the Door that leads into the Nartex.

B. The two little Doors, upon the right and left hand whereof are two passages
leading to the other Doors, marked also B.

C. Two large Vrns, which are kept full of Water to cool the Mahometans,
overheated by their (...) Gesticulations.

D. Four Columns of Porphyry, girdl'd with Brass in several places to preserve
them from breaking, as beginning already to crack.

E. Two little low Balcones or Terraces for the Singers, that regulate the rest
of the Musselmen at their Prayers.

F. The mouth of the Cistern where they draw Wat^^ out of the Cistern under the
Church.

G. The upper and lower Balustrades that run round about the Church, between
which the Lamps are set, which burn upon solemn Festivals, and in Lent.

The inside of SANCTA SOPHIA ye West End.


H. The Gallery where the Women sat apart from the Men during Divine Service.

WE are now to leave the Church, where I am sorry I have so long detained the
Reader; and therefore seeing the Doors are open, let him consider at which he
will go out. I must confess he has this advantage above me, that he may take a
prospect of them without any hazard, or being misused for his pains by the
zealous Musselmen, as I was; for I had finished all my work, but only the
Gates, and some few things relating to the Groundwork of the Church, and
lowest part of the lower Portico: To which purpose my long Beard and Habit,
with my red Turbant, (for none but Musselmen are suffered to wear white or
green) stood me in great stead. For in that Equipage I durst venture into the
Sophia, without notice taken of me by the Turks, whose Eyes are so zealously
fixed upon the Pavement, that they take little heed whether a Man's Turbant be
Christian or Turkish. Nevertheless one day trusting too much to my Habit, and
the Excuses which I had always ready cut and dried, I could not be content to
go alone as I was wont to do, but I must needs take a friend along with me, who
was a Venetian, and who in a whole year that he had lived at Constantinople,
had never dared so much as to look into the inside of the Mosquee. As for his
habit, it was well enough, but he wore long Hair, with a Calpac or Grecian
Bonnet upon his head, after the manner of the Europeans that live in Turkey. Now
having that day little to do, I carried him, forsooth, into the Portico, with a
design to have gone cross the Church. But my friend, when he had seen as much
as could be seen from the Portico, out of his Venetian Gravity, would not
venture to expose himself any farther, by hazarding a dispute with the zealous
Mahometans: So that he left me to go by my self, and stayed at the Door to be a
testimony of my rashness, not dreaming that he should be the cause of the
misfortune that befell me.

For while I was got into the middle of the Mosquee, and still making forward
to the Door next the Serraglio, two cursed Bigots of Turks, that were coming to
say their Prayers, found the Venetian at the Church door, under the roof of the
Portico, where I left him. They asked him, whether he were come there to turn
Musselman? To which, when he answered in the Negative, and told them, that he
only stayed for his friend that was gone into the Mosquee, a sudden
transportation of Zeal enflaming the two Turks, the one falls upon the Venetian
with his profane Fists, and expells him out of Holy Ground, while the other
makes toward me with his Papo^ches in his hand, and without the least warning,
gives me a rude Complement over the shoulders, for which I returned him thanks
with the swiftest pair of heels I could find. I did not think it safe to stand
upon Interrogatories, or to inform my self of the reason of his incivility. I
thought it more advantageous for me to trust to my Legs, than to stay to tell
the boystrous Turk by way of Remonstrance, That if Mahomet commanded him to
stand barefoot in the Mosquee, yet that I did not believe he ever intended that
any Turk should make use of his Shoes to abuse a Stranger in his presence. No
-- I ran away with all the speed I could, and fearing less the durtying my
Mestes or new Breeches, than to be defiled by the rude touch of a Musselman's
fist, I never left running till I got to the turning of the Street, where I put
on my Papouches or Shoes, which 'till then I had no leisure to do. Had these
Turks known that I some days before had eaten Bacon and drank Wine in their
Mosquee, it is ten to one they would not so easily have suffered me to win the
Race.

To return to the Matter. The West part of Sancta Sophia, where stand the Gates
of the Portico at which I got out, is one of the fairest Fronts of the Church,
as may be easily seen by the draught. Over the West Arch, which leans upon the
two great Pillars that support the Domo, you meet with a large Semidome, which
covers both upon the right and left hand two other small ones, which are as it
were instead of a Shoulder to the entrance into the Church. It had formerly
five Windows, but now one is stopped up. Between these two Elbows covered by
their Semidomes, appear the three principal Doors of the Portico, being placed
in the middle of the West Front, and between six other Doors equally divided
upon the right and left hand. That in the middle, which is the biggest of all,
is marked in the Design with the Letter A. The two other, (which are lower) by
B. Near to which are two passages, which cross over the Pillars that flank
them, leading to the three other Doors of each side. Through the great Door you
may discover another answering to it, and leading into the Nartex or Portico.

Over these three Doors are three large Overtures adjoining to the two sides of
the Pillars that flank the Front, and in the middle rest upon two double
Columns. Through which three Arches you may discover a good part of the upper
Portico which belonged to the Women's Gallery. In the midst of which stand four
little Pillars of green Marble, only for show, or else perhaps they might have
formerly served to make a separation between some Window or Lattice, which
prevented the Women from being seen. The upper part of this Front, over the
middlemost Doors, is taken up with a large Window parted by two Columns, and
cut in the midst by a piece of Stone-work, the Glass-work consisting only of
round Quarrels set in Plaster. The Ornaments of this Front, and of all the
rest of the Body of the Church, are of Marble, Alablaster, green Marble, and
Porphyry, Mother of Pearls, Cornelions, and several other rich Stones. I have
observed, to the utmost of my power, the order and fashion of all these
Ornaments beautified with such diversity of rich Materials; but the smallness
of the Volume to which I was obliged to accommodate the Plates, would not give
me leave to make a larger distinction of the several parts. However, if this
small Design prove acceptable to the World, I may in time be able to gratify
the Reader with a Des^ription in larger Draughts. In the mean time, the Reader
may be assured of all the exactness imaginable, and the various colors of the
Marble may be discerned by the variety of the Graver's hatching in the Plate.

Upon the side of these three middlemost Doors, the two little Pillars which
flank them form a kind of Elbow, by the assistance of the two great Pillars
which sustain the Domo; in the midst of which Elbow or Semicircle are two
Columns of Porphyry, each placed upon a Pedestal, equalling in height the third
part of the body of the Pillar. But in regard these two Columns that sustain
three Arches with their Pillars, support also five others, which make way for
six Overtures, upon which are fixed the Semidomes and their Galleries, the bulk
whereof rendered their weight too ponderous, the ensuing Earthquakes shook them
so terribly* that they began to falter in many places, which constrained the
girdling them about with Hoops of Brass and Iron, to prevent their total decay.

Between these two girdl'd Columns, upon each side, stand two great Jarrs or
Urns of Marble, having little Cocks belonging to them. These are filled every
morning with Water from the Cistern, drawn up at the little Overture marked F,
and covered with brass Covers. If these two brass Urns be not very ancient, yet
it may be conjectured, that they serve in the stead of those which were in the
time of the Greek Emperors, and were made use of for the Sanctification Water
which the Christians used when they came to Church. For History observes, that
there was a certain large Vessel full of Water, where the Faithful were wont to
wash their faces, to denote, that they were to present themselves pure and
immaculate before the Presence of God; which Vessel seems to be represented by
the Holy-Water-vessels in the Roman Catholic Churches; as having written over
it in a fair Golden Character this Greek Verse, which may be read either
backward or forward: (...).
Wash off thy Sins, and not thy Face alone.
But now they only serve to keep Water in, to quench the Musselmen's zealous
Drowth. For the most superstitious Turks tarry a long time at their Devotions,
and by means of their frequent Gesticulations, and Genuflexions, and tearing
their Throats with continually pronouncing the Name of God, or some one of his
Attributes, overheat themselves in such a manner, that their Lungs are almost
dried up with perpetual yawling; which makes them pant after the cool Streams
of these Water-Urns, whence they either take the Water themselves, or receive
it from the hands of a Dervich, or some other Officers of the Mosquee, who
stand ready with their Toulouks or Hair-bottles, and clean Glasses, to supply
the wants of them that call for their assistance; but this is only upon Solemn
Festivals, when the Mosquee is so full, that every one cannot go to relieve
himself.

Near the mouth of the great Cistern at the Letter E, as also right against it,
stands a little Marble Terrass upon four Pillars of the same, very like the
Balcones where the Musicians in Italy sit, only the Balisters are much lower,
to the end the People may observe the Gestures of those that are in it, who are
the Directors of the Turkish Devotion, by the Musselmen called Bellighler, as
their Seats or Terrasses are called Tebligh; which Seats or Terrasses, and
Chanters or Directors, are only in great Mosquees, for the little ones have no
need of so much Ceremony. The Katib who is the Curat^, or the Iman his Vicar,
are sufficient in such places; and for the Country Mosquees, as in our small
Parishes, one single Iman serves to do all the drudgery of Iman, Muezin or
Crier, Lamp-lighter or Muchtar, and Kahigim or Sweeper. But in large and much
frequented Mosquees, such as Sancta Sophia, there is a necessity for these
Terraces; for that the Musselmen, who are at a distance from the Maharab, would
never be able to hear or understand the Iman that reads Prayers, or to know
when to bawl, and when to kneel; which causes great confusion many times, not
unpleasant to behold; when one going to kneel, and another to rise at the same
time, he that rises salutes him that is about to kneel with the point of his
Turbant, to the great detriment sometimes of Eyes, sometimes of Noses; which
cannot but be a great disturbance to their offended Devotion. Therefore the
Directors placing themselves in these Terraces, and observing the voice and
gestures of the Iman, baul out to the Crowd what the Iman reads with a low
voice, and teach the Rabble when to respond, in due season, at the end of every
Rekies, or Couplet of the Prayer, Alla Ecber, and to prostrate themselves in
their proper cue, after their Example.

And thus I have said as much as can be said in reference to the inside and
outside of the Church of Sancta Sophia, referring my self, to supply the defect
of words, to the observation of the Plates, which he that shall diligently
consider, will find that the Body of this Church is in nothing at all less
glorious than it was formerly, notwithstanding all the Stories of the Greeks to
the contrary, unless it be where the Turks have defaced it upon the score of
their Superstition: For I look not upon the destruction of the Patriarch's
Palace, or the Monastery adjoining, to signify much to the Body of the Church.
As to the Front of the Church, there is no probability, that there ever was any
other than what now appears, which has nothing of that Grandeur and Beauty,
which a Church so loudly famed might justly require. True it is, that
Architecture, and her two Sisters, Sculpture and Painting, were at that time
little regarded, so that it seems rather a wonder that they did so well, than
that they did no better, considering the barbarity and ignorance of the Age.

Of the Religious Functions of the Greek Church formerly exercised in Sancta
Sophia, as likewise their present Practice.
IT is a Question hard to determine, what was the true Liturgy, or form of
Divine Worship of the Greeks, in the time of the first Christian Emperors, or
what it was a long time after them. The Ancients, as well in this, as in many
other things, give us little or no light. But if we may make any conjecture, by
what is now practiced over all the Greek Churches, we may conclude, that the
Governors, Ministers, and Officers of the Greek Church, were comprehended
under three Orders; Episcopa^, Sacerdotal, and Clerical. Under the Episcopal
Order were the Patriarch, the Archbishops, Metropolitans, and Bishops. The
Sacerdotal Order included Abbots or Priors, with their Brethren, Regular
Priests, and Cosmics or Secular Priests. The Clerical Order contained as now,
Deacons, Choristers, Children of the Quire, Sacristains, Lamp-lighters,
Sweepers, Porters, and Bell-ringers. Of all which, briefly in their Order.

Of the Patriarch.
THE Patriarch of Constantinople has not always been invested with that high
Title. M^trophanes was the first to whom it was allowed, as being no more than
a private Bishop, 'till Constantine constrained Byzantium to surrender to him
upon Composition, and to expel Licinius, who had taken Sanctuary there, and
whose Party they had embraced. Nor was the Byzantine Bishop any more than a
Suffragan to the Metropolitan, or Primate of Heraclea; wherein he had only ran
the same fortune with the City, which was by Severus compelled to truckle under
the Jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of Heraclea her Rival, for having
befriended Pescennius Niger his Enemy.

But when Constantine had once made it the Metropolitan Seat of the Empire,
then it was that the Bishops of Byzantium obtained the sole Title of Patriarch.
Afterward prompted by that Sin of Vainglory so common to Mankind, and so
natural to the Greeks, though they had received that Title only in
consideration and out of respect to the Emperors, yet they claimed all those
Rights and Privileges which they thought were any way due to their new
Dignity. And so powerfully they solicited the Emperor, that the Pope, sull
fore against his will, was forced to grant them not only such demands, for
which they had some grounds of Reason, but also the Primacy over all the three
other Patriarchs of Antiochia, Alexandria, and Jerusalem; and in regard that
Constantinople was in Thrace, that Province also was given him, with several
others which were formerly under the Jurisdiction of Rome, to which they had
been annexed by the Indulgence of the Emperors long before the fourth General
Council, in the year 451. After which, these Patriarchs having usurped the
large Provinces of Asia and Pontus, which appertained to the Patriarch of
Antiochia, the Pope was constrained to grant them absolute Ecclesiastical
Independency; and to confirm this Grant authentic and inviolable by a Canon of
the fifth Council, which was the second of the General Councils held at
Constantinople in the year 553. The Primacy over all the other Patriarchates
was likewise at the solicitation of the Emperor Justinian confirmed them in
the same Council.

But however they obtained their Jurisdiction, it was of a large extent, as
having under them 20 Archbishops, 24 Metropolitans, and a great number of
Bishops. Nor have they who enjoy the Dignity at this day less, only the Revenue
of so many Prelatures comes much short of what it was, though the people under
their several Diocesses give them much more than what formerly they did.

Since Vainglory and Simony became Masters of the Patriarchate, all these
Prelates are constrained to reimburse the person, who to clamber over his
Predecessor's head, gives never so much Money to the Grand Signor. Which is the
reason, that whereas the Emperors formerly gave great Presents to the
Patriarchs, to gain by their means the favor of the People under their
Jurisdiction, they now receive vaster Sums from them; which daily increasing
through the exorbitant Ambition of the Patriarchs, will soon enhance the price
so high, that in a short time it will be a difficult thing for all Greece to
raise the Sum demanded. In the space of two years that I stayed at
Constantinople, two different Patriarchs gave for the Patriarchship, the one
fifty, the other sixty thousand Crowns, as a Present to the Grand Signor.
Considerable Sums for the Caloyers, who profess the Vow of Poverty, and ought
to enjoy nothing of Propriety. Nevertheless when any of these Monks can meet
with a rich Merchant, which will advance part of the Money, they propose their
design to the Grand vizier, who fails not to grant the Title to him that gives
most, and having received the Present, gives him the Barat or Grand Signor's
Letters Patents, by virtue of which the old Patriarch is displaced, and the new
one settled in his room, with order to the Greeks to obey him, and to pay with
all speed the Debts contracted, under the penalties of Bastinadoing,
Confiscation, and shutting up their Churches. Which Order is presently sent to
all the Archbishops and Metropolitans, who give immediate notice thereof to
their Suffragans: Who laying hold on the opportunity, tax the Caloyers and
People under their Jurisdiction, the sum assess'd by the Patriarch, and
something more, under pretense of Expenses and Presents extraordinary.

Yet though the Promotion be thus irregular, they give the Title of Panagiotita
Sou to this very Patriarch, when they make their Addresses to him, that is to
say, Your All-Holiness, or Your most Supreme Holiness, so soon as he has taken
possession of his Dignity, of which this is the Ceremony: The aspiring Caloyer,
having notice that his Letters Patents are ready, hastens to the Serraglio, or
to the Caymacan's house, with two or three Bishops of his own gang; where being
arrived, and having kissed in most humblewise the lowest part of the Governors
Garments, the Grand Signor's Provisions are read to him; then having put on
over his Caloyer's black Habit, not much different from that of the
Benedictines, two Vestments of vary-colour'd Tissue, which the Grand Signor
presents him, he gets on Horseback with the Bishops in his train, who are
jackpudding'd in the same Dress, and in this Equipage they ride from the
Serraglio to the Patriarchal Church, which is about half a League off. The
whole Cavalcade consists of no more than a dozen persons, that is to say, a
Capigi, two Chiaux's, the Caymacan's Kiaia or Secretary, and some Janisaries
that march before. Behind come the Bishops and some few Caloyers of his
Faction, in a habit, fitter for a Masquerade, than the Train of a Patriarch.

The Patriarch being arrived at the Door of the Church, which he finds shut,
alights off his Horse, at what time the Vizier's or Caymacan's Secretary reads
the Grand Signor's Letters Patents; which done, and the Church Doors being
opened, the Secretary leads him in, and having placed him in the Patriarchal
Seat, the whole Cavalcade returns from whence they came in the same order as
they went. And thus the Patriarch enjoys the peaceable possession of his
Dignity, 'till a Crotchet comes into the pate of some other Caloyer, to offer
the the other ten thousand Crowns, and then good night Nicholas to his dear
purchased Honor.

When all the Ceremony is over, all the Officers of the Church come to kiss the
new Patriarch's hands, and to complement him with the Polychronos ti
Panagiotita sou, like the Cimplement to the Roman Pontiff Ad multos annos.
After this, Command is sent to all the Greek Prelates throughout the Ottoman
Empire, to satisfy without delay the Tax which the new Patriarch has imposed
upon them, unless they intend that others shall be substituted in their places.
To such a miserable condition has Schism, Vainglory, and Simony, reduced the
Greek Church, that it is now no more than the shadow of what it was formerly.

Of the Archbishops, Bishops, Caloyers, Priests, and other Officers of the
Greek Church.
THE chiefest in Degree next the Patriarch are the Archbishops, who have under
them several Suffragans; though as well the Patriarch, as the Archbishops and
Bishops, ought all to be of the Order of Caloyers, and to observe the Rules
which they professed in their Convents. And indeed all these great Prelates
live after one and the same manner, abstaining from Flesh, performing the same
Duties in the Church, and having the same Religious persons under them, that is
to say, Regular and Secular Priests.

The Regular Priests, or Papas Hiereus, are such as never marry; the Secular
Priests, or Cosmicos Hiereus, are admitted that liberty, but not above once in
their lives, nor to above one Woman at a time: But both the one and the other
perform the same Duties in the Church, and read the same Office. Which is so
tedious, that it takes up at least six hours in a day to go through with it.
Which is the reason that they easily dispense with the greatest part of it,
either for want of time or good will, or else because they have not
wherewithal to buy them Books enough to complete their Breviary.

These Books are about six in number, all of them, but one or two, large
Folio's, printed at Venice for the most part. The first is the Triodion, to be
read in Lent; the second Eucologion, containing all their Prayers; the third
Paraclitiki, comprehending all the Hymns, Anthems, and Songs, in honor of the
holy Virgin, of which they have a vast number; the fourth is the
Penticestarion, where is the Office to be read from Easter to Whitsontide; the
fifth is the Mineon, containing the Offices for every Month; and the sixth the
Horologion, which ought to be read every day, in regard it contains all their
Canonical Prayers.

The length of this Office, and the price of the Books, is the reason that
hardly any of the Bishops, Priests, or Caloyers, ever put themselves to the
trouble of reading it. There are none that think it worth their while, unless
it be at Mount Athos or the Holy Mountain, Neomogni in the Island of Chio, and
some few other well-governed Convents: For all the rest of the Greek Clergy
presume to lay it aside of their own accord, without expecting a Dispensation
from the Bishops, who not having leisure to read it themselves, set them an
Example which they are no less willing to follow.

I should indeed have put the Order of Caloyers before the Bishops, nay the
Patriarch himself, since there is not any who can pretend to those Degrees,
unless he be a Caloyer. But in regard it is not the custom so to do among the
Roman Catholics, these honest Caloyers shall give me leave for once to place
them in the rank which best becomes their seeming Humility. Now this I must
needs say, that take away their Ambition and their Vanity, the Caloyers lead
most strict and exemplary Lives. Like the Religious Orders of the Church of
Rome, they make the three Vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience; and they
observe them very exactly, especially in all the great Convents, Monte Sina,
Sancta Saba, St. Michael of Jerusalem, and those before mentioned. To this
purpose they never eat Meat, but live upon Pulse, Herbs, and Fruits, which they
manure themselves in the Lands adjoining to their Convents. They who are near
the Sea, may eat Fish, unless it be in Lent, and then it is a Sin so much as to
mention the words Fish, Butter, or Cheese, without the following Parenthesis,
Timi it is agias Saracostis; With respect to the holy Lent be it spoke. And by
their Example, the people are no less observers of that abstemious Season.

All these Caloyers being comprised under the three Orders of St. Basil, St.
Elias, and St. Marcellus, wear the same Habit, and observe almost all the same
Rule. Every one of these Convents have their Superiors, the Friars, and the
Novices, with the Lay-Brothers. The Superior is called Higoumenos or
Conductor, for the Title of Archimandritis or Abbot, is not so much used among
them. This Higoumenos is very much reverenced by the Monks, especially in the
great Monasteries; for in the lesser where there are several of equal standing,
they have much ado to preserve their Authority, especially when they enjoin any
displeasing Penance, farther than such a number of Genuflexions, or Fastings.
For as for any other more rigorous, the Superiors dare not so much as mention
them; fearing if they should threaten the Monks with severer Punishments, lest
they should drive them to a trick they have got, of not only renouncing their
Superiors authority, but the Christian Religion, and to make some rash Oath to
turn Turk by lifting their hands to Heaven; a Wickedness so frequent among
them, that there is hardly any considerable Town in all the Ottoman Empire,
where you shall not meet some of these Kachi's Muhammed, Papas Mustapha, Murat
Carabache; that is to say, several Monks and Priests, Armenians, Syrians,
Greeks, and others, who throw away their Cassocks and Caps in exchange for the
Turbant, which is of very ill consequence; for if these people are married, and
happen to have Children, all the Males above 15 years of age are bound to
follow their Father's Religion: Though if they be of riper years, they are
permitted to live at home with their Mothers and Sisters in the Christian
Faith. So that the fear of losing absolutely those which they would only
chastise according to their merit, causes the Superiors to be very cautious of
inflicting severe Penances, unless upon such as are willing to submit to
whatever they impose, or are very Criminal indeed. To this purpose I shall
relate a short Story which happened in Syria while I was there.

Near to Damas stands a very fair Convent of Nuns and Monks (I put the Nuns
first, because the place belongs properly to them.) This Monastry lies five or
fix Leagues from Damas to the Northwest, dedicated to the holy Virgin under the
name of Esseide Saidnaia. It is seated one part at the foot of a Mountain
belonging to the Monks, the other part at the top, belonging to the Nuns. Both
the one and the other wear black, and obey the Order of St. Anthony. Now in
regard these Nuns live much after the same rate of the Nuns of the Ave Mary at
Paris, a young Friar weary of the solitude of his Convent, bethought himself
(under pretense of the begging Trade, which those honest Virgins drive over all
the Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Antiochia) to take a mumping Ramble all
over Syria, but not understanding the Limits to which the begging Trade of the
Convent of Saidnaia was confined, because he would not be known near home, he
resolved to continue his vagabonding up as far as Jerusalem. To which prupose
he had counterfeited Letters from the Abbess of Saidnaia, by virtue of which he
had got together a considerable sum of Money, considering that Country was none
of the most wealthy in the World. And thus encouraged, he was in hopes to
loyter on as far as Tripoli in Syria, where he might Embark either for Europe
or for Constantinople, as he should see convenient. But coming to Dgebel
Ageloun, a large Mountain encompassed with small Christian Villages, he met
there at the same time two of the Patriarch of Ierusalem's Money-Collectors,
which that Prelate sends every year into those parts. Those fellows demanded of
him for whom he begged? to whom the Caloyer answered, for the Abbess of
Saidnaia. Thereupon the Jerusalem Collectors, not enduring such an encroachment
upon their territories, sent him to their Patriarch, who after he had wrote to
the Abbess, and received her answer, detecting the Caloyers falsehood, took from
him his habit of Priest and seculariz'd him, as unworthy of his profession and
the habit which he wore. And thus the Superiors of Monasteries in
extraordinary cases, for the support of their dignity, will not stick with
ignomy to deprive such Monks of their habit, who are either obstinately
disobedient, or from whose behavior they are afraid of some trouble or ill
accident. For they regard not the Vows which they have made to live and dye
under such an Order, since those Vows are not made, but at the good pleasure of
the Patriarch and Superiors of the Convent.

The professed Monks and other Fathers make no scruple to do the same; for they
quit their habit as they find most for their advantage. Nay, though they have
been Noviciats at least two years before Profession, they many times leave the
Convent to live upon their own Demeanes; or else absolutely to quit both Habit
and Order. For their Vows are rather a reciprocal engagement which they make
with the Order which they embrace, upon the deposition of a certain sum of Money
at their entrance, than any Vow, or any solemn obligation to live under the
strict rules of the Order. Nevertheless these professed Monks, and all the rest
of the Religious Fathers, labor altogether for the good of the Convent all the
time they live in it. Some take care of the Fruits, others of the Corn, others
of the Cattle, and generally of every thing that appertains to the house. To
which purpose, they employ their Novices also more often in the fields than in
the exercises of spiritual meditation and retirement, to which they apply
themselves as little as to their studies. Which is the reason that the Caloyers
are commonly so sottish and ignorant, that you shall scarcely meet with any in
the biggest Convents who understand any thing of the Greek letters, in which
character their service and all their Prayers are written.

Now the necessity which the Caloyers are in to manure their own Lands, causes
them to receive a great number of lay-Brothers into their Convents, so many,
that they almost equal the number of the Religious persons. These lay-Brothers
spend their whole time abroad in the fields, never returning home till the
evening; where notwithstanding their toil and labor all the day long, they
fail not to assist at a long Prayer, and to make a great number of Metaniai, or
genuflections, bowing their knees to the ground, first down, then up again,
then down again, with a motion so swift as is to be admired; which done,
contented with a light Supper, they betake themselves to their repose, which is
upon a bed which is not much softer than the bare boards, expecting till early
Matins and dawning daylight call them to their wonted labor.

Over all these Religious Monks there are Provincial Visitors, though much
different from ours in Europe. For ours make their visitations to hear the
complaints of the injured, theirs, whom they call Exarchi, never visit the
Convents under their jurisdiction, but to demand the money which the Patriarch
sends for. So that these poor Caloyers have but an ill time of it, to moyl and
sweat, and to cause their Lay-Brothers to toil and labor: For no sooner have
they got a little money together for the necessities of their house, but the
Patriarch sends his Visitors to discharge them of it. Yet notwithstanding all
these Taxes which the Religious Greeks are bound to pay, there are some
Convents in Turkey very well endowed, and some particular Monks so Rich, that
they dare adventure sometimes to beard the Patriarch himself, and to buy him
out of his Dignity, as I said before, especially being assisted by the Purse,
and cunning advice of some Rich Merchant, who knows how to come by his Money
again with good Interest.

Next to the Orderly Caloyers and Religious Priests, follows that of the
Seculars, or Cosmicos Hiereus. I have told ye, that all these sorts of Priests
are usually Married; but some circumstances relating to their Marriage I have
not yet related. So soon as they have been under the hands of the
Ecclesiastical Barber, who trims generally as they do among the Catholics, and
that they have served the Church for some Months, they are admitted into the
number of the Anagnostai or Readers, being thereby capacitated to read Mattins,
the Psalms, and such other things which our Clerks generally sing. The
Anagnostine perhaps may be the same with our four Minors, as comprehending all
the Duties which the Anagnostai ought to exercise. But in regard there are
other persons employed as Porters, Bell-ringers, and such like Officers, their
employment is only to read. When I speak of Bell-Ringers in the Greek Church,
it is not to be imagined that they are such who Toll their Bells as formerly.
No, for the Turks spoiled all the Steeple-Music in the Greek Church. Instead of
which, a certain Instrument called a Simandron, serves turn, which is a long
narrow piece of Board, upon which the Officer rattles with a wooden stick, till
he make the Board groan again; the noise of which assembles the poor Christians
together.

When the term of Clerkship is expired, the Bishop ordains him a Deacon, giving
him power to officiate at the Altar, and sing the Epistle, after which, if the
Deacon have a desire to Marry he is free so to do. Only he must give the Bishop
notice of it, and tell him with all the name and place of the Virgins abode, to
the end he may enquire of her good qualities, and take particular care that she
is handsome. For it is requisite that a Greek Papa's Wife have three good
properties, Dis^retion, Chastity, and Beauty. But why more beautiful than
Laymen? The reason is plain. For the Laymen may Marry as often and as many as
the please, but the Papa can Marry but one, and but once all his life time. And
therefore it is but reason that the Papa, who makes provision at once for all,
should have all those good qualities in one person, which if a Layman misses
in one, he may find in an other. And indeed they are generally very fortunate
in their Chaces: For if there be e're a handsome young Girl in the whole
Quarter where a Matrimonical Priest is upon the hunt, every one strives to have
him for a Son-in-law: As if the beauty in the Grecian women had been always
consecrated, if not to God, yet to his Ministers; by which the most charming
Beauties being emptied to those whom it behooves to be most pure, it becomes a
Proverb among the Greeks, that when they would praise or flatter a young Lady,
they say, she surpasses in virtue and beauty the fairest Papadie. And true it
is, that their beauty is generally graced with a most pleasing modesty, to
which the white vail which they wear upon their heads, the neatness of their
habit, and their harmless conversation, add such a luster, that it is
impossible but that they should win the affections of their Husbands. For this
reason the young Papa's are permitted to leave their severe employments for
some time, to attend the more delightful pastime of courtship, and taking order
for their Nuptials. The Ceremonies of which being over, they return to their
Functions, and are admitted into the Order of Hiero- Deacons, with power to
read the Gospel, and officiate at the Altar with the Priest, till he be in a
capacity to be made a Priest himself.

These are the chief Degrees in the Greek Church, the meaner Officers are
first, the Sacristans or Skeuophilakes, who take care of the sacred Vessels,
and Church-utensils. The second are the Calonarki, that name the Anthems and
Songs, and set the Tunes. The third are the Tyrori, or Porters, who take care
to open and unlock the Church Doors; and the least are the Candilafti, that
look after the Lamps.

Of their Offices.
AS to the Offices themselves, they differ according to the custom and Revenues
of the place. In great Convents the Monks rise at Midnight to read the
Mesonyction. Which Office lasts generally two hours. But upon great Festivals
the Mesonyction is changed into Olonyction, which lasts all night. The
institution of that Office was prudently intended to prepare them for the
devotions of the following day. But many are the abuses crept in, which might
be easily Reformed, had the Greek Church Pastors as wise and learned as the
Latin. Some I will relate which I have observed.

The Feasts that follow this Holonyction are either Panigyri, which we call
Fairs; or Polyeleon, which signifies plenarie Indulgence. To these Feasts there
^^ock great numbers of people: And in regard the most part go more out of
custom than devotion, they carry along with them provision of good cheer, to
spend the night merrily. So that the singers themselves, being generally good
fellows that will not refuse their Cups, fail not to meet with one good friend
or other, that gives them frequent occasions to take breath, and to make pauces
and rests which they do not find in their pricksong.

Being once at Nenita, a famous Town in the Island of Chio, upon St. Michaels
day, there happened the feast of that Arch Angel called the Panegyri, tou
Taxiarchi. At what time a friend of mine would needs have me go and see the
fashion of this Holonyction. The Town, not being above eight miles from Chio,
we arrived there the Seventh of September, which was the Eve of the Feast (for
in all the Greek Churches they follow the ancient Kalenders) and after a slight
Supper, being fasting night, we went to Church about Ten a Clock, by which time
the Church was so thronged that we had much ado to get to the Chanters seat,
whither I was resolved to crowd, that I might hear the Melody to the best
advantage. It was near an hour before the Service began, and there was already
such a horrid noise and confusion, that the Calonarchi not being able to raise
their Voices to be heard by those that were to take the Tune from their Notes,
and the Chanters not having their books before them pricked and ruled as in
Europe, the Music which was not in very good order was forced to crease; so
that the Protopsalti or Rector of the Quire grew angry, and at length his
patience forsaking him, after he had struck several blows upon the Bench where
he sat with his Dekaniki or Deans staff of Authority, he turned to the people
and cried out as lowed as he could bawl, Sopotate Theocatarati; Cursed of God,
will ye never hold your Clacks?

The noise of the stick, and the thundering Voice of the Ephimerios or Master
of the Quire, begat an indifferent silence for a while, and gave the Choristers
leisure to reharken to the Tune. But presently, after the Calonarchi reading
and baulling one thing, and the Choristers Singing and answering quite another
thing, as having sipp'd a little too much of the creature, put the multitude
into such a hideous strain of Laughter, that now the whole Church was all in an
uproar, nothing but noise and confusion, and the Choristers were once more
forced to put up their Pipes. This hurly burly endured along while, till the
Proto-psalti horn-mad began to lay on again with his Battoon, and redoubling
his fury, cried out a second time, Sopateda Fourkismeni, Hang-Dogs be quiet.
For you are to understand, that these Papa's are mere Clowns, and so regardless
of the gravity and decency that belongs to their functions, that they make
slight of cursing and giving ill Language in the very Church it self, as being
their common way of reproving those that they find misbehaving themselves in
the time of Divine service. Neither is it so much out of their zeal, but merely
out of an ill custom and habit of bad language, that they thus bespatter their
Parishioners, which they will not scruple, in their fury, sometimes to call
Rogue and Rascal in the midst of their Devotions for very slight miscarriages.

Thus the whole night was spent in an alternative variation of squealing and
singing, ribble rabble, chat, noise and din, laughing and cursing, with some
lucid intervals of silence and praying, till Morning slumber having seized the
greatest part of the Congregation, wearied with talk and hard drinking, they
said their Prayers in a little more tranquillity: Prayers being ended, they
went every one to dress their Victuals, and dinner being ready they fell to
eating and drinking, and so to jumping and dancing.

But in the better regulated Convents, this Holonyction is observed with
greater decency, in regard they are more careful to keep out the multit^de
which cause the disorder. After the Mesonyction Office is over, which lasts
till within two hours of Morning, the Monks return to their Cells till Five of
the Clock, at what time they begin their Mattins and Hymns, together with the
Prime, which is always Sung at break of day; for they still so order the
Service, that the Prime is always sung at Sunrising. Which being done, every
one retires to his Cell or to his labor, till Nine of the Clock; at which time
they return to Chapel to sing the Ten a Clock Noon Prayers, and to say Mass:
Which finished, the Monks retire to the Refectory, where there is a Lecture
read' em as they sit at Dinner. As they rise from Table, both Morning and
Evening, the Cook falls upon his Knees, and as if he expected the reward of his
pains or the pardon of his faults, he cries out to the Monks as they pass by
him, Eulogite Pateres, your blessing good Fathers! to which every one makes
answer, Theos Syncoresi, God bless thee. Thence they retire to their Chambers,
or to work, as they please, till Four a Clook, at what time the Simandron calls
'em again to Chapel, where they finish Evening Service, and go to Supper at
six; Supper done, they return to Chapel, to read the Service which they call
Apodipho, the after Supper-Service; which being concluded, at ^ight every one
retires to his repose till Midnight. At what time they have no occasion to
spend much time in dressing, in regard they lie in their Clothes, putting off
only their upper Garment: There being none but the Europeans that make use of
Sheets in Turkey.

Now in regard the Caloyers are they who enjoy the principal dignities in the
Greek Church, therefore all other Priests are conformable to their example;
which is the reason they never say above one Mass in a day, let there be never
so many Priests in the Convent. So that the Roga or Salarie of Twenty or Thirty
Crowns a year, which the Churchwardens pay to the Priest, is only for his
assisting at the Office, and not for saying Mass, which the people hardly
understand, so that a great number come when it is half over, and others when
it is quite ended. Nor do they who come last any way strive to excuse their
sluggishness, believing it enough to go in and look upon the Church, and make a
few genuflections and so home again; for they cry, God's compassionate, he will be
merciful to those that hear but half, and save those that come when all is done.

This may seem to be a kind of shadow of the ancient Divine Worship in the
Temple of Sancta Sophia, if we may be permitted to take our observation from
what is now in practice; but certain it is, that they are fallen into an
infinite number of errors, through the extreme ignorance of their Priests, who
either uphold the people, or precipitate them into all the superstitious abuses
of true Religion, which a disordered and irregular ignorance can be guilty of;
either to satisfy the silly devotion of the ill-instructed multitude, or their
own particular Interest, and profound sin of Avarice, which is too deeply
rooted in the whole Priesthood. All which abuses may be mainly attributed to
the little respect they show to God in their Churches, and the extreme
obstinacy wherewith they persist in their opinions. The first plunges them into
a great number of miscarriages under pretense of Religion, and the second will
not permit them to acknowledge their errors. I shall here insert some few
Examples both of the one and the other.

I came to the Island of Zant, during the time of the Greeks Easter, at what
time rather at the Instigation of my curiosity than devotion, I was resolved to
stay the whole Office out, which they sing at that Festival. To this purpose I
was obliged to go at Three a Clock in the Morning to the Greek Church, which is
called il Domo de Greci, though it be not the Cathedral of that place, in
regard the Greek Bishop, in whose Diocese lies the Island of Zant, resides as
Cephalonia. That Morning the Proto-papas, or chief Priest, began the Office at
Four a Clock in the Morning, which lasted till Nine; though in other places,
where they are more pestered with Turks, they begin at Midnight or sooner, to
the end they may have done by break of day. But in all that time I did not
observe, neither in the Gestures of the Priest, nor in the Prayers themselves,
any thing that could inspire the least devotion into a man. Every thing was
done with so little decency or Reverence, that I did not much admire at what
afterward happened. The Sun being up, and the Priest in the middle of the
Office, I was strangely surpised to hear the noise of so many Pistols and
small fire Arms let off, and at the same time a confused cry, Christos Anesti,
Christ is Risen: But this surprise of mine in a very short time turned into as
violent a laughter, which I could not forbear upon this Occasion. A hairbrain'd
sootish young fellow, who stood very near a Papa, taking no notice when he let
off his Pistol, that the good old man had a great head of hair and a stately
long Beard, according to the custom of all the Greek Priests, fired his Pistol
so near to the Papa's reverend bush, that his Locks and Beard were all in a
sudden flame: Which caused such a vast disturbance in the midst of Divine
Service, not a little interrupted before by the noise of the Pistolls, that it
would have afforded sport to any man, that had not been under the same
consternation of Bacon-singeing, that possessed the poor afflicted Papa. This
Ceremony, first brought into use to testify their joy as well for their being
rid of a meager Lent, as for the hopes of Resurrection, which that Feast
confirms to all Christians, is observed not only in the Island of Zant, but
also over all Turkey and the Ar^hipelago; and though it never be observed,
without some fatal disorder, yet the Greek Priests never speak a word of
suppressing it as an abuse crept into the Church, no more than they do of
another Ceremonious custom as idle, for the Priest to give about a cup of
strong water to all persons that are so happy to stand in his quarter. On the
other side, finding that the Toleration of these follies gains the affection,
and opens the purses of their Parishioners, they are so far from abolishing the
old, that they strive every day to introd^ce new superstitions that may any way
contribute to satisfy their natural and inherent Avarice. Of which the
Polykirion is an evident proof. This is a Ceremony not unlike that which is
used upon Candlemas day among the Latins, and falls out to be observed twice a
year, upon the Ephiphani and at Easter; for these being the two most noted
Holy Days among the Greeks, and which therefore bring the greatest numbers of
people to Church, the Priests took an opportunity to introduce a Ceremony that
every person should receive from them a Wax-Candle, which cost them no more
than Three or Four Sous a piece, but for which the people Ten or Eight at
least. It Is true they give the Children small pitiful Tailors fearing Candles
for nothing, which as their Parents take for a great favor, so it keeps them
from diving into the Cheat.

The Papa's have another stratagem to milk their Parishioners by means of their
Sphragides or marked Loaves. The secular Priests carry every one of them to
Church a Household loaf, and the Clerks and Deacons having cut it into small
pieces, the Priest blesses them, as he distributes to all the Congregation.
This is observed upon all Holy Days and Sundays toward the people. But the
Priests having thus engaged the Multitude, and unwilling to lose by their
charity and benedictions, put this trick upon 'em the first Sunday in every
Lent, to reimburse themselves. For then every Family covetous of the Papa's
Blessing, Bakes and brings to Church, a little Loaf made in the form of a
Cross, of which the four extreme parts are like a Lozenge, and the middle part
round; and every part marked with the name of Jesus thus, (...). These Loaves
the Priest takes, and having blessed them, breaks one Loaf into five parts, and
gives them to five several people: Now in regard those pieces being thus blessed
are presently endu'd with secret virtues, equal to all the Charms, Antidotes
and Amulets in the world, therefore the people are obliged to pay for every
marked piece six blanks, by which means one blessed Bun, which costs them
nothing, in regard every Family provides their own Loaf, produces them being
divided to five persons, no less than Twelve or Thirteen Sous; which is a very
good blessing-interest.

Yet notwithstanding all these petty cheats and several others which the
Priests impose upon the people, to pinch money out of their pockets, those poor
Christians are the most zealous to obey their orders and injunctions of any
people in the world, and to give them whatever they demand. They firmly believe
that a Papa can never tell a lie, and that no Oracle spoke such truth as what a
Greek Priest utters, whatever his ignorance, and how low and self Interested
soever his soul may be. It is impossible to make a Levantine acknowledge, that
the Bishops, Priests, and other Ministers of their Church, being so lumpishly
dull and sottish as they are, are incapable of instructing them in matters of
Faith which are above their reach. And therefore they choose rather blindly to
obey their commands, than to suffer themselves to be better taught, or
convinced of their errors.

Of their Faith.
AS for what concerns their Faith, they neither know what they believe, nor
what it is they ought to believe. Their Papa's never speak a word of
Catechisms, Articles of Faith, of Hope, or Charity; or if at any time a Papa
mounts the Pulpit, it is not so much to make a pious exhortation to the people,
nor to direct them how to lead their lives like Christians, nor so much as to
read a good Homily which is more easy, but to gain the Two Crowns which is
generally given to the Preacher for his Sermon, which as the people do not
understand, so neither do the Papa's know what they say. And which is more,
they draul out their words at such a distance one from another, that though
they stand a full hour in their Pulpits, yet they hardly utter Four Hundred
words in all the time. Nevertheless they are in high esteem, and the poor
people that understand not, nay some that heard not a word the Papa said, cry
one to an other as they go home, Psila Emiliseno Didascalos. What a rare
Preacher was this, what wonderful things has he said! Thereupon I once asked
some of their Adorers what it was they so much admired, and what it was their
Parson had told them, that was so charming to their ears? But when I found that
not one of them could remember the least tittle of what they so highly
commended, I made answer, Psila Emiliseno Didascalos diatiden heptases. Most
certainly your Preacher spoke Mysteries, for I find that none of you know what
he said.

Of their Sacraments.
COncerning the Administration of the Sacraments, they are by them administered
after a manner so different and disagreeing from the first Institution of the
sacred Mystery, that you would swear they either believe not in what they do,
or else that they take little care of what they are about. They number Seven
Sacraments, but to make short work of it, they administer but Three. Baptism,
Confirmation, and the Eucharist; they give them all together to Infants Forty
days after the birth; sometimes later, sometimes sooner, at the pleasure of the
Parents, or as necessity requires. Penitence, Extreme Unction and the
Eucharist, they make use of all together likewise, five times a year, at
Easter, Saint Peter's, St. Paul's, the Assumption of our Lady, and Christmas;
the Order and Marriage they confirm both together, and upon the same person.

Concerning Baptism; Baptism
when the Child is in a condition to be Baptized, they make choice of a
Godfather and Godmother, if it be a Boy; if a Girl, they many times content
themselves with a Godmother only. Then the Infant is carried to Church, where
he is plunged over head and ears in the Colymbitra or Font of Baptism. Which
done, the Godfather carry's the Child, Midwife-like, to the great door of the
Sanctuary, where they anoint the Child's head, neck, stomach, shoulders,
armpits, hands, elbows, legs and feet: Which done, they put upon the Infant a
white shirt, and wastcoate, and such other accoutrements as are requisite,
which they never put off in eight days after. At what time the Godfather and
Godmother carry the Child again to Church, there to have all the Child's swaths
and linen washed, which he has foul'd during the eight days. All which is done
in a little stone Vessel, bored through in the middle, lest the sacred Oils
that besmeared the Infants Clothes should be profaned by pouring away the water
that washed them upon the Ground.

This Oil is highly esteemed among the Eastern Christians, especially among the
Armenians, who some while since, had a great dispute in Law upon this very
subject. Their Patriarch, who generally resides in the upper Armenia, lives in
a large convent, which the Armenians in their Language call Echemiazin, the
Turks in regard of its three Churches Vscha Klisia, and the Europeans, the
Three Churches. It is seated in a large Plain at the foot of the famous
Mountain Ararat. This Patriarch was wont always to make the Myron (for so is
the holy Oil called) and sent it from time to time to all the Armenian Bishops,
as well those in Persia and Turkey, as to all the rest who had not permission
to make this Oil, which was a privilege only belonging to the Patriarch. But it
happened that about Ten years since, the Bishop of Jerusalem having an Ambition
to make himself Patriarch, for that Jacob Vartabiet, the present Catholicoes or
Patriarch of Armenia, had given over his trade, by an immediate power from the
Grand Signor, fell to work himself, and made such a quantity of the holy Oil,
as it is thought would suffice all the Armenians in Turkey for several years,
which new Jerusalem Myron has caused such a schism among the Armenians, that
all those who live in Turkey are now separated from their ancient Brethren, and
refuse the Bishop of Ierusalem's Myron, who by the authority of the Grand
Signor had usurped the Patriarchship of the Armenians, and maintains his ground
notwithstanding all the suits in Law commenced against him, and great sums of
money expended by the former Patriarch, who thereupon came the last year to
Constantinople, to try whether he could bring the Jerusalem Bishop to an
accommodation, and to take his Myron of him again as he did before.

This Oil is boiled in a great Kettle with several odoriferous herbs and drugs,
and the wood that feeds the fire is all sacred fuel, as the Relics of broken
Images, torn books, and such other Church-moveables as have been formerly
consecrated to pious uses. Nor will all this serve, unless it be made and
blessed by the Patriarch himself, and three or four Metropolitan Bishops, who
in their pontifical habits, and with their devoutest Prayers continually attend
the Composition from the Vespers of Palm Sunday, till Holy-Thursday Mass, which
is celebrated upon the great Jar, where this precious Oil is put up for use.

And this is that holy Oil employed in all Unctions of Baptism and
Confirmation, which is never twice applied to the same person. But there is
another Oil which they call Eukoloon, or the blessed Oil of Prayer, which the
Greeks frequently make use of to anoint those who are in perfect health, but
the Latins never but only to the gasping. The Greeks also give it at great
feasts to those who have confessed and received the Communion, but then they
apply it only to the forehead and hands, and the Priest when he performs the
Ceremony, repeats the end of the seventh verse of the 122 Psalm, (...), The Net
is broken, and we are escaped.

The fourth sort of Unction in the Greek Church is that which is given to the
Priests, Order
whether Caloyers, single men, or Married; for the Sacrament of the Order is
common to both. Therefore when any person desires to be ordained a Priest, he
is first examined whether he can Write and Read; for it is now adays a very
great accomplishment among the Greeks to have studied so far, there being
several admitted to the Priesthood that can do neither. Being thus examined by
his Pneumaticos or Confessor, who is many times as ignorant as himself, he is
presented to the Bishop; who, upon the report of the spiritual Father, gives
him his Orders, yet so as the ceremony is not completed in less than Three
days one after another; nor till the Bishop be satisfied of his life and
conversation, nor till he is proclaimed in a full Congregation axios, or worthy.

The Sacrament of Penitence Penitence.
among the Greeks at this day consists only in rehearsing their sins to the
Pneumaticos, and undergoing the penance enjoined. However this recital is made
without any serious examination of the confession last made, nor accompa^y'd
with any act of true sorrow or contrition It Is sufficient that they sit down in
a Cha^r by the Confessor, and in that commodious posture make him a rehearsal
of their faults themselves, or else tarry to hear what questions their
Confessor will ask them, and then patiently receive his injunctions of mild
Penance; which amounts to such a number of knee-bendings, or so many Alms,
which is more welcome. The next morning, or it may be the same day, after the
Priest has received himself, he sings with a loud voice at the great door of
the Sanctuary, (...), Approach in the fear of God, in Faith and Charity; and
then all the Communicants crowd to the said door, at what time the Priest
taking up the Chalice in his left hand filled with Wine and sops of Bread, and
a Spoon in his right hand, which they call Labidi, he distributes a spoonful of
Bread and Wine to very one, not excepting the young Lads of Thirteen or
Fourteen years of age, at which years the Greeks think 'em able to advise
themselves; more especially seeing that it would be unreasonable to deny the
Communion to such, when they administer it to sucking Infants.

The people throng in great numbers to this Metalambasis or Communion,
Eucharist.
which they receive without ever kneeling. And indeed there is no other posture
at Church in fashion, than that of standing among the Greeks. And for this
reason it is, that instead of Seats and Pews, you see nothing in their Churches
but your Dekanikiai, which are a certain sort of staves about four and five
foot in length, headed like Crutches, and upon these Crutches they lean and
rest themselves when they are weary with standing up right. And in this posture
they also receive the Communion, under both kinds, of Bread and Wine mixed
together in the same Potirion, and with the same spoon, without any thing of
squeamishness or distaste one of another, not believing that any one who
approaches the Eucharist can receive harm or infection of his Neighbor. Yet
the Priests are so civil, that if they see any one with an apparent pair of
scabbie chops, or that has any other foul disease about him, they will forbear
to nauseat the stomachs of the rest, but order them to stay and receive apart;
though if they should be so clownish as to make no dictinction, 'twould be
reckoned no great crime.

In other respects there is that disorder in the administration of the
Sacrament, that the crowd of people thronging in upon the Priest, cause him
many times to spill the sacred liquor upon their Clothes; and often upon the
ground. Which proves a sad accident to the poor Priest; who cannot perhaps help
the unruliness of the Multitude. For the Bishop being informed of this
mischance, presently suspends the unfortunate Papa many times for five or six
years. The Person thus suspended is called Argos; as it were to teach the
Priest, that he who will undertake to hold such a blessed Liquor in his hand
ought to have Argus's eyes in his head, and that if he miscarry in his duty, he
deserves no less than the punishment of that same drousie Guardian.

As concerning Marriage, Marriage.
the Ceremonies of performance vary according to the custom of the Country,
though the essential part of the Sacrament be the same. But the same Person
cannot Marry above three times; insomuch that a person that has been Married
above three times is pointed at as we point at Cut-purses or common Shoplifters
in the street. Now when two young couple are to be Married, supposing they be
passed the Age of Thirteen years, their Parents agree together and make up the
Match without ever acquainting the young couple, unless it be at Chios and some
other places in the Archipelago, where the young couple are too yare for their
Parents, and agreeing upon the business between themselves, are Married several
Months many times before their Parents know any thing of the matter. And as
these sort of private alliances are very frequent, it is observable that they
fall out much more to the content and felicity of both parties, than those
which are made by the Parents without the consent of the Children. But however
it happen, the Wedding Day being come, and the Contract being signed before the
Papa, the person to be Married goes to the Cadi, to whom he gives a Crown for a
Koget, or License to Marry such a person, of whose name and habitation he gives
the Cadi a note; which done, either in the Morning or Afternoon the Bridegroom
and the Bride go separately to the Church, where the ceremony is performed much
after the European manner, only with this difference, that in the Contract
which is made before Marriage the Husband cannot give to his affianc'd Mistress
as a present above Fifty Crowns in Silver, leaving him at liberty however to
augment the sum if he pleases afterward, though there is no obligation laid
upon him.

This Law was made to the end that Virgins might not be hindered from Marrying
to the first that courted them, upon hopes that another would give more; and
for their Dowry they take the fourth part of the household Goods which the
Husband leaves at his death, though perhaps she brought to her Husband very
little or nothing; it may be some few Clothes, Cushions, Coverlets, or Quilts,
which are very much used among the Eastern people.

The Ceremonies of the Contract, and of the Church being over, the Bride and
Bridegroom, their Godfathers and Godmothers, their Parents and Guests invited,
return home to the Brides house, and there begin their feasting and jollitie,
which according to the quality of the person continues till the eighth day
after the Wedding; in which time the Married couple many times eat themselves
out of house and home, and pawn their Goods to support the glory of the
Ceremony. They also observe two other Feasts during their lives, that is to
say, their own Birth-days, and those of the death of their Parents. And in some
parts of Turkey, there is a laudable custom among the Christians to feast all
their friends, when their Sons being arrived at the age of Fourteen years begin
to pay the Carache or Tribute which the Turks set upon the head of every
Christian; as if they rejoiced with the Apostles that they were accounted
worthy to suffer ignominy for Christ's sake.

Of their Festivals.
We May also add to the number of the Grecian days of Merriment, the Festivals
which they observe through the whole year, especially in the Islands, where the
Christians enjoy far more liberty than upon the Terra Firma. The most
remarkable of these Festivals are St. Andrew, St. Nicholas, the Forty Martyrs,
and St. George. The first of these Festivals is solemnized by the Greeks upon
the account that St. Andrew, being an Elder Apostle than St. Peter, was the
first that Christ called to the Christian Faith. They also believe him to be
the Eldest Apostle, because he first Preached the Gospel in Greece, where some
will have him to be the Founder of the Church at Constantinople, and give him
the Title of Proto-Patriarchis or first Patriarch. But the manner of keeping
his Holy Day, is no way correspondent to that honor which they pretend to bear
him. It Is true they go to Church in the morning, but all the day after, they
feast one another, and the Women do not believe they have done St. Andrew
right, if they do not Fry for the whole Family a certain sort of Fritters and
Pancakes, which they call Tiganites, fried in a pan with Oil. The same cheer
they have upon St. Nicholas day, only that they throw into the Batter a Temin,
which is a small piece of money worth five Sous, or else a Para which is another
piece of money to the value of Eighteen Deniers, of which one makes the tenth
part of an English Penny; and that person of the family who finds that piece of
money is esteemed very fortunate; a ceremony much like our choosing of King and
Queen.

Hagii Sarande's is another of their Holy Days, which though it fall out in
Lent, yet the Greeks make no scruple to honor it with the best cheer they can
make; especially in the Islands and out-Villages, where they dance and frisk it
like the Maids about a May Pole. I have often admired why the Greeks are so
jocund upon this Holy Day, considering the almost natural Antipathy between
them and the Armenians, in whose Country it was that these happy Saints laid
down their Lives for the Faith of Christ, as being the Forty Saints that were
put to death at Sebastia in Armenia. Nor are they less merry upon St. Georges
day. So that the Greek Holy Days are spent rather in Feasts and dancing than in
exercises of devotion. Nor do they repeat upon those days their Pater Noster
half so often, as the following verses, which serve to regulate the movement of
their dances, Ascore Psomai Kai asinai
Ton Hagion Sarandon inai.
Let us dance and spend at leisure
Forty-Martyrs-day in pleasure.


Besides these more solemn Festivals, the Greeks have also several Holy Days
that will make a Traveller laugh let him be never so serious. About the middle
of March I came to the Island of Mitylene, which is the ancient Lesbos, where
the great Pittacus one of the seven wise men of Greece was born, and walking
one day through the City, I saw the Women at several Windows, some laying on
with good big sticks upon skillets, others upon copper pans, or the covers of
Kettles, others upon other sorts of Kitchen furniture, and all to make a noise.
Wondering at the meaning of such a dismal noise, I went into the house of a
friend of my fellow Travelers. There I found the Children dancing in the
chamber to the barbarous melody their Mother made upon her brass Kettle-Drum at
the Window, at the end of every Verse of a Ballad, which two of the family sung
well enough, considering they were never taught at a Boarding-School, the whole
Choir came in with the burden of the Song, which was to this effect. Oxo psili
kai cori mesa
Martis kai chara.
March behind and give us ease,
Driving hence our Knats and fleas.


For the Women believe that by virtue of this ceremony, every year performed
upon St. David's day, the Fleas will never come near a house were they hear
such a horrid noise about their ears, at the beginning of the Spring. But
woeful experience will teach a Traveller the vanity of this charming
superstitiou. For there are such a world of Knats over all the East, that the
best charm a man can make use of is only a Psilo-diogma or a good Fly-flap, to
Murder as fast as he can those professed enemies of his rest. It Is true the young
Greeks, who are loath to carry the marks of their stings upon their tender
skins, have found out another sort of Persecution for their destruction. For
every night before they lie down, they wash their necks and arms with Vinegar,
to secure at least those parts which are exposed most to public view.

The Religious Exercises of the Turks in Sancta Sophia, and elsewhere.
AFter that Mahomet the Second had taken the City of Constantinople, and had
made his Entry into the Church of Sancta Sophia on Horseback, that same sacred
Temple, which the Christians had formerly Dedicated to the Eternal Wisdom of
the Son of God, ceased to be a place for the celebration of the Divine
Mysteries of the Christian Religion; so that after the 29 th of May, in the
year 1453. the former melodious sounds of those sacred Hymns and Songs that
accompany the Worship of God, was changed into the hoarse discords of the
Turkish Namas, which is the ordinary Prayer of the Mahometans. But in regard
this Namas may be considered with respect to him that prays, as it concerns his
Neighbor, and with respect ot God himself, it may not be amiss to take a short
view of a good Musselmans Duty, before he goes to his Prayers, while he is at
his Prayers, and after he has finished his Devotions, to the end he may acquit
himself well in reference to himself, his obligations toward his Neighbor, and
his duty toward God.

The Preparatious requisite for a Turk, before he goes to Prayers are five; the
first is to believe the Articles of the Mohammedan Faith. The second, to be
Circumcised. The third, to forgive his Enemies, The Fourth, to hasten to the
Mosquee when he is called. And the fifth is to wash, which is the preparation
just before Prayers.

Of the Faith of the Turks.
ALL the Articles of the Mohammedan Faith may be reduced to two; namely, that
there is but one God, and Mahomet his peculiar Prophet or Messenger. For the
word Resul-alla signifies rather a Messenger than a Prophet of God. The belief
of only one God happened by chance to the Turks; if we may credit Iacoub
Elkindi, an Author whose Works are to be seen in Syriac, who assures us, that
the Alcoran being written, Sergius sent Mahomet to some of the Arabian
Idolaters, who adored a huge Statue they called by the name of Hachar, which
signifies great or vast of bulk, to tell them, that being commissionated of
God, he did by his command advertise them no longer to adore any more Idols,
but to acknowledge the only true and one God which had sent him. But those
Idolatrous Arabians, devoted to the worship of their Hachar, would give no heed
to his message; for, said they very gravely and considerately, if we must adore
one only God which is thine, what shall become of our Hachar? Mahomet, not
knowing what answer to make to such a difficult and puzsling objection,
returned back again, to consult with the Monk Sergius. Who considering of what
Importance it was to bring over those Arabians to the Law which he was going
about to establish, in regard they were very numerous and neighboring upon
Mount Sinia, where he had been a Monk, sent back the new Legislator to acquaint
'em, that he had consulted the Divinity concerning their answer, and that he
was satisfied they should have the same esteem they had before for their old
friend Hachar, provided they would adore God too, in testimony whereof, he was
content that from thence forward all the true Musselmen should be called to
their Prayers in the name of God and Hachar. Upon this condition, that Hachar
might go Partners with God, the Arabians were content to worship God, and
follow the Law of Mahomet, and from that time forward they made their joint
supplications to God and Hachar; till Mahomet being grown into greater power,
ordered poor Hachars Idol to be taken out of the Temples and to set up in his
room in great Arabian Characters, these words, ALLA HOV HAC HER, God and
Hacher, which is the cry that the Mahometans have ever since used to call the
people to Prayers. And this is the Relation of that ancient Author Iacoub Ebni
Issaac Elkindi, who lived about the year Eight Hundred, about two Hundred years
after Mahomet.

Which if it be true, according to the report of this same Author who was a
Christian, the Cry of the Muezins is easily expounded. Though it be true on the
other side, that the most skilful in the Arabic Language, and most knowing in
the Alcoran, assure us, that we must not read the words Alla hou ei Hacher, God
and Hacher, but Alla hou Hachar, without the Article el, which is then no more
than God is powerful, and by maintaining that the words were never otherwise
written or pronounced, avoid the reproach of being the Offspring of Idolatrous
Ancestors, and of being constrained to change their first Religion for a new
Doctrine.

The (...) therefore give divine adoration to none but (...), the only Creator
of Heaven and Earth, and absolute Lord of the World. And this is the reason
they will not suffer in their Mosquees the Image or representation of any
living thing either in sculpture or painting; or if there be any left remaining
in Mosaic work, which the ancient Christians made for the Ornaments of their
Churches, they are either in places so obscure or so high where they are not
taken notice of, or if they are once discovered it is because they are unwilling
to be at the charge of Scaffolds to pull 'em down or deface 'em. But where such
prohibited things are within their reach, they are either disfigured and
demolished, or quite daubed over with the Masons Trowel.

The second Article of the Mohammedan Faith comprehends, in epitome, all the
vain dotages and extravagances of the Alcoran, in believing Mahomet to be the
Messenger of God, and that there was never any truth more certain than what
that Impostor has conveyed to 'em, as well by Tradition as Writing. Which
Article, being the source and fountain of all the rest, it will be needless to
repeat here their trifling Conceits concerning the creation and preservation of
the World, or the method which God has taken to sanctify and save mankind,
with many other fantastical and irrational opinions, wherewith their brains and
writings are stuffed. Nor shall I say any thing concerning their lewd
conjectures of Paradise, celestial in respect of the Beatific Vision of God, of
which they assure their believers; but beastial in regard of those brutish
pleasures which they hope there to enjoy with a full swinge, and the Apartments
which they allow therein to several Beasts, such as Abraham's Ram, Moses's
Heifer, Solomon's Ant, the Queen of Sheba's Parrot, Esdras's Ass, Ionas's Whale,
the Seven sleepers Dog, and Mahomets Camel. Nor need I speak of the number of
their Prophets, of which they have a vast scrowl, though none so famous as
Moses, Issa Peccamber or Christ, whose Filiation and Death they deny, and
Mahomet their chief; and therefore passing over these Absurdities of their
belief, I come to

The Circumcision of the Turks.
THe Law of Mahomet being the product of dull earthly humane Invention, that
had nothing of sublimity or tendency toward immaterialty in it, but such as
thought it sufficient to bound it self within the limits of voluptuous Sense,
had need of some remarkable character to distinguish it from other Laws. The
Christians, whom it concerns to worship God in spirit and truth, and not with
wrie faces and antic Gestures, do not think it necessary to maim any part of
the body which Nature has made perfect; and therefore it was the opinion of
many Interpreters, that the proselyte Gentiles were not obliged to the paring
off so tender a part as the Preputium, since that God not having given any
positive command for it, it was left at liberty. But Mahomet who was obstructed
by a Phimosis in the satisfaction of his brutal Lusts, being constrained to cut
off his Foreskin, ordained that all his adherents should be circumcised,
whether it were that he might the better be able to distinguish the Body's of
his Musselmen that should be slain in fight, for the propagation of his Law,
and to honor them as Martyrs; or whether to ensnare the Jews, and win them the
more easily to embrace his errors through the resemblance of Ceremonies; or
whether it were that that salacious Legislator affecting an outward cleaness to
conceal the inward filthiness of his soul, commanded those who had already
embraced his errors to mangle their Preputiums, lest any defilement sticking
to the part, should render their persons less acceptable to Heaven, is
uncertain; though the middlemost reason seems to be the most prevailing in
point of Policy, especially among those who look upon Mahomet to have been a
Machiavillian.

This same act of Circumcision, which the Turks call Shoonet, is only a mark of
their obedience to the verbal commands of Mahomet, there being no such
injunction in his Alcoran; only it was a thing by him afterward appointed,
finding that he had many followers, to distinguish his party from the
Christians who never Circumcised, and the Jews who Circumcised after another
fashion. Now in regard it is a mark of disobedience to the^r Law to be
uncircumsised, therefore they never admit any to their public Prayers that are
not distinguished so; that is to say, neither Christians, nor Children of five
or six years of age. However I never heard of any Inspectors that ever stood to
search at the Entrance of the Temple; besides that, I knew my self two
Christian Travelers that perfectly understood the Arabic and Turkish
Languages, who passed for as good Musselmen as any were in Turkey, and were
well received where ever they went, as being in the habit of Derviches, and
because they knew how to mumble over the Turkish Prayers in the Mosquees, when
they could not avoid going thither. But had it been known that those persons
were not Circumciz'd, they had not only been refused admittance, but burnt
alive, or else empal'd upon a stake.

Now they never Circumcise any till they come to six or seven years of age:
Elder than these are often Circumciz'd, but never younger, sometimes at twelve,
fifteen years or more, according to the pleasure of the Parents: Especially if
they be poor people, for then not being able to defray the charges of a
private, they must stay till the Rich make a public Circumcision of their own.
The day for the Ceremony being appointed, the Master of the house prepares a
great Feast, and makes his Son as fine as his quality will reach; then the boy
being mounted upon a Horse or Camel, is led in triumph through the Village, or
only that quarter of the City where his Parents live, if it be large. His
School-fellows and friends wait upon him on foot, hollowing and hooping for joy
that he is going to be admitted into the number of true Musselmen. The
Cavalcade being thus finished, and the guests returned back to the house, the
Iman makes a pithie Harangue upon the operation that is to ensue; at the end of
which comes a Surgeon, who having placed the lad upon a Sopha or Turkish
Table, two Servants holding a linen napkin before him, draws out the Preputium
in length as far as he can pull it, and so keeping it from running back, by
clapping a pair of little Pincers at the head of the nut, takes off the
surplusage with a sharp Razor, and then holds it up in his fingers to be seen
by all the Company, who cry out at the same time, Alla Hecher ia Alla Alla.
Which done he dresses the Wound, not a little to the torment of the party
Circumciz'd, who by his roaring convinces the standers-by what pain he endures
by the wounding so sensible and tender part of his body. But his friends are so
far from compassionating his lamentations, that they presently come all to
congratulate his admission into the number of the Faithful, and then take their
places at the Sopha, or Turkish Table, where they are entertained according to
the quality of the Parents.

And often the liberality of Rich men at their Child's Circumcision amounts to
large sums. For besides the Alms which they give to a great number of poor
Children which are Circumciz'd, frequently at their charges, at the same time,
they also distribute considerable Alms to the poor of the Neighborhood, to
the end they may obtain the blessing of God upon the new Circumciz'd Lad, and
all the rest of their Family.

The Ceremony of Circumcising Renegado's is almost the same. Only if they be
very poor, they have Basins carried after 'em to Collect the Alms of the
Spectators, who never refuse to give more or less. They also as others do,
carry an Arrow upright in their left hands, with the point downwards, to let
the people understand that they will rather be stuck with a Thousand Arrows
than renounce the Mohammedan Faith. However experience tells them, that there
are many who having slightly quitted their Religion, because perhaps they never
had any, with the same inconstancy abandon what they so solemnly and with so
much pain have embraced at their expenses; which is the reason that the Turks
have a kind of Proverb, Er kim fena Giaur olmichidi each ei Musulman olur. He
that has been an ill Christian will never make an honest Turk. In short, it may
be said that all the mischief which is done in Turkey is done by the
Renegado's, and not by the Turks, who are naturally civil and tractable enough,
especially where they meet with persons conformable to their fashions, and that
carefully avoid giving scandal or offense. And indeed it may be said that the
number of Renegado's is greater than that of the Turks; for that the most part
of the Basha's and their Retinue are Deserters of the Christian Faith or
Judaisme.

Now there are three sorts of Renegado's. The first are those whose misfortune
it is to be of the number of the Tribute-Children, which the Grand Signor
exacts over all his Empire. The second are those who voluntarily change their
Religion, out of hopes to raise their Fortunes; and the last, such as are
forced thereto, out of fear of such punishments which perhaps they have justly
deserved, or through the ill usage of a Tyrannical Patron, who make the
smallest number; for the Slaves in Turkey are not so ill used, as people
imagine; being as it were many times Vice-Masters of the Family; and I have
known my self some so well used by their Aga's, that after they have had their
liberty given them, and coming home into Europe, and not finding there what
they expected, have returned back of their own accord to a more pleasing
Servitude. It may be said, that those Slaves are happy in the midst of their
Misfortune, who being Masters of some piece of Ingenuity meet with a king Aga
in a great City. For such are cherished by their Masters, who will never deny
them going to Church, and to practice their own Religion: Many times also they
get the good will of their Mistresses, who out of that compassion which is
natural to their Sex, do very much assuage the Rigours of their Captivity, by
obliging them with Presents and Gratuities from time to time.

But to return to the Turkish Circumcision: I forgot to observe, that as there
is no set place for this bloody Ceremony, so is there no time prefixed, neither
is a man tied to the choice of his Operator. It may be done in the Bath, or at
home, by the Iman, or by the Surgeon; for being only a mark of
Mahometanisme, it admits of all sorts of persons to do the work, as also of all
places and Ages. Nor do they defer naming the Child till the time of the
Ceremony; and though they have Godfathers provided, yet is it not their
business to name the Child, which is done by the Parent, as soon as it is born;
at what time the Father taking the Infant in his Arms, lifts it up toward
Heaven, as it were an Offering to God, and then putting some few Corns of Salt
in the mouth of it, names the Child in uttering these words, May it please God
(Ibrahim, or what he pleases) that his holy name may be as savoury to thee, as
these Corns of Salt which I now put into thy mouth; and that he may preserve
thee from tasting with delight the things of this world. As for them that die
before Circumcision, they believe them to be saved by that of their Parents.
Only they break one of their little fingers, before they bury them, to mark
them for uncircumsised.

Of Pardoning Enemies.
THe Pardoning and forgiveness of our enemies is a thing not only of advantage
to the Tranquillity of Mankind, but is also enjoined by the sacred Command of
the Savior of our Souls. So that it is no wonder if the Turkish Laws, which
are only a corrupted Collection of what is partly good, partly bad, partly
indifferent, among Christians, Jews and Idolaters, have commanded the Musselmen
to pardon also their particular enemies: For they are obliged to be otherwise
affected toward the Enemies of their Religion and Country. So that there are
very seldom any Grudges between Turk and Turk; or if there happen any quarrel
among them, it behooves them not to let Friday (which is their Sunday) Sun to
set before they are perfectly reconciled, or if they cannot do that, they are
obliged the same morning to begin their devotions with that Prayer wherein they
make a protestation to God to pardon their Enemies, or else they believe that
all the rest of their Prayers will be in vain.

Upon these Grounds, and for these reasons, the Mahometans are severely
commanded to do no injury to their Neighbor, either in word or deed:
Reproachful Language as well as hard blows are equally forbidden. The wronging
his Neighbor in his Goods or Estate, by himself or at the instigation of
another, lies under the same restraint of punishment and forfeiture. The
drubbing-stick (which the Turks believe to have descended from Heaven, because
it imprints a deeper awe in their minds, and keeps them within the bounds of
their duty beyond all the most sacred Laws they can make) is the only pen with
which they ingross their Sentences against criminal Offenders. It Is enough for
the Sou-Bachi to walk now and then through the streets, to put the people in
remembrance, what they must expect from the least grumbling or murmer that
shall be heard among them; no less than a shower of Bastinadoes, not only upon
the Authors, but the spectators of the Infant-Tumult; without any regard to
their roaring, and reiterated cries of Toba Sult^num, which is the lamentable
ejaculation of the party under Correction.

The dread of this punishment keeps every one upon his Guard. They whose
fingers itch to be striking, dare not discharge their choler, for fear of being
constrained to empty their Purses of some Millions of Aspers, upon complaint
made to the Divan; much less dare they presume to strike, for fear of
undergoing a more painful sort of basting. Besides that they who are sensible
of another malice, and perceive a quarrel in the wind, being obliged under the
same Penalties to part the fray with all the speed that may be, never stir from
the place till all be quiet. And many times they make the two passionate
Antagonists friends upon the place, and oblige 'em to renew a friendship which
perhaps had never been, had they suffered their fury to have taken its full
swinge.

If the persons that are scolding or fighting will not give over,
notwithstanding all means used, and the repetition of a wholesome and pertinent
sentence out of he Alcoran, they draw 'em away by main force, crying out Charae
ulla, by the Law of God, and carry 'em before the Cadi, who fails not to
condemn them to the punishment of their obstinacy. And so the Sentence being
passed, they lay the Criminal upon his back, and after they have given him at
least Two Hundred drubs upon the soles of his feet which are tied to a Falaque,
they force him to pay Two or Three Thousand Aspers besides for his contempt.

The Rigor of these Laws does not only restrain the Turks from doing injury
one to another, but it has the same effect upon those that swear and profane
the holy name of God, which in other places (where the Laws pretend to a more
divine Original) goes unpunished. Which is the reason that the greatest Oath
which you shall hear among the Turks, when they would seriously affirm a truth,
is valla hebilla, by the God whom I adore. Nay you shall find that the Tnrks
who live at a great distance from Constantinople, and are consequently more
frequently in the Christians Company, make use of the Christian and Greek
Oaths, not having any so proper in their own Language, which yet they make use
of rather by way of flattery and caress. However we must confess they do not
always observe this moderation, especially among the vulgar sort, or when they
discourse with people of a different Religion; for then instead of those
indearing appellations of janum, iki gusum, cardache, my heart, my two eyes, my
Brother, and the like, they will give ye the outrageous Complements of Giaur,
Kupec, dinsis, or Infidel, Dog, and faithless. But such as are better Educated
than the common sort are much more civil and courteous, and as little as they
care for strangers, they are as kind and obliging to such, as if they were
natives of their own Religion, especially if they can discourse with them in
the Turkish Language.

I was one day at Boursa with Monsieur Vaillant, Mr. Bellocier de S. Sauveur,
and two other French Travelers, where passing by a certain place, a slave
belonging to a Turkey Merchant having spied us, and perceiving us to be
strangers, and more than that Frenchmen as well as himself, very civilly
accosted us, and invited us to his Masters House. He told us, that his Master
having a great affection for him, was glad to see any person at his house, that
he affirmed to be his Countryman; for proof of which he would treat us after
the Turkish mode, to show us that a slave in Turkey, who knows how to gain his
Patrons affection, is not always the most miserable person in the world. To
this purpose, he gave his Master notice of our coming, giving him withal to
understand that we were his own Countrymen, and therefore besought him that he
might have the credit of entertaining us. The Merchant consented, bid him
invite us the next day, and provide what he thought fit. In short, the slave
omitted nothing which he could procure to be dressed after the French fashion,
and the Master spared not for his Turkish Ragou's so that we had an
entertainment which sufficiently testified our welcome, and that there are
persons in all places and of all Religions, in the most barbarous of Nations,
that out of their innate honesty and goodness can distinguish between rudeness
and civility.

Nor can I pass by the kind entertainment which this honest Merchant gave us,
without giving him this due commendation; that besides the moral virtues which
he practiced, he wholly resigned himself up to the will of God: Which is more
usual with the Turks than with any other Nation, in regard of their opinion
touching predestination. Of which to give us some proof, he gave us a short
story of his life. Wherein after he had given us a brief account of some
misfortunes that had befallen him upon the account of Trade, and the breaking
of some of his Debtors, sickness and death of his Cattle and Servants, and the
like, perceiving that we compassionated his Misfortunes, he concluded with this
expression, Alla kerim, said he, beulai alla ister beulai olsun. God is all
powerful; and it was his will it should be so.

Nor was this the only civil person that I have met withal among the
Mahometans. I have been often in their Caravans, presented with Coffee, Fruits
and Sherbet, Among other times Traveling in the Caravan between Aleppo and
Dierbeker, the capital City of Mesopotamia, in regard I was the only European
among them, I was obliged to strike into Company with five or six Turkish
Merchants, persons of a good jolly humor, in regard they had a Tent to pitch
at resting times, which I being alone had not the convenience to carry. Now in
regard the Passengers are obliged to keep sentinel every night by turns, for
fear of being surpised by the Arabian Robbers, or Karakersi's, when it came to
our turn we made use of the Moon to light us to our divertisements, playing at
Quoits all our time round about the Caravan. The next company that relieved us,
finding that we were then enough to make up a Company for a dance or two,
undertook to sing us a Song, which put us all into motion. In this manner the
frolic went round; every one sung his Song, some in Turkish, some in Arabic,
which when they had all done, they desired me to sing one in French; which when
I had concluded they all fell a laughing one at another, because they could not
repeat my Song as I had theirs, and so were forced to give over the Dance, and
to listen to another that played upon his Taboura, and sang a new Air, which
pleased 'em much better than my seeming Gibbrish. And thus we continued all the
Journey, harmlessly, lovingly, and freely merry.

Of the Notice of Prayer-Time.
THe whole Mohammedan Religion being chiefly grounded upon frequent Prayer, it is
no wonder the Turks are so diligent in that sort of devotion. They believe that
the Christians and Jews not having obeyed the precept of God, who enjoined them
the duty of frequent Prayer; he commanded Mahomet to prescribe to the Musselmen
a task of no less than Fifty Prayers and Vows a day. But Mahomet foreseeing
that the task would prove too hard, so far prevailed with God Almighty, as to
be contented with a tenth part of the homage; in so much that the frightful
number of Fifty was reduced to Five. Now in regard that Bells and Clocks were
forbidden, there was a necessity to appoint certain persons, who by the
strength of their Voices should give the people notice of the Prayer time.
These Proclaimers are called Muezins from two Arabic words Muaz and zin or a
sound in the ear. These Muezins therefore are bound to get up to the tops of
the Towers of the Mosquees five times a day every day, and there stopping their
ears, to Proclaim as loud as they can tare their Throats Alla This word is
mistaken in the foregoing Pages and Printed Hecher.
Hecber. This they do at break of day, at Noon, at Three in the Afternoon, at
Sunset, and One of the Clock at night. Of these settimes for Prayer, the first
is called Salem, or Sabah namasi; the second Euylai namasi; the third Kindi
namasi, the fourth Accham namaci; and the last Yatisi namasi, or BedtimePrayer.
The Turks seldom fail at all these times, but never at the first and two last.
For should they miss these three of only five that are enjoined them, it would
cost them a severe and exemplarie punishment. Nor is there any excuse to be
made, for if they are not in a condition to go to the Mosquee, they are bound
to pray in the place where they are; nay even to light from their Horses, if
they chance to be Traveling upon the Road at that time. If they are in a
Caravan the Master is bound to make a stand, and to give notice himself of the
time as soon as it comes, turning his Caravan to the point of Koble or toward
Mecca.

Besides these five prefixed times of Prayer, of which the Muezins give notice
upon the Steeple tops, there are also two others, Friday or Sunday Prayers, and
Ramazan or Lent Prayers. The first of these appointments is called Salah, at
Nine of the Clock in the Morning every Friday, or giuma guni; the second is
called Taravie Namasi beginning at Midnight all the time of Ramazan Month, and
upon the full of the Moon of the two Months preceding, that is to say, upon the
Fifteenth of Regeb, and the Fifteenth of Chaban: However the Prayers which are
said all these times, never last above half an hour, and sometimes they chop'em
up in less than a quarter. So soon as Friday's Salah is done, the Tradesmen and
Shopkeepers may all attend their employments and go to work if they please; for
all Prayer and no work would turn but to very little profit.

The words which the Muezins baul out at Constantinople are not many; no more
than Alla Hecber, but they repeat these words several times and at several
quarters of the Galleries which surround the Towers, concluding at last with
these words, Ahia Elsela, Ahiah Elsela, as much as to say, Come away to
Prayers, I have given ye notice sufficient. Upon great Festivals and during
Bairam, you shall have a whole consort of these Cryers all in one Gallery
baulling their Alla Hecbers in different tones, like so many Cats upon the
Tiles; which to the Turks, that know no better, sounds more pleasantly than the
Scotch Bagg-pipes to a Foot Company. While I was at Constantinople one day in
Bairam, at what time a whole Kennel of these Muezins were yelling at the top of
a large Tower, a young Christian Greek Lad passing by the Mosquee, and not
liking their Music, began to mock them with an imitation of his own; which the
Mahometans that were going to the Mosquee over-hearing, they laid hold of the
Child, and endeavored to persuade him to turn Turk; using at first fair words
and large promises, which not prevailing, they put the poor Child in Prison;
and yet all their torment could not move the resolute Lad, who out of a
generosity truly celestial, chose rather to suffer the Bastinado, and the loss
of his life, which the merciless Turks took from him by cutting off his head,
than to renounce the Christian Faith, only breathing out with his last Breath
these words, which the Greeks frequently make use of in their Prayers, Christ
have mercy upon us. A rare example of cruel superstition in the Turks and of
Christian constancy in the Child.

Now though it is impossible their Cryers should make such a noise with their
throats as the Bells with their Clappers, yet in regard there are no Coaches at
Constaninople, and few of those Trades that deafen the ears, their Voices
being clear and strong may be heard a great way, even to the most remote
Quarters of the City, and into the Fields adjoining, where I have heard them my
self at a good considerable distance. Besides there is such a vast number of
these Muezins that they never want a full cry to make a noise, it being looked
upon as an act that merits pardon of their sins, to proclaim the Hour of Prayer
to the Good Musselmen.

Of the Purification of the Turks.
THe last preparation of the Turks for Prayer is that of washing. Which
Ablutions are of five sorts, and called by five several names. The first, which
is the most general, as being made use of as well by the Christians as Turks,
is in the ordinary Bath, which they call Amam. The second is what necessity
requires, and is called Taharet; which signifies cleaness. The third is to
cleanse themselves from any defilement which they may have fallen into by day
or night, which they call Gousla, or Purification. The fourth is to wash away
all the contaminations contracted in the day time through the Organs of the
five senses. For which they are forced to borrow a name from the Persians, who
call it Abdest, which signifies ablution. And the last is the Bath provided for
dead Body's which they call Eulu-i akmakh, or the washing of the Dead.

Of their Baths.
Over all the world there is no Nation that affects cleanliness so much as the
Mahomet^ns, as well Persians as Ottomans. So that I may say the essential part
of their Religion consists in these outward Ceremonies. For which reason they
have been forced to Build a great number of Bathing houses, that they may have
the liberty to wash their body's all over. Hence it comes to pass, that there
are a great number of these houses all over Turkey, and some not inferior to
the ancient Thermae of the Roman Emperors. You need no more than take a view
of those in the City of Boursa, which are all of hot water, contained in a
large receptacle, encompassed with seats. They are covered with two very fair
Domo's, under which are two large Chambers, where the Air and the Water afford
a different heat: With another large Room somewhat cooler; where you undress
before you go into the Bath. So that every one of these Buildings require at
least three large Rooms. The first where you enter and undress, where the Air
is Temperate, yet not so cool as in the street. The second warmer than the
first; and the third so hot, that it sets you presently in a sweat.

All sorts of persons are admitted into these Baths, as well Christians and
Jews as Turks, in regard they are Built for the public good and for the common
health of all people. I am persuaded that these Baths are in good part the
Cause that the Ottomans are not so subject to Diseases as the Europeans, and
that they would be more healthy than they are, but that they frequent them too
much. For these Baths, as all sorts of Physic, are only to be made use of in
case of necessity, otherwise they become more prejudicial than advantageous to
the health. I was acquainted in Persia with a Capuchin Friar, who
notwithstanding that he was above Fourscore years of Age, was nevertheless very
vigorous and healthy, because he never was wont to drink Wine, but when he
found himself not very well. For when he perceived himself indisposed, all the
Physic he took was only a large glass of generous Wine, which restored him to
his former temperament. The same may be said of the Eastern Baths, there could
be nothing more wholesome, were they moderately made use of, that is to say,
not above once a month; but in regard the Turks Bath themselves almost every
day, their brains are thereby so over moistened, that they are generally
troubled with a continual Rheum in their eyes. But such is their superstition,
that they choose rather to prejudice their health, than to give any Example of
disobedience to their Law.

It would require a good revenue, to use the Baths so frequently as they do,
were it as dear Bathing in Turkey as in France, and they would have as much
reason to complain as Martial of the exaction of the Age; Balnea post decimam
lasso centumque petuntur
Quadrantes. --
Then weary to the Baths he hasts, and pays
A hundred Quadrants for his future ease.
But in regard there is set no price, only every man gives, as at a Barbers
shop, what he thinks fitting himself, the pleasure becomes cheap without
exaction, and he is a good customer of a Turk that gives the value of Two Sous a
time; for the Franks and Europeans are more generous. All sorts and Sexes pay,
Masters, Mistresses, and slaves; only little Children till they come to be
seven years of age are exempted. The time appointed for the Men, is from break
of day till Noon. After which time there is no occasion for that admonition of
Hesiod, Neque in muliebri balneo corpus abluito vir.
Nor is it for Men in those same Baths wherein
The Women Bath, to wash their courser skin.


For the Women are allowed to take their turns, though more out of wantonness
than necessity; it being the chief place where the Gossips meet and spend the
Afternoon in tatling and junketting, according to that of Ovid, Condunt
furtivos balnea multa jocos.
Full many a want on prank the Baths conceal.
All the while, the Women are every one attended with an old she slave, that
looks to her Mistresse's Clothes in the outward Room. As it was the custom in
Martials time, Supra togalam lusca sederet anus.
When Blear-eyed Female slave quite out of date,
Over her Mistress Mantle brooding fate.


While these are upon the Guard, their Mistresses are busied in the Bath with
their Companions in coloring their Locks, the nails of their toes and fingers,
with the powder of an herb which the Arabians call Elbanna, the Turks Alkana,
which makes them look red, and gumming and dying the hair of their eylids, to
render themselves the more amiable to their Spouses, at their return home,
which is about Eight of the Clock at night, at what time the Bagno is shut up
till Four the next morning. Nor is this a custom of the Turkish Women only, it
being also observed of old by the Roman Ladies, according to that of Iuvenal.
Illa supercilium madida fuligine tactum
Obliqua producit acu, pingitque trementes,
Attollens oculos. --
Then on her brows the fucus rudely laid,
With needles point is far more neatly spread:
Which makes her trembling eylids still to fear
The frequent touches of each single hair.


But as to the washing and scrubbing of men, the Turks have a particular
dexerity. For after the man has undressed himself in the first Hall, he ties
about him a large Napkin, which they call Fota or Pestemal; and in that
equipage he passes through the second Room into the third, where he is to
sweat. To which purpose he lays himself flat upon his belly in the middle of
the Room, upon a place paved with Marble, and somewhat raised, which is the
hottest part of all the Bath; where after he has sufficiently sweat, he comes
to one of the Attendants in the stove, who takes him by his Arms, and having
pulled and stretched them out with all his force, and turned them backward and
forward, and then also observed the same method of stretching and pulling the
legs, with his hands and his feet, smooths over his backs and thighs with a
wonderful agility; which done he presently carry's the party thus prepared to
another part of the Room, where are several Cocks of hot water; there he washes
him all over, and rubs him with a Camlet, Grogram, or some such kind of course
rubber, after which the Tender sopes him and rubs him again.

These Grogram rubbers are come in place of the Sea the form of them in
Petronius Arbiter.
ancient Strigiles or Scrapers: Not so much for the form or matter, for these
rubbers are square, and serve only to cleanse away the filth that lies in the
skin, but the Strigiles were to scrape the skin: And certainly the former are
much more commodious, and manageable, than those Instruments of Metal which had
a handle and were made almost like a pruning hook. The Turks have the same
liberty as to their Rubbers, which the Romans had in reference to their
scrapers: For that every one may have his rubber to himself, and carry it with
him to the Bath for his own particular use, and thus Crispin in Perseus sends
for his own Scrapers; I, puer, and strigiles Crispini ad balnea defer.
Go Boy, fetch Crispins scrapers to the Bath.


But in regard the Turks are nothing nice in eating or drinking after one
another in the same dish or cup, they are as little scrupulous in suffering
themselves to be rubbed with another man's or a common rubber, though the
person were never so nasty, provided they see themselves that he was well
washed.

The frequent injunctions which the Law of Mahomet has imposed upon his
followers to Bath often, has occasioned several persons to erect Baths in their
own houses, where they may be tended by their own slaves, or wash themselves
without being obliged to go to the public stoves; and these Buildings serve for
a good excuse to the men, to deny their Wives the liberty of gadding abroad
under pretense of going to the Baths. They are so well contrived, that without
going into the Kitching, or being troubled with the steams of the pot, one fire
serves at once both to heat the Amamgick or stove, and dress dinner. Now in
regard these sort of Buildings are of great use in houses of any value,
especially in the Country, I do shortly intend to publish to the world a
Draught of the outside and inside of one of them, to the end they that are so
minded, may understand how to erect one in their own houses for the use of
themselves and their friends.

Of the Tahara or cleanliness of the Turks.
THe Mahometans affect cleanliness after such an extraordirary manner, that
fearing to be defiled by any sort of excrement which Nature expells, they are
not content to wash the universal Emunctory of the skin, but also to cleanse
all the issues of Nature, and that as often as they discharge the last
concoction of their nourishment. So that the Basin* or Embrik is never out of
their hands to clean all parts of their Body from whence any excrement
proceeds, which makes it a very pleasant sight to see the postures of a Turk
that is troubled with a looseness, or such a one as cannot hold his water, he
needs no other business to do; he has employment enough for his hands, and can
never complain that he knows not how to spend his time. They know not the
meaning of a Spunge-Carrier, and it would be a crime unpardonable to make use
of Paper; lest being written it should have any Letters in it that might
compose the name of God: or being clean, might be fit to have the name of God
written upon it. And for this reason it is, that Paper is in such high esteem
among the Mahometans. They never make use of it for trifling occasions, nor can
they endure to see it trod upon. If they find any bit of Paper in the street,
they take it up, kiss it, fold it up decently, and very devoutly put it in some
hole in the wall. This high value for paper certainly proceeds from the great
veneration they have for the Alcoran, which they never carry below their
Girdles; or else from their great love of Learned men, which are very much
esteemed among them.

This same cleanliness, so religiously observed, has employed the Mohammedan
Architecture in all Quarters of the City, especially near the Mosquees, to
build a great number of necessary houses, which in their Language they call
Adepkana, or the house of shame, whence that reproach so usual among them, that
when they would denote a person without shame, they call him Adepsis. These
public Conveniences are very beneficial; for besides the great care which they
take to keep them neat and sweet, which is the business of the Maidagi, or
public Scavenger, who cleanses them every Thursday in the week, there is a
Fountain always running in every one of the Partitions, or else a Cock to turn,
and ready to supply every one's necessity.

I must confess, we have nothing so commodious, nor any thing of this
convenience in any part of Europe; and yet at the same time nothing so
necessary, especially in great Cities, were it but only for decency, which is a
principal Ornament. You shall never see in Traveling over all the East, what
is daily observed and suffered in our Cities, the Walls of our Churches stained
with Urine, and bedecked at the bottom with the excrements of those who it
behooved to have approached those places with more respect. Nor is any body
there obliged to prejudice his health, by retaining his natural evacuations for
want of a convenience.

I never heard so many invectives against the Government of the Europeans upon
this account, as was uttered by a Turk at Constantinople, who had travailed to
Marseilles, and thence to Paris. He was wont accor^ing to the custom of his
Country to eat great plenty of Fruits, Salads, and among the rest of Cucumbers
half ripe, together with their stalks, a diet very proper to break a French
horses belly, yet very much used among the Eastern people, whose digestion
tames it well enough. This Turk lodged, as he told me, in the quarter of St.
Eustachius, during the heat of the Summer, which he found more fierce than in
his own Country ( Damasco in Syria, though it lie fifteen degrees more to the
South) and therefore to cool himself, he resolved to eat a great dish of Milk
and Cucumbers, and so to walk to the Fauxburgh St. Marcel, where he had some
business.



Returning back, the motion of his body, the coldness of the Cucumbers, and the
heat of the sea^on, falling at variance, and not being able to compose the
quarrel, just as he came to Place Maubert; the Cucumbers were so civil as to
desire to part Company, and knocked at the Turks backdoor to let 'em forth,
where they might find a more quiet Lodging, upon which the Turk entreating them
to stay till he got to his Lodging, doubled his pace. Nevertheless the
Cucumbers, not brooking delays, and urging hard for liberty, he searched about
for one of those Adepkana's, so well washed and so convenient as in his own
Country. But not being able to discover any thing but shops open, and streets
thronged with people, wherein it was not so proper to discharge a burden of
that importance as his was, you may believe him to have been perhaps one of the
most disconsolate men in Paris, not knowing what course to take in such a
disorder of his body.

This bitter affiction caused him with sighs to wish himself in the Geroon of
Damasco, which is a great place walled in, containing near Forty of these
necessary houses. He cursed all the streets of Paris, and would have given the
whole City, as rich and populous as it is, for his own dispeopled lousy
Antiochia. He longed for one of the Turkish Mosquees, rather out of respect to
their Adepkana's, than out of any devotion at that time. At last, as he told
me, in the height of his extremity he thus lamented his misfortune. Were I now
(said he to himself) at Grand Cairo, my pains would find redress, by only
bowing the head and crying, according to custom, to the Passengers, Kouf
nadarak ja sidi, or, Pray (Sir) look another way. But here in Paris, where
there are more people than stones in the street, what shall a man do in my
forlorn condition? But all these sad complaints little availed the distressed
Syrian. For before he could get over Pont au change, the Cucumbers grew so
importunately outrageous, that they forced open his back doors, and breaking
Prison vi and armis, gave the disconsolate Syrian to understand, that Milk and
Cucumbers was not so sweet as Milk and Honey. What would he now have given for
the hot and wholesome Baths in the Island of Milo, where he might have stripped
himself privately, and spent his time like one of the Muses in Helicon, till
his Clothes might have been washed, or new habit fetched? But there was no
help; therefore he must endure the smell, as he had made several others as he
passed along.

I will not here repeat all the Curses, with which he laded also the City of
Marseilles, where a man in a morning, if he take not a great care to carry his
Ears with him when he goes abroad, may happen to be well moistn'd with a sort
of very thick and very ill smelling showers. But among all his reproaches,
besides that of Bokier, I cannot omit this one, very proper to the Subject of
which I have been discoursing, concerning the Taharat or cleanliness of the
Turks, which was, that all the Giaurs, or Infidels, (for so the Turks call the
Christians) were Taharatisis, a sort of unclean and nasty people.

Of the Turks Gouslu or Purification.
Nor is it enough for the Turks to wash themselves all over in their Baths,
after Abdest (of which I shall discourse in the next place) they are obliged to
rinse their bodies, in some particular Bath, after any extraordinary evacuation
in the night, whether they have lain alone, or with company. This purification
is performed in a great square Tub or Vessel, filled every morning, and not
emptied till night. This is that Vessel which the Ancients called Labrum or
Oceanum, and the Turks Aouz Gousli. Now in regard they never make use of this
Purification, till they have been in the Bath, and used the Abdest, they soon
make an end of this Ceremony; for they do no more than plung^ themselves three
or four times in the water, and so give way to another, till they have all done
that needed such Purification.

Now though the number of these Rinsers be very great, considering the Married
men are tied to this Purification as well as the Batchelours, nevertheless they
never change the water, till every one has rins'd himself, and in the action
said the usual Prayer, La illa illalla, Allam dulilla, Alla hecher, or some
other to the same purpose.

Of their Abdest or Ablution.
THe fourth and last preparation for Prayers is the Abdest: And this may be
done with herbs or stones, where there is no convenience of water. They believe
that God (who regards the inside, and not the outside of men) would not hear
their supplications, if they had not appeased him beforehand, at least to the
utmost of their power, by this Abdest: And also that their Prayers put up in
that state of impurity would rather draw down the wrath of Heaven upon them,
than procure the blessings of God, without the assistance of Abdest. For which
reason they never erect any Mosquee without the convenience of Fountains, as I
have showed already.

It will be needless therefore to relate in what manner this Abdest is
performed. All people know well, that they wash the best part of the head and
neck, the arms to the Elbows, their feet, the end of the Priapus, and the
posteriour Orifice. However I must needs, tell ye, that these severe
injunctions of washing so often, are very troublesome to those that live in dry
places far remote from water, and to those that live in the Northern cold
Climates; which is the reason that several Turks could wish with all their
hearts that they might be permitted to change their Religion, which ties them
to so many inconvenient slabberings.

To this purpose I will relate what I heard said by one of those Turks, who
they call Raphasis-ler, these are a sort of Mohammedan Heretics, very numerous
in Syria, and several parts of lesser Asia. This person, in obedience to some
Religious Vow, had obliged himself to undertake a journey to Mecca, to which
the honest Musselmen are bound, at least once in their lives. He being in the
same opinion with the rest of the Caravan, that they should meet with water at
such a certain Well or Cistern upon the Road, (which the heat of the Sun had
dried up, contrary to their hopes,) had made use of the best part of his
provision of water as the rest had done, upon this Ceremony of Abdest, which
the devotion of that Pilgrimage frequently requires. By which means finding
themselves in the midst of the Sands, Deserts, and Heats of Arabia, they knew
not what course to take in that extremity of drowth which tormented them to
impatience. Nor was he of the number of those who had over much Gold, to
purchase of those who had been more provident: And indeed they had too much
need themselves, for him to hope, they would be persuaded to give gratis to
others. So that the poor Raphasis found himself reduced to endure a scorching
drowth, and ready to be buried alive in the stifling Clouds of Sand, which the
Wind raises in that miserable Road.

The remembrance of this extremity, from which nothing but the natural strength
of his Body had preserved him, inspired him with more execrations of Mahomet
and his accursed errors, than the most zealous of the Eastern Christians could
have invented for him. He said, He did not wish the Devil had taken him, for he
did not believe him so unjust as to let that Impostor escape his fury, who being
the sole cause of the death of so many Millions of people as perished in going
to Mecca, justly deserved to suffer as many deaths in Hell, as he had caused
poor creatures to suffer torments in his infamous cruel Pilgrimage; but he
wished with all his heart, that Heaven had Thunder struck from above, and that
Hell had then swallowed in flames, the first contrivers of that accursed
Alcoran, and the unfortunate Propagators of the Law of Mahomet; or that it had
been his fortune to have been a Christian like us.

I was strangely surpised to hear a Turk Blaspheme his own Religion in that
manner before two Christians; and therefore fearing he had some treacherous
design upon me, could he have but heard me speak any words upon which he might
lay hold, I asked my Companion, who that Raphasis was? and wherefore he talked
after that fashion? He told me, the reason was, because those Raphases being
neither Christians nor Turks, had not the liberty to declare themselves for the
one nor the other. That outwardly they conformed to all the exercises of the
Mohammedan Religion, but that in their hearts they believed not one tittle of
it, and that moreover they were all at this lock, that if any among them
renounced his Raphaisme to become a sincere Mohammedan, they received his
abjuration, but pursued him afterward to death, with no less malice, than if
he had turned Christian.

The fifth sort of Turkish washing is that which they call Eulu-iak maghi, or
the washing of the dead, of which I shall say nothing till I have done with
their Ceremonies before Prayer, this not being in practice till after the
decease of the party.

Now therefore after a true Musselman has performed all his purifications, it
behooves him to go to Church with his eyes fixed upon the ground, and to bear in
mind the profound reverence which he ought to pay to that place, and to make
his entry bare foot, or only covered with his Trouses. Which necessity of
pulling off their shoes so often, has caused the Eastern people to invent a
sort of shoes or slippers which they call Papouches, with one single sole, and
the upper leather of Goats skin tanned, and died yellow, red, violet, or black.
The Turks and Franks usually wear them yellow, the Armenians red, the Jews
black, and the Greeks violet. But none of these Nations are permitted to wear
them green in any part of the Turkish Dominion, which they may do in the
Persian Territories. It would be a great crime for a Christian to wear upon his
feet a color which the Mahometans look upon as sacred, in regard it was the
color which their Prophet so much affected, and which the Turks therefore
never put, but with great respect upon their heads, as serving to distinguish
their Emirs, who are allowed to wear a green Bonnet, as a mark of their being
allied to their great Prophet and Legislator.

Which puts me in mind of the witty answer that the great Sha Abbas gave to the
Grand Signors Ambassador. This Elchi, or Ambassador, from the Ottoman Port,
being very much troubled to see the Christians as well as Turks, over all
Persia, wearing green shoes and Trouses, in the name of his Master, required
Sha Abbas to forbid his Subjects any longer to profane a color, which all
true Mahometans ought to have a greater veneration for; that he very well
understood, that it being the Prophets peculiar color, it did not behove the
happy observers of his Law, to cover any other part of the body with it than
the head, or at least the more decent parts of the body above the wast, and
that it became him not with such an insupportable contempt to trample under
foot a color so sacred, as his Subjects not only did, but also the Giaurs, the
Chifoutlers, or Jews, and all other Mordars, or impure Nations, over all his
Dominions, unpunished.

Sha Abbas, who was the most accomplished Prince in all the East, whose noble
qualities gained him the affection of all the world, perceived hereby the
injustice of the Ottomans, which was to hinder all men, if it were in their
power, to make use of that color, of which Nature it self had made them a
Precedent, and set them so fair an example to wear at their discretion, as
being the universal Carpet which she has spread upon the surface of the Earth
for man to tread upon, which made him resolve to make a Jest of the Ridiculous
proposal of the Ambassador.

At first therefore he made a show of consenting to the Grand Signor's desire,
and promised the Ambassador That he would take order that his Subjects should
no longer profane the Prophets color, hoping that the Grand Signor would
issue forth the fame orders over all his Dominions, to restrain within his own
Territories the abuse of that sacred color, for which he seemed so zealous.
For, (said the Prince to the Ambassador) your Master beholds every day a
greater profanation of that color, and yet suffers it to go unpunished. My
Subjects only wear the color dead upon their shoes and trouses, but all the
Beasts in Turkey dung without any penalty upon the Grass, which is the living
color that Mahomet loved. Therefore if he will prohibit all the Beasts in
Turkey from defiling the green Grass with their excrements, which they do
continually, then I will take care my Subjects shall wear green shoes no
longer. The Elchi finding by the answer of Sha Abbas, that he did but laugh at
the folly of his Proposition, withdrew forthwith out of the Talare, or Room of
State where the Persian Kings give public audience to Ambassadors, to admire
his own yellow Papouches, which he had left at the door, according to the
custom, when the Turks enter into any Mosquee or Room of Grandeur which
deserves their veneration; and left the Persians to their own liberty.

Of the Turks behavior during Prayer time.
IT were to be wished, that all Christians who are wanting in their duty at
Church, and little heed the Prayers they make, might sometimes observe after
what manner the Turks acquit themselves, of that strict obligation which ties
all men to put up their supplications to Heaven with all humility and
attention. Certainly they might learn from them, not to enter the Church of God
so irreverently, with a soul defiled with the contaminations of sin, when they
observe how careful the Turks are to wash away what ever defilement their
bodies or habits may have contracted: They might learn to leave at the Church
doors all their worldly entreagues, and not to make the places appointed for
Prayer, their rendevouses for discourse, and particular designs, when they
observe the Turks leaving their shoes at the Mosquee door, and keeping silence
with so much awe and modesty during Prayer time, that can never be too much
commended.

In consideration of which Prayers, performed and said with so much modesty,
the Ottomans believe that God has made them Ma^ters of the most fertile parts
of the world: But that we may not only believe what comes from the Mouth of a
Mohammedan, I will relate what a Greek Christian one day told me, in discourse
about the Profanation of the Church. He was born at Constantinople, and about
Fourscore years of age, whose Father and Grand father had also counted an
Hundred successively. He lived near Sancta Sophia, and having observed me,
several times, going into the Portico of that Mosquee, the fear which he had
lest my frequent visits of the Turkish Temple, might produce in me, a desire to
change my Religion, or endanger me to be constrained so to do, obliged him out
of his charitable zeal to accost me, and to ask me, if it might not seem an
impertinent question, what it was that moved me to go so frequently to Sancta
Sophia? I answered him, that it was the beauty of the Mosquee that drew me
thither, and that I could not forbear viewing so ancient a Temple, which had so
long entertained the sacred Mysteries of Christianity.

The good old man, trembling, took me by the hand, and with tears in his eyes,
Ah Son (said he) had our Forefathers never entered into Sancta Sophia, but with
that reverence which now the Turks observe, we had still been Masters both of
Church and City. But, continued he, God who is always jealous of the honor of
his own house, has punished more grievously this sin of the Greeks, than all
the other Offenses which ever they committed. After which he told me what his
Grandfather had long before observed upon this subject, and confirmed to me,
that the vainglory of the Greeks was arrived at such a height in the Reigns of
the last Christian Emperors, that persons of Quality, and such as had any
Estates, were wont to ride into the Church on Horseback, or else were carried
into it in Litters, where their Horses and Mules frequently dung'd. He added
also, that Mahomet the II. who took Constantinople, had not presumed to have
entered the Temple in that manner, but that he was over persuaded, that if the
Greeks made no scruple of riding into the Church, he might do it as well as
they, and not alight till he came to the Altar, which he first made use of in
stead of a Horse-block, and then fell to Prayers upon it.

But the Mahometans behave themselves after another manner. They never come to
Prayers, but in a posture so modest and so humble, that it is impossible to
imagine a submission more profound. For after they have performed all their
ceremony's of washing, and put off their shoes at the door of the Mosquee, they
endeavor to place themselves as near the Iman, as they can; yet not so as to
crowd or thrust those that stand before them; there they kneel and sit upon
their heels, which is the posture that the Ottomans believe to be the most
humble, expecting in that form the beginning of Prayers, no man daring all the
while so much as to Whisper to his next neighbor.

Prayer time being come, the Iman rises, and standing upright, carries his two
hands open to his head, and stopping his Ears with his Thumbs, casts his eyes
up to Heaven, and sings very loud and very distinctly the Prayer, while the
people follow him with a low voice and imitate all his Postures. I shall not
hear repeat the words of the Prayer, as well for that there are few who
understand them, as that I may not give the Eastern Christians occasion to
blame me as they have done some other Travelers, who have written them down in
their Relations, accusing them as if they had an intention to teach the
Christians to pray to God after the Turkish manner, beside the danger that may
happen, lest any one finding the Namas or Turkish Prayers in our Relations, and
getting them by heart, should afterward be heard to repeat them (never
thinking of the danger of so doing) in any part of the Turkish Dominions, in
Mohammedan company; which would be a crime not to be forgiven, but by the change
of his Religion. It shall therefore suffice to tell the signification of the
Arabic words which the Turks pronounce in their Prayer, which are taken out of
the first Chapter of the Alcoran, having first represented the posture marked
with the figure I. Fig. X.
which is the posture the Turks observe at the beginning of their Namas.

The Turks lifting up their eyes and hands to Heaven at the first beginning of
their Divine Worship, cry twice, Milla hirrakhman irrahimi, that is to say, in
the name of God, gracious and merciful, then letting fall their hands below the
Girdle, as in the second posture marked 2, they say (with their eyes fixed upon
the earth) the Prayer which they call the Fatiche or Fatha, which signifies the
preface, as being taken out of the Exordium of the Alcoran, in these words
following.

Praise be given to God, who is the Lord of worlds, all love and mercy. O great
King of the day of judgment, we adore thee, we trust in thee, preserve us,
(seeing we invoke thy name) in the right way of those whom thou have elected,
and whom thou cherishest with thy favors, and not in the way of those against
whom thy wrath is kindled, nor of Infidels and wanderers from thy truth. Amen.

This Prayer being said, they bow their bodies, clapping their hands upon their
knces, as in the posture marked with the direction 3. saying Alla heu Hecber,
and the rest as follows.

God is great; O my God let Glory be given to thee, and together with thy
praise may thy name be blessed, and thy Grandeur be advanced. For there is no
other God but thee.

After this, accompanying the Iman, or the person that reads prayers, they cry
out with a loud Voice Alla Hecber, O great God. And prostrating themselves upon
the earth, they kiss it twice; as in the Posture marked 4. crying out as many
times, Alla Herber, O great God.

These bowings of the body they call Rekiets, differing in number according to
the hours of Prayer-time. In the Morning six times; at Noon eight; six at
Kimdi; eight at evening Prayer; and as many at midnight; when the solemnities
of Regeb, Chaban, or Ramazan, oblige them to rise at midnight to betake
themselves to the Mosquee.

When the first of these Bowings is over, they rise again and repeat the Fatha
preceding, which they say standing upright, without putting their thumbs in
their ears. Afterward they always continue the same Prayer, till they have
repeated as many Genuflexions, as the hour of the day requires. Which done,
they return to their first posture of sitting upon their knees, looking in
their hands opened, as if they were reading their own fortunes, as in the
postures marked 5, 6. and recite a certain number of benedictions and praises
to God, which they count upon the joints of their fingers. Which Benedictions
and Praises are certain Thanksgivings to God for having heard their Prayers,
sometimes they address themselves to Mahomet, crying out often Resul Alla,
which signifies the Messenger of God. But usually they make their Applications
to God alone; saying, Subhan alla, God be praised. Allem dullila, or praise to
God. La illa ill alla. There is no other God but God.

Having thus finished all their Rekiets, and done kissing the Ground, at the
conclusion they take themselves by the beard, and turning to the right and left
hand salute the two Angels whom they believe to be attending always upon them,
the one to incite them to virtue, the other to accuse them for the evil they
commit. These Angels they reckon to be one good the other bad: The one white,
the other black: The dull and material apprehensions of the Turks rather
distinguishing those incorporeal substances by their color, than by their
spirituality. I shall not here insist upon the dreams and fables which they
report concerning these two Angels, or of the Visions of Gabriel, who as they
say always appeared to their Cheiks and Derviches for the revelation of some
new mystery. It is enough to show you in the postures, marked 7 8. the gestures
which the Mahometans observe when they salute those two Angels.

When the Musselmen have ended their Prayers, which never last longer than half
an hour, certain chanters meet together in the small Balcones, See Fig. VIII.
marked in the description of Sancta Sophia with the letter D. and sing in
counterpoint notes certain Songs which are not unpleasing; after which, on
Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, a Preacher mounts the Pulpit, and expounds to
the Auditors, some point of the Alcoran after his own manner. sometimes
likewife they Preach in the Market places; and they always conclude their
devotions with certain Prayers for the prosperity of the sultan, and his Arms
against his enemies, to which the people being present, make no other answer
than Amen.

What the Turks do after Prayers.
THe worship of God being the chiefest of all humane Actions, of which Prayer
is the principal part, it may be hence concluded, that all the other affairs of
the Turks, as well as of all other people, are to be postpon'd to Prayer. But
in regard that all men follow different employments, according to the diversity
of their Genius; I shall reduce all the business of the Mahometans into three
particular Heads. The Ecclesiastical Affairs, the Business of the Divan, and
the popular Employments. To the first appertains the Duty of Prayer; to the
second the Execution of Justice; to the last belong the Trades of the People
and their Military Exercises.

To every one of which I shall say something briefly without stopping at any
thing which others perhaps may have said before me.

of the Turkish Mosquees or Temples.
AT what time the Turks begun to set up the first exercise of their Religion,
they performed their Divine Worship in the open fields, and before all the
world, as they still continue to do in such places where they have no Mosquees.
But after their Empire began to enlarge, and that they had won several Towns
from the Christians, they also made use of their Churches to practice therein
the ceremonies of their own Religion: And when they had occasion to. build
Mosquees, they took their Models from those of the Christians, not being
Architects skilful enough to erect them after their own proper and particular
manner. And this is the reason that all the Mosquees in Constantinople are but
imperfect copies of Sancta Sophia. They have only added some Towers and
Portico's adorned with Fountains after their custom. As may be easily observed
in the Draught of the three fairest Mosquees in Constantinople hereunto
annexed. Of which I shall only explain the Directions, there needing no more
than only to observe the platform and the outside work for the more easy
apprehending what is most remarkable.

The New Mosquee, situated in the Hippodrome.
SUltan Achmed's Mosquee may pass for o^e of the most beautiful as to the
outside, which ever the Turks erected, it being the only Temple of all that
ever I saw in the East, which has six Towers, whereas the rest have not above
Two or Four at most. These Six Towers are very high, having every one three
Galleries a piece, so wrought that you may see through them in diverse places,
though they are built of white hard stone, not much unlike to Marble. Every one
of these have within them a pair of winding stairs.

Now in regard these Towers are very high, and the winds very boisterous at
Constantinople, it may be thought such sort of Buildings should be subject to
frequent downfalls; this cosinderation caused Monsieur Colbert, whose knowledge
of things is as general, as of large extent, to ask me whether they did not
often tumble down? I answered him, that those Towers being wrought very smooth
and round, they did not make resistance sufficient to give the Winds power to
shake them: Besides that the Stones are mortass'd one within another, and bound
together with a very strong and stiff cement, so that there has not been
observed the fall of any Tower erected upon the Ruins of the Christian
Buildings, for above these two Hundred years.

This Mosquee Built by Sultan Achmet, is situated in the largest Piazza
belonging to the City of Constantinople, formerly called the Hippodrome,
because it was the place where they ran their Horse-Races; and being still made
use of for the same purpose, the Turks give it the name of Atmeidan, The place
for the Horses. This Piazza, which I have not described as being already done
by others, lies to the west of the Temple, as also the famous Serraglio of
Ibrahim Basha, which is a far better piece of Architecture in some of our
Romances, than it appears to be in the Hippodrome; to the North-East and
South-East side of it, toward the Channel of the Black-Sea, lie the delightful
Landskips of Scutari, Calcedon, Fanari-sckio, and of the Plains, Hills and
Valleys, that environ them. The Isles of the Princes and the Propontis appear
to the South, with a part of the City; and upon the North and North-West side
stands the Church of Sancta Sophia, the Serraglio, the City of Gelata, the
Haven of Constantinople, and all the Suburbs which are very large: So that the
top of this Mosquee, and the Towers that environ it, afford one of the most
delightful prospects in the whole world.

Although the Hippodrome, which is a Piazza almost twice as big as the Place
Royal in Paris, ly just before the Mosquee; yet there is also another large
square, to enclose the Building, which is separated from the Atmeidan by a low
wall, about Fourscore ^athom in length, having in it Seventy two Windows with
Iron Grates, and three Gates, of which one stands in the middle, and the other
two at each end of the wall, being all three barricadoed with Iron chains, like
the doors of all the rest of the Mosquees. This Churchyard, if it may be so
called, is planted with Trees, making several straight walks, especially on the
North-side where the Founder lies entombed, as also that unfortunate Prince
Sultan Osman, who was put to death in the Seven Towers.

Now though this Mosquee may be said to be the most beautiful in
Constantinople, if not in all the East, yet there is not any more irregularly
built in all the Ottoman Empire, not only against the Laws of Architecture, but
also contrary to the Mohammedan injunctions.

It Is true, that in regard it requires a vast expense to erect a Mosquee,
therefore the Grand Signors are expressly forbid to undertake so difficult an
enterprise until they shall have won from the Infidels, Cities, Provinces, or
Kingdoms sufficient to defray the excessive charges of such magnificent Piles.
However Sultan Achmet, though he had not by any conquest extended the bounds of
the Empire, resolved to Build a Mosquee, to the end he might eternize his name,
since his achievements did not suffice to recommend him to posterity. And
though the Mufti, the Mulla's the Cheiks, and other Doctors of the Law, laid
before him the sin of undertaking to erect such a costly fabric, since he had
never been in any other Combats, than those which are daily to be seen for the
exercise of the pages, and divertisement of the Prince, nevertheless he gave
little heed to their admonitions, but carried on the work with a vigor
answerable to his resolutions; and when he had finished the Pile, because he
had slighted his Chaplains exhortations, called it Imansis Gianisi, or the
Temple of the Incredulous. It is also called the new Mosquee, as being one of
the last that was Built.

The whole body of this Mosquee is of a square figure, covered with a Domo, not
so proportionable as it should have been to the rest. It is supported within,
by Four large thick round Pillars, and the Arches which, winding over them,
sustain the four half Domes that encompass the great one, are the occasion that
the Building is neither very Roomy, nor over light. Before you enter the
Mosquee you must pass through a very lovely Court, surrounded with a Cloister*
supported with Six and Twenty Arches, which have every one of them their Roof
and their Cupola covered with Lead. All these little Domes are supported by
Twenty Six Columns of speckl'd Egyptian Marble very neatly turned, but their
Chapters are after the Turkish manner; all the space which they environ is
paved with square Marble, in the midst of which stands a Fountain of an Hexagon
figure, built of the same stone. This prostile or Court is raised very high;
there being no less than Thirteen steps up to it. The rest of the Building may
better be seen and understood in the following Plate, to which I refer you for
farther satisfaction.

An Explanation of Figure XI.
A. The Circumference and Elevation of the Grand Dome.

B. The four great round Pillars that support the great Dome. They are
over-topp'd by Four little Hexagon Towers, which appear without at the
Direction B.

C. Four Semi-Domes, resting upon the Grand Cupola.

D. Four little Domes at the four corners of the Mosquee.

E. The great door of the Mosquee, whose Cupola is higher than the rest.

F. A great number of Fountains under Galleries supported with Marble Pillars.

G. The Court surrounded with Galleries covered with Thirty small Cupola's,
resting upon Twenty Six Pillars of speckl'd Marble.

THE PROSPECT OF SULTAN ACHMED's MOSQUEE


H. Two doors having several steps to enter into the Court, one to the North,
and the other to the South.

I. Two other doors with steps opening into the Mosquee.

K. The outward Galleries that give admitance into the inward Galleries that
answer to them, marked in the Plat form with the letter K.

L. The place where the Maharab or Mirabe stands.

M. The Six Towers, each of which has Three Balconies for the Muezins to call
the people to Prayer.

N. The great door of the Churchyard.

O. The chief entrance into the Cloister.

P. A hexagonal Fountain covered with its Dome.

Of the Solimany.
IF ever Emperor of the Turks merited according to their Law to erect a
Temple, in regard of the Conquests he had made upon the enemies of the Ottoman
Grandeur, assuredly Sultan Soliman was the person, the second who bore that
name, and the Fourteenth Emperor of the Musselmen. All the three parts of the
Hemisphere served only to be the large* Theater where he acted the fatal
Tragedies of War. The unfortunate Rhodes was one of the first places in Asia,
that became the deplorable subject of his Triumphs. A good part of the Kingdom
of Persia, of which he took upon him the Imperial Diadem at Bagdat, submitted
to his fortune, after he had won Herzeron, Irivan, Thauris, and several other
places. He also made himself Master of Tunis and Tripoli in Africa, and wrested
a great part of Hungry from the European Potentates, taking the Cities of Buda,
Alba Regalis, and the Fort of Sigeth some days even after his death at Quinque
Ecclesiae.

This Prince, (who was Proclaimed Emperor of the Turks the same year that
Charles the V. was Crowned Emperor of the Germans) after his return to
Constantinople from the Conquests of Rhodes, and Bagdat, caused that stately
Mosquee to be erected, to which he gave his own name, to the end that it might
remain to Posterity a faithful and eternal Monument of his Victories. This
Temple is one of those where Mohammedan Architecture has followed the strictest
Rules of Art, being no less beautiful within than without, and Built like the
rest upon a square Foundation, covered in the middle with a large Domo, no way
inferior either in beauty or figure to that of Sancta Sophia. This Domo is
sustained with four large Pillars marked in the Draught Fig. XIII. with the
letter D. and between these Pillars to the North and South, stand two great
massy speckl'd Marble Columns, all of a piece, that form three Arches, which
bear a piece of the wall, and strengthen the great Arch of the great Pillars
which stand at a very wide distance.

To these Four great Pillars within, there are Two others that answer without,
to which they serve as buttresses, so far however from deformity, that they
rather please the eye; as you may observe in the Plate of the outside, Fig.
XII. at the letter D. Within these outermost Buttresses runs up a little pair
of stairs leading to the Roof, and Domes of the Temple, to which you may easily
ascend by another pair of stairs that are above without side, marked by the
letter B.

Between these Buttresses are three Windows that enlighten the sides of the
Church, under which Windows are two very fair Galleries, roof'd and covered
with Lead, and supported with several Marble Pillars, with their Chapters after
the Turkish manner, as at the letter G. and a little lower at F. are the
^ountains wherein to wash before Prayers begin.

On the right side of these Fountains, at the letter E. stands a little round
door, at the foot of several steps, leading up to a little lattic'd Gallery,
through which the Grand Signor ascends into his Closet, alighting first from
his Horse upon a stone cut into steps, and marked with the letter Q. A little
beyond, at the direction L. is the Garden where Sultan Soliman the Founder and
his Wife lie interred, and into which you may enter through the door marked H.
or another which is opposite to it; which door is barricado'd with a chain, as
you may see in the Draught of the North part, Fig. XII.

I have already told the Reader, that the Eastern people know no such evil
custom as that of Burying their Dead within the walls of their Churches, let
their Quality or Wealth be never so considerable. But for all that, the
Emperors many times dispense with that custom so far, as to reserve to
themselves a Burying place near to the Mosquees of their own Erecting. And
therefore Soliman, than whom no man had a greater care of infringing the
laudable customs of good Government and Order, would not have his bones laid
within the Temple, but reserved for himself a Sepulcher in the Garden behind
his Mosquee, which in the Draught is marked with the letter I. This Tomb is the
most regular and best piece of workmanship in all Constantinople, being of an
Octagon figure, encompassed without with a Gallery, of which the roof is
supported with Fifteen small Marble Pillars; and within is also another small
octangular Gallery, having a green Marble Column erected at each Angle, with
their Pedestals and Chapters of white Marble, which form as many Arches, that
support the Domo. In the midst of this Sepulcher is the Tomb it self of Soliman
and his Son, at the foot of which stands a large Taper in a Candle-stick of
Copper. Round about are several wooden Lecterns or high Desks, where the
Softa's lay their books, when they come to pray for his Soul.

In the same Garden is also the Sepulcher of Soliman's Wife, marked with the
letter K. For as the Turks never admit their Wives to pray with 'em when they
are alive, so they never suffer them to lie with 'em in the same Tomb, when
they are dead. Believing their old Wives shall never be admitted to accompany
them into Paradise, where they hope to find far younger and handsomer, leaving
their cast-terrestrial Wives to make much of the Giaurs, whose lot they pretend
it will be to stand without doors. Not far off are the Houses of Easement for
the Softa's, of whom there are a vast number employed to take care of Soliman's
future happiness, as one that left great Pensions behind him for that purpose.

But besides these necessary conveniences, there are also adjoining to all
your Royal Foundations certain Timarkana's or Almes-Houses, where there is a
daily distribution of Bread and Chorva, which is a certain sort of Pottage, or
some other sort of Alms, which extends not only to the men, but also to the
dogs, who are a great object of Turkish Charity. For though they will rather
build kenels for them in the street than suffer them to come within their
doors, or to lick the same dish wherein, men have eaten before, (for which
depraved custom of the Europeans, the Turks reproach them with the name of
Kupekler) yet they will admit the poor Currs to partake of their Alms very
freely. On the left side of this Mosquee are several little Domes, which The
Solimannie Built by Soliman the Magnificent.
reach from the Two great Towers to the Two little ones, whose Cupola's cover
the Arches, and all the compass of the Cloister that lies before the entrance
into the Temple. In the midst of which is a large Water-work, that feeds Ten
Fountains for the use of the Musselmen in their continual dablings.

The Two Towers next the Mosquee are crowned with three very high Galleries,
but they which stand at the end of the Court are lower, and circled only with
Two Galleries, for the use of the Muezins. These two little Towers terminate
the whole Building, which is in the middle of a large Court, planted round with
Trees, environed with a Wall, wherein are several open Windows grated and
Barred, as may be seen in the Draughts of the Elevation and Platform.

An Explication of Figure XII.
A. The great Domo, not much less than that of Sancta Sophia, and almost as
much weather-beaten.

B. The steps-leading to the Gallery round about the Dome.

C. Other little Domes that are placed round about the Temple.

D. Buttresses having stairs within, the Cupola's which cover them being only
for outward Ornament, as giving no light into the Temple.

E. doors and steps where the Grand Signor ascends into his Closet.

F. The Fountains where the Turks wash.

G. Galleries for the Sultan's principal Officers.

H. The entrance into the Garden, which contains the Sepulchers of Soliman and
his Wife.

I. Soliman the Founders Sepulcher.

K. His Wives Tomb.

L. Several Trees which make the walks that beautify this Garden.

M. The Two great Towers.

M*. Two other lesser Towers at the West end of the Cloister, circled with only
Two Galleries, and lower than the other.

N. The North entrance into the Mosqu^e.

O. The small Cupola's that cover the Gallery that runs round the Court.

P. The Dome which covers the Fountain in the middle of the Court.

Q. A large stone cut into steps, where the Grand Signor alights, when he comes
to Prayers.

An Explanation of Figure XIII.
A. The Domo, one of the fairest and neatest, next to that of Sancta Sophia.

B. The Mirabe or Maharab, in the midst of the Temple, standing here in its
right situation toward Koble.

C. The Mufti's Mamber.

D. The four great Pillars that sustain the great Dome.

E. Four large speckl'd Marble Columns, very high and all of a piece.

F. The little Galleries within the Mosquee.

f. The Fountains under the outer Galleries.

G. The outer Galleries, through which the Grand Signors Train enter into those
within.

g. The door at which the Grand Signor enters.

H. The little Pillars that support the two Cupola's, which supply the defect
of the Grand Dome, between which Pillars are also little Galleries supported
with little Marble Pillars.

THE PLATFORM OF THE SOLIMANIE


I. The great door of the Mosquee in the midst of the Cloister.

K. The doors to the North and South sides.

L. Six Domes of a middle size.

l. Four lesser Domes.

M. The Four Towers with their stairs.

m. Six other pair of stairs to ascend into the Galleries without at the top of
the structure.

N. The two entrances of each side of the Court.

O. The great door.

P. The Fountain in the Court.

Q. The floor paved with marble, as is the whole Mosquee.

R. Twenty Eight little Cupola's that cover the Arches, supported by Twenty
four Columns all of a size.

S. The Seven doors of the Enclosure answering to as many avenues.

T. The Solimanny, being built upon one of the Hills in Constantinople, causes
an ascent to the North, for which reason the North doors have each a pair of
stairs, leading up to the Platform, adorned with rails, and shaded with several
Trees.

t. The Adepkana's or Houses of Easement.

V. The same conveniences for the Priests belonging to the Sepulcher.

X. The Churchyard walled in, opening with Nine doors, and planted round with
Trees.

Y. The Platform of Soliman's Sepulcher.

Z. His Wife's Tomb.

. A little Chapel where Passengers or the Officers of the old Seraglio retire
to pray for the Founders.

Of the Mosquee of Validea, built by the Sultaness, Mother of the present Grand
Signor.
It Is not a usual thing in Turkey, for the Sultanesses to build Mosquees. Only
this was a peculiar privilege which the Mother of the Grand Signor now
Reigning, obtained by her extraordinary wit and cunning, as having by the same
Artifices obtained an entire freedom, and credit over all the Ottoman Empire.
This Temple which is the last Monument of Mohammedan piety, to my thinking is
one of the most elegant and most exact pieces of workmanship of all the rest
which are in Constantinople. And indeed it was no more than might be well
expected from the Sultaness Validea, the Wife of Ibrahim the I. and Mother of
Mahomet the IV. who being one of the most aspiring and accomplished Lady's that
ever entered the Seraglio, would most certainly spare for no cost, when she had
once designed to eternize her memory by a curiosity in Architecture. To which
intent she could not have chosen a situation more advantageous or more
favorable to her purpose, as intending thereby to oblige all the Ottoman
Princes descending from her issue, and all the people in subjection to their
Laws, together with all such strangers as should come to Constantinople, to
bear her in remembrance, while the one admired the sublimity of her parts in
carrying on, and bringing to perfection a work so rarely thought of by those of
her sex among the Turks, and from the other she procured to her self that
happiness which she expected by virtue of the supplications of those, who
beholding the beauty of her female Fabric, would be continually praying for
the eternal rest of her soul. She therefore made choice for the situation of
her Mosquee, of a piece of ground not far from the Seraglio, and at a very
little distance from those lovely Kioscs, which the Grand Signor erected to
give his Sultanesses the pleasure of viewing the Port of Constantinople, and
all the Vessels that sailed in and out.

This Temple is erected upon a square Foundation in a large circuit of ground,
environed by the walls of the City to the North and West: The south space is
taken up with a Bazar or Market-house, and her own Sepulcher, both which she
added to her Religious structure. The East part is enclosed with another wall,
wherein is the principal entrance into the enclosure, in such a place as
answers to one of the Gates of the City, not far distant from the Seraglio
Gardens.

Having therefore described the several parts of the preceding Mosquees, I
shall make no farther description of this, in regard that excepting its
particular beauty, it differs in other respects little or nothing from the
rest. For, like those others, it shows its Galleries high and low, its
fountains underneath, two Towers with three Balcones a piece, several
Semi-Domes, Cupola's and Lanterns, as also its Court before the Grand Entrance:
Only it excells all the rest of her sister Mosquees in the beauty of its
situation. For it is seated by the Sea shore, near to one of the lesser
Harbors of Constantinople, and which is the most frequented of all, by reason
of the Custom House close by, and the neighborhood of the New Bazar, or
Market-house erected by this Prin^ess for the convenience of Merchants, and
therefore for the rest Validea Built by the present Grand Signor's Mother.
I refer the Reader to the Draught, and the expl^cation of the Directions.

The Explanation of Fig. XIV.
A. The Grand Domo covered with Lead, and topp'd with aspire of Gilded Brass.

B. Little ^anterns to adorn the outside only, and to facilitate the ascent to
the Dome.

C. Two great Semi-Domes answering to two other on the other side.

D. The outermost Galleries answering to those other in the inside.

E. A large Kiosk for the Grand Signor to rest himself when he comes to this
Mosquee, and the two small Towers appearing like Chimneys above it, denote it
to be a Royal Fabric.

F. The Fountains where the Turks wash, there being as many on the other side.

f. The door by which the Grand Signor enters.

G. The Entrance to the North.

H. The North door of the Court.

I. A staircase, and door leading from the Seaside to the Court, barricado'd
with a chain.

K. The principal entrance into the Cloister and Mosquee, where all the
Cupola's that appear about the Cloister, cover so many Arches supported by
Marble Pillars.

L. The Trees planted all along upon the south side of the Mosquee, in the
midst of which is the Sepulcher where the Sultaness lies. Behind the Trees
appear the Cupola's of a very fair Timarkana or Hospital Founded by the
Princess.

M. The Two Towers surrounded with Three Galleries a piece.

N. This ^uddle of Domo's is a large Bazar or Market-house, with shops and
lofts, called Validea's Bazar, as being by her Built.

O. At the Two chief entrances into this Fabric are Two Sebilkana's or Water
Almes-Houses, where the people drink water gratis. That on the other side is
much larger, where the Sebilkar, or person employed to distribute the Water,
during all the heat of Summer, cools his pots in Buckets of Snow, where you
shall hear the poor people after they have drank cry out, Rakmet ulla alla men
aoukaf. God be merciful to her, through whose goodness we enjoy this kindness.

P. The Custom House of Constantinople: right against which on the other side
lies that of Galata.

Q. The descent from the Harbor of Validea.

R. Certain Fruiterers shops.

Now in regard this Mosquee is most of all exposed to the view of those that
come to Constantinople, therefore it is that the Turks most usually solemnize
their public thanksgivings in this Mosquee. The Grand Signor no sooner wins
any Victory over his enemies, but the Towers of Validea are the first that with
their Bonfires and fireworks give notice thereof to the people. The Galleries
which are very large being all hung round with lighted Torches, and the
combustible matter so disposed upon Lines and Chains, that you may read in the
very flames the name of the Grand Signor, and the Conquests he has gained. But
flying Fireworks, as Squibs and Rockets, are utterly forbid, to prevent firing
of Houses, especially when the Kara-iel or North-East Wind blows.

This Wind blowing frequently at Constantinople, is never so much to be feared
as when any fire breaks out, so that if any person had a design to reduce this
great City to ashes; he need set but any one house on fire near Validea, when
this Wind rages, by one private way or other, of which many might be found out,
and he would certainly see the sad but assured success of his enterprise.

They call this wind Kara-iel or the black wind, not only because it blows from
the Black-Sea, but in regard of the fatal effects which it produces, it being
the occasion of dismal losses to those that Sail from Cuffa in Crim-Tartarie to
Constantinople. For confirmation of which, I one day there saw the ruins of one
of the most deplorable shipwracks that had happened in those parts of a long
time.

Several Vessels of different Burden set ^ail from Caffa, to the number of
Eighteen, with a good Wind; but in a short time that pleasant Gale not able to
keep the field, was forced to give way to a Kara-iel so rude and boystrous,
that hardly the like had raged in those Seas. The miserable Vessels were now in
the midst of those merciless waves, when this Tempest surpised them, and not
knowing where to cast Anchor, they were forced to quit their helmes, and commit
themselves purely to the compassion of the wind, in expectation of nothing but
Death. In short, the wind having thus got them within his power, some he brake
one against another, others he dashed against the Rocks, so that of all the
whole number, only Two escaped, which by good fortune arrived at Constantinople
without Sail, Mast, or Rudder, as if the Sea had only spared those two to carry
tidings what was become of the rest.

All the Houses of eight and twenty Towns that ly upon the Thracian Bosphorus,
some in Asia, some in Europe side, had not Windows sufficient to hold the
Spectators that thronged to view the miserable estate of these shattered
Vessels, driving along toward the Haven. Which so mollifi'd the Beholders
hearts, that some made Vows for their safe arrival in Harbor, others wept, and
all deplored their condition till they saw them safe in the Port.

The Vessels which ly in the Harbor of Constantinople fear not so much this
black wind, from which they are sheltered by the Hills of Pera and Tophana, as
they do Gun doghisi, or Gun batisi ocusguiar, that is to say the Eastern and
West^rn Winds, especially when they blow hard. For then they knock the Ships
one against another, after such a surly manner, that the Mariners are
constrained to a very hard labor, not inconvenient to themselves alone; for
they must be very drousie that can sleep in any of the Houses adjoining to the
Port, by reason of the hideous noise which the Seamen make a-board the Ships.
There is nothing to be heard but a confusion of Voices, which spreading through
the streets over all the Neighboring Hills, allarm's all the Dogs in the City,
who each putting in for a share to make up the dismal consort, cause such a
dreadful disorder in the Air, that you would think the dissolution of Nature
were at hand: Enough to terrify the most daring resulution, in a person that
never had heard the same before.

Besides these Four Mosquees, there are several others very considerable, to
which they give the title Dgiameler, or Royal Mosquees, every one bearing the
Names of those Emperors that built them; nor are they consecrated by any other
Title than that of their Founder; Sultan Bajazet, Sultan Mahomet, Sultan Selim,
Sultan Morat Giamisi. But if a Basha were the Founder, they are distinguished
by the word that denotes his Employment, and that other word Meschit, and thus
that Mosquee which the Basha of Caramania Built, is called Caraman Pacha
Meschit. But the word Dgiami being more honorable, it is given indifferently
to all the Turkish Mosquees, so that custom will rather have it. Mahomet Pacha
Dgiamisi, than Isouf Aga Meschit.

The number of Mosquees is very great over all Turkey, in regard the Turks are
very punctual in coming to Prayers at least thrice a day. In the City of
Constantinople alone there are reckoned to be Four Thousand Nine Hundred Sixty
Five. And a certain Dervich told me one day, there were no less than Fourteen
Thousand in all Turkey; though I fear he was out of his tale, if not six, yet
five Thousand at least: They are all kept well in repair, as being all well
endowed, besides that one or other Godly Musselman dies every day, leaving a
pious morsel behind him for his souls benefit. The usual Foundation-rate for
the Softa to read Prayers five or seven times in a day, is Eight or Ten Aspers
per diem: He that leaves such a Legacy does well; others leave so much for the
maintenance of a Lamp, or so much quarterly to the Poor; of all which Legacies,
the Kesler Agasi, or Superintendent over the Ladies of the Serraglio, is
Disposer General, and next to him the Katib, or Curate of the Mosquee.

Now among the great number of those that repair to the Mosquees, there are
some who out of a desire to be accounted holy, are not content to abide in the
Mosquee all day, but beg to stay there also all Night long in the exercise of
their Devotions, among the rest a (...), who was looked upon in the neighborhood
where he lived as a very sober religious person, begged leave from the Director
of a small Mosquee, that he might sometimes tarry all night to satisfy his
devotions. The Director, who in those little Mosquees is both Iman, Porter and
Lamp-lighter, embodied all in one Office, willing to gratify the good man's
zeal, granted his request, as often as he desired, not Dreaming that his design
was to devour more Oil in one than would feed Twenty Lamps in a fcore of
Nights. For he knew him to be a man that few had observed ever to eat but very
sparingly, and therefore judged him to be a most sanctified soul. But he was
ignorant it seems, that he slept all day, and took his repasts gratis at Night:
But at length, finding that his Oil wasted at an ungodly rate, and not knowing
whom in the world to suspect, he ordered one night two of his friends to watch
this same pious Dervich, and if they found him peccant, to strap him
wellfavourdly. For he shrewdly suspected this holy Votary to be the Zetiegi or
Oyl-licker, and absolutely cleared the Rats as innocent of the crime.

To this purpose, the Iman having placed his friends in a convenient corner,
locked the Mosquee door and went his way. Presently the devout Dervich
believing all was safe, drew out his loaf from his bosom and fell to work, and
ever and anon, as he dipped his bread in one of the Lamps which was full of
excellent Oil, he would thus reason with his conscience touching the scruples
which it weakly offered to defer him from stealing the joy of his stomach.
Whatever (said he) comes from God is common, this Temple and all that is in it
comes from God; this Oil comes from God; this bread comes from God, and I am
the servant of God, and therefore I may make use of what comes from God, and so
fell a sopping, like a Rat that dips his tail in a Sack-but. The Iman's two
friends having observed him, and mad to see how greedily the holy Dervich
licked up the sacred Oil, stole upon him without being perceived, while he was
busy at his bou allactan guelur, which he repeated every time he sopp'd his
bread, and giving him some half ascore good licks over the shoulders, crying
out at the same time Bou daha allactan guelur, This also comes from God, turned
him out of the Mosquee, where he was never permitted to sop more.

Of the Mohammedan Ecclesiastical Officers.
AS for the Ecclesiastical persons that officiate in the Turkish Mosquees, thus
in short. The Mufti is the chief, being as it were the Patriarch of the Turks,
and principal Governor of all the Mosquees, as also chief President of all the
Divans. His authority extends over all Turkey, as being a person of great merit
and well versed in Law; for which reason he is consulted in all affairs most
knottie and difficult to resolve. The question is propounded to him in writing,
and the business is determined by his Olur or Olmaz, it may, or may not be,
which he subscribes at the bottom of the Fetfa, or demand, with his name, and
addition of Fakir or Poor, which he affects above all other.

Next to the Mufti is the Katib or Curate, who reads Prayers upon Fridays and
other Holy Days: Under him are the Imans, of which there are several belonging
to the Cathedral Mosquees: And next to them the Belligler or Singing men. The
Ovazes, or Nasijetgis, who are the Preachers, and mount the Pulpit Three times
a week, to instruct the people in the points of Religion, and what they ought
to believe and do. The Sokta's or Softa's and Mulla's, who are sort of
hirelings, that never say Prayers but when they are paid for it, or else when
they are sent for to sing the praises of the dead. The Mucktars who take care
of the Lamps; the Klingiler, who looks after the Carpets; the Kaimgiler, or
Supurgiler, whose business it is to clean the Carpets, as also the rest of the
Temple. The Capigiler or Porter; the Muezins or Cryers; and several sorts of
Derviches, Cheiks, and Santons, a sort of people that resort to the Mosquees,
rather to share in the Alms, than for any service which they perform there.

All the Officers are well paid, and have good Salaries, to encourage them to
be careful to keep the Mosquees neat and clean from all manner of filth and
defilement, and more especially to keep out the Dogs. Only Cats are
priviledg'd, as well to the end they may kill the Mice, which many times make
bold with the Carpets, as for that they were Mahomets good friends, being
generally a very cleanly creature: Add to this a third reason, because they
sing upon the Tiles so like to his Musitianers.

Of their Hospitals.
YOu may cast into the number of Mosquees, those other places which the Turkish
Piety has Founded in Constantinople. For there are in that City above an
hundred considerable Timarkana's or Hospitals for the infirm and distracted;
and Takiakana's, or places to lodge the poor, where they have every day an
allowance of Bread and Porridge. The Khans or Caravansera's are great houses
built much like the Colleges in Paris, and founded by rich persons, to lodge
strangers, where they may remain secure, and at small expenses, as long as they
please, paying only one or two Aspers a day, which is no more than a Sous at
most. There are of these Karavansera's about Four Hundred and Seventeen, with
their Fountains and storehouses, and some have their Mosquees, and Baths too
within themselves.

The strict prohibition of Wine among the Turks, makes them take great care in
providing store of Fountains as well for their Religious as necessary uses.
Insomuch that the number of Fountains in Constantinople and the Suburbs is
reckoned to amount to Five Thousand Nine Hundred Thirty Five, as well those
belonging to the Mosquees, as in other parts of the City, from whence the
Water-bearers fetch it in great Brazen Tankards, holding the quantity of two of
our Buckets, and carry it home to the houses of such as want it. The water
which supylyes these Fountains, is brought from Belgrade, a City distant from
Constantinople about Four or Five Leagues.

Of the Divan, or the Turks Courts of Justice.
AS among all the Nations in the world, it will be a difficult thing to find
any one that bears a greater reverence to the places appointed for Divine
Worship, than the Turks, so may it likewi^e be as certain that there are not
any people more submissive to the decrees and sentences that issue out of the
Divan, in point of Justice. There is no requiring a second Summons to cite the
party to appear before the Judge. He that believes himself most guilty, fears
not to go and receive his Sentence, as if he believed the proverb absolutely
true, which says, that the hand cut off by Justice does no evil. Yet does not
this proceed from the integrity of their Judges, nor the equity of their Laws,
for there is nothing more unjust or more Tyrannical, but it proceeds from the
fear of the Battoon, and the cruel Fines which they lay upon people, who
neither dare nor can appeal to any superior Justice, which can only be
expected by the Caimacan or Grand Vizier himself.

The Court of Justice is called the Divan, and there is one at least in every
City, how small so ever it be, where it is kept of due right in the Cadi's
house. But where there is a Basha, he does all he can to deprive him of that
privilege, and to take the Cognizance of all business to himself. As for the
Constantinopolitan Divan, it is held in the great Serraglio four times a week,
Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Thursday. Upon every one of these days, the
principal Offic^^^* that is to say, the Grand Vizier, or in his absence the
Caimacan, sits in the middle, the Nichandgi Bachi, or the Keeper of the Seals,
upon his right hand; the Cadile squiers, or Superintendents of Justice, upon
his left hand; and the Defterdars, or Prothonotaries, some on the one side,
some on the other. The Capigi Bachi or chief Porter, and Chaours Bachi or chief
Usher, guard the Entrance.

The chief Affairs under the Cognizance of this Chamber are the public
Revenue, then the Militia, next the political Government, and distribution of
Justice over the whole Ottoman Empire. Then they examine the Negotiations of
Ambassadors, what they demand, and what answer to give. Afterward they make
dispatch of Privileges, Grants, Passports, Letters to the absent Basha's, and
condemn Criminals, or those whom they believe to be so, to death. This done,
they hear the business and complaints of particular persons, doing quick
justice, and with a conscionable equity, especially if the Grand Signor be in
Town. For then the Judges are afraid, lest he should be listening at a certain
Window that looks into the Divan, having only a black Cyprus Curtain drawn
before it, and being himself a witness of their injustice, should send for
their heads as soon as they rise from the Tribunal.

It will be needless here to tell you what crimes deserve burning, what
empaling, what hanging, what merit casting into the Sea, and what offenses are
punished with drubbing. It Is sufficiently known, that all Offenders against
Mahometanism are only burnt and empal'd; Murder and Robbery is punished with
hanging and beheading; Adultresses are thrown into the Sea; but as for drubbing
every small fault procures it. And therefore since I can add nothing but what
has been abundantly discoursed already, I shall only relate a short but
pleasant story concerning the Justice of the Turks.

It is the custom of the Turkish Judges, to cause the party that brings his
cause before them to swear the truth of the matter alleged by laying his hand
upon the Alcoran, with this farther penalty, if what he swears to be true prove
false, he shall be forced to part with his Wife to the Embraces of another, at
least for such a time, which custom is more especially observed in Syria. One
time while I was at Antiochia, a young Merchant of that City, who was lately
Married to a beautiful Phoenician Damsel of Damascus, whom he passionately
loved, had some occasion of suit with a Merchant of Aleppo, at what time to
confirm the justice of his cause, he happened to let fall certain words, that
he wished another might enjoy his Wife, if the thing he had sworn were not
true. Whereupon the Judge gave judgment in favor of the young Married
Merchant, and condemned his Adversary.

He understanding well the penalty which the Law inflicted upon those that
swear a false Oath, would not abide by the first Sentence, but brought about
the business again, in hopes of a revenge, if he could so order the matter that
the young Merchant might be parted from his Wife, though it were for no longer
than Twenty Four Hours, long enough a conscience for a man to be fairly
Cornuted. To which purpose he made it his business to find out some Knight of
the Post, to swear that what his adversary had sworn was false. This was no
difficult thing to obtain, for among the Turks, there are several who will sell
their consciences at a cheap rate.

Nor was it long before the Aleppo Merchant being furnished for his Money,
brought Witnesses to swear according to his mind and direction. Which being
solemnly done, the Cadi turns the scale of Justice, and condemns the amorous
Antio^hian according to the Law, as a person who not regarding his word, was
unworthy to possess so fair a Treasure, to lose his Wife, and orders him to
deliver her up to his disposal. The unfortunate young man, heavily afflicted at
the thought of a loss so insupportable, made his Addresses to a certain Cheik,
who had the repute of a very wi^e and learned man, and to whom frequent
applications were made in difficult cases, desiring him to find out a knack to
puzzle the Law. He unfolded his condition to him, and besought him to invent
some way to mitigate the rigor of the Law, and to speak to the Cadi in his
behalf; withal, to Oil the wheels of his Invention, he gave the Cheik Ten
Sequins in hand, to the value of Three and Twenty French Crowns. The Cheik, who
was no fool, but a person of a quick wit, and sharp Imagination, told the young
Merchant, that it was an enterprise of great difficulty to move against the
power of the Law, however he made no question to find out some favorable
interpretation of it, and so to order the matter that the Cadi should confirm
his exposition, provided he would not be wanting on his part to prepare the
Judge for an Alteration of his opinion, by anointing the palm of his hand with
a small present of that effectual Balsom which men call Gold.

The Merchant of Antiochia, who would have parted with all Syria, rather than
his dear and beautiful Wife, was not unmindful of the Cheik's wholesome
admonition. So home he went, fetches Twenty Sequin^ more, and returns to his
Law-Doctor. When the Cheik beheld the fair Temptation ready, away he carry's
the young afflicted Lover to the Cadi, who having ordered the Client and his
Council admittance, Sir, said the Cheik, you have given sentence against this
person, which I cannot deny but to be conformable to Law; however, in regard it
is a great affliction to him, and that he is my particular friend, I come here
to beseech ye, that for my sake you would receive the little small present
which he makes ye, and permit me to construe this Law according to my slender
opinion. The Law is, that whoever he be that shall swear a false Oath, shall be
for ever parted from his Wife, or at least that another man shall enjoy her for
Twenty Four hours, and ly with her in the presence of her Husband. I confess,
the Law is a good Law, and the sentence you have given is a just sentence. But,
Sir, let me beg that it may be thus put in execution. The Merchant Wife shall
be parted from him for Twenty Four Hours as you have determined* But he that
enjoys her, and that shall embrace her in the presence of her Husband, shall be
if you are so pleased to decide it, the River that washes the Walls of
Antiochia, he has all the qualities which the Law requires, he is called
Orontes, and is of the Masculine Gender. The Cadi surpised at the ingenious
Evasion which the Cheik had found out to help him to the Twenty Sequins,
changed his former opinion, and pronounced Sentence of Execution according to
the cunning Advocates more gainful intimations, and dismissed both Parties out
of the Court, to the great joy of the young Married Merchant.

Of the Employments of the Turks.
MAn was born for Action, and those Nations are most worthy of praise, who best
employ themselves, and are most in business. True it is, that the final causes
of the Turkish industry, are the same with those of all other people,
necessity, profit, and pleasure; but in regard they are contented with very
little, therefore they are not much perplexed with an eager thirst after
wealth, not think it worth the breaking their Brains in the study of Arts and
Sciences. So that it is no wonder if you meet among them, with no more than
what is absolutely necessary for humane being; indispensable in the course of
Trade, or but meanly assistant to the divertisements of the Mind, or
recreations of the Body, or to pass away the time, which always grows tedious
to persons so lumpish and so little studious as the Mahometans.

Those Employments to which necessity constrains the Turks are Agriculture,
Baking, dressing Victuals, and Building. As to the first, the Christians are
only they that Till the Earth over all the Ottoman Empire. The Turks never put
their hands to the Plough, unless extremity constrain them; for there must be
neither Christians nor Armenians in that Village, where the Turks trouble their
heads either with Sowing or Reaping. As to the second, there are in
Constantinople not above seven Hundred Bakers that keep public Ovens, where
those that make their bread themselves may carry their dough to have it baked.
These Bakers, whom they call Ecmekgiler, generally keep a Mill in their own
houses, which Mills, to the number of Six Hundred, are turned by several sorts
of beasts, according as they are in bigness. There are neither Water nor
Windmills belonging to the City, nor to any of the adjacent parts. Neither is
their bread well tast^d nor good for any thing, but when it is hot, or only of
one days baking; for it being made up in flat round Cakes, presently grows hard
and dry.

Their Cookery is much like that in the Kitchen of Alexander the Great, who
refused the Cooks which the Queen of Caria sent him, saying, that his Governor
Leonidas had left him two, the best in the world at making Sawces to quick'n
the Appetite, that is to say, stirring in a Morning to sharpen the stomach
against Dinner, and Evening exercise to beget an Appetite for Supper; and
indeed those are the best sawces to make a man relish the Mohammedan Ragou's.
Pilaw, or Rice boiled in the Broth of flesh, or else with Water and Butter, is
one of their choicest dainties, and without which the greatest feast in the
world would signify little. With this they frequently mix a sort of curdled
Milk, which they call Ioghourt, Saffron to color it, Honey or Pekmes to
sweeten it, and several other Ingredients, such as the fantasticalness of a
depraved relish dictates to their humor. Their Roastmeats, which they call
Kiabab, of which they seldom make use, are neither larded nor stuffed, unless
it be with the fat of huge Caramania Mutton, and little better tasted than
their Boiled; and then lastly, in regard the pleasure of Prohibited Wine never
keeps them long carowsing after meals, they have snapp'd up their Dinners and
folded up their Sofra or Napkin, before a French man has supped up his first
mess of Pottage; a thing which the Turks never heard talk of.

This temperance, which would never agree with a German's or a French-mans
stomach, is of great advantage to the Turks, especially in War. For they never
burden their Camp with any other provisions, than Rice, Butter, or some few
dried Fruits, nor carry along with them an unprofitable train of people, to
provide and dress a Hundred varieties of dishes; nor are their Soldiers put to
it, to hazard their lives, by straying from their Body, in search of dainties
to satisfy their intemperance: And at home, a Tun of Rice, with a small
quantity of Butter, and dried fruits, will serve a numerous family for a whole
Twelvemonth. For my part I cannot attribute the strength and plumpness of the
Levantines to any other cause than to their temperance. So that were they
permitted to enjoy large possessions of their own, and to receive the Rents of
them to their own use, that sparing course of life would enrich more Families
in a year, than the Kitchen-expences of France have ruined Families in that
Kingdom in several. For the Kitchen in a House, is like the spleen in a man's
body, the larger it grows, the more it occasions the rest of the Vitals to
dwindle away.

I must confess, in favor of Galen, that the greatest part of the Eastern
people, especially the Merchants, Handicraft-Tradesmen, Travelers, and such
like, eat little at Dinner, but make their full meals at supper, contrary to
the custom of the Europeans, who according to the precepts of the Salern
School, follow the advice of Hippocrates. But notwithstanding this dispute
between the Two Princes of the Faculty of Physic, Custom (which is a second
Nature) is the best arbitrator of this difference. However, to say no more of
the Turkish Cookery, I cannot forbear at Paris to entertain my friends now and
then with a dish of Pilaw, Doulma, Bourek, Chorba, and other Eastern Ragous, to
show that I have dieted with all the Eastern people.

Now as for their Architecture, if they have any certain Rules among
themselves, they never make use of them for their private edifices. There are
none but their public structures, as Mosquees, Baths, Hospitals,
Caravansera's, Basars, and Besestins, which have anything passable to commend
their Art. For in their other private Buildings you shall hardly meet with any
thing, but only some Rooms Wainscoted, gilt and fretwork'd, and those also but
very few, and without any other furniture than Sopha, spread with its Minders
and Coverlets. So that whoever considers the Turks frugal manner of living,
will easily believe their grand Design to be rather the enlargment of their
Dominions, than to establish the prosperity of what they have won already. So
vain a thing it is, among them to seek for Amphitheaters, Paintings,
Sculptures, or any other rarities, which are the products of noble Arts. They
are the sworn enemies of ingenuity, not having any thing among them, but what
their own natural stupidity prompts them to, for the mere support of humane
life: So far are they from the ancient quaintness and ingenuity of the
sedulous. Egyptians, Arabians, and Greeks, whose Territories they now Lord
over, tyrannizing over their posterity with so much cruelty, that they will not
suffer them to improve those Arts or Sciences among themselves, which their
Ancestors first found out, nor to make use of that knowledge which they have
gained elsewhere, though in the practice of Physic, which they so much admire.
So that should an Akin or Physician but attempt the Anatomy or dissection of
any Creature, for the discovery of some new benefit to Mankind, he might assure
himself, notwithstanding the respect they bear to his profession, of such an
unreasonable amercement, as would consume in one day, the gains of all his life
before.

But I must forbear to speak any more in the dispraise of this Barbarous
people, lest they should revenge themselves upon me with Interest when they
find me next in their clutches, especially being upon the point of undertaking
another Voyage to the same places, that nothing may escape me which is worthy
observation in those parts. I shall therefore conclude with my Prayers to the
supreme Lord of all things, that he would be pleased to inspire the most
puissant Monarch in the Universe, with a design, which would not fail of
success, under the conduct of his Piety, and supported by the Valor of a
Prince who justly merits the Title of most Christian King, and happily
Victorious.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
HOw to furnish ones self for a Voyage to Constantinople. p. 1 A Draught of the
Hellespont and Propontis. Fig. I.
2 The Hellespont how bounded. ibid Village of Infidels, why so called. 3
Plenty of Provision there. ibid. Xanthus and Scamander famous Rivers, why.
ibid. The New Castle of Asia described. 4 Turks Bread not so white as ours,
why. 5 Ruins of Troy described. 6 Island of Tenedos. 8 An Adventure of the
Authors with two French Officers. 9 A Relation of Two famous Exploits performed
by the Venetians against the Turks. 11 The New Castle of Europe described. 15
The Ignorance of the people which border on the Hellespont. 16 The Dardanels
described. 17 Why so called. 18 Witchraft of the Inhabitants. 19 The manner of
Saluting these Castles. 21 A remarkable story of a French Admiral. 22
Lampsacus, Magnesia, and Myus described. 26 Gallipoli described. 27 Directions
for Sea men how to steer through the Hellespont. ibid. The Propontis, why so
called, its extent and situation. 28 Cyzicum, its ancient and present state. 29
Nice Described. 31 Montagniac formerly Apamea described. 32 Nicomedia, an
historical account of it. 33 An accident that happened to the Author. 36 A
Mohammedan Miracle. 37 The Sea of Calcedon, its extent. 38 Fanari-Kios^, a House
of Pleasure belonging to the Grand Signor, described. ibid. Calcedon, its
History. 40 Rodosto, a particular account of it. 43 Perinthus or Heraclea
described. 44 Polygamie not the best way to people a Country. 48 Cotton, how
sow'n and gathered. 49 A remarkable story of the deliverance of a Venetian from
Turkish slavery. 50 Isles of Marmara, their Description. 52 Isles of the
Princes described. 54 Caloyers, their manner of living. 55 Fig. II.
The Draught and Description of Constantinople. 57 Its admirable situation. 59
Its Plenty. 60 Its Antiquity and various Names. 61 Its form and extent. 64 Its
Walls and Gates, with a description of the Castle of the seven Towers. 65 The
liberty of the Prisoners in that Castle. 66 An Account of Bellisarius's Tower,
and the Historical Pillar. 68 What befell a ra^h young Traveller who ascended
that Pillar. 69 The Fountain of Sanctification much reverenced by the Greeks.
71 Chief Gardiner's Kiosc described. ibid. A Description of Two rich Kiosc's
built by Sultan Soliman. 74 The Circuit and Inhabitants of the Grand Seraglio.
76 Fig. III.
A Draught of the Seraglio. 77 The French Kings question about the Seraglio,
and the Author's answer. 78 The only probable way of getting into the Women's
Apartments. 79 Fig. IV.
A Draught of the Gate of the Seraglio, and its explanation. 80 Sancta Sophia,
by whom founded. 81 Its Rebuilding and several Repairs. 83 Its forms and
dimensions, and description. 85 A Draught of the Platform, and its explanation.
90 Fig. V.
The Turks opinion about Our Savior's Crucifiction. 99 A reflection upon the
Greeks, and such Travelers as have not been faithful in their Relations about
Sancta Sophia. 103 A Draught of the North West Prospect of this Church. 104
Fig. VI.
The Outside described. 106 A Pleasant Relation of what happened to the Author
about his drawing the inside of Sancta Sophia. 110 A Draught of its South
Prospect. 117 Fig. VII.
The South Prospect described. 118 Fountains always adjoining to their
Mosquees, and why. 119 A Draught of the inside of Sancta Sophia the East end.
121 Fig. VIII
Its Description. 122 A Draught of the inside of Sancta Sophia the West end.
128 Fig. IX.
The Author in great danger. 129 The Description of the West end. 131 The
ancient and present state of the Greek Church. 136 Their Patriarch. ibid. The
Simony and corruption used to attain the Patriarchship. 138 The manner of
installing the Patriarch. 139 Their Archbishops, Bishops, etc. 141 The
Caloyers. 142 Their Discipline. 143 A story of a young Friar. 144 The
Lay-brothers 146 The Secular Priests. 147 The great care used by the Greek
Deacons in the choice of their Wives. 148 The Officers of the Greek Church. 150
Their manner of celebrating the feast of Saint Michael. ibid. Their Celebration
of Easter. 154 A strange custom with a pleasant Accident. 155 Stratagems used
by the Greek Priests to open the Purses of the Laity. 156 Their Faith, and
general ignorance. 158 Their Sacraments. How they baptize. 159 Their Holy Oil,
and the dispute between the Armenians and them about it. 160 Sacrament of the
Order. 161 Sacrament of Penitence. 162 The Eucharist how received. 163 Their
Marriages. 164 A politic Law. 165 Their Festivals. 166 A strange and idle
custom of the Women in Mitylene. 167 The Religious Worship of the Turks, and
how they ought to be qualified. 169 Their Faith, and how they came to believe
in only one God. 170 Their Circumcision, how performed. 173 A wise Saying of
the Turks. 176 Three sorts of Renegado's. 177 The Turks opinion of such as dye
before Circumcision. 178 Their duty toward their Neighbor. 179 Scolding or
Fighting how punished. 180 A Story of a French Slave, and the civility of his
Turkish Master. 181 The Civility of some Turkish Merchants to the Author. 182
Their times of public Prayer. 183 How they are called thereto. 184 A Tragical
story of a Greek boy. 185 The Ablutions of the Turks in general. 186 Their
Baths. 187 Their too frequent use prejudicial. 188 Their manner of washing and
scrubbing. 190 The cleanliness of the Turks. 192 Their venerable esteem for
Paper. 193 A merry story of a Mohammedan. 194 The Turks Gouslu or Purification.
196 Their Abdest or Ablution. 197 A story of a Mohammedan Heretic. 198 The
colors worn in Turkey, and their veneration for Green. 200 The witty answer of
Sha Abbas, Emperor of Persia, to the Grand Signor'^ Ambassador. 201 The Turks
devout behavior during Prayer time. 202 The Discourse of a Greek Christian
with the Author. 203 Fig. X.
The Relation and Draught of the severl postures used by the Turks during
Prayer. 205 Some of their Prayers. 206 What they do after Prayers. 208 Of their
Mosquees or Temples. 209 The Description of Sultan Achmet's Mosquee. 210 Fig.
XI.
A Draught of its Elevation and Platform. 214 The description of Sultan
Soliman's Mosquee. 215 Fig. XII.
A Draught of the Elevation of the Solimany 219 F. XIII.
A Draught of its Platform. 221 The description of Validea's Mosquee. 223 F.
XIV.
Its Draught. 226 The North East Wind dangerous to Constantinople. 225 The
Relation of a great Shipwreck. 227 The East and West Wind most troublesome to
the Ships in Harbor. 228 Number of Mosquees in Constantinople and Turkey. 229
A pleasant story of a Dervich. 230 Mohammedan Ecclesiastical Officers. 231 Their
Hospitals and Fountains. 233 Their Courts of Justice. 234 Several Crimes, how
punished. 235 A pleasant story of an Antiochian Merchant. 236 Employments of
the Turks. 239 Their Cookery. 240 A saying of Alexander the Great. ibid. The
advantage the Turks reap by their temperance. 241 They prefer a Supper to a
Dinner. ibid. Their Architecture. 242 Their degeneracy from their Ancestors.
ibid. The Conclusion. 243
ADVERTISEMENTS.
VADE MECVM, or the Necessary Companion: Containing, 1. Sir Samuel Morland's
Perpetual Almanac, readily showing the Day of the Month, and Moveable Fe^sts
and Terms, for any year past, present or to come, curiously graved in Copper;
with Tables of the Fixed Terms, Feasts and Remarkable Days; Suns Rising,
Setting, and Place; Moons Changes and Place, Time of High Water, Principal
Fairs in England and Wales, Length of Days and Nights, with other useful
things. 2. The Years of each King's Reign from the Norman Conquest compared
with the Years of Christ. 3. Directions for every Month in the Year, what is to
be done in the Orchard, Kitchen, and Flower-Gardens. 4. The Reduction of
Weights, Measures, and Coins, wherein is a Table of the Assize of Bread. 5. A
Table wherein any Number of Farthings, Halfpence, Pence, or Shillings, are
ready cast up; of great use to all Traders. 6. The Interest and Rebate of
Money; the Forbearance, Discompt, and Purchase of Annuites. 7. The Rates of
Post-Letters, both ^nland and Outland. 8. The Principal Roads in England,
showing the Distance of one Town from another in measured and computed Miles,
and the Distance of each from London; also the Market-Townes on each Road, with
the Days of the Week the Markets are kept on; as likewise the Hundred and
County each Town stands in. 9. The Names of the Counties, Cities, and
Borough-Towns in England and Wales, with the number of Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses chosen therein to serve in Parliament. 10. The usual and Authorized
Rates or Fares of Coachmen, Carmen, and Watermen. The Third EDITION, much
enlarged, and Printed in a long Octavo, like the ordinary Paper-pocket-books,
price 2 s.

TABLES of EXCISE for Strong and Small Beer, Ale, Cider, Coffee, Chocolate,
Tea, and Sherbet, according to the present Establishment; also Tables to reduce
Gallons into Beer or Ale Barrels and Firkins; likewise an Abstract of all the
Duties enjoined, Penalties inflicted, and what else is chiefly contained in the
Laws of Excise. The 2d Edition, whereto is added Mr. Mayne's and Mr. Walker's
Tables for Ganging. Twelves* Price 1 s.

Both sold by Thomas Passinger at the Three Bibles on London Bridge, and John
Playford, in Little-Britain.

THe Doctrine of INTEREST both Simple and compound, explained in a more exact
and satisfactory method than has hitherto been published, discovering the
Errors of the ordinary Tables of Rebate for Annuites at Simple Interest; and
containing Tables for the Interest and Rebate of Money for Days, Months, and
Years, both at simple and compound Interest: Also Tables for the Forbearance,
Discompt, and Purchase of Annuities; all exactly calculated; As likewise
Equation of Payments made practicable and useful for all Merchants and others.
Together with diverse other useful Reflections. Humbly presented to the King's
most excellent Majesty, by Sir Samuel Morland Knight and Barronet. Octavo.
Price 3 s. Sold by Robert Bolter at the Turks-Head in Cornhill.

THe History of the most unfortunate Prince King Edward the Second, with
Political Observations on Him and his unhapy Favorites Gaveston and Spencer;
written by the Right Honorable Henry Lord Viscount Faulkland, Price bound 1 s.

ENgland's Black Tribunal, set forth in the Trial of King Charles the First, by
a pretended High-Court of Justice, Ian. 30. 1648. with his Speech on the
Scaffold; together with the Dying-speeches of the Nobility and Gentry who were
Inhumanly murdered for their Loyalty, viz. the Earl of Strafford, Dr. Laud
Archbishop of Canterbury, Duke Hamilton, Earl of Darby, Marquess of Montross,
Sir Henry Hide, Sir Henry Slingsby, Colonel Penruddock, Colonel Gerrard,
Collone^ Andrews, Dr. Hewit, and others. The price bound 2 s.

WIt and Mirth, an Antidote against Melancholy, compounded of new ingenious
Poems, witty Ballads, and new and pleasant Songs and Catches; newly Reprinted
with several Additions. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

A Second Part to the Antidote against Melancholy, contaning merry Tales, witty
Ie^^s and Bulls, Price bound 1 s.

THe Christian Man's Duty, delivered in a Sermon in the Temple Church, by R.
Ball, D. D. and Master of the Temple. Price 6 d.

THe whole Book of Psalms put into English Meter, all to be Sung to the common
Tunes used in Parish Churches; by the Reverend Henry King, late Lord Bishop of
Chichester, either for public use in Church, or in private Families. The Price
bound 2 s.

THe Psalms of David, and other Sacred Hymns, according to the Common Tunes
sung in Parish Churches, composed in Four parts in Folio. Price 2 s. 6 d.

THe Psalms in Meter, as they are sung in all Parish Churches, with the proper
Tune to every Psalm; composed in three Parts, viz. Cantus, Medius, and Bassus,
in a small Volume, convenient for to carry in the Pocket to Church. The price
bound 3 s.

A Brief Introduction to the skill of Music, both Vocal and Instrumental,
together with the Art of Composing Music in parts, by I. Playford, in Octavo.
Price Bound 2 s.

THe Musical Companion, containing variety of New Catches and Rounds of three
and four Parts; also choice Songs, Airs, and Dialogues, of two, three, and
four Parts, in Quarto. Price bound 3 s. 6 d.

MVsicks Recreation on the Lyra-Viol, containing new Airs, Tunes, and Lessons,
with Instructions for Learners. The Price stitcht 2 s.

THe Dancing Master, or plain and ea^ie Rules to dance Country Dances, with the
proper Tunes to each Dance to play on the Treble Violin. The price Bound 2 s. 6
d.

MVsicks Handmaid, containing new Lessons for the Harpsichord and Virginals,
newly Reprinted, with Additions of plain and easy Rules for Beginners to play
from the Book, all engraven on Copper Plates. The Price 2 s. 6 d.

THe Pleasant Companion, containing new Airs and Tunes for the Flagelet, with
plain Instructions for Learners. The Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

APollo's Banquet, a Book of Tunes for the Treble-Violin, containing variety of
new Airs, and Theater-Tunes and Iiggs; to which is added, the proper Tunes to
the French Dances, as they are in use at Court and Dancing-Schools: All which
Tune^^ay be performed upon the Recorder or Flute. Price 1 s. 6 d.

THe Delightful Companion, Containing new Lessons and Instructions for the
Flute or Recorder. Price 1 s. 6 d.

All these are to be ^old at John Playford's Shop near the Temple-Church.

FINIS.

