DISCOURSES Upon several Divine Subjects.

BY THO. GREGORY, M. A. Late of Wadham College in OXFORD, And now Lecturer of
Fulham near London.

LONDON, Printed for R. Sare, at Greys-Inn-Gate in Holbourn. MDCXCVI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY, Lord Bishop
of LONDON, DEAN of the CHAPEL, And one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.
My most Honored Lord and Patron,
THE great Blessings which I enjoy under the happy Influence of your Lordship's
Favor, oblige me with all due Humility to lay these Discourses at your
Lordship's Feet: not as though I can be so vainly arrogant, as to imagine they
any ways deserve your Perusal or Acceptance, but purely as an Acknowledgment of
your Lordship's Goodness, and an hearty, though poor, Expression of my unfeigned
Gratitude. Most of them have been compiled since your Lordship vouchsafed to
receive me under your Wings, and therefore it may be expected, that they
approve themselves in some measure worthy of so noble a Patronage. This (I
confess) I have ambitiously endeavored effectually to accomplish; But if I
fall short of so Great an Enterprise, I humbly hope for Pardon from your
Lordship's Candor, which the World has so long and so deservedly admired. I am,

My most Honored Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble, most Grateful, most
Dutiful Servant, T. G.

TO THE READER.
IT IS the indispensable Duty of every Faithful Christian, to obviate (as far as
he is able) the growing Distempers of the Age he lives in. This I have, with
the greatest Sincerity, though not with the greatest Abilities, attempted in the
following Discourses, which are designed to preserve thee, through God's
Blessing, from those dangerous Rocks so many poor Souls unhappily split upon,
viz. Schism, Skepticism, Worldly-Mindedness, Heresy, False Notions of God and
of his Holy Covenant, and Despair. If my Endeavors prove successful in any of
these Points, I unfeignedly beseech thee to give God the Glory, and Me thy
Prayers.

Farewell.

The principal ERRATA of the Press are thus to be Corrected.
PAge 41. Line 18. for where read were. p. 49. l. 18. f. time r. times. p. 53.
l. 6. f. who had traduced r. who traduced. p. 69. l. 6. f. thought r. thoughts.
ibid. l. 9. f. of the lust r. of lust. ib. l. 11. f. tempers r. tempests. p.
74. l. 27. f. false-glossing r. false-glozing. p. 76. l. 17. f. irradations r.
irradiations. p. 78. l. 20. f. momentary r. momentany. p. 82. l. 25. f. Elapses
r. illapses. p 96. l. 5. f. is urged r. is he urged. p. 102. l. 17. f. as r.
of. p. 106. l. 17. f. entered his Soul r. entered into his Soul. p. 110. l. 23.
f. to r. and. p. 136. l. 1. f. these r. those. p. 140. l. 8. f. a Being taken
up r. a Being wholly taken up. ib. l. 26. f. Blessedness r. Blessed. p. 152. l.
11. f. momentary r. momentany. p. 115. l. 7. f. places r. place. p. 156. l. 18.
f. fleting r. flitting. p. 161. l. 24. f. divest r. divest. p. 164. l. 16, 17.
f. declares Sinners r. declares to Sinners. p. 165. l. 18. f. waits their r.
waits for their. p. 166. l. 28. f. appears r. appear. p. 168. l. 8. dele too.
p. 179. l. 26. f. Symbals r. Symbols. p. 187. l. 21. f. the World r. this
World. p. 188. l. 10. f. (...) r. (...). ib. l. 26. f. divested r. divested. p.
194. Marg. f. M. Osyr. r. M. Tyr. p. 208. l. 8. f. farther is r. farther, he
is. p. 211. l. 24. f. the heavenly r. thy heavenly. ib. l. 11. f. He Redeemed
thee too r. He Redeemed thee. Redeemed thee too. p. 222. l. 4. f. Countries r.
Counties. p. 239. l. 15. f. (...) r. (...).

1 KINGS xviii. 21. How long halt ye between two Opinions? If the Lord be God,
follow him; but if Baal, then follow him.


THese Words are a just Expostulation of a Prophet of the Lord with the
rebellious and stiff-necked Sons of Jacob and Joseph. God had so fully revealed
himself unto them, and so plainly chalked out the way, which they should walk
in, that 'twas absolutely impossible they should be either ignorant of the one,
or mistaken in the other, without willful Perverseness and the most studied
Prevarication. He made himself known even by his name Jehovah to their Fathers
in Egypt, and assured them, by many miraculous or Supernatural Acts of
Vengeance upon the Heads of their Enemies, that He, who is the Author of
Nature, the Controller of Second Causes, and the Sovereign Commander of all the
World, vouchsafed, in a most peculiar manner, to become their God. He brought
them out of that Land of their Captivity, that House of their Bondage, with a
mighty hand and stretched-out Arm: marching himself at the Head of their Armies
in a Pillar of Cloud by Day, and a Pillar of Fire by Night. He afterward most
solemnly proclaimed himself to them before the glorious Battalions of attending
Angels upon Mount Sinai: even entering into a Covenant with his People; and, as
their Lord and King, giving them Ordinances, Laws, and Statutes, for the
Regulation and Government of their Public and Private Concerns, their Lives
and Polity. In short, He made Israel alone, of all the Nations of the Earth,
his Firstborn; arrayed him with the Excellency of Dignity, and the Excellency
of Power; caused all his Brethren to bow down before him, and his name to be a
Blessing and a Praise in all the Earth.

And yet so perverse and untoward was the Disposition of this People, so
monstrously disingenuous and ungrateful their Returns, that they never
seriously considered what he had done, the wonderful Mercies he daily showed to
them; but always turned their Backs, and fell away like their Forefathers,
starting aside like a broken Bow. Though the Sons of Levi throughout all their
Tribes instructed them continually in the Law of the Lord, and Prophets were
sent in every Generation to continue them in the Knowledge and Service of their
God; nay, though God, to prevent their seeking after lying Divinations, was
pleased, in a most extraordinary manner, to reside himself amongst them, and to
be always ready, by his Urim and Thummim, to answer and direct them in all
momentous Emergencies; yet, they perpetually affronted him to his very Face,
and provoked him to Jealousy by their shameless Backslidings. They forsook God
their Savior, and lightly esteemed the Rock of their Salvation: not only
rejecting him from being their King when he reigned with the tender Mercies and
Indulgencies of a Father; but also diminishing him even in his Godhead, by
setting up other Lords besides him to Rule over them. No sooner did the
Government 1 Kings 12.30.
introduce or 2 Kings 12.3. Chapter 18.4.
tolerate the Superstitions of strange Worship, but they displayed at large the
Levity and Baseness of their Temper; either causlesly falling off from the God
of their Fathers, and devoting themselves wholly to the Abominations of their
Neighbors, or sacrilegiously dividing between Him and Them, between the Lame
and the Blind, and the Almighty God. The Temple of the Lord shall not be shut
up nor broken down, if the Houses of Idols may also stand open and be
frequented; nor the Priests of the Living God be molested in their Office,
provided the same Liberty be allowed to the Worshippers of Demons. In a word,
They Will be contented to Worship sometimes before the Ark of the Lord, if at
others they may as religiously bow themselves in the House of Rimmon; and
devoutly sing Praises to the God of Heaven, may they join likewise in the
Adorations and Services of Baal.

This lukewarm, indifferent, trimming Behavior, this desultory, faithless,
ungodly Temper being justly reproved and condemned by the Prophets, was so far
from returning to a due stability in the ways of Godliness, that it ran out
into the violent, outrageous Extremes of Bigotry and Superstition: not
contenting it self any longer with the Schismatical Erection of Altars against
Altars, but under the specious Colors of ancient Sophistry, the plausible
Pretenses of a more excellent way of Worship, proceeding even to throw down all
the Altars of God in the Land, to revile, persecute, and slaughter his
Servants, and to advance and cherish the Authors of Schism, the Incendiaries of
Church and State, and the Patriots of their Irreligion, the Prophets of Baal
only. As though to serve God in his own way was an unreasonable Imposition upon
the Liberty of Conscience, and the Patriarchs and Prophets were all Idiots and
Madmen, because they and their Families would serve the Lord.

This revolting, light, unstable People, the Prophet Elijah (I say)
expostulates with in the Text; plainly affirming, that it is altogether
inconsistent with the Nature of true Piety to halt between two Opinions, or (as
Grotius explains it) to alternate and vary in the Objects of their Devotion,
sometimes Worshipping God, and sometimes Baal; it being their indispensible
Duty, once for all, to satisfy themselves thoroughly which of these two is God,
and then for ever to renounce the one, and to fix and center in the Service of
the other. How long (says he) halt ye between two Opinions? If the Lord be God,
follow him; But if Baal, then follow him.

How seasonably we may, with this Expostulation in our Mouth, address our
selves to the Present Age, I need not inform you. Every Man, that looks
carefully about him, and seriously considers the present Posture of Affairs,
sees it is absolutely necessary. The Life and Spirit of Religion seem to be
banished out of our Streets; and nothing but Skepticism and Incredulity,
Superstition and Profaneness, Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, to dwell in our
Land. To promote their own Ends, or the Interest of a Party, Men profess
themselves Sons of the Established Church, frequent her Assemblies, conform to
her Injunctions, and appear zealous and devout in her holy Offices. But all
this while they do but flatter her with their Mouth, and dissemble with her in
their Tongue; for their Heart is so far from being whole with her, that they
detest her Constitution, repine at her Establishment, and constantly strike in
with her deadly Enemies, endeavoring by all means possible to supplant and
overthrow her. They talk perpetually of the Loveliness of Friendship, and wish
that our Jerusalem might at length be at Peace and Unity within her self: and
yet at the same time they think it no Sin to frequent unlawful Assemblies; though
they thereby widen her Breaches, strengthen the Hands of her Enemies, confirm
their Prejudices, and become the Abetters and Promoters of an execrable Schism.
In a word, They are exactly of the same Temper and Complexion with the
upbraided People in the Text, standing ready, as the Tide of their Interest
turns, to revolt from God to his Rival, from Truth to Falsehood, from Union to
Schism, from the Church to a Conventicle.

Now this indifferent Temper they ordinarily style Moderation; which is a
Virtue truly excellent and laudable in it self, but the least understood by
these Men of any in the Circle. That only obliges Men to manage their Disputes,
and to assert their Principles, of whose Truth they are fully persuaded, with
Temper: but This allows them to have no Principles at all, or at least to act
as if they had none; and consequently is so far from answering its Character,
that it is a very indecent and unreasonable thing, odious and abominable in the
Sight of God and Good Men, most impious in its Nature, and pernicious in its
Consequences. Which will evidently appear from these three Considerations: I.
That it plainly demonstrates, that Men are acted by no fixed and steady
Principles, but are of vagrant and loose Minds, unresolved in their Judgments,
unsettled in the Faith, and in truth of very little or no Religion at all. II.
That it exposes every particular Person to all the various and fantastic
Spirits of Error and Delusion. And, III. The whole Community to Ruin and
Destruction.


1. This indifferent Temper is both impious in its Nature, and also pernicious
in its Consequences, because it plainly demonstrates that Men are acted by no
fixed and steady Principles, but are of vagrant and loose Minds, unresolved in
their Judgments, unsettled in the Faith, and in truth of very little or no
Religion at all. Origin tells Celsus, that such is the Nature and Excellency of
Christianity, that it utterly stripped and divested Mankind of all their
hereditary and most prevailing Immoralities: the Scythian thereby becoming mild
and courteous, the Persian chaste and continent, the Roman humble and
condescending, and the Greek veracious and modest. But had the Greek, together
with the Profession of Christianity, still retained his Vanity and Falsness,
the Roman his Pride and Haughtiness, the Persian his Softness and Incontinence,
and the Scythian his Fierceness and Inhumanity: Had (I say) these Nations, thus
divided between the Christian Virtues and their Pagan Vices, Christ and their
Idols, God and their Lusts, the Father had never gloried in their Accession to
the Church, but most deservedly excluded them from the Denomination of true
Believers. For how can he sincerely Believe God to be the Best of Beings, who
will not Love and Serve him with his whole Heart? or Christ to be his only
Savior, who shares his Affections between Him and Belial? How can he believe
Christianity to be a truly divine and heavenly Instituti-who affects it with
Lukewarmness, Indifferency, or Moderation? or how can he contend earnestly for
the Faith once delivered to the Saints, who still fluctuates and wavers between
two Opinions? The Indifferency of his Temper, abundantly betrays the
Incredulity of his Heart; and having no settled Principles, he is in danger
(like a Ship without Ballast) to be over-set with every Wind of Delusion and
Imposture. The Second Thing to be considered.

2. This indifferent Temper is both impious in its Nature, and also pernicious
in its Consequences, because it exposes every particular Person to all the
various and fantastic Spirits of Error and Delusion. Were Men once well
grounded in the Principles of their Religion, and able to give a Reason for
their profession of the Faith; did they not take up their Religion upon Trust,
and (like the Turks and Pagans) only therefore embrace it, because consonant to
the Belief and Practice of their Progenitors; they would be wonderfully
delighted in the Statutes of the Lord, and walk without Offense in the Path of
his Commandments. The multifarious Contrivances of the Enemy, and the Deceiver,
would be easily detected and unravelled by their Reason; which, assisted by the
unerring Records of Divine Revelation, would break through all the Fogs and
Vapors of Deceit, with the Strength and Brightness of the faithful Witness in
Heaven. But when the Mind lies uncultivated, and devoid of true Principles, and
is not framed into a Right Understanding and Judgment of Divine Things; when
Men cannot rationally account for any, and therefore are indifferently inclined
to all the ways of Worship, the Tempter will soon appear in the beautiful Form
of an Angel of Light; and under that disguise, unhappily decoy them into the
endless Mazes and Labyrinths of Error. The Shadow of Religion, to their
unskilful Judgments, will soon be effectually recommended for the Substance;
and the External, fallacious, superficial Signs, be mistaken for the Interior
and Real Acts of Devotion. A judicious, safe, well-grounded Piety, will be
renounced for the wild irrational Dictates of Melancholy and Enthusiasm; and
one fantastical, senseless, unintelligible Interpreter of the Divine Oracles,
be preferred before ten Men, that can render a Reason. In a word, They Will be
induced either totally to reject the Word of God for their own pretended
Inspirations; the undefiled Law of the Most High, for the soul, impure
Suggestions of their ungodly Spirits; or at least, to mingle with the Waters of
Life, the putrid Streams that flow from their own Cisterns. This I need not
prove from the Records of Antiquity: our own Nation being a sad Demonstration
of it at this day. For how are some of our Brethren, though they enjoy the most
blessed Opportunities of a right Information, tossed to and fro (like foolish
Children) with every Wind of strange Doctrine? How are they led away by every
Impostor from the simplicity of the Gospel? and spoiled and plundered of their
Christian Armor by the false Prophets, that are gone out into the World? Alas!
were it not for the decent and orderly, the wise and prudent, the beautiful and
heavenly Constitution of our Established Church, This Land, which was not long
since the Glory of all Lands, would really be nothing else, but a Spiritual
Bedlam: all the various kinds of Spiritual Phrenzy and Madness having entered
into it, and uncomfortably filling its mournful Habitations with their
outrageous Blasphemies and unintelligible Jargon. No Notion so absurd and
ridiculous, no Doctrine so monstrous and paradoxical, no Principles so wicked
and atheistical, but what find some dreaming Prophet amongst us to espouse and
assert them; and that Dreamer, though he has neither Piety nor Learning, nothing,
but the loathsome detestable Vernish of Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, to
distinguish him from his Neighbors; has, notwithstanding, his Followers,
Abetters; and Admirers. Men's indifferency in the Affairs of Religion
unfortunately leads them to those unlawful Assemblies, where their unstable and
treacherous Hearts are easily taken captive by the Spirit of Delusion; so that
under the pretense of trying all things, they really let go all, that is good;
from Neuters, or indifferent and lukewarm Friends, commencing virulent,
irreconcilable Enemies to the Preachers of sound Doctrine. To such Delusions
and Inpostures (I say) are Men unhappily exposed by their unaccountable
Indifferency in the Affairs of Religion. But, alas! this is not all; For,

3. This indifferent Temper not only exposes particular Persons to the various
and fantastic Spirits of Error and Delusion, but the whole Community likewise
to Ruin and Destruction. A Kingdom divided against it self (says our Mar. 3.24.
Lord) cannot stand; and by these means this Nation stands divided into several
Factions and Parties, who with all imaginable Rancor and Bitterness endeavor
to devour and prey upon one another. Our Enemies then may save themselves the
danger of venturing their Necks among us. Let them have but Patience, and we
shall do their work for them. What their Plots and Cabals, their Fire and
Faggots, their Gunpowder and Treason could never effect, our Enmities and
Divisions, our Fewds and Animosities, our Strises and Seditions will certainly
bring to pass. These disunite and weaken our Forces in the day of Battle. These
divide our Councils and evacuate the wise Sanctions and Decrees of our Synods.
These pull down our Fortresses, our Walls, and Bulwarks, and expose us naked
and defenseless to the Incursions of the Common Enemy. Though therefore we never
so solemnly protest against the Innovations of Popery, and zealously declare
our Abhorrence and Detestation of its impious Doctrines, unless we endeavor,
by all lawful and warrantable means to cement these Differences, we our selves
are the Men who maintain its Interest here, and make way for its unhappy
Readmission into the Land. May the Good Lord of Heaven and Earth then open all
our Eyes, and cause us to know the Things which belong unto our Peace, before
our Sins provoke him to hide them finally from our Eyes.

And thus you have seen, how much this indifferent Temper falls short of the
Character some Men unskilfully put upon it. That it is so far from being allied
to that truly excellent and laudable Virtue, Moderation, that it is a very
indecent and unreasonable thing; odious and abominable in the sight of God and
Good Men; most impious in its Nature, and pernicious in its Consequences. That
it plainly demonstrates, that Men are acted by no fixed and steady Principles,
but are of vagrant and loose Minds, unresolved in their Judgments, unsettled in
the Faith, and in truth of very little or no Religion at all. That it not only
exposes particular Persons to the various and fantastic Spirits of Error and
Delusion, but the whole Community likewise to Ruin and Destruction.

Let me then entreat you, my Brethren, for the Credit and Reputation of our
Common Christianity; for the Honor of our most Beautiful, Prudent, and Pious
Mother, the Church of England; for the Preservation, Safety, and Happiness of
these Kingdoms; as you love your God, your Religion, your Country, your own
Souls; to be steadfast and immovable in the Profession of the Faith, not walking
deceitfully and in Masquerade, as (you see) the manner of some is, nor basely
prostituting your Consciences by an hypocritical, prevaricating Behavior to
your Secular Interest; but, in spite of all the Terrors and Allurements of the
World, serving God with a faithful and true heart, with Uprightness and
Sincerity, all the days of your Life. And to this End, give me leave to advise
these few things.

1. That you call no Man Master upon Earth; i. e. That you never have any Man's
Learning or Piety in such Veneration, as to receive all he says for an Oracle,
for an infallible Rule of your Faith and Manners; but that you always remember,
that you have a great Master in Heaven, who has given you a sure and certain
Rule to walk by, and who expects your Obedience without any Reserve. This
Caution was given by our Lord himself to his Disciples; Mat. 23.
and it truly favors of the excellent Wisdom and Providence of its Author. For
the Proselites of the Pharisees were possessed with such a Persuasion of the
great Sanctity and unparalleled Learning of their Masters, that they entirely
resigned themselves up to their Conduct and Guidance, becoming thereby, both in
Notion and Practice, twofold more the Children of Hell than themselves; and
those famous Contests between the Thomists and Scotists and other Disputants in
the Church of Rome, are wholly to be ascribed to the overweening Opinion which
they all pertinaciously retain for their own Patriarchs. Nay, the First Sin
that crept into the World, came this way: for I conceive, with a great and
learned Joseph Mede. Book 1. Disc. xl.
Author of our own, that 'twas the too great Opinion which the Woman
entertained of the Wisdom of the Serpent, that induced her first to listen to,
and then to comply with his Suggestions; and I doubt not but that the Apostate
Spirits themselves, might still have kept their Heavenly Habitations, had not
their deluded Fancies doubled the Glory of that Son of the Morning, Lucifer. In
short, Vid. Hen. Dodwell Ep. 2. Sect. 5. and Steph. Penton. Appar. Spec. ad
Theol. par. 1. cap. 6.
It Is the superstitious Reverence and unaccountable Honor, which the Schoolmen
pay to Authority, that betrays them into many unhappy Errors, as well in their
Theological as Philosophical Speculations. Honor Men then only as Men.
Whatever their Natural or Acquired Excellencies may be, they are all subject to
Error. Try all their Doctrines therefore, whether they be of God; and believe
nothing, though enforced with the greatest Human Authority, unless upon due
Examination you find it consonant to Scripture and Reason. And so I come to the

2. Thing advisable; which is, That you would try all Things, and not take up
your Religion upon Trust, upon the Authority and Recommendation of your
Natural, Civil, or Spiritual Fathers; but, that you would let it be (what it
ought to be) a Rational Service the Result of your own mature impartial, and
well-weigh'd Considerations. And what in this I say unto you, I would say more
particularly to our Dissenting Brethren. They are equally guilty with the
Romanists in this Point; depending too securely upon the Authority, and
acquiescing in the Reports and Representations of their Leaders. I would
therefore (I say) most earnestly entreat them, as they will answer it at the
Dreadful Day of Judgment, when every Man must stand or fall by his own
Conscience, to judge for themselves; and fairly and ingenuously, severely and
impartially, to weigh and consider the Doctrine and Discipline, the Principles
and Order, of our Established Church. Could we thus far prevail; I am verily
parsuaded that those Heats and Passions which now so tumultuously boil in some
Men's Bowels against her, would all evaporate and expire; and we should soon
walk together into the House of God as Friends. Which I therefore believe,
because it is well known, that many of her Adversaries have been perfectly
reconciled to her upon lesser Motives: only by venturing to consult their own
Senses, and calmly and sedately to look into her Devotions. The Church did then
to their unbiased Judgments most clearly unfold her ravishing Beauty and
Brightness, and their wondering Eyes saw and confessed her Parts and comely
Proportions. She appeared fair as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, and (quite
contrary to their Expectations) terrible to Enthusiasm and Popery too, as an
Army with Banners. I would therefore (I say again) most earnestly entreat these
Persons to lay aside their Prejudices, and with their own Eyes seriously to
look into and examine her Constitution. If she injoyns any thing, that is
inconsistent with any Law of Reason, any Law or Rule of the Gospel, any Article
of our Faith, any part of Christian Worship, or the Practice of the Universal
Church in the First and Purest Ages; Reason would that we should bear with
their Separation. But if her Doctrine be truly consonant to the Word of God: If
her Discipline serves directly to the Beating down the Strongholds of Sin, and
to the Promotion of Piety and a Good Life: If her Devotions are substantially
pious and prudent, serious and comprehensive, significant and intelligible, and
Every way most wisely and divinely composed: If her Ceremonies are not only few
in Number, but likewise decent, grave, significant, and edifying in their
Nature and Use: In a word, If she does all things (according to the Apostolical
Injunction) Decently, and in order, after the Primitive Patterns, according to
the best measures of Human Wisdom. If (I say) she does all this, (and all this
'twill be demonstratively evident to every impartial Enquirer, that she does)
then I cannot but affirm, that their Separation from us, in point of
Conscience, is altogether unwarrantable, impious, schismatical. But because
they are taught to be deaf to our Apologies and with an unmanly, blind,
implicit Faith, to believe us Apostates to Popery and Innovation. I would (I
say) most earnestly beseech them to use their own Senses; and to read, to
think, and to judge at last for themselves. That they would not pass Sentence
upon us, before they know us; nor judge of the Doctrine or Discipline of our
Church by the Prejudices of their Education, or the disingenuous, illaudable
Reports of their Partial Leaders; but wholly and entirely by the word of God,
the sure, infallible Rule of the Holy-Scriptures. A Method, which in the next
place I likewise most heartily advise you to.

3. Then, Read the Scriptures. This is the Duty of Every Christian, required
and enjoined by the Savior of our Souls, the Lord Christ Jesus. Search the
Scriptures, (says Joh. 5.39.
he) for in them ye have Eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me.
And indeed, 'twas by these that our Lord himself repelled the impudent Assaults
and crafty Insinuations of the Devil: that his Apostles both planted and
watered his Church: and that the pious Fathers and Councils baffled the
Heresies, and put to Silence the Ignorance of foolish Men. Let as many of us
therefore, as can distinguish between Good and Evil; Young Men and Maidens Old
Men and even Children, be conversant in these Writings. They are that Rule,
which, if duly attended to, will not suffer us to err, being not (like the
Oracles of Demons) wrapped up in intricate, obscure, ambiguous Expressions, but
plain and easy to the meanest Understanding. Plain and Easy (I say) in all
things necessary to Salvation; the Credenda as well as the Agenda of our
Religion; the things which demand our Faith, as well as those, that call for
our Practice, in many places displaying themselves in such Capital Letters,
that he who runs may read them.

There are indeed in these Writings (...), some obscure Places, and hard to be
understood. But these (I conceive) are not necessary to be understood; For if
they were, our Heavenly Father had undoubtedly so delivered them, that by his
Blessing upon our honest Labor and Study, we should at length certainly,
clearly, and distinctly understand them. But since (as I humbly conceive) they
are not so delivered, but after all our Pains and Industry lie securely
envelop'd with their own Darkness, we may safely conclude from the Goodness of
our Maker, that they are not necessary to be understood. Nay, I verily believe,
that such is the nature of some of these Places, especially of some in St.
John's Revelations, that it is prodigious Impertinence and unpardonable Vanity,
to determine peremptorily upon them. They seem to be Prophecies, which belong
not to us, but to our Children; Not to the Present, but Future Ages of the
Church, when they will all clear up, and apparently unfold themselves in their
utmost Completion. Then at last will the Clouds all vanish and disappear, and
these places shine forth with untainted Luster and Brightness. Then will the
Church behold, with Joy and Transport, the manifold Wisdom of God, which for
wise and great Ends is hid from these Ages and Generations; and which
therefore, it is no ways necessary we should understand.

Let others then (if they dare venture) curiously pry into these Recondite
Points; Let them continually rack and torture their Brains in the fruitless
search after these hidden Mysteries, till their (...), Knowledge falsely so
called, so swell add puff them up, that they either wrest them to their own
Perdition, over-looking the plain, self-evident places, and by unwarrantable,
contradictory expositions of the obscure, bringing in damnable Heresies and
Corruptions into the Church; or (of all which this present Age is abundant
proof) they cause their own Heads to grow vertiginous, and irrecoverably fall
into the lamentable state of Delirancy and Madness. But let us be sober and
wise unto Salvation, not impertinently prying into things beyond our reach; but
studying the things which make for Peace, and things whereby we may edify one
another. Let us meditate in the Law of the Lord, not to gratify our Curiosity,
but to meliorate our Lives; not to encourage and patronize Divisions and
Schism, but to preserve Union and Concord in the Church of God; Not to be
litigious, noisy, and impertinent; but holy and unblameable in all manner of
Conversation. The fourth and last thing to be advised.

4. Study to live well, or in all the Accidents and Emergencies of your Lives
to keep a Conscience void of Offense toward God and toward Man. This is the
best and surest way to preserve your selves pure from all manner of Contagion:
For I can never entertain such unworthy Thoughts of my Blessed Maker, as to
think he will suffer an ingenuous Soul, who makes it her Business sincerely to
search after Truth, and diligently to walk in the old Paths, ever to die in any
Damnable Error. And if I am not unpardonably mistaken, the Sacred Oracles do
abundantly confirm me in this Persuasion. Great peace, says the Psalm. 119. ver.
105.
Psalmist, have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them: and Ver.
130.
again, When thy word goes forth, it gives light and understanding unto the
simple: and Ver. 104.
again, Through thy Commandments I get understanding, therefore I hate all evil
ways. And our Joh. 7.17.
Lord himself, If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine,
whether it be of God. And as I am persuaded, that it is absolutely impossible
for a devout, well-meaning, sincere, and pious Soul ever to die in any damnable
Error; so, on the other hand, I conceive it almost as impossible for a Man, who
has cast off all Care of his Conscience, to keep his Faith long pure and
undefiled. 2 Timothy 1.19, 20.
St. Paul tells us of Hymeneus and Alexander, that having put away their
Conscience, they miserably made Shipwreck of their Faith: And it is observable
of the Learned Jews, that when about three or fourscore Years before the
Nativity of Christ they began to relax their Discipline, and to dissolve into
the loose and wanton Customs of their neighboring Orientals, they immediately
betook themselves likewise to transform their Faith; resolving the Commandments
of God into their own Inventions, and making his Word of none effect through
their upstart Traditions. You see they first defiled their Conscience, and then
their Faith.

May then the God of all Grace, who has called us unto his Eternal Glory by
Christ Jesus, keep us steadfast in the Faith once delivered to the Saints; and
to that End stablish, strengthen, settle us in every good Word and Work. To Him
he Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen. Amen. 1 PET. Chapter v. Ver. 8. Your
Adversary the Devil, as a Roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may
devour.


WHether that ancient Opinion of the Heathens de invidia Daemonis had its Rise
only from those grand Cheats and Delusions which the more inquisitive and
searching Heads amongst them observed to be imposed upon the World, not only in
their more common and ordinary ways of divination, but likewise by the most
celebrated Oracles themselves, as De Mist. Egypt.
Jamblichus argues; or rather, as the Learned Orig. of Temp. Eo.
Casaubon contends, borrowed its Original from the History of the Fall of Man,
which the several Nations are supposed to have received by Tradition from the
Sons of Noah, and Plato more particularly from some Learned Jews in Egypt; I
shall not take upon me to determine: My present Scope and Design being only to
show;

1. That in the Confession of All, as well Heathens as Christians, there are a
sort of wicked and malignant Demons, which are Enemies to mankind. Expressed
in these Words of my Text, The Devil, your Adversary.

2. That these wicked and malignant Demons are permitted to wander up and down
in the Earth. Expressed in these Words, The Devil, your Adversary, walks
about.

3. To lay open, with what indefatigaable Pains and various Stratagems they
seek to ruin Men, and with what Cruelty they treat them, when they are
delivered up into their hands: Expressed and implied in these words, As a
roaring Lion he walks about, seeking whom he may devour.

4. Though they have Malice enough to destroy us all, yet that they cannot do
us the least Mischief, unless God permits them. Expressed in these Words,
Seeking whom he may devour; or, may be permited to devour.

1. In the Confession of All, as well Heathens as Christians, there are a sort
of wicked and malignant Demons, which are Enemies to mankind. Should we take
the Wings of the Morning and travel over all the Nations of the Earth, we
should find but very few among the Reputed Sages of the Heathen World, who did
not acknowledge and maintain this great Truth. (...), says Lib. de Is^d. and
Osir. p. 369.
Plutarch, It is the Opinion of the most, and wisest of them: And just before
more at large; (...). This Tradition, says he, is very ancient, deduced from
the Eldest Theologists and Legislators to the Poets and Philosophers, whose
first Author cannot be found, and yet has gained firm and unshaken Belief, not
only in ordinary Discourses and Reports, but has likewise diffused it self
into the Mysteries and Sacrifices both of Greeks and Barbarians: The Truth of
which Assertion, we find amply confirmed by the concurrent Testimony of
Diogenes Laertius, Prooem. ad. vit. Philosoph.
who tells of the Persian Magi, that they acknowledged two distinct Principles,
(...), a Good and a Bad Demon; and for the Confirmation of what he says,
quotes Eudoxus, Hermippus, Aristotle, and Theopompus. And the Egyptian Typho is
in every ones mouth, to whom they ascribed all that was evil; as they did
whatever was good to Isis and Osiris. Neither did this Opinion confine it self
within the narrower Limits of Egypt and Persia; but, like Nebuchadnezzar's
Tree, planted and rooted in the midst of the Earth, it grew and was strong, and
the Boughs thereof reached unto Heaven, and the Branches thereof to the end of
all the Earth. The Romans did not shake off its Leaves, or cut off its
Branches; and the Graecians delighted themselves under the Shadow of it: the
latter as Lib. de Isid. and Osirid. p. 370.
Plutarch witnesses, attributing what was good to Jupiter Olympius, what was
evil to Hades; the former, says Noct. Attic. l. 5. c. 12.
A. Gellius, sacrificing to Dijovis, that he might do them good, and appeasing
his Anti-God Vejovis, as he might do them no harm.

It must indeed be confessed, That this Opinion, (as it is vulgarly understood)
how ancient and universal soever, is diametrically opposite both to Scripture
and Reason; it setting up two contrary Principles equally invested with
infinite Power, and so by necessary Consequence destroying them both, with many
other Absurdities and Contradictions, which this is not a proper time to
enumerate. Yet this does not diminish one Ray from the Illustration it gives to
my present purpose, since it clearly and evidently demonstrates that the
Heathen World did concur in the Testimony of a wicked Demon; which, as
Porphyry relates in the Close of his Letter to Anebo, was vulgarly known by the
name of the Deceiver.

But if we advance from the Ancient to the more Modern Philosophers, we shall
find, that, like the Sun, the higher this Doctrine of Evil Spirits ascended,
the fairer and clearer it gradually showed it self; and that breaking in some
measure through those thick Mists of Error, which had grievously overrun it
since its first Rising, it at length diffused again a true and genuine Light
over the Minds of Men, notwithstanding those little Spots, which still appeared
in its Face. PluPlutarch indeed, seems not over-willing to embrace it; yet he
doubts he can give no good Account of those Phantasms or Apparitions which
haunted the Excellent and Philosophical Dion and Brutus, unless he
receives,(...), as Prooem. ad Vit. Dion.
he calls it, that very ancient Tradition, that there are certain impious and
fascinating Demons, which envy good Men, and withstand their Enterprises, by
creating Fears and Troubles to them, that so they may hinder them in their
pursuit of Virtue, lest, by continuing steadfast and unblameable in Good, they
should after Death be made Partakers of greater Felicity than they enjoy. Not
unlike to this, is the Description which Jamblichus gives of them; De Mist.
Egypt. sect. 2. cap. 6. and sect. 4. cap. 13. Edit. Oxon.
who critically decyphering the different Apparitions of the Gods, Archangels,
Angels, and Demons, expressly asserts, (...), That the good Demons do not
administer to Men's Lusts, or prompt them to any Impiety; but that they are Evil
Demons, who inflict Diseases upon their Bodies, and enslave their Souls to
Sensual Appetites, (...), and depress and clip the Wings of them who generously
aspire to the bright-shining Regions of Immortality. These he Sect. 4. cap. 7.
elsewhere extravagantly calls (...), Demons essentially wicked, who yet take
upon them to be good and of a truly Divine Nature, and do therefore command
their Worshippers to be just and holy, whilst in truth they have no care of
Holiness and Virtue, but do studiously contrive the Ruin of Mankind. And in
many other places of that admirable Book De Mysteriis Aegyptiorum, he
excellently describes the malignant Temper of these Evil Spirits; so that though
in the main he closely adheres to the Egyptian Theology, yet here he exactly
treads in the Steps of his Master Porphyry, Epist. ad Anabon. and de Abstin. l.
2. p. 199.
who tells us, That there are a sort of Spirits (...) of a deceitful Nature,
who turn themselves into all Forms and Shapes, (the very Description, that is
given of them in Sacred Writ) (...), and taking upon themselves the Persons of
good Demons, craftily insinuate into their unwary Worshippers, that they are
the Causes of all Good as well as of Evil, whereas indeed they assist Men in
nothing that is really Good; but do only cheat, delude, and impose upon them,
whilst they feast their Nostrils with the Fumes of the Altar, and make it their
business to throw Rubbs in their ways who walk in the Paths of Virtue. Proclus
delivers the very same Doctrine: (...), says he, (...). Some, I know, would
have these Earthly Demons to be only good Spirits of an inferior Order, who
constantly attended the Superior Deities; but if we consider that they took
upon them these false Titles, and personated their Superiors only that they
might the better delude their Worshippers, we must needs confess them to be of
the other sort; especially since the Philosopher In A'cibiadem.
elsewhere fully explains himself, and in a whole Chapter abundantly lays open
the Malignity of these Spirits, almost in the same Words, as those Christian
Writers Apol. c. 22.
Tertullian In Octavio.
Minut. Felix, and De Idolorum Vanitate.
St. Cyprian have done. In short, De Abst. l. 2. and apud Iambl. de Mist.
Egypt. sect. 1. c. 18.
Porphyry distinguishes the Demons, which the Graecians worshipped, into Good
and Bad; the Former they called (...); the Latter, (...). And as though he had
a mind to subvert the very Foundations of Ethnic Theology he no less
dogmatically than truly asserts, (...). Put (...) in the Singular Number, and
he says with St. Paul, That what the Heathens thus sacrificed, they sacrificed
to Devils, and not to God. From all which put together, it evidently appears,
That the thinking Sages of the Heathen World had a clear and distinct Idea of
the Malignity of some Evil Spirits; which we Christians know to be Apostate or
Fallen Angels.

2. These wicked and malignant Demons are permitted to wander up and down in
the Earth. Minut. Felix tells us of Hosthanes, whom he calls the First of the
Magi, that he delivered a tradition of some malignant Demons, which wander to
and fro in the Earth, and are Enemies to Mankind; and both the Jews, with most
of the Vide eruditissimum illum virum Josephum Mede l. 1. sermon. 4.
Fathers of the four first Centuries, and also the Pythagoreans and Platonists,
and other Sects, have carried the Notion yet higher, affirming that not only
the whole Circumference of this Lower World, but that likewise the several
Regions of the Air, and all that Space above the Globe of the Earth to the Face
of Heaven, is full of Demons or Evil Spirits, who serve under their (...) or
Prince, and are commissioned and sent out by him to inveigle undiscerning
Mortals into Ruin and Destruction. Thus the great Sect. 4. cap. 13.
Patron of the Egyptian Mysteries does not hesitate to assert, (...), that
without all Controversy these Spirits have a vast and almost unlimited Power
over the Affairs of Men, and in the Government of this World; and therefore
Sect. 2. cap. 3, 7.
he indifferently calls them (...), Governors, Rulers of this World, who
manage all Sublunary things as they please. And indeed, he seems here to
stretch himself much beyond his Measure, and not to speak like an
undisciplined, unilluminated Philosopher. For the Savior of the World himself,
who best knew what Power he had given to this Enemy of Mankind, Joh. 12.31.
styles him (...), the Prince of this World; and the great Apostle of the
Gentiles advances yet farther, expressly 2 Cor. 4.4.
calling him, the God of this World: both which mighty Denominations
sufficiently indicate, that the Devil is more than a petty Prince in this
World. Nay in the sixth Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians, he delivers
himself in such terms as seem to betray the Reading of the forecited
Philosopher: Put on, says he, the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
repel all the Temptations and Stratagems, and to hold out against all the
Assaults of your Adversaries; for your Danger is great, and your Enemies
powerful; you wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, i. e. against any ordinary
Human Enemies, but against the several Ranks of Devils, (...), against
Principalities, against Powers, (...), against the Rulers of the Darkness of
this World, against spiritual Wickedness, or (as the Grotium videas, and
Hammondum.
Syriack reads) wicked Spirits in high places. Here, as the Reverend and
Learned Dr. Hammond observes, Wicked Spirits in high places are distinguished
from the Rulers of the Darkness of this World; noting thereby several sorts of
Devils, either in respect of their Mansions, (...), aerial or earthly Spirits;
or else of the Inclinations which they suggest. The Earthly Devils suggesting
grosser, carnal Appetites, the Filthiness of the Flesh; the Aerial, Pride,
Vainglory, Malice, and such like, the Filthiness of the Spirit.

But from the Consideration of the destructive and implacable Temper of these
Spirits of Darkness, the truly Philosophical and most Thinking Pagans (followed
herein by some eminent and ancient Vide Hermae Pastorem, lib 2. mandat 6. Edit.
Ox.
Christians) have been induced to believe, that every individual Person is not
only the common Scope of their Envy and Malice; but that (as the Poet sings)
Quisque suos patitur manes, every Man has likewise his peculiar Evil Angel,
which constantly attends him, curiously observing his Faults, and endeavoring
by all Arts and Stratagems to ruin and destroy him. Thus every Pythagorean had
two Genii, a Good one and a bad one, the latter of which, Olympiodorus calls
(...), that Demon which hales the Soul to Judgment, and which, he says,
follows her into this World against her Will; whereas she chooses her Good
Genius to be her Leader and Guardian, and, as Plato speaks, (...), an
Accomplisher of all her Desires. Mahomet has adopted the same Doctrine into his
Religion; telling us withal, That they sit on Men's Shoulders with Table-Books
in their Hands, and that the one writes down all the Good, the other all the
Evil a Man does.

But whatever we think of this, certain it is, That the Evil Spirits are not
only permitted sometimes to tempt Men to bring Mischief upon themselves, but
that many of the Disasters and Calamities which are brought upon the World, may
also be attributed to the same pernicious Agents, Jamblicus was very sensible
of this; and therefore he Sect. 2. c. 7.
calls them (...), punishing or revenging Demons; and for the same Reason the
Gallaeum consulas ad calcem Orac. Sibyll.
Chaldaick Oracles style them (...), Earthly Dogs and Executioners of Mankind.
De Abst. l. 2 page 198, 202.
Porphyry is of the same Opinion; ascribing the Miseries of Humane Life, such
as Plagues, Famines, Sterilities, Earthquakes, Droughts, to no other Cause than
the Malice of these Demons: and he is followed herein by Bodinus, who
attributes not only all prodigious Thunders, Storms, and Tempests, but even
your most ordinary Winds to Good or Bad Angels. Now though I can by no means
subscribe to him in this Latitude, yet it is sufficiently evident from the
History of Job, that as to the former Opinion, both he and the other
Philosophers are much in the right. For Cap. 1.
there we find him both consuming the Good Man's Sheep and Servants with
Lightning, and also by a great and violent Wind from the Wilderness,
overturning the House upon his Sons and Daughters: Psalm. 78.49.
Nay, the Royal Psalmist puts the Case beyond all reasonable Doubt; assuring
us, That the dreadful and tragical Scene of multiplied Signs and Wonders in the
Land of Egypt was acted by the Ministry of Evil Spirits. He cast upon them,
says he, the Fierceness of his Anger, Wrath, and Indignation, and Trouble,
(...), by sending Evil Angels among them: And the Apostle seems to assert no
less, when he Ephesians. 2.2.
calls the Devil the Prince of the Power of the Air.

But as it is certain, that the Devil is permitted sometimes actually to tempt
Men, sometimes to amaze them only by the horrible Fragors of Storms and
Tempests; so likewise it is evident, that he is a Person capable of a delegate
Employment in some great Mutation of States: and many Probabilities have been
observed by wise Personages, says the Excellent Bishop Great Exemplar, page 100.
Tailor, persuading that the Grandeur of the Roman Empire was in the Degrees of
Increment and Decrement permitted to the Power and Managing of the Devil; that
the Greatness of that Government, being in all Appearance full of Advantage to
Satan's Kingdom, and employed for the Disimprovement of the weak Beginnings and
improbable Increase of Christianity, might give Luster and Demonstration to it,
that it came from God; since the great Permissions of Power made to the Devil,
and acted with all Art and Malice in Defiance of the Religion, could produce no
other effect upon it, but that it made it grow greater; and the Greatness was
made more miraculous, since the Devil, when his Chain was off, fain would, but
could not suppress it.

But perhaps it may be here objected, That though we must confess, that before
the Mysterious Incarnation of the Son of God the Devil had such vast Dominions
in the World, that he seemed actually to have possessed what God promised to
his Son, even the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the
Earth for his Possession; yet, since the Triumphant Ascension of our Blessed
Savior, we cannot suppose, without Contradiction to Sacred Writ, that he now
retains any at all, since both Joh. 12.31.
Christ himself assures us, that he has cast him out, and St. Pet. 2.4.
Peter expressly declares, that they are cast down to Hell, and delivered into
Chains of Darkness to be reserved unto Judgment. To this we answer,

Those bright Sons of the Morning, which grew vertiginous through the Sublimity
of Happiness, and are most deservedly charged with Folly for leaving their own
Habitations, are indeed bound over to Eternal Pains, and lie at present in a
dark, miserable and wretched Condition. Wherever they be, they carry Hell in
their Breasts, and read in their Consciences the large Characters of Divine
Vengeance, consigning them over to Everlasting Woe and Misery. But Yet we must
needs acknowledge, that it is abundantly evident, both from Mat. 8.20. Mat 5.7.
Luke 8.31.
Scripture and Reason, That their present Punishment, how dolorous and bitter
soever, will be much heightened and increased after the Great Day of Accounts;
so that though I will not deny, but that (as the Schoolmen and other Divines of
Latter ^i^es would have it) many of these infernal Bands may be so closely
committed to Prison, that they are never permitted to make Excursions into the
Earth; yet, on the other side, we may dare to affirm, that the All-wise God
does often suffer great Troops and vast Multitudes of them to come abroad into
this World, either for the Trial of the Good, or for the Punishment of the Bad,
or to be to us what the Remnant of the cursed Nations was, to the sinful
Israelites, even Pricks in our Eyes, and Thorns in our Sides. And, if we
impartially consider, neither this Text of St. Peter, nor the parallel one of
St. Jude, do any thing evacuate or enervate this Assertion. For if they must
needs be understood to prove such an actual condemning of the Devil to Chains
at present, that he shall not come forth till haled to Judgment; if I say, the
Sense of the Words must needs be this, we cannot allow them by any means to be
true. For even when these Epistles where written, (which is supposed to have
been a little before the Destruction of the Jews, his Dominions were large, and
his Empire extensive. He did not only work powerfully in the Children of
Disobedience, who were taken Captive by him at his Will, but had also began to
Lord it over God's own Heritage. He was daily sowing Tares among the Wheat, and
endeavoring to choke the good Seed, and to render it fruitless. Like an hungry
Lion, he roared after the Prey, and began to glut his Jaws with the Blood of
the slain; and upon this account, the Apostle, in my Text, warns the Christians
to watch, and to be always upon their Guard against so potent and vigilant an
Adversary. Though therefore the victorious Savior of the World has utterly
divested these Evil Spirits of their Power, and made his Conquests over them
publicly discernible to all Men, by throwing them out of their Temples,
gagging and silencing them in their Oracles, and so dragging, as it were,
Principalities and all the Powers of Darkness shackled and unarmed at the
Wheels of his triumphant Chariot. Though, I say, since the towering Roman Eagle,
which for many Ages had spread its all-conquering Wings over the trembling
World, submitted her self, and gave place to the humble Sign of the Cross, the
Sound of the Gospel is gone out into all Lands, and its Words unto the Ends of
the World; so that the Kingdoms of the World are become the Kingdoms of the
Lord, and almost all Nations do him Service; yet, Certain it is, that the Devil
is not yet totally banished out of this World: For in the 23d Chap. of the
Revelations and the 3d Ver. we have an account of a closer Imprisonment of
Satan, and so of his Regiments of Evil Spirits, that shall be before the Worlds
End, than is yet for sthe present; and it is also manifest from the Sozom. Hist.
l. 5. c. 19. p. 627.
History of Primitive Times, that after the Death, Resurrection, and Ascension
of Christ, he was still permitted to be in the World. For even in the Times of
Julian the Apostate, we find his Oracle yet standing; and 'twas the constant
Custom of the Church, in the first Ages, to excommunicate, or, as S. Paul
phraseth it, to deliver enormous and incorrigible Sinners to Satan, as to a
Lictor or Executioner, who was wont to sift and shake them terribly, and by
inflicting Diseases and Torments upon the Body, forced them to fly for Refuge
to the Arms of their offended Father. Now therefore, we must indeed acknowledge
with the Rev. 12.9, 10,
Inhabitants of Heaven, that Salvation and Strength, and the Kingdom of our
God, and the Power of his Christ, is come unto us; for the great Dragon is cast
out, that old Serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceived the whole
World: He is cast out of his Strongholds, and his Angels can no longer
exercise their Tyranny in the Earth: But yet he still sits lurking in the
thievish Corners of the World, and privily in his lurking Dens does he plot
against the Innocent; his Eyes are wholly set against the Saints. Though his
Hands are tied, and he is bound to his Good-behaviour; yet, as an Explorator or
Searcher for faults, he goes up and down to and fro in the Earth.

I know there are some, who will be ready to object, That this Relaxation of
Evil-Spirits from their dark houses of Sorrow, can by no means consist with the
Wisdom of God; For since his Justice condemned them to unspeakable and Eternal
Torments, it is next to Madness (say they) to suppose, that he would suffer
their Pains to receive any Diminution; which yet the Hurt which according to
this Position they are sometimes permitted to do to Mankind, would certainly
afford them.

But this seeming Contradiction will be easily reconciled, if we consider, that
the like Argument may be urged as well against the Absence of good Angels from
the Court of Heaven. For since it is piously believed on all hands, that the
Blessed Inhabitants of those serene and peaceful Mansions are now (the time of
Probation being gone long ago) fully and unalterably confirmed in Happiness and
Glory; how can we imagine, that their heavenly Father would be so unkind, as to
deprive them of the Beatifick Intuition of his interior Beauties, and, as it
were, to banish his beloved Sons for a time from the Regions of Bliss? And yet
we need not be beholden neither to the Egyptians nor to the Platonists for the
Confirmation of this Truth; the Sacred History, more than once, assuring us, if
they do not constantly adhere to, and inseparably accompany Good Men, yet that
they often descended to succor them in their Dangers, and are also still
(...), Ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister to them, who shall be heirs
of Salvation.

Wherefore, in Answer to this Objection, we may consider, That Kindness and
Compassion are so twisted and interwoven (as I may so say) with the very
Essences of these glorious Creatures, that it is Heaven to them to relieve and
assist their Fellow Servants here below; which being joined to that infinite
Delight and Satisfaction, which they undoubtedly receive in the Execution of
the Divine Will, makes abundant Recompense for the seeming Loss of that more
plentiful Harvest of Joys which the Blessed reap in the Mansions above.

And on the other side: The Evagation of Evil Spirits from their infernal
Dungeon, must rather afford them fresh Occasions of Torture, than administer
any true Solace or real Content. For so fierce and implacable, so insolent and
outrageous, so envious and Eternally malicious, are these Sons of Perdition,
that it must needs be Death to them to be frustrated in their Designs, and
worse (if possible) than Hell it self, to see their Plots and Machinations all
defeated and unravelled. How then must they fret and tear their Bowels for
Grief, to find their weak Attempts trampled on in great Disdain and Triumph by
the Regenerate Sons of Adam, who dwell securely under the Defense of the Most
High, and abide continually under the Shadow of the Almighty? To see themselves
sunk into so low and despicable a condition, that they are as light and
contemptible as the Dust before the Wind, whilst the Angels of the Lord
persecute and Scatter them? How must they be clothed with Shame, and Dishoour
and Confusion of Face, to see those little Mists they endeavored to raise,
utterly dispersed and vanished, and the Glory of the Lord shining round about
the World, and appearing out of Sion in perfect Beauty? But not to prosecute
these Considerations any farther: The bare dismal Apprehensions of that
accumulated Punishment, which after the Last Day they must certainly undergo
for all the Evil they have done amongst Men, are sufficient to counterpoise
whatever accidentary Satisfaction they seem to receive upon the Earth.

I foresee but one Scruple more, that may arise against this Discourse; which
is, That supposing Men were very well disposed to believe all we have said, yet
those Antic, ridiculous Circumstances, which in the Narrations even of the
gravest Personages do accompany many things of this nature, strongly argue the
Uncertainty of them all.

But, to this 'twill be sufficient to answer, with the Learned and Judicious
Dr. Appendix to the Antidote against Atheism, c. 12. par. 3.
More, That the Conversation of Evil Spirits amongst us in this World ought to
seem never the more incredible for those ludicrous Passages. For it is not at
all disconsonant to Reason, that such Demons, which have their Haunts near
this lower Air and Earth, are variously Hanc, opinor, ob causam audiunt apud S.
Lucam c. 4. v. 33. (...) and passim apud Ethnicos penates, Lares, Lamiae,
Empusae, Fauni, Satyri, Lemures, etc.
lapsed into the enormous Love and Liking of the Animal Life, having utterly
forsaken the Divine; and that therefore there are such Passions and Affections
in them, as are in Wicked Men and Beasts; and that some of them especially bear
the same Analogy to an Unfallen Angel, that an Ape or Monkey does to a Sober
Man; so that all their Pleasure is in unlucky ridiculous Tricks. This (I am
sure) is fully and clearly attested by De Abst. lib. 2.
Porphyry, Orig. cont. Cells. l. 8. p. 417. and l. 7. p. 334.
Celsus, Origin, St. Basil (or whoever else was the Author of that Commentary
upon Isaiah) and others. Wherefore,

3. I come to show with what indefatigable Pains, and various Stratagems, they
seek to Ruin Men, and with what Cruelty they treat them when they are delivered
up into their hands. This sublunary Region indeed, which Man inhabits, is
nothing else but a continued Scene of Changes and Revolutions. All things in
this natural World are subject to Ebbs and Flows, and nothing is found in it
that acts either uniformly or constantly. But the Devil's Malice is of another
Constitution; it suffers no Intermissions, no Vicissitudes, but (like that
stock of Motion which that great Mechanical Wit Descartes supposes the
Universe at first endowed with) it continues always in the same proportion, and
is never intended or remitted. For though he may act more fiercely at one time
than at another, yet certainly he pursues his Revenge in general with the same
Earnestness and Vigor, and always wills our Ruin in the same measure of
Volition. Hence it comes to pass, that having once gained Permission to begin
his Assault, he, like Fire, has no Power to suspend his Act, but is as entirely
determined by the Fullness of his Malice, as a Natural Agent by the Appetites
of Nature. Thus, as though it had been a small thing to have caused infinite
Numbers of the Heavenly Host to let fall their Crowns, and to have swept away
with his Tail the third part of the Stars of Heaven, we find him in the way
Infancy of the World, nay (if some say true) in the same Day wherein Man was
Created, plotting and nontriving to ruin all Mankind in their Head. And though
it is believed, for very good Reasons, that he could not, with all his Art and
Subtilty, entice so much as the Impure and Debauched Posterity of Cain to
Idolatry before the Flood; yet we are too well assured, that he laid the
Foundations of his Empire very early in the World. For Historians say, that
even in the time of Heber, who was the fifth from Noah, Idolatry began mightily
to prevail; these Hellish Impostors giving Answers through the Images, which
Men generally carved to themselves in Memory of their Ancestors, and to which,
upon all Occasions, they addressed themselves with the most solemn Veneration.
And from thence, how imperious and domineering, how haughty, arrogant, and
cruel, how tyrannical and intolerable, he showed himself to his Worshippers,
till Christianity appeared in the World, all Histories, both Sacred and
Profane, do abundantly testify. Having exalted himself above all that is
called God, and (the Jews excepted) rendered the whole Creation subject to
Vanity, he sat himself Lordly in the House of God, acting there like himself,
the grand Chief of the Damned. He sent Miseries and Calamities upon the Theater
of the World for his Sport and Pastime, and set on one part of the Creation to
bait another for his Diversion. Like the immane Roman Emperors, he took
Pleasure to exercise Men with Dangers, and to see them play bloody Prizes
before him. Neither thousands of Rams, nor ten thousands of Rivers of Oil,
could satisfy the raging Thirst or Boulimy of this ravenous Wolf. He must
needs tear in pieces the more excellent Prey, and take his Pastime in Rivers of
Human Blood. Thus in Crete and Africa under the Name of Saturn he glutted his
Ears with the last Groans and dismal Accents, and his devouring Jaws with the
tender Carcasses of slaughtered Infants. Thus in Cyprus, Tenedos, and
Lacedaemonia; in Carthage, France, and Germany; in Arabia, Scythia, Egypt, and
Rome it self, he made himself drunk with the Blood of Men; which is attested
not only by those Christian Writers Apol. c. 9.
Tertullian and Divin. Institut. l. 1. c. 21.
Lactantius, but likewise by that acute Philosopher and Enemy to Christianity
De Abst. l. 2. p. 226.
Porphyry; who, after he had reckoned up in how many places of the World Human
Sacrifices were in use, confesses 'twas done at Rome in the Feast of Jupiter
Latialis even in his time. Nay, as though the Air had been corrupted, and Men by
natural Breathing drew in the Infection, this Contagion spread it self as far
as the House of God, and the Holy Land it self was defiled with Blood. Not only
Aliens and Strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, but even God's own peculiar
People, was so bewitched and besotted, as both to adore the Sun, when it
shined, and the Moon when she walked in her brightness, (which it self was an
Iniquity to be punished by the Judge) and also to inflame themselves with Idols
under every green Tree, and to offer their Sons and their Daughters unto
Devils. Thus though his ambitious Designs were balk'd in the Beginning, and he
fell with all his Legions, like Lightning, from Heaven; though he could not be
like the Most High in Glory, nor erect his Throne next to the Almighty; yet he
vaunted himself here amongst the deluded Sons of Men, and by his Villainies,
Sophistries, and Arts of Terror, affrighted them into the Worship and Adoration
of his Person. Yet even then (so great is the Pride, and Unbounded the Malice
of this cursed Arch-Daemon) as though Crowns and Septers, and all the Tributary
Princes and Potentates of the Earth had been too little; as though the Glory of
so much Power, and the infinite multitude of Slaves and Vassals availed him
nothing at all, whilst good Mordecai bowed not, nor did him Reverence, he was
restless and dissatisfied, and with haughty Haman impatiently sought his Ruin.
He repined at those peaceable, Halcyonian Days which under the kind influence
of Heaven pious Souls did enjoy, and whom Providence hedged in he chiefly
longed to devour. This is fully illustrated in the Instance of Job, where, as
soon as God had permitted to put forth his hand, and touch all that he had, how
did he muster up all the Mischiefs Hellish Malice could invent, and with
greater Eagerness than that of an Eagle or Vulture, seize upon the Prey? He
plundered him in his Estate (says the Reverend and Learned Dr. Patriarchal
Dispensation.
Cave) by the Sabaean and Chaldaean Free-booters, who left him not an Ox or Ass
of all his Herd, not a Sheep or a Lamb either for Food or Sacrifice. He
endeavored all he could to blot out his Name from under Heaven, having slain
his seven Sons and three Daughters at once by the Fall of an House. He blasted
him in his Credit and Reputation, and that by his nearest Friends, who had
traduced and challenged him for a Dissembler and an Hypocrite. He ruined him in
his Health, having smitten him with sore Ulcers from the Crown of the Head to
the Sole of the Foot, till his Body became a very Hospital of Diseases. Nay,
that not the least Dawnings of Consolation might peep through this black Cloud
of Sorrow and Anguish, besides those ghastly Spectacles and horrid Apparitions
whereby he infested his Cap. 7. ver. 14.
Dreams, he suggested to his Cap. 6. ver. 4.
waking Thoughts sad and uncomfortable Reflections; the Arrows of the Almighty
being shot within him, the Poison whereof drank up his Spirits, the Terrors of
God setting themselves in Array against him. And thus, for at least twelve
Months, say the Jews, probably for a much longer time, did this grand Engineer
of all Mischief wreek his Hellish Malice upon this Good Man, till God in Mercy
put a Period to this tedious Trial, and crowned his Sufferings with an ample
Restitution.

But if we ascend from these Times to the first Plantings of the Gospel, we
shall find him yet more eagerly prosecuting all Acts of Hostility; possessing
Men's Bodies, tormenting them with sundry kinds of Diseases, and endeavoring,
if possible, to break the very Golden Chain of Predestination. Now that
dreadful Woe, which the Rev. 12.10, 12.
Angel with a loud Voice denounced from Heaven against the Inhabitants of the
Earth and of the Sea, was fulfilled: for the Devil was come amongst Men having
great Wrath, because he had but a short time. He saw the Prophecies were all
fulfilled; that the Scepter was departed from Judah, and a Lawgiver from
between his Feet; that therefore Shiloh was suddenly to come, unto whom the
gathering of all People should be. He saw, that his Coming was now grown, not
only the Expectation of the Jews; but the common discourse too of all the
Heathen Nations. That there was (...), as St. Cyril says of him, a great and
eminent Harbinger, who in the Power and Spirit of Elias introduced and ushered
in the Arrival of this Son of Righteousness, and spoke great and glorious
things of this Son of God. Wherefore, not to mention his persecuting him, a
poor helpless Infant by jealous Herod, nor yet to re-mind you of those many
Troubles, which he afterward created him from the hypocritical, ambitious,
blood-thirsty Pharisees; that he might leave no stone unturned, nothing
unattempted, whereby he might compass his Designs, he impudently attacks the
Redeemer of the World himself, and perceiving him to be a Person of greater
Sanctity and Perfection, than to be moved by sensual and low Desires, he
thought Ambition might be most likely to Ruin him, since 'twas that, which
prevailed so powerfully upon himself; and accordingly the Dominions of the
World are offered to the Sovereign Disposer of them, and the Heir of all the
Kingdoms of the Earth is tempted to accept of his own, at the expense of
falling down, and worshipping the Devil. Which brings me to the other part of
this my Third Particular, which is, to observe, what various Ways and Methods
this cunning Serpent takes to entrap us.

When the Devil intends a Battery, he views the Strength and Situation of the
Place; and where he espies the weakest Guards, there he most vigorously makes
his Onset. True it is, that in our Savior he could have no such Advantage; but
how Fatal it has proved to his Spouse, the Church, no Man, that justly glories
in the Title of a Christian, can be ignorant. He stirred up Kings and Princes,
and the greatest Powers and Policies of the World, to confederate and combine
together to extirpate and banish it from off the Face of the Earth. By Arms and
Armies, by Strength and Subtilty, by Malice and Cruelty, he endeavored to
stifle and smother it in its Infancy and first Delivery into the World. But
when he found, that, notwithstanding all this Opposition, it still lifted up
its Head in triumph, and outbrav'd the fiercest Storms of the most violent
Persecutions; that neither Swords, nor Axes, nor Crosses, nor wild Beasts, nor
Chains, nor Fire, nor all other Instruments of the most exquisite Tortures
could prevail any thing at all; but that, as he complainingly tells Porphyry,
they might as well, and to better purpose, attempt to write upon the Surface of
the Water, or to fly like a Bird in the Air, than to reduce the Christian from
his Sentiments, and compel him to blaspheme, he immediately betakes himself to
other Counsels, and seeks to undermine that Faith, which he saw he could not
carry by open Assault and Battery. And how successfully he thus worked in God's
Vineyard, the many Heresies, which grew up together with the Gospel, do
sufficiently demonstrate.

But to pass from Universals to Particulars, from Communities of Men to
Individuals: Let us through all the intermediate Ages retreat to the Origin of
the World, and we shall find him even then giving a full and convictive
Evidence of that Craft and Subtilty which he exercised more at large in
Succeeding Generations. He beheld our first Father entertaining his Wife with
the fondest Caresses of too amorous a Fancy; and therefore by the Mediation of
so dear an Object he presents the Temptation. He knew that his Arguments were
not convincing of themselves, and therefore the beauteous hands of the young
Virgin-Mistress are made the Orators. Thus afterward in the ears of envious
Saul he Sounded the glorious Panegyricks of his Rival, and suggested to his
remiss and unguarded Successor the softer Whispers of the Spirit of
Fornication. Before young Beginners in Religion he displays a frightful Scene
of ensuing Difficulties; that it is a solitary, lonesome, melancholy Profession,
under whose baleful Influence nothing but Roots of Bitterness, can spring up.
He insinuates into their Heads, that God is a consuming Fire to all alike; that
he is busied in Heaven, not only to destroy the Wicked, and to dash in pieces
Vessels of Dishonor, but likewise to break the bruised Reed, and to cast
smoking Flax into the Flames of Hell. He suggests to them, that Christ is a
hard Task Master; who though he very well knows, that our Foundation is in the
Clay, yet unreasonably obliges us to the Work of Angels, and to the
Performances of the most Exalted and Beatify'd Spirits: That though the Law is
prescribed to Persons whose Varieties and different Constitutions cannot be
regular or uniform, yet he allows no Latitude of Performance, but unmercifully
binds us all to just Atoms and Points. And thus by opening his Mouth in
Blasphemy against God, and by pretending to speak peaceably to Men; by
deterring them either with the pretended Difficulties of Religion, or by
blowing up their new-kindled Zeal into Superstition; in short, by all the Arts,
which either his Hellish Malice or Policy can invent he labors to ruin the
Children of Men; so that if the overruling hand of Providence had not put a
Hook into the Nostrils of this Leviathan, the Foundations of the Intellectual,
as well as of the Natural World, had long since been out of course. Which
brings me to my Fourth and Last Particular, which is, to show, though he has
Malice enough to destroy us all, yet that he cannot do us the least Mischief,
unless God permits him.

4. It Is the Opinion, I confess, of the Learned Part of the World, that the
Strength and Natural Faculties of this Prince of Darkness are nothing
diminished or impaired by his Fall; but, that he still glories in the same
Power, which swelled him with so much Pride, as to say in his Heart, I will
ascend into Heaven; I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God; I will sit
upon the sides of the North; I will ascend above the Heights of the Clouds; I
will be like the Most High. Yet this ought not to discourage the weakest of us;
for let his Strength be what it will, and his Malice so great, that (as the
Queen of Sheba said of Solomon's Wisdom and Prosperity) the half of it has not
been told us; yet we are sure that he has his Bounds and Limits prescribed him;
and that as Jamblichus comfortably remarks, (...), there is one God, who
overrules all the Legions of malignant Demons. For this we have the
Confession of the Devil himself: (...), Haec, aliaque hujusmodi oracula
referuntur a Porphyrio, Proclo, Ethnicisque aliis; nonnulla etiam a Lactantio.
Videas item Gallaeum, qui hoc oraculum habet ad calcem Sibyll. page 43.

(...).


The Demons, says he, which wander about the Earth, how unruly and
ungovernable soever, are tamed by the irresistible Scourge of God's Rod. And
how truly he spoke, the History of Job, and of the Herd of Swine make manifest
and apparent: There we see they could not so much as enter the filthy Swine,
till Christ had given them leave; nor touch a Hair of that good Man, till
permitted from above; so that what that afflicted Saint says in another Case,
is verified in this: That hitherto indeed he may come, but no farther, and here
shall his proud Rage be stayed.

From what has been thus discoursed I shall now briefly deduce two or three
Corollaries, and conclude.

1. Then, Let us consider, what End and Design God has in suffering these
Enemies of Mankind to be abroad in the Earth; and since we shall find, that he
leads us through this great and terrible Wilderness, wherein are fiery Serpents
and Scorpions, that he may humble us, and that he may prove us, to do us Good
at our Latter End, let us never frustrate such gracious Purposes, nor provoke
him by our Continuance in sin to let us fall into the hands of these Enemies,
who already distress us in our very Gates. The Arrows of the Lord are every
where in the Earth, and shall not the Inhabitants of the World learn
Righteousness? If we have any real Love for our selves, any Concern for our
true and main Interest, let us open our Ears to Discipline, and presently
return from all our Iniquities. For we shall not serve God for naught; He will
make an hedge about us and about our House, and about all that we have, on
every side; His Hand shall hold us fast, and his Arm shall strengthen us, so
that the Enemy shall not be able to do us violence, nor these wicked Spirits
approach to hurt us. Not to hurt us therefore I say, because though he permit
them to cast us into the Furnace of Affliction, yet he does it only to refine
and purify us from our Dross. He may use them as sharp and cutting
Instruments, but then it is with this merciful Design of letting out our
Corruption. In short, However they may sometimes seem to triumph over us in
this World, yet certainly there will be an End, and our Expectations shall not
be cut off. When Death shall draw back the Curtain, the Face of things shall be
utterly changed. Then shall the Righteous Man stand in great boldness before
the face of such as afflicted him, and made no account of his Labors; and they
shall say within themselves: This is he whom we had sometime in Derision and a
Proverb of Reproach; we Fools endeavored to make his Life Madness, and to
cause his End to be without Honor; but how, in spite of all our Malice, is he
numbered among the Children of God; and whilst we are condemned to Everlasting
Torments, His lot is among the Saints?

2. Since we are besieged on every side by such potent, subtle, and treacherous
Enemies, let us take care to be always upon our Guard; and since our Journey is
dangerous, and our Way slippery, let him that thinks he stands surest, take
continual heed lest he fall. The latter Platonists indeed talk much of a Class
of Beings, called (...), Unites, Goodnesses, Minds or Intellects, which they
suppose to be as Essentially immutable as the Father of Lights, with whom is no
variableness or shadow of turning; but we have not so learnt Christ. And though I
cannot deny, but that as some Men, for a long, obstinate uninterrupted abuse of
God's Grace, are at last justly given up to their own Hearts Lusts, and
suffered with the utmost bent of their Souls to follow their own Imaginations;
so the Analogy of Reason seems to require, that others, who in spite of all
Opposition, have for a long time manfully resisted the Devil, and in the midst
of Temptations faithfully adhered to the Commandments of God, should at length
be so firmly established with his Free Spirit, that they should never be moved,
but become burning Lamps to give constant Light in the Temple of God: yet since
no Man, no not the Chosen Vessels and chiefest Favorites of Heaven, could
scarce ever assure themselves of so happy a State, but were perpetually forced
(...), to use Roughness to their Bodies, and to keep them in Subjection, least
after all, they should become Cast-aways; I think it highly concerns every one
of us to keep our Souls diligently, to lift up the hands that hang down, and to
strengthen the feeble Knees, to hold fast that which we have, that neither Man
nor Devil deprive us of our Crown.

Lastly, Let us look up to Heaven, and with Hearts full of Joy and Gratitude
bless that God to whom alone we owe the Happiness of all those Hours and Days
of Peace, in which we sit securely under our Vines, and eat the pleasant Fruit
of our Fig Trees, and see no Serpent winding his voluminous Trunk about the
Branches, and presenting us with fair Fruit to ruin us. It Is the Lord's doing,
that we have the Quietness of a Minute, and it ought to be mavelous in our
Eyes; for if he had not put a Bit into our Enemies Mouth, but should suffer him
cruelly to fall upon us, he would render us of all things in the World the most
miserable. Our Tables would become a Snare to us, our Beds a Torment, our
Dreams fantastic, lustful, and illusive. Every Sense should have its Object of
Delight and Danger, an Hyaena to kiss, and to perish in its Embraces. How
strongly then are we obliged to adore the Lord, by whom comes Salvation, and
to Love and Praise that God by whom we escape Death? Who out of the Abundance
of his overflowing Goodness, miraculously rescues us from the base and
miserable Slavery of these Evil Spirits into the glorious Liberty of the Sons
of God? O how plentiful, may we say with the Royal Psalm. 31. ver. 21.
Psalmist, is his Goodness, which he has laid up for them that fear him; and
that he has prepared for them that put their Trust in him, even before the
Sons of Men! Though they walk in the dark and gloomy Valleys of the Shadow of
Death, and are encompassed by Enemies on every side, yet by his infinite Mercy
and abundant Grace, he turns them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan unto the Living God.

Wherefore to him who is thus able to keep us from falling, and notwithstanding
all the malicious Attempts of our Ghostly Enemies, to present us faultless
before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy; To the only wise God, Our
Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever. Amen. COLOS.
iii. 2. Set your affection on things above, not on things on the Earth.


THAT it is our Interest, as well as Duty, to set our Affection on things above,
not on things on the Earth, I shall (without any preliminary Discourse) briefly
evince from these following Reasons.

I. Because they only are proportioned to the utmost Capacity of the Soul, and
consequently they only can yield her true Satisfaction; whereas all things here
are vain, insufficient, empty, and unsatisfying. II. Because they only are
Permanent, Sure, and Certain; whereas all things here are frail, short, and
uncertain. III. Because they only refine and spiritualize our Nature, widen and
enlarge our Faculties, and so fit and prepare us for the spiritual and
abstracted Entertainments of an Immortal and Divine Life; whereas all things
here degravate and weigh down the Soul, reach out to her that Cup of Oblivion,
which makes her forget her own Nature and Excellencies, and ingloriously to
take up with the enjoyments of Brutes.
1. It Is our Interest, as well as Duty, to set our Affection on things above,
not on things on the Earth, because they only are proportioned to the utmost
Capacity of the Soul, and consequently they only can yield her true
Satisfaction; whereas all things here are vain, insufficient empty, and
unsatisfying. Whoever diligently attends to the Workings of his own Mind, and
seriously considers the Bent, Appetites, and Inclinations of his Soul, will
soon find her to be of so exalted a Nature, that not all the Good of the
Creation, though amassed together and fully enjoyed, would be able to terminate
her Desires, to employ the whole Activity of her Love, to fix her entire
weight, or to detain and give Anchorage to her boundless Aspirations. The
voluptuous Epicurean (whatever he pretends) can never satisfy the Cravings of
his Soul with Corporeal Pleasure, nor the most Quintessential Stoic find an
(...) and (...), a Self-sufficiency and Tranquillity within his Breast, arising
out of the Pregnancy of his own Mind and Reason. (...). Our Souls have strong
and weighty Motions, and nothing can bear them up, but something permanent and
immutable. They Sink through all these present Entertainments, as a Stone does
through a watery Medium, till at length it happily arrives to its own proper
Center. They may indeed enjoy so much of this or that particular Object, as to
desire no more of it; but then their Desires are still running out after some
other Objects; and when they have obtained and enjoyed them too, they still
remain as dissatisfied as before. The Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the
Ear with hearing, says Eccles. 1.8.
Solomon. Though they are the widest of all the Senses, and can take in more
abundance with less Satiety, and serve more immediately for the Supplies of the
Rational Soul; yet a Man's Eye strings may even crack through Vehemence of
Poring, and his Ears be filled with all the Variety of the most exquisite
Sounds, Harmonies, and Lectures in the World; and after all, his Soul within
him be as greedy to see and hear more as it was at first. Hence arise
Distractions of Heart, anxious and carking Thought for to Morrow; Rovings and
Inquisitions of the Soul after infinite Varieties of earthly things; sparklings
of the Lust; Swarms of Endless Thoughts; those Ebbings and Flowings, those
Tempers and Aestuations of that Sea of Corruption in the Heart of Man, because
the Soul can find no Center here to rest upon, nothing large enough for the
Entertainments of so ample and so endless a Guest. In short, We may (I confess)
refresh our selves with the Excellencies of the Creatures, and discover such
variety of Sweetness and Beauty in their Natures, as will plentifully entertain
us with delightsome Speculations. But for pure Rest and Peace, for plenary
Acquiescence and Termination of Desires, it is no where (as I have Doctrine of a
God, and Provid. Vindicat. and Assert. p. 36, 37.
elsewhere shown at large) to be found within the whole Latitude of the
Creation. Nay, This is confirmed by the ingenuous Confession of One, who was
the most Experienced of all the Sons of Adam for Enquiry, the most wise for
Contrivance, the most wealthy for compassing all Earthly Delights: Who, many
years sifted out the finest Flour, and tortured Nature to extract the most
exquisite Spirits, the purest Quintessence, which all the Varieties of earthly
Delights could afford. Who yet at last had nothing better to say of them all,
than that they were Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. I have seen ( Eccles. 1.14.
says he) all the works that are done under the Sun, and behold All is Vanity
and Vexation of Spirit.

This (I say) is our case with all these present Entertainments: They smilingly
offer themselves to our Embraces, and deceitfully promise us all the
Satisfaction our Hearts can desire. But when we have once taken them into our
Arms, they immediately fade and pine away in our very Embraces, and leave the
Soul weeping and disconsolate for her unexpected Disappointment.

But now it is quite otherwise with the things that are above. No sooner does
the Soul pass from her dark Prison into the Mansions of Light and Glory; but in
that Paradise of God, where happy Spirits sit down by immortal Streams,
entertaining themselves with Songs of Love and Praise, she finds perfect
Satisfaction and Termination of all her desires. Having joined herself to God
(to speak Platonically) as a Center to a Center, she rests there with full
Acquiescence and Complacency. Whatsoever is beautiful and glorious, whatsoever
is fair, lovely, and harmonious in the Face of Nature, she contemplates in the
most eminent manner in her Beloved, the Unfoldings of whose Beauty discover to
her such Causes of Joy, of Transports, of Ecstasies and Ravishment of Spirit,
that all her Faculties overflow with Joy and Everlasting Gladness. Which brings
me to my Second Consideration, which is to show, that it is our Interest, as
well as Duty, to set our Affections on things above, not on things on the
Earth, because They only are permanent, sure, and certain; whereas all things
here are frail, short, and uncertain.

2. Now though we were born with all the Advantages of an healthful Body and of a
cheerful Spirit, and blessed with all the Circumstances of Success and Fortune:
yet when we have compassed all our Projects, when we are happy (if possible) to
the utmost of our Capacities, when all things conspire to complete our
Felicity, the most pleasant Prospect we can take from this highest pitch of
humane Happiness, is the gloomy Regions of approaching Death and Darkness. The
Fatal Sword hangs perpetually over our Heads, and though it may possibly hover
there for some time, it cannot be long, before it fall, and cut off the Thread
of Life, and so put a final period to all our Mirth and Happiness. It Is the
irreversible Decree of Heaven, that after a short, mushroom Life, we return
into Dust and Silence; and that, when we have floated up and down a few Minutes
upon the troublesome Waves of this tempestuous World, we disappear, and Sink
back into the grave and bottomless Dungeons of Oblivion. Nay perhaps, whilst we
are dancing upon these restless Waves, some violent Accident may prevent the
Work of Nature, and suddenly crush the Bubble into its original Nothing. In
short, All those Differences, which now so much distinguish the several sorts
of Men, must ere long expire, and the Ashes of the Deformed and Beautiful, of
the Learned and Ignorant, of the Honorable and Base, lie intermingled
together. The Crowns of Kings, and the Shackles of the Prisoners, the Robes of
Princes and the Rags of Beggars, the Gallants Bravery and the Peasants Russet,
the Statists Policy, the Courtiers Luxury, the Soldiers Gallantry, and the
Scholars Curiosity, must all, ere long, be laid aside in the Melancholy
Retirements of the Grave. (...). M. Anton. ad Stips. lib. 5. c. 8. p. 135.
What then is there in all this World that deserves our Care? What worthy the
Thoughts, the Love, the Embraces of an immortal Soul? Alas! were these Things
never so good and satisfactory in themselves, yet this single Consideration of
their Shortness and Uncertainty, would (like a Moth fretting a Garment) cause
all their Beauty to consume away, and constrain the Wise and thinking Few to
pronounce them Vanity.

But as the Things that are seen, these present Entertainments of Sense, are
Temporal; so the Things that are not seen, those Glories, Crowns, and Scepters,
that expect us in the other World are Eternal. Heaven is an Eternal Sabbath,
the Saints Everlasting Rest. Their Inheritance is not only Undefiled, but
incorruptible likewise, and such, as fades not away. There they Labor no
more, Sin no more, Sorrow no more; but, secure of the Everlasting Fruition of
those Unutterable Glories bask themselves in the pleasant Rivers of overflowing
Felicity. Their Crowns are set with the invaluable and sparkling Diamonds of
Immortality; Their Glory is immarcessible, and suffers no Eclipse; and they
follow the Lamb in white Robes, and shine like the Stars in the Firmament for
Ever and Ever. O come then, thou bright and Everlasting Day, and break in upon
these sad benighted Souls of ours! Put an End to this toilsome, this wearisome
State, and take us into the possession of thine own Rest and Peace; that these
superficial, fallacious Pleasures may never beguile us more, but we securely
Sabbatize in the Kingdom of God, the Eternal Comprehensions of Celestial Glory.

3. It Is our Interest, as well as Duty, to set our Affection on things above,
not on things on the Earth, because They only refine and spiritualize our
Nature, widen and enlarge our Faculties, and so fit and prepare us for the
spiritual and abstracted Entertainments of an immortal and Divine Life; whereas
all things here degravate and weigh down the Soul, reach out to her that Cup of
Oblivion, which makes her forget her own Nature and Excellencies, and
ingloriously to take up with the Enjoyments of Brutes. When the deluded Soul is
once taken Captive by the superficial, false glossing Excellencies of temporary
Objects, and suffers herself to be lulled asleep in the Lap of sensual
Enjoyments, they immediately spoil her of her Strength and Beauty, and betray
her into the hands of her immortal Enemies. They entirely shave off those
golden Locks, which rendered her at once invincible and comely, and by clipping
her radiant and sublimating Wings, confine her to the lower Regions of Sense
and Materiality. Nay, by the delusive Strains of their Magical Songs they so
effectually steal away and inchant her Affections, that she grows utterly
unmindful of her Relations above, and resigns herself wholly to their unequal
Embraces. Her noble Aspirations, which could easily ascend above the utmost
Limits of corruptible Nature into the boundless Habitations of immortal
Blessedness, like heavy terrene Exhalations, arise now no higher than the
Regions of Sense; and all the rational and delicious Entertainments of
abstracted Contemplations give way to the vile, impure suggestions of an
earthly, sensual, and brutish Imagination. In short, They so vastly decline her
from her true and natural Point, and sink her so low into the loathsome
Faeculencies of the material World, that (as though 'twas the Perfection of her
Nature to be subservient to the Body, and uninterruptedly to enjoy the beggarly
Delights and Gratifications of Sensuality) she openly Prosecutes the exalted
Entertainments of the Divine Life with all the Expressions of Rudeness and
Disdain, and shamelesly chooses that for her Portion and Inheritance, which is
the particular and discriminating Curse of the Serpent: Upon thy Belly shall
thou go, and Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life.

But now as the scanty disproportionate Enjoyments of Sense naturally debase
and impoverish the Soul, so do the Contemplation of spiritual Objects
unconceivably improve and enlarge all her Faculties. As when Moses conversed
with his most glorious Maker, and the attending Myriads of Holy Ones upon Mount
Sinai, he derived upon his Face such Reflections of their Beauty, such bright
and vivid Irradations of their excellent Glory, that the Children of Israel
could not look steadfastly upon it; so when we frequently meditate upon the
noble and exalted Beings of the other World, they naturally dilate and expand
all our Faculties, sublimate and brighten our enlarged Spirits, till they
appear like those of their own Company, Beautiful and Majestic, as the Sons of
the Morning. They raise such importunate and insatiable Desires, such towering
and seraphick Aspirations in the Soul, as will acquiesce and terminate only in
the blissful Enjoyments of the Supreme Good, the everlasting Fruition of his
incomprehensible Glory. The best Enjoyments, the noblest Entertainments this
World can afford, savor of nothing now but Dung and Filthiness to their
Palates, which can relish nothing but the Dew of Heaven, the spiritual Manna,
the Food of Angels, those pure and divine Joys which refresh the Saints above
for evermore. And thus whereas the Degenerate Soul, which is clogged with the
Propensions of the Animal Life, needs no angry Cherub with a flaming Sword to
keep her unhallowed hands from off the Tree of Life, her own corrupted Nature
(as the excellent Pythagorean and Academick have long since observed) being
utterly incapable of the Joys of Heaven; this enlarged and purified Soul, on
the contrary, is duly qualified for the noblest Entertainments of that exalted
State. From the Suitableness and Congruity of her Faculties with the Objects,
she will sweetly center upon those intellectual Pleasures, and most amply spend
all her Powers upon the Infinite and Essential Goodness, as upon her most
proper Object, the End of her Being, the Author and Finisher of her Happiness
and Glory. In a word, She will go away from her earthly Tabernacle ready tuned
to the Music of Heaven, in the first moment of her Entrance skilfully strike
in with the Quires of Angels, and harmoniously raise her Voice to the Songs of
Sion.

Thus you have my Reasons which enforce the Exhortation in the Text. I shall
now briefly deduce from them two or three practical Inferences, and conclude.

1. Then, You have seen how vain, insufficient, empty, and unsatisfying all the
Profits and Pleasures of this World are: that the whole Earth, though changed
into one Paradise, would not be able to yield the Soul Satisfaction; and
likewise if it could, that she is not certain of enjoying it one minute. Let
this Consideration then teach us to pray with the Excellent Vide Simplicii
Orationem apud Jamblichum ad calcem notarum. Edit. Ox. eandem videas ad finem
Epicteti.
Philosopher, That we may know our selves, and not devote our Exalted Nature to
the empty Gayeties of these momentary Bubbles; but apply our Minds constantly
(...), to the glorious Realities of the other World, the substantial
Entertainments of Life and Immortality. Let it remind us (I say) not to trust
in these uncertain Riches, these broken Reeds, these slender Stays of Vanity,
these Impertinencies, Dreams, and Nothings; but to lay up our Treasures in
Heaven, those secure and everlasting Storehouses, where no Thief approaches,
nor Moth corrupts, nor Death, which blasts all our Enjoyments here,
interposeth; but we shall reign Kings and Princes with our God for ever and
ever. Let it warn us to be perpetually mindful of our Mortality, and humbly and
diligently to wait all the days of our appointed time, till our Change come. In
a word, Let it oblige us to forget those things that are behind, and reaching
forth unto those things that are before, to press with all possible Vehemence
toward the Mark for the prize of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus.

2. You have seen how great and glorious the Rewards that expect us in the
other World are; that they are both proportioned to the utmost Capacity of the
Soul, and also will be enjoyed to all Eternity. Do not you then long for this
happy state? and sigh and desire ardently with St. Paul to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ? My Father, and Mr. John Gregory, in his posthumous Discourse of
the Morality of the Sabbath, page 101.
Here (as says a Blessed Author) you have hard Working-days, sore Labor and
Travel under the Sun. The Devil assaults you, the World hates you, your own
evil Hearts many times distress you, and crazy Bodies discourage you. We are
all here clouded with Sin and Misery, and ah! our Vileness is upon us. Let us
then bear up our Souls upon the loftiest Wing of Divine Contemplation, and
follow our Ascending Lord above this Darkness and miserable Habitations into
the radiant Mansions of his Fathers House, the Kingdom of Glory. Let us
meditate Day and Night upon that blessed time, when we shall have our Feet upon
the Top of Mount Sion, and rejoice in the Felicity of his Chosen, the unfolded
and essential Glories of his Divine Countenance, which are too bright for our
mortal Faculties, and which none can see and live. When we shall give Thanks
with his Inheritance, the blessed Societies of Saints and Angels, and
everlastingly enjoy the delicious Repasts of Anthems and Allelujahs: in short,
upon the infinite Transports and Ravishments of the Soul in the secure and
everlasting Fruition of the Divine Love, upon the mutual Endearments and
Caresses of Immortal Spirits, and upon all those glorious things which are
spoken by him who made and fully understands them, of the City of God. Let us
frequently and seriously (I say) contemplate these things, and they will most
assuredly so influence our Wills, and fan the Flame of our Affections, that we
shall become perfectly (...), dead to our selves, and to all the luscious
Relishes of the sensual Nature, continually tending upwards with importunate
Reaches toward heavenly Objects. Then we shall be sufficiently encouraged to
take up the Cross of Christ, and willingly and cheerfully undergo all the
Afflictions and Tribulations of this Life; well knowing, that the Sufferings of
this present time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be
revealed in us; this light Affliction, which is but for a moment, working for
us (...), an infinitely more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory.

Lastly, As our future Happiness proceeds from the Vision of God, so you have
seen, that without Holiness no Man can see him. Let this then excite us to form
and fashion the Frame of our Minds into a Likeness and Affinity with our
Blessed Maker. Let it oblige us to prepare our selves for the Intuition of his
Beauty, to purify ourselves as he is pure, and to purge, refine, and
spiritualize our Nature, that we may be qualified for the Possession of our
proper Center, our home and native Region, the Highest Heaven. Let it lead our
awak'ned Souls to the Divine Goodness and Philanthropy for the Regulation of
their disorderly and tumultuous Appetites, and induce them humbly and intensly
to pray at the Throne of Grace, that they may perfect Holiness in the Fear of
God. For when we thus sincerely desire to shake our selves from the Dust, to
arise, and put on our beautiful Garments, and to see the King in his Beauty,
the Glory of the Lord will be revealed to us, and we shall certainly behold the
Excellency of our God. As the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, solacing
himself in the ardent and dear Reciprocations of her Love, so will our God
rejoice over us. He will be in the midst of us, he will save us, he will
rejoice over us with Joy: He will rest in his Love, he will rejoice over us
with Singing. He will take away all our Dross, and for his Name's sake purify
and cleanse the Corruptions of our Nature, until the Righteousness thereof go
forth as Brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns. In a
word, He will vouchsafe us the most gracious Visitations and Elapses of his
Holy Spirit, and never leave letting himself down into us, till he has quite
loosened us from Sin and from ourselves, and wrought us up into such a blessed
Uniformity with the Divine Nature, as will make us meet for his amiable
Dwellings, the City of Righteousness, where we shall joyfully mention the
loving Kindnesses of the Lord, and be for ever delighted with the Abundance of
his Glory.

Which God, of his Infinite Mercy, grant, etc. HEBREWS ii. 3. How shall we
escape, if we neglect so great Salvation?


IN handling these Words, I shall endeavor to show, 1. The Greatness of the
Salvation wrought for us by Christ; and 2. Our Inexcusableness and the
intolerable Aggravations of our Guilt and Punishment, if we neglect it. That so
either common Gratitude in reflecting upon the infinite Condescensions of
Divine Love may draw us, or at least the Terrors of the Lord may affright us
into Obedience. For how shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation?

I. I am to show the greatness of the Salvation wrought for us by Christ. And
this appears,

1. From the Consideration of the Greatness and Majesty of the Person
undertaking it. Now 'twas not any one of the Patriarchs, who were burning and
shining Lights in their Generations. 'Twas not Moses, nor one of the Prophets,
by whom in times past he spoke unto the Fathers; But when the Fullness of the
time was come God dealt with us, as the Lord of the Vineyard did with his
Husbandmen; last of all sending even his own Son to be his Ambassador to
Mankind. His own Son, from whom by the Spirit all those Divine Teachers, which
from the Beginning of the World to his Birth went before him in the Flesh,
received their Power and Commission. Of whom Moses and the Prophets were only
Types, Forerunners and Shadows; Figures, Ministers and Substitutes, to prepare
and enable the World by degrees to receive this great Mystery of Godliness, God
manifested in the Flesh: this last and universal Declaration of Life and
Immortality brought to light in his Gospel. His own Son, who is his
only-Begotten, Co-essential and Coeternal with himself, the Heir of all
things, the Lord of Glory, the very Brightness of his Fathers Glory, the
Express Image of his Person, full of Grace and Truth. His own Son, Col. 1.16,
17.
by whom were all things made, Visible and Invisible. Those most glorious and
exalted Sons of the Morning, who when the Foundations of the World were laid,
sang melodiously together, and shouted for Joy, as well as the Beasts of the
Field. All Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and Powers in Heaven and Earth,
as well as the subordinate Classes of inferior Beings, and who still upholds
them all by the Word of his Power. This is the Person, that comes to Save us.
Even He, Phil. 2.6, 7.
who subsisted in the Form or Nature of God, and therefore thought it no
Robbery, but his inviolable Right, to be Equal with God, makes himself of no
Reputation, but takes upon him the Form or Nature of a Servant, and is made in
the Likeness of Men. Deus Humana visit sab imagine terras. God himself, I say,
even the High and Lofty One, that inhabiteth Eternity, and whose Name is Great,
Wonderful and Holy; the Lord Jehovah, with whom is Everlasting Strength, in
very deed bows the Heavens, and comes down to dwell among Men. Well then might
the officious Host of Heaven, the Quires of Angels, who long desired to see the
Mystery of this Day usher in the Birth of this great Prince with Songs and
Allelujahs. Well might one of them, clothed with the Brightness and Similitude
of a Star, call the Levantine Princes, the great and Learned Magi, as Emblems
of his Future Conquests over the Princes and Learned Sages of the Heathen
World, to do him Obeisance; and others, winged with Joy and Triumph carry these
glad Tidings to the humble Shepherds, and send them likewise, as the
First Fruits of his own People, to pay their Homage to their Lord. For had the
heavenly Host been silent, the Lowest Class of Beings, the very senseless and
inanimate Parts of impatient Nature, had questionless found a Voice to have
told us, That unto us a Son was born, unto us a Child was given, whose
Government is upon his Shoulders, and whose Goings forth from Everlasting.

But now how miserable and wretched was our Captivity which the Arm of
Omnipotence only could lead captive? How thick and dismal the Darkness we were
in, which the irresistible Rays of the Sun of Righteousness only could disperse
and scatter? How weighty and insupportable that Wrath which nothing could
appease, but the adequate Condescensions of an Infinite Love? Where were all
those spotless Beauties of the Upper World? Those kind, compassionate Spirits,
who seem to make it a great Part of their Heaven, to relieve us here below?
Where all those bright Squadrons of exalted Seraphims whose Names are renowned
and glorious for their transcendent Love in the Habitations of Men here, as
well as in the Mansions of Glory? Could not these unstained, pure, and
undefiled Images of our heavenly Father, These faultless, innocent, and
unblameable Beings, who continually surround his Throne with Anthems of Praise,
intercede for, and reconcile the offended Deity to Sinful Man? No, we were such
heinous Offenders, that nothing less than God himself, could satisfy for our
Faults: These Blessed Spirits could only in strains of Sorrow lament our Fall,
and with a Pity and Concern commensurate to the passible Nature of such happy
Beings, expect the Final determination of Infinite Wisdom, Goodness and Justice.

I know many Learned Men, both Ancient and Modern, are of Opinion, That God
might have pardoned the Sins of Mankind without any Satisfaction made to his
Justice, Solo nutu, and jussu, and voluntate, merely by the unexceptionable
Prerogative of his Sovereign Will and Power; and that 'twas only to show his
great Concern for the Honor of his Laws, and his everlasting Hatred and
Detestation of Sin, that he humbled his own Son to become a propitiation for
it. Far be it from me, to entrench upon the Divine Omnipotence, or impiously to
say to his Goodness, what himself does to the Sea; Hitherto shall thou come,
but no farther, and here shall thy Operations be staid. Yet I think we may
venture to affirm, that these Excellent Persons seem to be so enamored with
the Beauty, of that lovely Attribute, his Mercy, that they have hardly
vouchsafed to cast so much as one glance upon his Justice. Mercy, I
acknowledge, is his Favorite, his darling Excellence; the very Flower and
Beauty, as I may so say, of his Nature, in which his Soul takes most Delight
and Complacency. And this, considered alone, might have remitted the whole Debt
without any payment at all, or at least have accepted the Satisfaction of an
Angel. But then I consider on the other hand, that Justice is as Essential to
him as Mercy, and that as the one is infinite, so is the other too. Now Justice
(you know) demands the whole Debt should be discharged, and the Sinner not
released till he has one way or other paid the uttermost Farthing. But which, I
pray, of all the Angels, is sufficient for these things? or where shall we
find, amongst those Finite, though glorious, Beings, a Savior able to satisfy
Infinite Justice for the Sins of the whole World? The Blessed Jesus looked and
saw there was none to help, and wondered there was no Intercessor; therefore
his own Arm brought Salvation to him, and his Righteousness it sustained him.
What I say, none of all Created Beings, none of the heavenly Powers, those
Magisterial and Masterpieces of his Creation, could Undertake, the Son of God
himself humbly descends from his Throne of Glory even down to his Footstool,
to perform and accomplish. Welcome then, thrice welcome, Blessed Jesu, into
thine own World. Welcome to the unhappy Dwellings of forlorn and helpless Man.
May the sense of thine infinite Love enlarge thy Dominions, and cause all
People, Nations, and Languages, to rise up, and call thee Blessed. May all
Nations, whom thou have made come and worship thee, and glorify thy Name; For
thou art Great, and do wondrous things, thou art God alone.

Now then, my Brethren, let us not so ill requite this stupendous Condescension
of the Son of God, as to debase him (as some impious and ungrateful Wretches
do) beneath the Condition he humbled himself unto. Let us not, I say, for his
infinite Love cast Dirt in his Face; or, because he vouchsafed to assume the
Infirmities of Humane Nature, despoil him (as much as we can) of the Glory and
Majesty of the Divine. Though his Beauty was benighted under a Cloud, there was
Form and Comeliness enough in him, that we should desire him. The unconverted
Joseph. de Antiq. Jud. l. 18. c. 4.
Jew himself will tell us, that his Divinity, like the Sun shining through a
Cloud, gave such Illustration and Testimony to all his Actions, that 'twas
hardly lawful to call him a Man. And now he has run his Race, and finished his
Course; the Cloud is removed, and the Mists all scattered before the prevailing
Sun. The Incarnate God shines forth in his full Glory and Triumph; yea, he is
now altogether lovely. It Is the highest Repast of Angels, and the peculiar
Entertainment of Glorified Spirits, to behold, admire, and praise his excellent
Greatness; and when our enlarged Souls shall fly away to the same blissful
Mansions, and be admitted to the Comprehensions of an intuitive Beatitude, they
shall with equal Satisfaction contemplate his Divine Beauty, and as skilfully
tune their Harps to his Praises as they. Let us therefore, in the mean time,
lay our Hand upon our Mouth, and with all due Prostration both of Body and Mind
adore this great Mystery of Goodness, this astonishing Miracle of the Divine
Mercy and Condescension, which, though above the adequate Comprehension of our
Reason, is put beyond all possibility of Distrust; being most amply confirmed
to us by the concurrent and infallible Testimony of God, Angels, and Men.

At his Baptism and Transfiguration, you know, he was proclaimed by a Voice
from Heaven, to be the Beloved Son of God, in whom he was well pleased. And
again, when he brings in his First-begotten into the World, he commands, that
this Exinanition of himself (this Obscuration of his Essential Glory under the
Veil of Humane Flesh) may not diminish one Ray from the Honor of his Divine
Majesty; but that all the Potentates in Heaven and Earth fall down and worship
him. Worship him, Psalm. 97.7.
says he, all ye Gods, all ye Angels and Thrones in Heaven, all ye Kings and
Judges of the Earth. The holy Angels, with their usual Cheerfulness, obeyed the
Royal Orders. They humbly adored the holy Child Jesus, and stood ready, through
all the Periods of his Life, to Serve and Worship him. St. Peter, though he saw
him not so clearly as these Blessed Spirits, generously confessed, that he was
Christ the Son of the Living God; and he received this Confirmation from the
Mouth of our Lord himself, That Flesh and Blood had not revealed it unto him,
but his Father only, which is in Heaven. Nay (to the everlasting Shame and
Confusion of the unbelieving Sons of Men) the Devils themselves have ever
subscribed to this Article. They knew and confessed him here on Earth, and
still believe and tremble. The over-awed and trembling Vid. Suidam in August.
Oracle plainly confessed to the Roman Emperor at his Birth, that though he
appeared under all the disadvantageous Circumstances of Humanity and Weakness,
He was the Sovereign Lord and King of the blessed Beings above; Luke 8.28.
which was afterward confirmed by a whole Legion of unclean Spirits, when in
the Man possessed they jointly lifted up their Voices to him with a Jesus thou
Son of God Most High. But to what purpose, I say, was all this? or why all this
Noise and Ostentation, had he not been the Son of God in another and more
excellent manner than were any of the Sons of Men, who either lived with him,
or that went before him, had there not been something in it extraordinary, that
entitled him to so sublime and divine a Privilege?

Angels, Kings, and Prophets (I confess) are frequently called the Sons of God.
They have a larger Participation of his Power, or a Communication of more
special Grace than is indulged and granted to his other Children; but yet their
Honor and Dignity fall infinitely short of that of Jesus the Son of God. For
to which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this Day have I
begotten thee? Or who is he amongst all those exalted Sons of the Most High,
whom the Father advanced to sit at his own Right Hand till his Enemies are made
his Footstool? David (you know) was a King, and yet he calls him Lord; and John
the Baptist, though he was more than a Prophet, was never by Angels, Men, or
Devils acknowledged to be properly the Son of God: no; these are the high
Prerogatives of our Lord Christ Jesus: to him alone belong the most glorious
and supereminent Titles of his own Son, his only Son, his only Begotten, and
the Heir of all things. So that in all things (I say) he has the Pre-eminence.

But the Scriptures (if possible) speak plainer yet. They not only instruct by
natural and necessary Illations and Consequences, but also (to prevent all
Cavils and Disputes) are careful in many places to assert this Truth as
clearly, and as expressly, as Words can speak. Joh. 20.28, 29.
St. Thomas believes and confesses to him, that he is his Lord and God; and
those who should afterward inherit the same Faith, are pronounced Blessed. The
Beloved Joh. 1.1.
Disciple is positive, that the Word was God; and in the Close of his first
Epistle speaking of Jesus, (to show against an Objection, which he rightly
foresaw would be afterward urged against the Christians, that they might
safely worship him, without any Fear or Danger of that Idolatry which the
Heathens were guilty of in worshipping their Demons,) This, says he, is, not
Deus factus, a made God, a God by Office, not by Nature; but (...), the True
God. The Learned 1 Cor. 15.87. 1 Timothy 3.16. Romans 9.5.
Apostle adds, that this Second Man is the Lord from heaven, and God manifested
in the Flesh, and again, (most blasphemously, if not truly; this being that
particular Eulogy which is due only to Jehovah, the one Supreme, Eternal God of
Israel) (...), God over all Blessed for Ever and Ever. Nay, (not to mention the
many Repetitions of this most glorious Doxology to him in other places of
Scripture) This is that good Confession our Lord himself made before his Judge.
He had all along, to the Rage and Amazement of his Enemies, held his peace;
showing by his Silence, that he despised all their Accusations as certain and
apparent Calumnies. But no sooner is urged to determine this Point, but he
opens his Mouth, and decides the matter. I adjure thee by the living God, Mat.
26.63, 64.
says the High Priest, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of
God. Jesus, after their modest way of Affirmation, says unto him, Thou have
said, Or, as St. Mark more positively, Jesus said, I am. It Is certain, the
High Priest understood him not in that Vulgar Sense wherein Great and Righteous
Persons, Kings and Prophets, are called the Sons of God; but that he affirmed
himself to be so in the Literal, Proper, and Natural Signification of the
words: For otherwise he could not, upon the account of this Confession, have
charged him with Blasphemy, nor consequently the Council have voted him to be
guilty of Death. Thus too in the Fifth of St. John he tells the Jews plainly,
that God is (...), his own Father; making himself thereby (as they rightly
concluded) to be Equal with God. And in another Conference with them in the
Tenth of that Evangelist, He not only owns himself to be the Christ, and the
Son of God in the most proper sense; but adds farther, that He and his Father
are One: One, not in Will only, but in Essence, Glory, Honor, and Power. I am
sure the Jews understood him thus: for knowing, that none could call himself
the proper and natural Son of God, who must not assert himself likewise to be
God, and allowing him to be nothing more than a mere Man, they again tax him
with Blasphemy, and go about to stone him. I and my Father, says our Lord, are
One. Then the Jews took up Sons again to stone him. Jesus answered them Many
good Works have I showed you from my Father; for which of those Works do ye
stone me? The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone thee not, but
for Blasphemy, and because that thou, being a Man, make thy self God. The
Jews, I say, in these places accuse him of calling himself the Son of God in
the most proper Sense, and consequently of making himself also very God. And
yet our Lord is so far from traversing the Indictment, or reselling the
Crimination, that in Verse. 38. he confirms their Logic, and then leaves them
in this Opinion, which certainly he could never have done without infinite
Derogation from the Honor of the Divine Majesty, and downright blasphemy, had
he not really been what they apprehended he said he was: the Proper, Natural,
and Only Begotten Son of God.

Thus, I say, is the Divinity of our Lord put beyond all possibility of
Distrust, being preached to all the World by Angels, Prophets, and Apostles;
Proclaimed more than once from Heaven by the God of all Truth, the Eternal
Father of Angels and men; and also most positively asserted in a public
Assembly by our Lord himself, who, as the 1 Pet. 2.22.
Holy Ghost bears him witness, did no Sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.
What need we then, My Brethren, any farther witness? Or how is it possible for
any Man, who rightly understands the weight of Divine Testimony, to call it
into Question? Such Men as Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 28.
Eusebius has long since observed, must be more wise than their Maker, more
knowing, and more intelligent, even than God that made them. Those inspired and
infallible Witnesses, the Prophets and Apostles, were not so knowing; and the
most intelligent of all the Heavenly Spirits, the Cherubims themselves, if
compared to them, are found wanting. The Church of Christ, in all Ages, has
unhappily been overspread with the thick, uncomfortable darkness of Ignorance
and Error; and These Men alone have had the inestimable Privilege of enjoying
the happy Goshen, the Dwellings of Light, the glorious Habitations of Wisdom
and Knowledge. For if after the complicated, irrefragable Testimony of so many
Infallible Witnesses, the Belief and Confession of the Church be required in
this Matter, She has in all Ages believed and confessed it. This is that Faith,
says the Council. Paris. tom. 1. page 844.
Synod of Antioch, which we have received from the Beginning, and which the
holy Catholic Church preserves pure and undefiled; having derived it by a
constant and uninterrupted Succession, even unto this Day, from the Blessed
Apostles themselves. And Videas Bulli Defensionem Fidei Nicenae, and Whitbit
tractatum de vera Christi Deitate, sect. 2.
some truly excellent and Learned Divines of our own, have shown at large the
Truth of this Assertion, from the particular Writings and Monuments of the
Primitive Fathers; who, as well before as after the Council of Nice, with one
Heart and one Voice confess and maintain the Divinity and Eternal Generation of
the Son of God. These well-grounded and pious Souls could not be laughed or
ridiculed by the Scoffs and Jeers, the Taunts and Sarcasms of their Learned and
witty Adversaries; nor frighted by the severest Appearances of Torture and
Persecution, out of their Trust and Confidence in the Holy Jesus; but
notwithstanding all the Imputations of Folly and Madness from an invidious
Trypho, a scoffing Lucian, a virulent Celsus, and a malicious Julian, they
continually called upon him in the time of Trouble, and (as Epist. l. 10. Ep.
97.
Pliny tells Trajan) sang Praises to him as to the God of their Salvation.
Neither did they only thus bravely contend for the Faith against the violent
Incursions of the wild Boar out of the Forest; the Menaces and blasphemous
Assaults of their professed Enemies, the Jews and Gentiles; but also were
infinitely careful to secure it from the Wiles and Stratagems of the little
Foxes; those false Teachers, that crept in amongst them, and under the specious
Pretenses of Reason and Revelation continually endeavored to spoil the Lords
Vineyard. No sooner did any Heretic dare to impugn or invalidate this
Doctrine, but he was immediately disowned by all the Faithful, and
Anathematized or cast out of the Church as a ravenous Wolf, who designed only
to devour and tear in pieces the Lord's Flock, which is demonstratively Evident
from that Class of Heretics, Ebion, Theodotus, Artemon, Paulus Samosatenus,
and Photinus. In short, Socinus himself confesses, that the whole Stream of
Antiquity runs against him; and, that of all the Primitive Fathers and
Councils, there is not so much as one that any way countenanceth his Opinion.
So that you see, from all hands, that unless with a truly Satanical Pride we
exalt our selves above all that is called God, and flatly give Heaven and
Earth, God, Angels, and pious Men the Lie to their face, and side only with
Jews, Turks, and Pagans, we must acknowledge the Blessed Jesus to be in very
deed no other than the Only-Begotten Son of the Most High, the Maker of All
things, the King of Glory, Alpha and Omega, the First of Beings, and the Last
of Ends, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.

Thus then does the Greatness of our Salvation appear from the Greatness and
Majesty of the Person undertaking it. It does so

2. From the Greatness and Unconceivableness of those Sufferings, whereby he
did accomplish it. Some, indeed, lessen the Sufferings of our Lord, by thinking
he had the Comprehension of Blessedness, the Supports of actual Glory in the
midst of all his Torments; that even then he did behold the Face of God, and
communicate in Glory. But in answer to Men of these Thoughts, I consider with
the Excellent Bishop Great Exemplar, page 413, 414.
Tailor,

1. That though the two Natures of Christ were knit by a mysterious Union into
one Person, yet the Natures still retained their incommunicable Properties; so
that as the Divine Nature could not by virtue of this Union derive upon it self
the Infirmities of the Humane, so neither did the Humane partake in all
Instances of the Felicities of the Divine: these indeed being essentially in
God, but to Man communicated without Necessity, and by an arbitrary
Dispensation. Though therefore, as God, he is omniscient, and knows every thing;
yet that, as Man, he was ignorant as many things, seeking Fruit upon the
Fig Tree when the time of Figs was not come, and telling us himself, that he
knew not the Day nor the Hour when he should judge the World; and therefore
being said to have increased in Wisdom and Knowledge. Though, as God, he is
from Everlasting, and World without end; yet that, as Man, he had a Beginning
in the Circumscriptions of time. Lastly, Though, as God, 'twas impossible for
him to suffer, yet that, as Man, he was the Subject of Torment and Misery.

2. That some Virtues and Excellencies were then in the Soul of Jesus, which
are not consistent with a glorified State; such as Hope, Holy Desires, and the
like: All which having their Seat in the Soul, do suppose her yet in a state of
Pilgrimage; a Condition, that is imperfect, and in order to something beyond
what is present, it being impossible (as St. Paul observes) for a Man to hope
for that which he already sees and enjoys.

3. That this Opinion annuls and destroys the whole Merit of his Sufferings.
For the least glympse of Glory, the minutest Ray of Beatifick Vision,
out-weighs the greatest Calamities, and infinitely exceeds all that Spirit of
Pain that can be extracted from the Infelicities of this World. But the Holy
Scriptures everywhere assure us, that his Passion upon the Cross was a state of
Merit and Work, and that as a Reward of it, he was crowned with Glory and
Immortality. We see Jesus, says the Heb. 2.9.
Apostle, who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the suffering of
Death crowned with glory and honor. And Phil. 2.8, 9.
again, Christ humbled himself, and became obedient to Death, even the Death of
the Cross. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name
which is above every Name. For his Sufferings (you see) his Name was exalted,
his Kingdom glorified, and his Humanity advanced above all the Orders of
Angels. For these he was made the Lord of all the Creatures, the First Fruits
of the Resurrection, the Exemplar of Glory, the Prince and Head of the
Catholic Church: And therefore since all this was his Recompense, the Reward
of his Sufferings, it could not be a necessary Consequence and natural Efflux
of the Personal Union of the Godhead with the Humanity.

On the other hand there are who affirm, that the Soul of Jesus upon the Cross
suffered the Pains of Hell, and all the Torments of the Damned; and that
without such Sufferings, it is not imaginable he should pay the Price which
God's Wrath did demand of us. But the same that reproves the former, does
likewise reprehend these latter. For the Hope, which was the support of his
Soul in the midst of its Agonies, as it confesses an Imperfection, that is not
consistent with the state of Glory, so does it exclude that Despair which is
the Sting and Torment of accursed Souls. Our dearest Lord suffered indeed the
whole Condition of Humanity, Sin only excepted; and by those sad Pains he
endured upon the Cross, merited Heaven for himself as the Head, and for all his
faithful Servants as the Members of his Mystical Body. But yet (I say) we
cannot conceive that he was ever under the Amazement of Hell, or that upon the
Cross he felt the formal Misery and Spirit of Pain, which is the Portion of
Damned Spirits, because 'twas impossible he should despair, and without Despair
it is impossible there should be a Hell.

But though I can by no means subscribe to this Assertion; yet I think it is
highly probable, that in the Intention of Degrees and present Anguish the Soul
of our Lord upon the Cross might feel a greater Load of Wrath than is incumbent
in every instant upon perishing Souls. S. Paul tells us, that every Sinner, as
such, carries no less a Load about with him than a whole Body of Death. How
many Deaths then, and unconceivable Agonies, must the Lamb of God have felt,
when (as the Prophet speaks) the Lord laid on him the Iniquities of us all?
Certainly the lively Sense of united, concentred Vengeance due to the Sins of
the whole World, and the vast and singular Capacity of his Soul who was the
Word incarnate, rendered his Sufferings most amazing and insupportable. His
Agony was so great, that it compelled him, for a time, almost to despair, and
sink under its weight. Sure we are, it extorted from him this most bitter Cry,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And how insupportable must those
Sufferings have been, which could appear even to stagger such a Faith, and to
eclipse his Assurance of the Presence and Love of his Heavenly Father?

But now again, How great is the Bitterness of that Death, the rescuing us from
which, brought so much Shame, and Pain, and Amazement upon the Son of God? How
unparalleled and unconceivably great that Salvation, in the purchasing of which
the Lord of Hosts himself did even bleed and die? The Waters of Bitterness (you
see) entered his Soul, and the Storms of Death and of his Father's Anger broke
him all in pieces. But if this was done in the Green Tree, what without this
would have been done in the Dry? If (I say) the Sufferings of our Lord, who was
the Son of God and innocent, who was all fair, and had no spot in him, were so
sad and lamentable, then how amazing and insupportable had our Portion been
without this Atonement, whom Sin had rendered his professed Enemies; and, as it
were, fitted and marked out as Fuel for everlasting Burnings? But,

3. The Greatness of our Salvation appears, in that it frees us from the
Bondage and Slavery of the Law. This was a grievous and servile Dispensation,
consisting of innumerable little Rites and Ceremonies, which had no intrinsic
Value in themselves, and are therefore said by God himself to be Statutes that
were not good; but were only adapted for a time to the weak Capacities and
babe-like Humors of the Jews. Of Rites and Ceremonies, I say, so heavy and
burdensome, that the Apostles themselves complained, that 'twas a Yoke upon
their Necks, which neither they nor their Forefathers were ever able to bear.
But now has Christ taken this Yoke from off our Necks, and made out a way for
us into the Liberty of the Sons of God. He deals no longer with us as with
Children in our Minority, but has delivered us from the Tutorage and Paedagogy
of the Law, from the Severity of its Commands, from the exact Punctilio's and
Numerousness of its Imposition. The new Moons and Sabbatical Years, the many
Washings and Purifications stand us in no stead; neither are we obliged to long
and tedious Journeys to Jerusalem, to present our Oblations and Sacrifices at
the Temple. Christ our Passover having been sacrificed for us, and the Messiah
cut off, all those typical Oblations and Sacrifices must for ever cease, the
Shadow give place to the Substance, those Ritual Observances to Natural and
Moral Duties, those Carnal Ceremonies to the Spiritual Worship, and that
Temporary Dispensation to the Everlasting Covenant of the Gospel. Circumcision
now avails no more than Uncircumcision, and it is neither Meat nor Drink, but a
new Creature only, that commends a Man to God. In a word, our Duty is no longer
clogged with a company of useless and troublesome Ceremonies, but (like the
Services of the ancient Patriarchs) is more easy and acceptable, more plain
and simple, more humane and natural, more becoming the Grandeur and Majesty of
the Divine Being, and, more agreeable to the Nature of a spiritual and immortal
Soul. It Is only to be happy the most proper and compendious way; to love our
blessed Maker for himself, and our Neighbors for his sake; to visit the
Fatherless and Widows in their Afflictions, and to keep our selves unspotted
from the World. All which, especially if we consider the extraordinary
Indulgence of Divine Assistance, which we now enjoy, render our Salvation
Great, Wonderful, and Glorious. And so I come to my Fourth Particular, which is
to show, the Greatness of our Salvation, from the Consideration of those
greater Aids of Divine Grace, those particular Mercies we now enjoy under the
Dispensation of the Gospel, whereby we may be freed both from the Guilt and
Punishment, and also from the Power and Dominion of Sin.

4. Now the Law only discovers Sin, but affords no degrees of supernatural
Power to subdue it; but with the Preaching of the Gospel the Holy Ghost was
sent down from Heaven, who by illuminating, preventing, and exciting Grace
assists Men to perform the Conditions of Salvation, and is promised in rich and
liberal Supplies to all that humbly and ardently pray for him. God now pours
Water upon him that is thirsty, and Floods upon the dry Ground; he pours out
his Spirit upon our Seed, and his Blessing upon our Offspring, whereby they
may spring up as among the Grass, as Willows by the Watercourse. The Law
directs to no means for the Expiation of Guilt, but peremptorily and
dogmatically denounces Death to all Offenders. The Soul that sins shall die.
But the Gospel delivers us from this terrible Sentence of the Law, and allows a
Renovation of the Sinner by Repentance, to which the plenary Pardon of Sin is
assured. Wash ye, Is. 1.16, 17, 18.
make ye clean, says God by his Evangelical Prophet, put away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well, and though
your Sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red
like Crimson, they shall be as wool. God indeed will not pardon those who
flatter themselves in their Sins; but they who confess and forsake them shall
find Mercy. The Law exacts absolute perfect, uninterrupted Obedience; and for
the least Omission or accusing Act, past an irrevocable Doom upon the Offender:
Cursed is the man that continues not in a things written in the Law, to do
them. But the Gospel mitigates and allays this Strictness and Severity; calls
only for sincere and persevering, though imperfect Obedience, and propounds
such merciful Conditions to the guilty, that upon the performance of them they
may plead their Pardon sealed with the Blood of their Redeemer, to be saved and
crowned in the Day of Judgment.

And thus whereas the Law works nothing but Wrath, being as terrible in its
Injunctions, as 'twas at first in its Promulgation; the Kingdom of Heaven, the
Gospel of Peace, addresseth it self to us after another manner. It speaks to us
in a still, small Voice; the whole Tenor of it (you see) running in this
gentle strain, Sin no more; Repent and be converted; Come to Christ, and be
refreshed, and find Rest unto your Souls. The Grace of God, I say, which
brings Salvation, does thus appear, teaching us, that if the time past of our
Lives shall suffice us to have wrought the Will of the Gentiles, and we will
now in good earnest renounce all our ungodly and worldly Lusts, and take care
for the time to come faithfully to discharge our Duty to God, our Neighbor,
and Ourselves, to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World,
Sin shall not have Dominion over us, God having obliged himself by express
Promise, that he will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but
that in all our Temptations he will make a way for us to escape, that we may be
able to bear them. So that though Sin is not entirely destroyed, (that being
the Privilege of Angels and Souls freed from the Fetters of Mortality) yet (as
St. Paul speaks of its Effect, Death) it has lost its Sting, and is only
instrumental to the Advancement of the Glory of God, who upon our sincere and
hearty Repentance, and Reformation of our Lives, will pardon all our past
Offenses, though never so many and great in themselves; and for those daily
Failures, those Sins of Infirmity, those Lapses of Humane Nature, which the
Best of Men must more or less be subject to, as long as they lie under the
Disadvantages of Mortality, will put them all upon the Score of the Cross.

5. The Greatness of the Salvation wrought for us by Christ, appears, in that
he has delivered us from that Ignorance and Darkness which the whole World lay
in at his Coming. Both Jews and Gentiles (I confess) had some Notices or
Conception^ of a Future State; but then they were so miserably intricate and
obscure, so confused and uncertain, that they were very little better than none
at all. Those most Thinking and Learned Pagans, the Pythagoreans and
Platonists, after the most diligent Search and Enquiry into these Matters,
could never advance beyond a Probability: all their fine Harangues and
rapturous Discourses upon the Immortality of the Soul, being Indications rather
of their good Wishes, than Demonstrations of its Reality. Aristotle not only
wavers and fluctuates in his Opinion, but also Problematically disputes against
it; though it must be confessed, that in his Book De Anima he styles her,
without any scruple, Eternal and Immortal. But the Stoics are as Dogmatical in
this Point as in any other. Sometimes indeed they talk like Abstracted Beings
or pure Intelligences, with the noblest Flights of Rhetoric and Fancy
decyphering the Exalted Happiness of the Soul when she is entirely loosned from
the Clogs of Matter, and freely roves up and down in the pure unmixed Regions
of Light and Glory. But then (as though they had lain all this while in a
Trance, and had only been entertained with the fantastic illusive
Representations of a sportive Imagination) they for the most part peremptorily
determine, That Death is not only the Separation of the Soul from the Body, but
the utter Dissolution likewise, or Dissipation of both; there being no more
after the Death of a Man than was before his Birth, viz. Emptiness,
Insensibility, and Darkness: Nay, when in their abstracted Humors they
vouchsafe to allow her a Subsistence without the Body, it is only till the next
Universal Conflagration, when she and all Created Beings must End and Die
together. Nor indeed was the Confession of that great Master of Morality,
Socrates himself, much better; for, concluding his gallant and most excellent
Apology before the Areopagites, with some glorious Reflections upon the
inestimable Happiness of Good Men in the other World, he in the very last Words
dashed all with an open undisguis'd Acknowledgment of his remaining Doubts and
Jealousies. Sub finem Apol. apud Platonem.
(...). Could I be assured (says he a little before) of the Reality of this
Blessed State, I would gladly die a thousand times over to enjoy it. But now
(my Judges) the time of my Departure is come: It Is your Lot to live, and mine
to die; which of these two is the Better, (...), is a thing utterly unknown to
any but God alone. In short, Dicaearchus, Democritus, Epicurus, and their
Followers, as constantly as positively declare, That there is no Subsistence of
the Soul after this Life; but that when the Body returns to Dust, she
immediately relapseth into the bottomless Abyss of Annihilation and Darkness.

And then for the Jews, at the time of our Savior's Coming, they stood much
upon the same Level: For, though from the Translation of Enoch and Elias, and
the Death of their Patriarchs, who never inherited the Promises of Temporal
Felicity, and particularly that of Moses, which their Rabbis are pleased to
call The Kiss of God's Mouth, intimating thereby, that he breathed out his Soul
by the Force and Energy of Contemplation; without those Pains and Convulsions
which are the usual Concomitants of the Death of other Men, resolving himself
into the Embraces of his Maker: From the positive and express Words of Job,
which (however some Modern Commentators are pleased to understand them) are, I
conceive with S. Hierom and the Ancients, as plain and clear a Confession of
the Resurrection, as any that have been made since the Promulgation of the
Gospel: From the glorious Confession of that excellent Woman and her seven
Children in the Maccabees, who all refused Deliverance, that they might obtain
a better Resurrection: and from those many Promises of Eternal Life scattered
up and down in the Book of Psalms, and other Writings of the Old Testament.
Though (I say) from all these one might reasonably expect the Jews should have
had some fuller and clearer Knowledge of the State after Death; yet being no
part of that Covenant which (if strictly considered as made with that People at
Mount Sinai) was founded only upon Temporal Promises; Peace, Long Life, Plenty,
and Prosperity in their own Land, they had generally no other Effect, than that
they were believed to be the Reward of Men of Heroic and Extraordinary Piety.
Nay, their unaccountable Blindness and Unattention to the Faith and Manners of
their Fathers, who did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all drink the
same Spiritual Drink, as we Christians do, occasioned so many Cavils and
Disputes amongst them, that the Sadduces peremptorily denied it; not only,
decrying the Resurrection of the Dead, but affirming likewise, with the
forementioned Epicureans, that the Souls of Men did perish together with the
Body. And though the Pharisees on the contrary confessed it, yet their Notions of
it (as Josephus himself, Antiq. Jud. l. 18. c. 2.
who was one of them, tells us) were no better than those of Fairy-Land or
Elysian Dreams. Delicious Dwellings, flowery Fields, Crystalline Rivers, and
beauteous Trees of Gold, under whose delightful shade they should play and toy
away a whole Eternity with fair and amorous Virgins, was the utmost Heaven they
could or cared to imagine; and therefore the Sadduces so often foiled and
buffled them with that Argument of the Woman and her seven Husbands, which they
thought to be so conclusive, that (but with different Success) they attacked
likewise with it our Savior himself.

But now the Veil is taken off by Christ, and we behold the Glory of the Lord
with open Face; For this (says the Apostle) is the Promise that he has promised
us, even Eternal Life. A Life not of sensual and brutish Pleasures, not a
Paradise of all Filthiness and Debauchery (whereby the Epileptick Impostor has
likewise imposed upon his Followers) but a Life of perfect Purity and Holiness,
a Life of immaterial, spiritual, abstracted Joys, of chaste and rational
Delights; where our Nature shall be entirely conformed to the Divine, made like
to God, and we enjoy an endless and uninterrupted Communion with our Maker.
This he has promised, and of this he has given us Assurance; all the Assurance
the thing is capable of, in that he has not only raised himself from the Dead,
but called likewise some of our Brethren already out of the Grave, and taken
them up with him in their glorious Bodies to enter beforehand upon the
Possession of this promised Inheritance. So that we may boldly say with the
Apostle, We know for certain, and are fully assured, that if this earthly house
of our Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Thus has the Sun of Righteousness dispelled
all those Clouds of Ignorance and Darkness which overspread the whole World at
his Rising, and brought Life and Immortality to perfect Light through the Gospel.
Which must certainly be acknowledged to be a very great Salvation, if we
consider in the next place, that he has hereby rescued us from that base and
slavish Fear of Death, by reason of which we had otherwise been all our
lifetime subject to Bondage.

6. Now how unwelcome soever Death must be to those Men, to whom it is therefore
all Terror before, because all Darkness behind; who are therefore dismayed at
his Approach, because they know not the Consequences of this King of Terrors;
it is impossible that Person should immoderately fear Death, who considers, that
it is only a Passage from this Wilderness to the true Canaan, the Rest above,
that flows with Milk and Honey, with Innocence and Happiness for ever: who
knows, that the Death of the Saints is not total, but that as in the Ceremony
of Purification from Leprosy one Bird was killed, the other let fly into the
open Air, (the mysterious Shadow of the Lepers being restored to a state of
Liberty) so when the Body dies, and returns to the Earth, the Spirit is freed
from the Clogs of Mortality, and returns, with Songs of Joy and Triumph in its
mouth, to the Object of its Happiness, the God that gave it. Nay, the faithful
Christians, the true Lovers of Jesus, who have tasted the Goodness of the Lord,
and long considered and well weighed the incomparable Difference between the
mean, imperfect, frail Felicities of this present World, and the substantial,
solid, immutable Glories of that which is to come, must certainly cry out with
the inflamed Cant. 1.4.
Spouse, Draw us, and we will run after thee: O! loosen our Affections from
this World, that we may readily ascend to thee. Their longing Souls will renew
the passionate Sighs of the Exiled Prophet, O when shall we come and appear
before the presence of God! How welcome must Death be to them, when it comes
(as it were) with Olive-branches in its hands to offer them Peace? to set them
at perfect Liberty from the Bondage of Corruption, the Servitude and Thraldom
of their mortal Bodies? They know their happy Souls will be immediately
conveyed by Angels into the Presence of their Savior, and by him presented to
his Father without Spot or Wrinkle, invested with his Righteousness, complete
in his Holiness, and prepared and qualified for an Everlasting Communion with
him in Glory. That they are the Reward of his Sufferings, the precious and dear
Purchase of his Blood, and therefore that they shall be joyfully received into
Heaven by him, who will then see the glorious Effects of the Travail of his
Soul, and be satisfied. That the Angels, who rejoiced at their Conversion, will
much more do so at their Glorification; and the Church of the Firstborn, who
have before them entered into Glory, have a new Accession of Joy, to see them
safely arrived at the same undefiled and immortal Inheritance. These things (I
say) thus duly considered, must needs inspire them with Courage and Alacrity,
and enable them cheerfully to lay down their Bodies, that they may ascend to
the Seat of Blessedness, this happy Society above, that inspires mutual
Endearments and Joys for evermore. I am sure 'twas thus with the Primitive
Christians. S. Paul, with the most earnest Affections and passionate Zeal,
desired to depart hence, to leave the transitory, dissatisfying Pleasures of
this Life, to be dissolved and to be with Christ; and the Martyrs with all
imaginable Boldness and Gallantry encountered Death, that interposed between
them and Glory. They as willingly left their Bodies, as Elias let fall his
Mantle, to ascend into Heaven.

Some indeed of these excellent Persons (as Hom. 8.
S. Chrysostom tells us) went to Death with many Appearances of Fear. When they
heard the wild Beasts roar, they were struck with Horror: At the sight of the
Executioners and the Instruments of Torture, they were pale and trembling. The
Flesh seemed to cry out, O! Let this Cup pass from me. But these, alas! were
but the little ineffectual Struglings of innocent Nature, which, though weak
and faint, followed the Spirit, and corrected its own Desire with, Not my Will,
but thine be done. As the Moon in Eclipse, though obscure, goes on in a Regular
Course, as when it is full of Light by the Reflection of the Sun; so these
Christian Heroes, though as it were, forsaken and deprived of the kind
Influences of the Spirit, the bright Beams and Irradiations of Divine Comfort,
persever'd notwithstanding in their Regular Motion, the resolute and undaunted
Profession of the Truth. No Torments could force them to renounce their
Savior; no Terrors of Death to warp from the Profession of their Faith; but
the Consideration of that eternal weight of Glory, which after a short night of
Sorrow and Heaviness they should receive in the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light, enabled them at length to overcome their Fears, and in spite of all the
Reluctance of Nature, to keep the Command of God, and the Faith of Jesus. Thus
the Stars fall down from Heaven, and Clods of Earth ascend and shine in the
Firmament. The Angels, that excelled in Strength and Knowledge, kept not their
state of Purity and Glory, but are shamefully sunk down into Corruption and
Misery: but these humble Believers, though weak and encompassed with many
Difficulties, were preserved by the Blood of Jesus from destructive Evil, from
the Fear of the First, and the Power of the Second Death, passing undauntedly
through the Dominions of the King of Terrors to their Fathers Kingdom, where
with all the Company of Holy Angels and Beatified Souls, they now lie infolded
in the Circles of Peace and Joy, expecting the Consummation of Blessedness, the
Redemption of their Bodies in the joyful and glorious Morning of the
Resurrection. Which brings me to my Seventh and Last Particular, which is to
show the Greatness of the Salvation wrought for us by Christ, in that he has
not only merited the Salvation of our Souls, but the Redemption likewise, or
the Resurrection, of our Bodies.

7. Of all the Christian Doctrines, this was ever esteemed the most incredible;
and has accordingly, in all Ages, met with the greatest Opposition. The Learned
Heathens generally looked upon the Body as the Prison, the Dungeon, and
Sepulcher of the Soul, and therefore do not stick to affirm, That for a
separated Soul to return into a Body, is to undergo a second Death. Nay, that
famous Rabbin Ben Maimon was of the same Persuasion; it being a known Aphorism
of his in his Great Work, That in the World to come (or state of consummate
Happiness) there shall be nothing but pure Incorporeity. This engaged them to
employ all their Learning and Parts to represent this Doctrine as a monstrous
and ridiculous Paradox, not fit to be embraced by any of the genuine Sons of
Wisdom and Learning. Accordingly we find St. Paul was counted mad by Festus,
and but a Babbler at best by the great Wits at Athens, for venturing to preach
to them Jesus and his Resurrection: and it chiefly stomachs the Heathen in
Minutius Felix, that the Christians should peremptorily assert the Resurrection
of the Body, which every Eye saw to be subject to Corruption; and yet at the
same time threaten Ruin and Destruction to the Heavenly Bodies, which the
generality of Philosophers acknowledged incorruptible. Nay some Christians
themselves have not been very careful to answer us fairly in this matter.
Photius tells us of Synesius, that for his great Parts and singular Abilities
he was made a Bishop, before he believed this Article; and the Socinians,
Anabaptists, and some other Sectaries, seem to be no great Favorers of it at
this day. But what if these Men believe not? Shall their Unbelief make the
Faith of God of none effect? God forbid. Yea let God be true (as the Apostle
speaks) though every Man a Liar. He then that is Truth it self, who therefore
can neither deceive nor be deceived, has told us, that the hour is coming, in
the which all that are in the (...). Joh. 5.28.
Grave shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good to
the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil to the Resurrection of
Damnation.

And now (my pious Brethren) how joyful and pleasant a thing is this, to hear
of the Restitution of our lost Parts, the Renovation of our corrupted and
putrefy'd Bodies? that they shall not be devoured in the Jaws of Death and the
Grave, but restored to us again all Fair, and Beautiful, and Glorious? Sin
indeed removes us all into the Retirements of the Grave, and securely locks us
up for a time in the Iron Embraces of the King of Terrors. It dismantles us of
all our Strength and Beauty, and dooms us to dwell for ever in those dark
Houses of Forgetfulness and Corruption. We lie in the Grave like Sheep,
helpless, and fast bound in the Chains and Fetters of Death. This last Enemy
has at present an absolute and entire Domination over us; our Beauty, Honor,
and Glory, mouldering and consuming all away in his insatiable Dwellings. But
yet he who has the Keys of Hell and of Death, has promised to unlock the
Doors of these loathsome Prisons, and to let the Prisoners go forth into a
state of Liberty and Glory. He turns Man to Destruction; but his Almighty
Voice will one day call through all the Receptacles of Nature, Come again ye
Children of Men. By him lastly, who lives and was dead, and is alive for
evermore, shall those that sleep in the Dust of the Earth be awaked and sing,
Death is swallowed up in Victory. Which Consideration alone, as it is full of
Comfort, and Joy, and Triumph to every faithful Christian, so is it likewise
sufficient to curb the Arrogance and Haughtiness of that Apostate Spirit. Who
therefore (says an ingenious Br. Rel. Med. page 87.
Author of our own) chiefly frequents Coemeteries, Charnel-Houses, and
Churches, because they are the Dormitories of the Dead; where, like an insolent
Champion, he beholds with Pride the Spoils and Trophies of his Victory over
Adam.

And thus I have discharged my first General Head, which was, to show the
Greatness of the Salvation wrought for us by Christ. I now proceed to my
Second, which is, very briefly to lay before you our Inexcusableness, and the
intolerable Aggravations of our Guilt and Punishment, if we neglect it. How
shall we escape, etc.

1. Then, we shall be utterly inexcusable, and intolerably aggravate our Guilt
and Punishment, if we neglect this great Salvation which Christ has wrought
for us, because we shall be entirely destitute of the mollifying Circumstances
and Considerations of Ignorance. Whilst Men had little or no Understanding, but
walked on still in Darkness, 'twas no wonder that the Foundations of the Moral,
as well as of the Intellectual World, were out of course. Their broken Notices
of another State, and beggarly Conceptions of its Delights and Entertainments,
induced them rather to let loose the Reins to their Intemperance, than to
correct and retrench the Luxuriancy of their Vices. A more delicious Canaan,
the Fields and Groves of Elysium, and a Mohammedan Paradise, naturally lead Men
to an unbounded Gratification of their sensual Appetites, as to that which is
the End and Perfection of their Beings, their ultimate Portion in the Regions
of Eternity. So that a truly moral Man, with such Persuasions about him, would
be an Object equally strange and surprising, as Fuel or dry Stubble, that will
not take fire in the midst of a burning fiery Furnace.

But now with Christians is the Case quite otherwise. We know for certain both
the Existence and Nature of the other State. That for pure and holy Souls, who
are entirely cleans'd from the Stains and Pollutions of corrupted Nature, and
raised to the Possession of their Primitive Brightness, remains a most glorious
and undefiled Inheritance, Entertainments most agreeable to their enlarged
Faculties, exalted and divine Joys for evermore. That for impure and sensual
Souls, on the contrary, who fight under the Banner of the World and the Flesh,
forsaking God that made them, and lightly esteeming the Rock of their
Salvation, is prepared a Worm that will never die, and a Fire that will never
be quenched. We know (I say) that Refined and Purified Souls will be received
into serene undisturbed Mansions of everlasting Happiness, the City of the
Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, where, with all the shining and innumerable
Companies of Holy Angels, they shall for ever behold and praise the unfolded
Beauties of their God and Savior. That on the other hand there are sad,
uncomfortable Regions of Darkness and Misery, where Fire and Brimstone, Storms
and Tempests, will be the lamentable and everlasting Portion of the Ungodly.
Fire and Brimstone, to possess, inflame, and torment their Bodies; and the
Storms and Tempests of an enraged Conscience impetuously to hurry their
awak'ned Souls through all the unhappy Stages of that woeful Eternity. If we
then dare to commit Wickedness, who have received this clear Knowledge of its
sad Effects and Consequences; that it cuts off all our hopes of the Glories of
Heaven, and irrevocably condemns us to the unconceivable Agonies and Amazements
of Hell; we put our selves beyond all possibility of Excuse, and (as our
Savior himself assures us) unmeasurably enhanse the Severities of our
Condemnation. This is the Condemnation, Joh. 3.19.
says he with an Emphasis, i. e. the highest, the greatest, the most
intolerable Condemnation, that when Light is come into the World, Men love
Darkness rather than Light. In a word, God may vouchsafe to wink at the times
of Ignorance, and graciously overlook the unhappy Miscarriages of the
unenlightned World: He may be favorable to the Servant that knows not his
Will, and therefore does unwittingly things worthy of Stripes: But Christians,
who know their Lord's Will, and yet prepare not themselves, nor do accordingly,
will have nothing to plead or pretend for their Disobedience, and therefore
will most certainly be beaten with many Stripes.

2. We shall be utterly inexcusable, and intolerably aggravate our Guilt and
Punishment, if we neglect this great Salvation which Christ has wrought for us,
because we thereby become guilty of the vilest Ingratitude. We know the
infinite Obligations to Duty and Gratitude, which our Heavenly Father has laid
upon us; all the Stratagems of his Goodness, the astonishing Miracles of Divine
Mercy and Condescension. That he, whom the Virgins, the untainted Beings above
adore and love, meekly drew a veil over his Essential Glories, and clothed
himself with Flesh for the Society of Mankind. That the Eternal, Independent,
All-sufficient One, stooped down for our sakes to the lowest Estate of
Uneasiness and Need; and the Lord and Governor of all the Kingdoms of the
Earth vouchsafed to dwell among us, though he scarce found a place where to lay
his Head. That the King of Glory was contented not only to be despised and
rejected of Men to become a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief; but also
to suffer his most precious Life to be most cruelly and ignominiously taken
from among Men, that be might entitle us again to Happiness and Glory. Nay, we
have seen the only begotten Son of the Living God oppressed and groaning under
a heavier load of Misery than all this; almost sinking under the insupportable
Burden of his Father's Wrath and in the Anguish and Bitterness of (...) Soul
most lamentably complaining, t^ his Father too, whom he had never offe^^ed, had
for the Foulness and Blackne^^ our Iniquities hid his Face from him. (...)
more, we are sensible that we our se^ have been the Betrayers and Murderers of
the Lord of Life; that he has frequently bled afresh, and been crucified again
(...) our new Sins; that our repeated Impieties have wounded his sacred Side,
and the (...) rows of our Ingratitude pierced him to (...) very Heart. How
(notwithstanding (...) this) he is so merciful, that he will not suffer his
Displeasure to arise, but that he calls us daily, importunes us incessantly,
and entreats us earnestly to return. That he begs us not to ruin and destroy
our selves, opens his Arms to receive us, though we have been never so
ungrateful, and promises Pardon for all that is past, if we will but take care
to be obedient for the future. Lastly, we know, that if we will return, and do
Works meet for Repentance, he will in due time take us from this Vale of
Misery, these Regions of Exile, this State of our Pilgrimage into his Father's
House, there solemnly pronounce our Discharge before all his Saints, and crown
us with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

Now then to trespass against this great Friend and Benefactor, whose wonderful
Love even condescended to assume our Nature into his Divinity, and so to exalt
it above Cherubims and all the brightest Orders of Intelligences; who in our
Nature thus assumed graciously embraced for our ^akes both the Miseries and
Calamities of a distressed Life, and also the Infamy and Tortures of an
accursed Death; who still (notwithstanding all our disingenuous and most
ungrateful Returns) continues his Tenderness and Compassion for us, even ^ayly
offering his Grace and Pardon to the greatest of Sinners, and by all the gentle
Insinuations of an unwearied ^over endeavoring to allure and entice them into
Happiness. To trespass (I say) against this great Friend and Benefactor, is
certainly a Provocation of the most amazing Proportions, a Sin of the deepest
Dye, the basest and soulest Ingratitude, that can be imagined. What then (think
you) will be the Condition of such Sinners when God shall come to Judge the
World? When they shall see him, whose infinite Love they have despised and
rejected, coming in the Clouds of Heaven, and all his Holy Angels with him, to
reward every Man according to his Works? Alas! every Circumstance of this
glorious Day will frightfully represent to their awak'ned Consciences the
monstrous Aggravations of their unparalleled Ingratitude. This God, who now
comes in the Clouds with Vengeance is that very Savior who died to redeem
them. Those Emeralds or sparkling Jewels that shine so gloriously in his Body,
the deep and ghastly Wounds he received (...) their sakes: Those glittering
Attendant^ and Myriads of holy Ones; the Company he designed for their Eternal
Conversation and those bright Regions of Everlast^^^ Day, which appear over
their Heads, the Place he so dearly purchased for their immortal Inheritance.
These things (I say) thus united, and at once represented to their view, will
swell their Passions to that Height and Fullness, as infinitely exceed the
Measures of Mortality to conceive. They will occasion such sharp, such acute
Reflections, as (like two-edged Swords) will every way rend, and tear, and
stab, and gash their mollified Spirits with fresh incurable Wounds to all
Eternity. Their monstrous Ingratitude will then look them broad in the face,
and (like frightful and terrible Gorgons or Furies) possess their Souls with
Horror and Trembling, with ineffable Amazement and everlasting Confusion. In a
word, The thorough and lively Apprehensions which they shall then have of their
Sins and Follies, will so incense and enrage them, that they will be all in a
flame with Fury and Indignation against themselves, weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing their Teeth; always, as it were, uon a Rack, without any Intermission
of their Pains and Anguish, distorted, afflicted, distracted, confounded.

What then remains, but that, since these things are so, we seriously take our
Case into Consideration? That since our Burden is lighter than that of Jews or
Gentiles, we run with greater Cheerfulness the ways of God's Commandments? That
we grieve not the Holy Spirit, nor turn the Grace of God into Lasciviousness;
but that the great, extraordinary Assistances which we now enjoy under the
Gospel, influence our Wills, direct our Choice, and give Warmth and Vigor to
our Affections? That the certain Faith and Assurance which we have of a Future
State, and of its Rewards and Punishments, work most powerfully upon our Minds
to conquer all the Temptations of this Life, to deterr us from doing any thing
whereby we may forfeit our Crown, and to render us steadfast, immovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord, forasmuch as we know, that our Labor will
not be in vain in the Lord? and since the greatest Punishments imaginable
attend our Miscarriages, that we lift up the hands that hang down, and
strengthen the feeble knees, and run with patience the Race that is set before
us? Let us then look unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, and
follow his Example, who for the Joy that was set before him endured the Cross,
despised the Shame, and is therefore now sat down at the Right Hand of the
Majesty on High. Let us frequently contemplate his stupendous, unfathomable
Love in vouchsafing to assume our Nature; that he, who is Mighty, should so
debase himself to magnify us, and evermore say with the inflamed and seraphick
Virgin, Holy and Blessed is his Name. Let us, with her Piety and Devotion, view
the Immaculate Lamb of God crowned with Thorns upon the Cross: Let us behold
him there bleeding and dying for our Sins. Let his unconceivable Agonies sink
deep into our Hearts, and make us to weep bitterly for those Sins which caused
such Torments to our Dearest Lord. Let us beseech him by all that Anguish and
Amazement his Soul endured for our sakes, never to suffer us to crucify him
any more; but that he would be pleased to come and take up his Lodging with us,
to drive out all those Usurpers, the World with its Vanities; to make an utter
Destruction of every Amalakite, and to take to himself the entire Possession of
our Hearts. Let us most passionately entreat him not to suffer our immortal
Souls, the price of his own Blood, to perish; but that he would be graciously
pleased to wash away all their Stains, to cloth them in his white Robe, and so
to present them spotless and unblameable to our Heavenly Father. Lastly, If the
Author of Salvation, and that Eternal too, be worthy to be praised, let us now
begin these Songs upon Earth, which will be our happy Employment and Business
in Heaven, with all those glorious Angels and Holy Ten Thousands that worship
about the Throne, saying, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power be unto
him that fitteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for Ever and Ever. Amen.
Amen. Allelujah.

ECCLES. ix. v. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might.


WEre we to take the Measures of our most holy Profession, as they are reached
out to us in the Systems of some Christian Rabbis, how prodigiously irrational
and absurd an Institution would it appear to be? An Institution both repugnant
to the glorious Attributes of God, and also destructive to the Welfare and
Happiness of Mankind. They pronounced it a state of absolute Liberty and
Emancipation, a perfect Discharge from all Duty and Obedience, a Charter only
of Libertinism and Licentiousness. Provided a Man be orthodox in his Notions,
and sound in his Faith, it is no matter how he lives, like an Angel or like a
Devil, so apt are Men to abjure their Reason in complement to their Senses; and
rather than forsake their darling Vices, to shelter them under the Patronage
even of the immaculate Jesus.

But if we look upon Christianity as our Great Master himself is pleased to
hold the Perspective, as he is all Fair, (...), Psalm. 50.2.
the Perfection of Beauty, and the Holy One of Israel, so would his Institution
appear to be a most fair and amiable Copy of his Eternal Beauty and Holiness.
It commands us not to rest in a fruitless, barren, and dead Faith, but to
evidence its Life and Reality by our Works. That we walk worthy of the Vocation
wherewith we are called; turning from these Idols of our own Brains, these
vain, fantastic Ideas of our carnal Imaginations, to serve truly and painfully
the Living God. That we trifle not away our precious hours in Idleness and
Impertinence; but work out our Salvation with all that Care and Solicitude a
matter of such moment requires, even with Fear and Trembling. It endeavour^ by
all the endearing Methods of everlasting Love and Kindness to allure and charm
us into the Practice of all Virtues, beseeching us even by the Mercies of God,
all those ineffable Appearances of Goodness which take up the Wonder, the
Praises, and the Adorations of the Sons of God in Glory, that we think no
Sacrifices worthy of our Maker, but such as are offered in the purest Fires,
the most ardent and brightest Flames of Seraphick Love. That the Redeemed of
the Lord declare not his Glory in such feeble Sounds and Voices, as are the
faint Echoes of a distant Valley; but that they clap their hands together with
Joy and Cheerfulness, and sing Praises to him lustily, and with a good Courage.
That our Souls, with all their Powers and Faculties, magnify and set forth the
admirable Greatness of the Lord, and our Minds also, or Spirits, rejoice with
Joy unspeakable in God their Savior. In a word, That we do not the Work of the
Lord negligently, nor be remiss and slothful in the great Business of our
Souls; but always fervent in Spirit, vigorously industrious to improve all
those Talents, all those golden Opportunities God intrusts us with, to our
greatest Advantage, with our utmost Diligence serving the Lord. Whatsoever thy
hand finds to do, do it with thy might.

The Reasonableness of which Exhortation, I shall briefly represent to you from
these following Considerations: I. From the Nature of God. II. From the Nature
of our own Souls. III. From the transcendent and inestimable Value of the
Rewards that attend us. And, IV. From the exceeding Brevity or Shortness of the
time we are allowed to work in.


1. From the Nature of God. Was God indeed such a one as the Epicureans fansi'd
him to be; a Being taken up with the Fruition and Contemplation of his own
Blessedness, and that would never vouchsafe to respect the humble Addresses and
Supplications of his most faithful Servants, we should have no great reason to
wonder at that Coldness and Indifferency, that lukewarm and careless Behavior
which appears so visibly in our Religious Performances. Nay, I could willingly
conclude with the Wise Senec. de Benef. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Heathen, that nothing but pure Madness could induce Mankind to bestow any
Worship at all upon such a Being, who, as though he was deaf as Baal, and
helpless as Dagon, after all their Wrestlings and Importunities would neither
hear them, nor help them. But alas! we have no such Pretense or Subterfuge for
our Impiety. The God whom we serve, is indeed that Blessedness and Eternal
Being that rests upon his own Center, without the Assistance of any External
Object, enjoying infinite Delight and Complacency from the solitary
Contemplation of his own Essential Perfections. He dwells in the high and lofty
Place, encircled with such transcendent Rays of Light, that the brightest
Seraphim veil their Faces, and at an awful distance adore his inaccessible
Glory. Yet do Mercy and Goodness so essentially sit enthroned with his glorious
Majesty, that even he, who thus inhabits Eternity, humbles himself to behold
the things that are done both in Heaven and Earth. The Lord looks down from
Heaven, says the Psalm. 33.13.
Psalmist, and beholds all the Children of Men: from the habitation of his
Dwelling he considers all them that dwell upon the Earth. And the
Philosophic Orator, without the help of Revelation, Sit persuasum civibus,
says he, and so on. i. e. Let all the Citizens assuredly know, that God takes
particular notice what manner of Persons we are, with what Mind and Devotion we
perform the Acts of our Religious Worship, and that he will deal with every man
according to his Works. He is not a petty Prince, 1 King 20.13, 28.
(as the Syrians profanely imagined) whose Knowledge and Sovereignty are
confined only to a particular Province; but the Lord most High is terrible, he
is a great King over all the Earth. Not only the shining Inhabitants of the
Courts above, the innumerable and invincible Legions of Glorious Angels, but
the inferior Troops likewise of natural Causes serve under his Banner, and
duly execute his Commands. He makes the Spirits or Winds his Messengers, and
the flaming Fires his Agents or Ministers. The Clouds at his Command drop
Fatness upon the Hills and Mountains, and the Valleys likewise by his Blessing
stand in their Season so thick with Corn, that they laugh and sing. Yea, the
most casual and seemingly fortuitous Actions are ordered by his Wisdom, and the
Sun sees nothing in all his Course so little and inconsiderable, but what falls
under his Care and Providence. He feeds the young Ravens that call upon him;
and the Lions roaring after their prey, do seek and receive their Meat from
God. By him do the Rose in Sharon and the Lily of the Valleys on play their
fragrant Beauties? and the airy Choiristers securely sit upon the Boughs and
sing, not one of them falling to the ground without our heavenly Father. Yea,
the very Hairs of our Head, says our Lord, are all numbered. In short, no Space,
no Place, exludes his Presence. He penetrates into the Center of our Spirits;
enters the secret Chambers, the closest Recesses and Retirements of our Hearts;
yea, and discovers all our most secret Thoughts and Imaginations long before we
our selves do, even before they are. He is about our Paths, and about our Beds,
and spies out all our ways.

Now then, considering the Nature of God, how ought our Souls, think ye, to be
employed in his Worship and Service? Is this God, whose Majesty fills Heaven
and Earth, to be approached with flat and tepid Devotions? Is he fond of
trifling impertinent Ceremonies? or to be pleased with Lip-Devotion and
complemental Addresses? Certainly no. The Lame and the Blind (says the Prophet)
such impotent, Mal. 1.8.
imperfect Services, if offered to an Earthly Governor, would most assuredly
be rejected; much less then can they be grateful ^o him, who is the Fountain of
all Dominion and Sovereignty, the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, who reigns
to all the Ends of the Earth. The matchless Excellency of his Nature (as many
Learned Pagans have observed) calls for our best and noblest Performances,
neither will he accept of any thing less than the Cream, the Flower and
Strength of our Reason. We must nor pretend to honor him with our Lips, when
our Hearts are far from him; but always approach him with the deepest Awe,
Reverence, and Admiration; love and desire him (as an exact and learned Mr.
Norris in his Reas. and Rel. page 39.
Author speaks) with the full Bent and Spring of our Souls; and fix and
concenter upon him all our Passions and Affections. The Armies of Heaven, the
glorious Troops of Angels, serve him thus. Their Wings know no weariness from
continual Flying; their Voices are never hoarse through loud and constant
Allelujahs; but with unconceivable Alacrity and Joy they sing and fly, and do
his Will to all Eternity. It Is true, our present Encumbrances are many, our
Wings are clipped, and we cannot run so nimbly as these bright Favorites of
Heaven, yet such is the Nature of our Souls, that even in this unhappy state of
Degeneracy, they may arrive to many degrees of their B^ness and Alacrity. It Is
impossible (...) we should love and praise our Maker (...) these Spirits do,
who with open Face behold his unfolded and essential Glo^: yet may our Spirits
(if they are not wan^ing to themselves) regain, in a great measure, their
heavenly Nature and Activity. They need not be so oppressed with the weight of
the Body, not so confined to these Walls of Clay, but that they may frequently
^o abroad, recover upon the Wing, mount into a purer Air, far above the
^ttractions and Enchantments of Sense, and converse freely with God. And so I
come to my Second Consideration, which is, to represent to you the
Reasonableness of the Exhortation contained in the Text, from the Nature of our
own Souls.

2. Sad indeed and deplorable are the Decays of our Primitive Beauty, and
lamentable the Ruins of our Original Frame. God made Man upright; his whole
Constitution was beautiful and harmonious, and his Soul (drawn, as it were, by
the central Force of her native Seat) moved naturally toward Heaven. But if we
view him in his present Condition, Quantum mutatus ab illo est! how is this
glorious Creature changed! Clouds and Darkness (if I may so speak) are
continually round about him: Confusion and Disorder are the Habitation of his
Seat. His Understanding is dark and cloudy; his Will crooked and perverse; and
he is become a strange Contradiction to himself; being not able to do the
things that he would. Wars and Tumults, intestine Broils and Commotions, ruffle
and discompose him, and there is a Law in his Members impetuously fighting
against, and frequently bringing into Captivity the Law of the Mind.

But though the Soul is thus shamefully fallen from her Primitive State of
Excellency and Perfection; yet, how glorious is she still in comparison of all
the Creatures that are round about her? The glimmering Remains of her original
Beauty, the very Twilight of her native Luster and Brightness, appears so
wonderful and dazzling, that she is still but a few degrees below the Angels of
God. How swift are her Motions? how nimble her Thoughts? how brisk and active
her Operations and Reflections? The swiftest Morning-Ray passes not so soon
from East to West, as she flies through all the Airy Regions into the highest
Heavens, and thence again descends through all the Ethereal Plains, to
contemplate in their various Mansions the Workmanship of her Maker. How exalted
are her Aspirations? how boundless her Desires? how vastly large and
comprehensive her Capacities? She weighs all the Excellencies of Nature in a
Balance, and finds them wanting: her Appetites and Inclinations being no more
to be satisfied with any Created Good, than an hungry Stomach with wise Sayings
or excellent Diagrams.

But now has God enriched our Minds with these noble Powers to prosecute the
Delights or Interests of this World, and to bestow some fashionable and
perfunctory Attendance only on his Service and Obedience? No, these vast,
capacious Spirits, that can take in and lodge so many Truths together without
Confusion or Disorder; that are so restless and indefatigable in their Search
after Happiness, and can no where acquiesce, or terminate their Desires upon
any Created Good, are designed for the highest and most exalted Entertainments.
Not for these disproportionate Objects of Sense, the faeculent Pleasures of the
Body, (which the contracted Faculties of Brutes are able even in their utmost
Intention to comprehend) but for Joys truly Angelical and Divine; for Communion
and Fellowship with God himself by Prayers and Praises here, and for the most
intimate Fruition of his Beatifick and Essential Glories in Heaven hereafter.
How unworthily then do we behave our selves toward them, when we decoy them
down into earthly Enjoyments? How do we cramp and streighten their Faculties?
contract and lessen their aspiring Strength and Vivacity? Their natural Motion,
you see, is toward Heaven, and they grasp at nothing less than Glory, and
Honor, and Immortality. Let us not then confine them to the Earth, when they
are ready to take Wing, and fly toward Heaven. Let us not enslave them to poor
and beggarly Objects, when their Capacities dispose them for the Fruition of
the Best Being, the Life of Angels. When through the Assistances of Religion
they are advanced to their true Elevation, they will immediately ascend above the
Magnetism of secular Entertainments. They will then be possessed with such lively
and ravishing Apprehensions of the Divine Beauty, as will oblige them, for his
sake, utterly to discard and renounce all their other Loves. Though there be
threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without number, yet
their Love, their Undefiled, will be but one. In a word, They Will collect and
concenter all the scattered Rays of their Affections into this one Point,
delight and solace themselves only in the Lord their God, and sing and give
Praise to him with Fervor and Alacrity as the Angels do, who joyfully wait his
Call, and stand with Wings stretched out, ready to fly when he commands.

3. I am to represent to you the Reasonableness of the Exhortation contained in
the Text, from the Consideration of the transcendent and inestimable Value of
the Rewards that attend us. (...). We are engaged, says the Philosopher, in a
great Conflict, a Divine Enterprise, it is for a Kingdom and for Liberty; for
the Liberty even of the Sons of God, and for the Kingdom of Heaven. As we were
not redeemed by corruptible things, such as Gold, Silver, or precious Stones;
so neither is our purchased Inheritance of so trifling and inconsiderable a
value. The Liberty of the Sons of God is an Eternal Emancipation from Sin and
Misery, from the Solicitations of our Senses, the Importunities of Satan, and
from all the Disadvantages and Encumbrances of this mortal State. Have you seen
the Cedars or the Fir-Trees, which from a little Seed rise so high, and spread
their Branches so wide? Just so will it fare with Man in the State of
Regeneration; infinitely beyond his present Self will his Perfections be. Here
the Corruptible Body presses down the Soul, and the Earthly Tabernacle weighs
down the Mind, which otherwise would muse of many things. But there will our
Spirits, to their endless Joy and Comfort, find their Garments lighter; this
unweildy Clog of Flesh and Blood being made fit to serve them in their briskest
Motions, and even to vye with the swiftest Seraph that flies in the Regions of
Light and Glory. Here though we sometimes travel with Vigor and Alacrity in
the way that leads to Sion; yet in an instant such Fogs and Vapors rise from
our terrene and sensual Affections, as cast a cold Damp over all our Faculties,
and make us heartless and unactive as the Earth we tread on. But there we shall
be all Life, and Spirit, and Wing, entirely freed from the Vicissitudes of
Mortality, and bath our active and sprightly Plumes in the Silver Streams of
Eternal Joy and Delight. Here Satan sometimes mixeth himself among the Children
of God, and many enter into the Choirs of the Saints, who know not how to chant
their ravishing Melody, the Songs of Sion. But in the Blessed Consort above,
every Soul will be harmonious, and skilfully contribute its part to the full
Music of Heaven. The glorious Company of the Apostles, the goodly Fellowship
of the Prophets, the noble Army of Martyrs, together with the several Orders of
glorious Angels, will stand about the Throne; with one Heart and one Voice
giving glory to him who sits thereupon, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. They
shall wear Crowns on their Heads more bright and glittering, than those of the
Mightiest Oppressors; and those immortal Palms they shall carry in their hands,
declare, That Death is Swallowed up in victory. They shall no longer stand
behind the Wall of Partition, nor be debarred by a thick House of Clay, from
beholding the ultimate Object of their Love and Praise; but all intervening
Obstacles and Impediments shall be removed, (...), Psalm. 84.7.
and that Summum Bonum, that Fountain of Life and Blessedness, that Primitive
and Original Beauty, the God of Gods himself, appear in his Essential Luster
and Brightness, to every one of them in Sion. In short, It Is in vain to attempt
the painting of this Blessed State by Rhetorical Colors: no Words, no
Thoughts, can reach it; yea, the bold, licentious Metaphors even of Poets
themselves, fall infinitely short of its Greatness and Excellency. Eye has not
seen, says St. Paul, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of
man to conceive the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

Now then can we think this Blessed State designed for them that are at Ease in
Sion? who rest in the Notional Considerations of the Goodness of their Maker,
and therefore lie securely dissolved in the softest Caresses of Luxury and
Voluptuousness? No. We must be conformable to our Lord in the Likeness of his
Death, before we can be so in the Likeness of his Resurrection. We must
crucify the Old Man, and utterly abolish the whole Body of Sin, and by our
constant and uniform Practice of an Universal Righteousness, strive to enter in
at the strait Gate. We must labor with all our Might to make our Calling and
Election sure, and press with all possible Vehemence toward the Mark for the
prize of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus. If these Corruptible Crowns,
the fading momentary Honors of this Life; if (I say) the transient Favor of a
Prince, and the vain, uncertain Plaudite's and Hosanna's of the Crowd cannot be
justly achieved without Toll and Labor; then surely we cannot expect that
these immortal Honors, the Approbation of God himself, the Applause of his
Holy Angels, and the Crown of Immortality, can be obtained at a cheaper Rate.
This were to prostitute the Divine Favors, to vilify the Pearl of Price, and
insufferably to debase that Glory which cannot be comprehended but by the
Circle of Eternity. Nothing then, but Constancy and Perseverance, can crown the
Christian Hero, and set on his Head an immortal Diadem. Be faithful unto the
End, says our Lord, and I will give thee the Crown of Life: and again, To him
that overcomes, I will grant to sit down with me on my Throne, even as I also
overcame, and am sat down with my Father on his Throne. Lift up the Hands then
that hang down, and strengthen the feeble Knees. Behold, Thy Savior holds out
to thee a Crown of Glory, and invites thee to partake of his immortal Joys. He
calls thee to the blissful Choir of Angels, and to the glorious Society of Just
Men made perfect, who following him in White Robes, do nothing but sing and
love to all Eternity. Alas! could we but hear some Echoes of those Songs
wherewith they make the Paradise of God, the Place of his happy Residence, the
Seat of his Eternal Empire, the Heaven of Heavens continually resound; some
Remains of those Voices, that Symphony and Joy wherewith the Saints above
triumph in the Praises and solemn Adoration of the King of Spirits, how would
they inflame our Desires to be joined with them? O how amiable should we think
those Dwellings of the Lord of Hosts? Our Souls would most passionately desire
and long to enter into the Courts of the Lord, and to go and sing with those
glorious Beings the Praises of the Living God. We should choose rather to be
Door-Keepers, the very meanest Persons of all that Blessed Company in the House
of God, than to enjoy for ever the utmost Liberality of Created Nature in the
Tents of Wickedness. We should think nothing too much to part with for that
Blessed Inheritance, but readily sell all that we have for that Pearl of Price,
that inestimable Treasure, those solid and substantial Glories of the Kingdom
of Heaven. In a word, we should cheerfully follow the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors, through all the Stages of Mortification and
Self-denial; most gladly encount'ring all the Tribulations, Hardships, and
Difficulties the World or Satan can bring upon us, that we might at last attain
to that ineffable Glory. But,

Lastly, I come to represent to you, the Reasonableness of the Exhortation
contained in the Text, from the Consideration of the exceeding Brevity or
Shortness of the Time we are allowed to work in. Man is like a thing of naught,
says the Psalmist, his time passes away like a Shadow, that necessarily
disappears when the Sun leaves our Horizon, and may also fall short of that
Period by the Interposition of a Cloud. He carries within himself the Causes of
a necessary and speedy Dissolution, and is also liable to ten thousand
Accidents without, that may hasten his Ruin. Nay, though by the good Providence
of God he happily escapes all these, and arrives to his utmost Period, that
natural Term, which is set him by the Temperament of the First Qualities; yet
what an airy, fleting, and fantastic Appearance is he? Our Life is but a
Vapor, says St. James, which appears and dances up and down a few Minutes over
the places that gave it Birth, and then vanishes, and sinks back into its
primitive Night and Darkness. The Day wears away apace, our Sun hastens to go
down, the Shadows every Moment increase, and the Hours of Darkness come on,
that long Night of Silence and Solitude, wherein no Man can work. It is
appointed for all men once to die, says the Heb. 9.27.
Apostle, and then for ever to cease from laboring and improving their State;
for immediately follows Judgment, which consigns them either with Lazarus to
the Refreshments and Consolations of Abraham's Bosom, or to the dismal
Dwellings of Dives in everlasting Burnings.

Phaedon. c. 45. p. 178. in Dialog. select. Edit. Cantab.
Plato indeed, and from him the Romanists at this day, talk much of an
intermediate State, where Satisfaction may be made for some Miscarriages of our
Lives here. But in all the Word of God, there is not so much as one place that
countenanceth this Opinion. It Is not the Doctrine of God, but the Invention of
Men; the weak and beggarly Element of this World, not the Revelation of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: He only commands us to be therefore prepared
continually for our Last Hour, because we then enter upon a state eternal and
immutable: that private particular Sentence which passes upon the Soul at her
Departure from the Body, being to be openly renewed and confirmed upon the
whole Man at the General Day of Judgment. How ought then this Consideration to
alarm all the dormant Powers and Faculties of our Souls, and to wind them up to
the highest pitch of Action in this momentous Affair? How careful, I say,
should we be by a prudent Management and Husbandry of these fleting Moments, to
secure to our selves a happy Portion in the Regions of Eternity? If we mispend
these Days of Probation, you see there remain no more. If we neglect these
present Opportunities, we are lost for ever. And what a dismal Reflection
(think ye) will this be in the other World, when we shall remember, that Mercy
was frequently offered us, and that we as frequently rejected it? and that for
the little imperfect Services of a few Days, our Maker graciously offered to
place a Crown of Eternal Glory upon our Heads? Alas! This is the chief
Ingredient of that bitter Cup which afflicts and torments the Damned for ever
and ever. This that dismal Thought, which raises the Storms and Tempests in
the Kingdom of Darkness below. Once they might have been saved; once they had
their Day, and they refused the Light when it shined. Their God was gracious
and merciful to them, but they were cruel to themselves. He offered them Mercy,
but they would never accept it. He called them to Life, but they obstinately
chose Death. No Tortures so exquisite, as such Reflections. No Lashes so
severe, as the Upbraidings of such an enraged Conscience. These (I say) are the
Snakes that twist about their Heads, and sting, and hiss, and make them roar to
all Eternity.

From which miserable State, God in Mercy preserve us all, through the Merits
and Mediation of Jesus the Beloved. To whom, etc. MATTHEW. xi. 28. Come unto me
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest.


BUT am I called indeed? may the ravished Soul say. Called too to Ease, and
Refreshment, and Peace, though my Sins and Impieties are so many? Does the Holy
One of Israel regard so vile a Creature? and will He, who is the God of all
Purity, vouchsafe to receive into his Arms so impure a Wretch? Yes; for it is
the Voice of my Beloved that spoke. He stands not, as formerly, behind the
Wall, nor looks in at the Window, showing himself only through the Lattess; but
has opened the Door, and is come in, and speaks and says to me, Rise up, my
Love, my Fair one, and come away. Draw me then, O my Beloved, and we will run
after thee. Receive me, though the Sun has looked upon me; though I am black,
and coarse as the Tents of Kedar. I am bowed down and ready to sink under the
weight of my Sins. I have no might against this great multitude of
Transgressions that is set in Array against me, nor know I what to do, only my
longing, my languishing Eyes are still upon thee, and I will patiently hearken
what the Lord God will farther say unto me, who so graciously speaks to
Sinners, that, like his Saints, they turn and come unto him. Come unto me (says
he) all ye, that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest.

In which Words are four things observable.

I. A gracious Invitation; Come. II. The Person to whom the Invitation is made;
Unto me: that is, unto Christ. III. The Persons invited, All Penitent Sinners
in general; All ye that labor and are heavy laden. All ye that sigh, and
groan, and are bowed down, and ready to sink under the grievous Burden of your
Sins. IV. The Benefit of accepting this Invitation; I will give you Rest.
1. We have in the Text a gracious Invitation, Come. God spoke once, and twice
also have I heard the same, that Mercy belongs unto God. For this is the
Voice of him who is the Wisdom of the Father; that Wisdom, which by the Mouth
of his Prophet Chap. 55. ver. 1.
Isaiah called in the same manner to the Sons of Men, inviting them to come
freely, and partake of his Divine Refreshments. Ho, every one that thirsts
says he, come to the waters; and he that has no money come, buy, and eat; yea
come, buy wine and milk, without money, and without price.

The Angels indeed that sinned, are fallen into the gloomy and lamentable State
of utter Desperation. There is no Mercy in store for these self-deluded,
inexcusable Apostates of the Upper World; but because they foolishly exalted
themselves against the Lord, whom they could not but know to be the Author and
Fountain of all Happiness and Glory, they are entirely dismantled of their
primitive Robes of Light, and cast down from their Heavenly Mansions into this
Lower Orb, where, in miserable and darker Habitations, they are reserved, as
condemned Malefactors, (...), says 2 Ep. 2.4.
S. Peter; (...), says Ver. 6.
St. Jude, for everlasting Chains of the Blackness of Darkness at the Judgment
of the Great Day, when they shall be brought forth, as out of a Prison, before
the Tribunal of Christ, and hear the just Sentence of Eternal Death more
solemnly pronounced against them before the General Assembly of the Saints and
Angels.

This (I say) is the deplorable and undone Condition of the Apostate Angels.
Their Fall is irrecoverable, their Sin irremissible, and the Decree that is
gone out against them irreversible. But Man, though a Being of a much lower
Class, and an Apostate too, finds Favor and Mercy at the hands of his God. He
vouchsafes him the liberty of Second Thoughts, and if we will but be obedient
and hearken, promises an entire Renovation of his Corrupted Nature by the
abundant and powerful Communications of his most Holy Spirit. Nay, so desirous
is he of this happy Change, that he long prostitutes his Patience (as I shall
instantly show more at large) to Men's wanton Humors in Expectation of it, is
contented to lay aside his amazing Glories, and seems to divest and strip
himself of all his Attributes, save that of Mercy. His All-seeing Eye
graciously overlooks our manifold Sins and Wickednesses, and, as though he saw
them not, continues to shine upon us with its reviving Brightness. His Justice
gives way to his Forbearance and Long-suffering; and when it takes place, it is
so tempered and qualified, that in the midst of Judgment he always remembers
Mercy. Mercy is his Favorite, his darling Excellence, that lovely and amiable
Attribute which is over all his Works, and in which, we are sure, his Soul
takes most Delight and Complacency.

'Twas by this Name he, in the Presence and Assembly of his invincible Holy
Ones upon Mount Sinai, most solemnly proclaimed himself to his Servant Moses:
The Lord, Exodus 34.6.
says he, the Lord God, merciful and gracious. Nay, though he is the God of all
Truth, and therefore can no more deceive than be deceived; yet, as though it
had been a small thing thus to have proclaimed himself before Men and Angels,
he has likewise, in a gracious and wonderful Condescension to the Infirmities
of his Creatures, and that the broken and contrite Spirit might have the surest
Word of Promise that could possibly be given it, vouchsafed even to interpose
his Oath, and as solemnly to swear the same thing. As I live, says the Lord
God, Ezekiel. 33.11.
I have no pleasure in the death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from
his way, and live: Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways; for why will ye die,
O house of Israel? What tender, what compassionate Strains are these? It Is as
if he had said, Since there is no Being so great as my self, by my self I have
sworn, that as sure as I am God, that eternal and faithful Being, with whom is
no Variableness or Shadow of Turning, I desire not the Death of any Sinner; but
had rather, ten thousand times over, that you would all, from the least to the
greatest, hear my Voice in this Accepted Time, this day of Salvation, and
repent, and be saved. For now do I freely offer you my Grace, which I most
passionately beseech and entreat you to accept, and to return, and live. Turn
ye then, turn ye unto me, for why will ye die? Why will ye weary me out with
your continued Provocations? Why will ye constrain me, by your unworthy and
most wretched Abuses of my Grace, your insufferable Grievings of my Spirit, at
length to depart from you, and to leave you to die in your Sins? Is Eternal
Death so desirable a thing? Is Heaven and my Glory so despicable and vile? Why
then, let me ask you again, since you have my free Grace to enable you to
Return, nay, since it is far easier for you to be saved than to be damned, why,
why, will ye die, O house of Israel?

Thus does our Heavenly Father, by the most solemn Protestations demonstrate
his Everlasting Love and Kindness to Mankind. And how exactly do all his
Dispensations correspond with these his gracious Declarations? With what
Patience (I say) and Forbearance, does he deal even with the greatest of
Sinners? How affectionately entreat them to fly into the Harbor, and to secure
themselves, by a timely Reformation, from the Wrath which is to come? Such
various Ways and Methods does he contrive to bring them to Repentance, so
earnestly beg and solicit them to accept in time the Terms of Salvation, that
one would think 'twas his own, not their Interest, that Men should be saved. He
always, like a generous Enemy, declares Sinners his just Anger and Displeasure,
and excites them before it be too late, to prepare to Meet him, and with
Weapons, which will most certainly prevail, viz. Prayers and Tears, to disarm
his Justice.

Thus when within the small compass of about two thousand years his gracious
and mavelous Works of Creation and Providence were so far from being, praised
and had in Honor, that all Flesh had degenerated from this great End of its
Creation, and most shamefully corrupted its way upon the Earth; though he was
grieved (to speak after the manner of Men) at the very Heart, and it repented
him that he had made Man, yet he could not immediately withdraw his Hand, and
let him fall into Ruin, but mercifully prolonged the day of Vengeance and gave
his sinful Creatures time and space for Repentance. He resolved indeed, that
the Spirits, which he had made, should not Eternally remain in their Bodies, as
Slaves and Vassals to those Instruments of Unrighteousness, but that if Men
repented not, he would open the Windows of Heaven and break up the Fountains of
the great Deep, and bring in a Flood upon them, that should sweep them all
away. But, before he can do this, Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness, must daily
assure them of their Danger, and he waits their Repentance a hundred and twenty
Years.

Thus too, though the Sins of Sodom and Gomorrah were very grievous, and cried
loud, and the Cry of them ascended up into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath,
yet could not they prevail with him to let loose his Thunder to overwhelm them
with a swift and deserved Destruction; but on the contrary (to prevent, if
possible, their Ruin) he, by his good Providence, so ordered and disposed
things, that Lot, a holy and pious Person, living amongst them, should first
lay before them their prodigious Impieties, and warn them to prevent the heavy
Judgments due to them, by a speedy Repentance. And, when (notwithstanding all
this) they sinned yet more, and forced his Holy Spirit to forsake them utterly,
by their intolerable Fornications; yet would not his Goodness then give him
leave to execute upon them the Fierceness of his Indignation; but still stayed
his hand, and engaged him to be gracious. As though 'twas possible for him to
be deceived, it induced him to make a further Enquiry; to go down, and see,
whether they had indeed done altogether according to the Cry of it, which was
come unto him. Nay, though their Sins and Provocations were so many and so great,
yet so much greater was his Mercy; so unwilling was he that they should perish,
that he promised the interceeding Patriarch, that, if he could find but ten
Righteous Persons amongst them, he would save them all.

But (not to multiply Instances, which are numberless) the liveliest and most
breathing Image of the Divine Mercy and Pity, the most glorious and ravishing
Displays of his unbounded Compassions appears in the wonderful Contrivance of
our Restitution, the mysterious and Costly Redemption of Lapsed Man. This is an
Instance of Love so astonishing and unfathomable, as will afford new matter
through all the Ages of Eternity, for the Contemplation and Praises of the
Saints and Angels in Heaven. Since it is a Province too great for any Created
Being, the Son of God himself, before whose insupportable Glories the Seraphims
veil their faces, graciously descends from the Celestial Paradise into the
Wilderness of this World to seek his straying Creatures, to restore the lost
sheep of the House of Israel; and with his own Voice to call them back to
himself, the great Shepherd and Bishop of their Souls. He comes in his Father's
Name to proclaim Pardon and Forgiveness to all, that return to him; to
demonstrate his infinite Tenderness and Compassion for every Soul of the Sons
of Adam; that (notwithstanding all their Sins) he would not have any of them
perish, not the greatest, not the oldest, not the most presumptuous of Sinners,
but that all should come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and be saved. This is
his Business, This his Errand, This the great End and Design of his Coming;
which having finished in all the Parts he undertook, and to confirm our Faith,
sealed his Letters of Invitation with his own Blood; and being now to return to
the Father, he (to the Everlasting Comfort and Joy of Repenting Sinners)
commands his Apostles to go forth and carry them into all Parts of the World.
Go Mark 16.15.
says he, and Preach the Gospel (these glad Tidings of Reconciliation and Peace
between God and Man) to every Creature. And accordingly too St. 2 Cor. 5.19.
Paul tells us, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing to them their trespasses and sins. The whole Tenor and Design (you
see) of the Evangelical Dispensation is to bring Sinners to their Savior, to
call them off from all their vain Confidences, to believe and trust only in the
Son of God; to beseech them to come to Christ, that they may be refreshed and
find Rest unto their Souls. And so I am brought to the Second Thing observable
in the Text, viz. the Person to whom the Invitation is made; To Me: that is to
our only Savior and Redeemer, the Lord Christ Jesus.

2. We are not then to unfold our Necessities, or to present our Supplications
and Prayers to Saints or Martyrs, to Patriarchs, Prophets, or Apostles, no not
to the Blessed Virgin Mother her self. The Votaries indeed of this Glorious
Saint in the Romish Church are (as a Learned See a Discourse of the due Praise
and Honor of the Virgin Mary, entitled, Speculum Beatae Virginis.
Author of our own has shown at large) sufficiently extravagant in the Honors
they pay to her. They exalt her above the Thrones even of Cherubim and
Seraphim, array her in the brightest Robes of Majesty and Honor, and most
religiously and devoutly Romance her into a Deity, Nay, this is not the
Practice only of her private Authors, but the more Authentic Voice likewise of
her public Offices, in which they frequently invoke her by the paramount
Titles of Mother of Mercy, Mother of Grace, Sweet Parent of Mercy, Queen of
Heaven, the Gate of the Great King, the only Hope of Sinners, and their most
gracious Lady.

Now these (I say) are Rants and Excesses indeed. Excesses, which questionless,
if known, would put the Modesty of this Blessed Virgin to a much greater Blush,
than did the Appearance and Complement of the Angel Gabriel. We confess her
Privileges and Prerogatives are singularly great. He that is Mighty has
magnified her and Blessed is her Name. We acknowledge her a most happy
Instrument of our Good, and therefore shall her Memory be always Dear to us.
Dear and Honored throughout all Generations; Dear and Reverenced, but not
worshipped and adored. In a word, Her (according to her own Prediction) will we
ever call Blessed; but only amongst Women. To Her will we ascribe Glory,
Honor, and Praise; But to her Son alone, with the Father and the Holy Spirit,
Power, Might, Majesty and Dominion.

For (to speak a little closer to this Point) if the Saints in Heaven (This
Blessed Virgin, and the Rest) have no constant Knowledge of our Affairs here
below then it is the Inference of every Elementary Logician, and the Concession
of the greatest Champions of their own Party, that it is altogether in vain, and
to no purpose, to Pray to them. Si non cognoscant nostras orationes, videtur
otiosum and supervacaneum ad ipsos orare, are De Relig. tom. 2. l. 1. c. 10.
Suarez his own Words* But that the Saints in Heaven (this Blessed Virgin and
the Rest) have no constant Knowledge of our Affairs here below, and
consequently that it is altogether in vain, and to no purpose, to Pray to them,
is evident from that of the Prophet Cap. 63. v. 16.
Isaiah: Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not. For certainly if
Abraham and Israel were ignorant and know nothing of the Affairs of that very
People which descended from their own Loins, then we have all the Reason in the
World to conclude, that the Saints in Heaven have no constant Knowledge of us,
and of our Affairs, who are perfect Strangers to their Blood and Families.

Our Adversaries (I know) will be here ready to Object, That Abraham and Israel
were rightly said by the Prophet to be ignorant, and to know nothing in his
Time of the Affairs of Mankind, and consequently, that then indeed 'twas but in
vain, and to no purpose, to pray to them, because before the Resurrection of
our Lord the Patriarchs were not admitted into Heaven, but lay only in Limbo,
the Retired and Secret Caverns of the Earth, where they were utterly excluded
from the Vision of God and likewise from all Traffic and Commerce with Men.
But that now the case is quite altered with them; that they are all translated
from those Regions of Darkness, that State of Expectation* those Tabernacles of
Hope, into the inmost Court of Heaven, the Kingdom of their Father, the Land of
Fruition, where their Understandings are so widen'd and enlarged that they have
a particular, entire, and perfect Knowledge of all things, that are done both
in Heaven and Earth, and consequently of all the Circumstances, Concerns,
Occurrences, and Affairs of every Man's Life, so that now they are become the
proper Objects of our Devotion; being both privy to all our Necessities, and
also as Fellow Members of the same Mystical Body, most willing and ready to
here and assist us. But I answer,

1. That this Opinion of Abraham and Israel's being in Limbo only, and not in
Heaven it self before the Resurrection of our Lord, is groundless and
unwarrantable. Elias, we are sure, was translated into Heaven, and we know
likewise, that Moses came down with him from that place to commune with our
Lord upon the Mount. But if these his Sons were thought worthy, before the
Resurrection of our Lord, to be admitted into those blissful Mansions; why
Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, and the Peculiar Friend of God; Why Isaac
and Israel, and the other Patriarchs and Prophets, who were all Heirs of the
same most holy Faith, should be excluded, I know not.

But supposing this Opinion was really as true as they would have it; and that
we could not deny, (what you see, we have all the Reason in the World to deny,)
but that the Saints before the Resurrection of our Lord lay only in Limbo, but
are now in Heaven: yet that being there, they have a particular, entire, and
perfect Knowledge of all things that are done in Heaven and Earth, and
consequently of all the Circumstances, Concerns, Occurrences, and Affairs of
every Man's Life, and so are become the Objects of our Devotion, is, I answer
in the

2. Place a most unphilosophical, false, and impious Assertion that has no
Foundation in Scripture, Reason, or Antiquity.

1. It has no Foundation in Scripture. Now to pray after any other manner than
what Christ himself has taught us, is not only Ignorance, but Sin, says De
Orat. Domin. page 139. Ed. Oxon.
St. Cyprian. But what one place is there (I ask) in all his Scriptures, that
demands this of us? which of all his Apostles, Evangelists, or Prophets, does
allow that any of the Saints departed should be invoked by us? Bannes, a
Learned Dominican, ingenuously confesses, that he knows not of any. His Words
are as express and full as can be: Orationes ad Sanctos faciendas neque etiam
express neque involute Scripturae docent, i. e. that it is our Duty to Pray to
the Saints the Scriptures do neither explicitly nor implicitly inform us. And
those of his own Profession have never yet been able to show that he is in an
Error.

2. This Assertion has no Foundation in Reason. For if the Saints in Heaven
have a particular, entire, and perfect Knowledge of all things that are done in
Heaven and Earth, and consequently of all the Circumstances, Concerns,
Occurrences, and Affairs of every Man's Life, and so are become the Objects of
our Devotion, then this Knowledge of theirs is owing either

1. To their own Ubiquitary Presence, by virtue of which they see and hear all
our Words and Actions, as some of our Adversaries affirm. Or,

2. As others, with the like Boldness, To their Perspicacity and
Clear-sightedness, whereby they are able to discern our very Thoughts and
Intentions. Or,

3. To the constant and faithful Relations of daily-ascending Saints and
Angels; as a Third more modestly. Or,

4. As most, To the Vision of the Divine Essence, which they call Speculum
Trinitatis. But all these ways are ridiculous and absurd, and some of them
impious. For,

1. The Saints in Heaven have not a particular, entire, and perfect Knowledge
of all things that are done in Heaven and Earth, and consequently of all the
Circumstances, Concerns, Occurrences, and Affairs of every Man's Life, and so
are become the Objects of our Devotion, because they are every where present,
and so see and hear all our Words and Actions. Heaven indeed is God's Throne,
and the Earth is his Footstool. The Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him; but
he fills all Places both in Heaven and Earth, and the imaginary Space too
beyond the Limits of Both, he is a God near at hand to us all; to those that
abide in the Continent, and that remain in the broad Sea, and also that live
afar off in the Ends of all the Earth. In a word, though he cannot be
circumscribed or included in any Place, yet by his Immensity he is so every
where present, as not to be excluded out of any; so that we may all of us, at
one and the same time, pour out our Prayers before him with full Assurance of
being heard. But now it is quite otherwise with all Created Beings. Creation
necessarily implies Limitation; so that it is as great a Contradiction to say,
That the Essence or Virtue of a Created Being can be Boundless or Infinite, as
that a Self-Existent, Independent Being can be Finite. Every Abstracted Spirit
therefore since Created, though raised to the utmost degree of its Perfection, is
but Finite; and consequently (as that great Patriarch of the Roman Schools,
Sum. Part. prim. Quaest. 52. Art. 2.
Aquinas himself confesses) non se extendit ad omnia, sed ad aliquid unum
determinatum, though it may, as it pleases, be sometimes in a greater, sometimes
in a lesser place, yet it is so far from being able to extend it self to all
places, that it is always necessarily and unavoidably but in one. Non est
ubique, nec in pluribus locis, sed in uno loco tantum, as he speaks again in
the same Paragraph. Great then only is the Lord, and greatly to be praised,
because there is no End of his Greatness.

2. The Saints in Heaven have not a particular, entire, and perfect Knowledge
of all things that are done in Heaven and Earth, and consequently of all the
Circumstances, Concerns, Occurrences, and Affairs of every Man's Life, and so
are become the Objects of our Devotion, from their Perspicacity or
Clear-sightedness, whereby they are able to discern our very Thought and
Intentions. This is plain from the Argument immediately foregoing: For since,
according to the Laws of Creation, the Saints are all limited and circumscribed
in their Essences and Perfections, it must necessarily be granted, that they
are likewise limited and circumscribed in their Science or Knowledge; it being
impossible for any Being but such as is Immense and fills all Places, to know
the different Concerns of all the several Beings residing and acting in those
different Places. God then alone (since it appears, that he only is
Omnipresent) must be acknowledged to be (...), the Searcher of the Hearts. In
him indeed do our Souls and Bodies live, move, and have their Beings. He
understands our Constitution, knows whereof we are made, the Composition (as I
may so say) of our very Essences, and therefore discerns all the Motions and
Operations of our Souls. In short, It Is his Prerogative alone to be about our
Paths, and about our Beds, in our Hearts, and in our Spirits, and consequently
to spy out all our Ways. Whence it likewise appears in the

3. Place, That the Saints in Heaven have not a particular, entire, and perfect
Knowledge of all things that are done in Heaven and Earth, and consequently of
all the Circumstances, Concerns, Occurrences, and Affairs of every Man's Life,
and so are become the Objects of our Devotion; from the constant and faithful
Relations of daily ascending Saints and Angels; from the Informations and kind
Intercourses of Guardian Angels, and the narrations of such happy Spirits, as
leaving their Earthly Tabernacle daily ascend thither; because it is evident
(you see) that there are many things here amongst us, which these Saints and
Angels can never understand, many Designs and Contrivances, many Wishes and
Desires, many Vows and Prayers, that are lodged only in the Heart, and
consequently are known only unto God. Wherefore

4. The Saints in Heaven have not a particular, entire, and perfect Knowledge
of all things, that are done in Heaven and Earth, and consequently of all the
Circumstances, Concerns, Occurrences, and Affairs of every Man's Life, and so
are become the Objects of our Devotion, from the vision of the Divine Essence,
which they call Speculum Trinitatis. Now it is a great Question amongst Learned
Men, Whether the Blessed Spirits above are indeed capable of seeing the Divine
Essence, and many of no ordinary note espouse the Negative, thinking it as
impossible for a Created, Finite Being, to behold the Essence of an Uncreated,
Infinite Being, as it is for a Bird of Night to gaze steddily upon the Sun.
Which Opinion (if true) entirely destroys this Speculum Trinitatis, and dashes
it with its Consequences, all to pieces upon the Ground. But, I confess, I
hitherto see nothing that can induce me to embrace it, The Affirmative seems
most consonant both to Scripture and Reason.

When Moses humbly desired, that God would vouchsafe to show him his Glory, or
to imprint upon his Mind a clear, distinct Idea of his Divine Essence, he was
answered, That he could nor have his wish now, whilst he lay under the
Disadvantages of Mortality, because he was a God dwelling in such Light, as no
Mortal Eye could approach; but that he should so see him hereafter, when these
Impediments should be removed, and he happily invested with the stronger
Privileges of Immortality. Thou can not see my Face, says God, Exodus 33.20.
for there shall no man see me, and live. For these words certainly imply, That
though he could not now, by reason of the thick Veil of his flesh; yet that he
should see his Essence hereafter, both when his Earthly Tabernacle should be
dissolved and laid aside* and also, when he should receive it again all
clarified and spiritualized.

Moses himself undoubtedly understood them thus: for had he thought otherwise,
and that he was never to be admitted to the Intuition of his Maker's Glory, the
naked, clear, and real Vision of his Divine Essence; but that he was for ever
to rest in Symbals and Figures; in reflected Glories, and secondary
Manifestations, (which was to find his Ultimate Happiness in some thing really
distinct from his God) his devout, affectionate Soul, which so ardently
breathed after the most intimate Fruition even of the Living God, would never
have been satisfied with this uncomfortable Answer, but we had questionless
heard of the sad Complaints, the bitter Bemoanings, and doleful Accents of his
disconsolate Spirit, who, when the natural Bias of her Desires moved
necessarily toward God, trembling continually, like the amorous Needle, for
the Embraces of that most Lovely and Amiable Object; was yet for ever excluded
from his Beatifick Presence, the Contemplation and Fruition of the interior
Beauties of her Beloved.

And indeed we all so naturally desire to see this First Cause, this Parent of
Nature, and the Author of all our Beings, that though we were surrounded with all
the Sweets of Paradise, all the other most exquisite Delights and
Entertainments that Heaven can afford; yet, without Him they would but fade*
and wither, and dwindle into nothing, and our restless, dissatisfied Spirits
would still, in the midst of them all, be impatiently crying out, Ah! Where,
Where is our God? For as He is the First of Beings, so is He the Last of Ends:
(...), says Plato rightly, that proper and principal End of Rational Beings,
the Vision of whom alone can satisfy the aspiring Soul, and in the Circle of
whose Embraces only the immoratal Spirit finds Rest, and Peace, and Joy for
Evermore.

See him then we shall in the other World: See the Sovereign Fair openly and
clearly, really, and as He is. Now we hear of him by the Ear; but then, shall
our Eye with Joy and Triumph see him. Now we see through a glass, darkly; but
then Face to Face. Now we know only in part but then shall we know, even as we
our selves also are known.

This Expression (I readily acknowledge) is not to be understood according to
the Strictness of the Letter. As we are known, is a Note of Similitude only,
not of Equality; for the Sun may as well be included in a Spark of Fire, as God
be comprehended by our Finite Faculties. Know him then we shall, not so as to
comprehend him, but so as to be ravished and for ever transported with his
Essential Perfections. The Light of a Candle as truly shines as the Light of
the Sun, though not with equal Extent and Splendor; so shall our Knowledge be
truly like His, reaching even His Divine Essence, though not Equal to His in
comprehending it, as He does ours.

Thus far then are we and our Adversaries agreed. The Saints in Heaven do
really view and contemplate the Divine Essence. But now to say, that they
behold in it all things that are done in Heaven and Earth, and consequently all
the Circumstances, Concerns, Occurrences, and Affairs of every Man's Life, and
so are become the Objects of our Devotion, is most absurd and ridiculous. If
you let a Vessel down into the Sea, 'twill indeed be filled to the utmost of
its Capacity; but then, you know, it must needs overflow, because it is
impossible it should receive into its Bosom the vast Congeries of that
inexhaustible Abyss. So admit the Saints into the Presence of their Maker,
where they may clearly and distinctly behold his Divine Essence: their Finite
Understandings may indeed by his voluntary Revelations be filled with all that
Knowledge they are capable of receiving; but then it is necessary they likewise
overflow, because, it is absolutely impossible they should be widen'd and
enlarged to the infinite and boundless Comprehensions of Omniscience.

This besides the Reason of the thing, (which assures us, that it is absolute
impossible any Being should have the Attributes of the Divine Nature, which has
not the Divine Nature it self) is plain from the Instance of the Angels. These
Blessed Spirits were before the Incarnation of our Lord admitted into their
Father's House, the Mansions of Glory, the Royal City of the Heavenly King. The
time of their Probation was over and gone, and they all unalterably confirmed
in a state of Happiness and Glory. Their Business, and Employment was to
contemplate the Unfolded Beauties of the Divine Countenance, and to sing
continually in the Presence of the Lord, that Great is the Glory of their God.
And yet how imperfect was the Knowledge, how improveable the Understandings
even of these Intelligences? Notwithstanding this clear Vision of the Divine
Essence, the Mystery of Man's Redemption was so far hid from their Eyes that
before the Manifestation of the Son of God in the Flesh, they had only some
general, dark, and obscure Notices of it. And though now (as Ephesians. 3.10.
St. Paul tells us) the manifold Wisdom of God is in a greater measure made
known unto them by his Dispensations in the Church, yet even now are they so
far from being able to comprehend it, that 1 Epist. 1.12.
St. Peter assures us they still desire to look farther into it. These things,
says he, the Angels desire to look into. In short, our Lord has put this case
beyond all doubt; for speaking of the Day of Judgment: Of that Day and Hour,
Matthew. 24.36. and Mat. 13.32.
says he, knows no Man, no, not the Angels of Heaven, nor the Son, but my
Father only. For if the Son of God himself, as Man, though he is to be the Umpire
of that Great Day; and the Holy Angels, who always behold the Face of their
Father, and who with unspeakable Alacrity and Joy will attend and wait upon him
in this his glorious Expedition, was once and are still ignorant in this
matter, then certainly it can be nothing but Folly and Madness to imagine, that
the Spirits of Just Men and Women (which, though never so perfect as such, are,
as they stand in Relation to their Bodies, to whom they have a natural
Inclination, even in Heaven it self, but in a State of Imperfection) should so
far excel, as to have an entire and perfect Knowledge of all things, that are
done both in Heaven and Earth.

Now then from what has been thus discoursed, I presume, it is Evident, that
there is no Foundation in Reason to think, that the Saints (tho in Heaven) have
a particular, entire and perfect Knowledge of all things that are done in
Heaven and Earth, and consequently of all the Circumstances, Concerns,
Occurrences, and Affairs of every Man's Life, and so are become the Objects of
our Devotion, as our Adversaries pretend; but that on the contrary, we have all
the Reason in the World to conclude, that they have no constant Knowledge of
any thing here below; and consequently, that according to the Romish Doctors
themselves, it is otiosum and Supervacaneum, an idle, vain and superfluous, and
according to Truth it self, an impious, wicked, and idolatrous piece of
Devotion, that is put up to them. For though we allow, that God does sometimes of
his especial Grace vouchsafe by an Extraordinary Revelation to acquaint his
Saints with something of our Affairs here below, like the good Shepherd in the
Gospel, who when he had found the Sheep he had lost, soon informed his
Neighbors of it, and called them together to rejoice with him for it; nay,
farther, though I cannot think it too much to grant, that the Saints in Heaven do
not only intercede with God for the Church in general; that he would be
favorable and gracious unto Sion, and vouchsafe to repair the Breaches in the
Walls of Jerusalem; but also that some of them, at some Times, on some
Occasions, which either an immediate Revelation from God himself, or perhaps
the Relation of a Guardian Angel or possibly a short Errand of their own
discovers to them, do (as Ep. ad Trall. page 80. Vsser. Edit.
Ignatius, De Orat. sect. 34
Origin, De Mortalit. page 166. Ed. Oxon.
Cyprian and Vid. Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 3. Basil. Hom. 20. Ambros. de obitu
Theod. Hieron. Ep. 25.
others think they do) Pray for some of us in particular; yet since there is no
certainty in this matter, no Revelation to inform us when this is done, or
indeed whether it be so much as done at all; we cannot from such pious
Conjectures only infer with the Council of Trent, that we ought to Pray to
them, or make them the Mediators between God and our selves; especially since
(besides the Arguments already alleged) God himself has expressly pronounced
him Cursed who thus trusts in Man, and makes Flesh his Arm, and whose Heart
departs from the Lord. All we are to do, is to Praise and Magnify the Name
of God for them that he has been pleased of his gracious Goodness to deliver
their Souls from the Burden of the Flesh, from the Waves and Storms of this
tempestuous World, and to land them safely on the peaceful Harbor of Eternity.
That he adorned and enriched them with his manifold Gifts and Graces, whereby
they are rendered as burning and shining Light to his Church in succeeding
Generations, This, I say, together with a Reverential Respect, and study of
Imitation, is all we have to do upon their Account; and This, we are sure,
(whatever the Trent Doctors determine) was the only Inference the Primitive
Church made from these Premises. (...). The Honor, says Vid. tom. 5. p. 625.
Vid. and Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 15. page 134, 135. and Aug. de Civit. Dei l.
8. c. 27. and l. 22. c. 10.
S. Chrysostom, that we are to pay to the Martyrs, is to strike the same Lines,
as those invincible Heroes have done; to copy out their Fortitude and
Magnanimity, and with the like Cheerfulness to lay down our Lives for the
Lord's sake. And so I come to my

3. Particular, which is to show, That as this Assertion has no Foundation in
Scripture nor Reason; so, neither has it the least Support from Antiquity.
Spiritus Defunctorum, De cura pro mortuis.
says St. Austin, non vident quaecunque eveniunt aut aguntur in ista vita
hominum, i. e. The Spirits of the Saints departed, do not know all things that
are Acted upon the Stage of the World. And Ep. 3. de Epitaph. Nepot.
St. Hierom, speaking of his deceased Friend Nepotianus, is more particular:
Quicquid dixero, says he, quia ille non audit, mutum videtur; quocum loqui non
possumus, de eo loqui non desinamus. Whatsoever I shall say, seems dumb and to
no purpose, because Nepotian does not hear me; yet since we can no more speak
with him, let us be the longer in speaking of him.

I know the Fathers about the latter End of the Fourth Century in their Funeral
and Anniversary Panegyricks of the Saints and Martyrs, frequently use very
elegant and affectionate Apostrophe's to them, as though they supposed them
present. But the Popish Abusers of this innocent. Custom would do well to
consider, that they most cautiously usher them in with If's and And's, as in
that Orat. 1. cont. Julian.
of Nazianzen: (...), Hear, O thou Soul of the Renowned Constantine, if thou
have any sense or knowledge of these matters: For every Schoolboy will tell
them, that this is only a Rhetorical Flourish, a pleasing Strain of Eloquence
taken up by Orators in expressing their own, and moving the affections of
others; but never used by any as a Form of Prayer, or a Mode of addressing
their Devotions to the Deceased.

But we need not seek far for the Sense of Antiquity in this Matter. The
Fathers have sufficiently declared their Opinion in their Controversy with the
Arians. These Heretics divested the Blessed Jesus of his Divinity; diminished
and degraded him into a mere Creature, and yet held it lawful to pay him
Religious Worship. This, (though the Arians declared they worshipped him only with
an inferior degree of Worship, parallel to what our Adversaries now call
(...), not with (...), or that Degree, which is peculiar only to the Supreme
God, was universally abhorred and detested by the Fathers, who looked upon it
as an impious Restoration of Pagan Idolatry. (...), says Athanasius, (...); i.
e. Why do not these Arians, since they are of this Opinion, descend into the
Class of the Unbelieving Gentiles? for they are all guilty of one and the same
kind of Idolatry, Worshipping the Creature besides the Creator. But now if the
Arians were thus peremptorily condemned by the Fathers for Idolatry, because
they worshipped the Blessed Jesus, though but with (...), as they supposed him to
be a Creature; then how is it possible for our Adversaries to escape the same
Condemnation, who pay the same degree of worship to those we all know to be
Creatures? The Arians supposed the Son of God to be a Creature, but were in the
wrong; and therefore, though Formally Idolaters, according to their own mistaken
Hypothesis, yet were they not Materially and Really so. But these Men know for
certain, that the Saints they worship are indeed but Creatures, and therefore
are as well Materially as Formally Idolaters. The Arians worshipped the Son
indeed as a Creature; but then not as an Ordinary, Inferior Creature; but as
the first, the most glorious, and the most excellent of all Creatures, by whom,
as an Instrument, all the others were made, and yet were found Guilty; How then
shall these Men escape, who worship in the same manner these ordinary,
Inferior Beings, whom we all know to be the Workmanship of his hands, as he is
God.

But tho the Saints are to have no part or share in our Devotions, yet may we
not humbly present our petitions before the Exalted Thrones of Angels and
Archangels? The Saints indeed were Persons of like Passions with our selves,
they had their Slips and Miscarriages here upon Earth and now in Heaven still
bear the Marks and Badges of their Sins, being deprived of half of themselves,
their Bodies. But these Blessed, indefective Spirits are the Firstborn Sons of
the Heavenly King the most Correct and Amiable Patterns of his Essential Purity
and Holiness, and certainly he expects we should peculiarly honor them whom
himself in so especial a manner delights to honor.

Honor them indeed we will, and in the way most becoming such glorious and
Exalted Beings. We will endeavor to copy out their heavenly Virtues, to
transcribe their Heroic Exellencies, and to live like Angels here, that we may
for ever live with them hereafter. But to pray to them to invoke them, to
implore their Aid and Assistance in the time of our Need, is what neither they
desire nor we can give. (...), see not, Rev. 19.10. and 22.9.
was the Heavenly Messengers abrupt and hasty prohibition to St. John, when
dazzled and overcome by his Extraordinary Glory, he would erroneously have
worshipped him for his Adorable Master; and he that dares do this, holds not
the Head says Col. 2.19.
St. Paul; but vainly pust up by his fleshly Mind, degenerates (as the whole
Laodicean Vid. Balsamon. Canon. p. 841.
Council in its thirty fifth Canon truly declares) into the Abominable and
Sacrilegious Rites of the Idolatrous Jews and Gentiles. For whatever Fig Leaves
Men may sew together to cover their Nakedness withal, it is most certain, that
they who in these Nations worshipped their Baalim, their Demons, or Angels
most, did it upon the very same Principles, as our Adversaries do at this day.
The Vid. Plat. sym. Apul. de Demon. Socrat. and Grotium in 2. cap. Ep. ad Col.
v. 18.
Pythagoreans, Vid. Plat. sym. Apul. de Demon. Socrat. and Grotium in 2. cap.
Ep. ad Col. v. 18.
Platonists, and other Learned Heathens, will answer for themselves, and the
Rabbis (as they are cited at large by the learned Intell. Gust. p. 468, 469.
Cudworth) for both Jews and Gentiles, that they were always so far from
thinking by such worship to derogate any thing from the Honor of the Lord
Jehovah, whom (though under different Names) they all equally acknowledge to be
the Common Father of Gods and Men, that they did verily believe he was highly
pleased at that sort of Worship, which they gave these his Extraordinary
Ministers; the Honor redounding chiefly to himself that made them; and also
that he accepted their Humility, who duly sensible of their own Vileness and
Unworthiness, dared not to approach his awful Majesty without the Introduction
of such mighty Favorites, such Beloved Mediators. And yet (notwithstanding
these so specious Pretenses) our Romans 1.
Apostle expressly declares of the Gentiles, that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God; but were therefore vain in their Imaginations,
because they worshipped the Creatures, though not as so many Supreme, Independent
Beings; but only as Mediators of Intercession, (...). Besides, the Creator, and
the Prophets, continually bait the Jewish Church for these things, with the
soul and odious Name of Whore, Prostitute Whore, and Abominable Harlot. So that
you see, it is the peculiar Honor, the incommunicable Prerogative of the Son of
God (as the Learned Orig. cont. Cells. l. 5. p. 233. and l. 8. p. 382.384.395.
Father peremptorily and frequently inculcates) to be our Mediator, to receive
our Devotions, and to intercede for us at the Right hand of the Father; Prayer
then shall be made only unto him, and daily shall he be praised. He is the way,
the Truth and the Life, and no man can come unto the Father but by Him. As in
the Earthly Tabernacle the High Priest only entered into the most Holy Place
beyond the Veil, there to be an Agent with God for the People; so our only
High Priest, the Blessed Jesus has therefore by his own blood entered into the
Holy of Holies, the Heavenly Tabernacle, that there he may appear in the
Presence of God for us. He is that Angel with the golden Censer, who offers the
Incense, the Prayers of the Saints, upon the golden Altar before the Throne;
that Angel of the Presence, that Messenger of the Covenant, who is able to save
them to the uttermost that come unto God by him. Though therefore there be (as
the Learned 1 Cor. 8.5.
Apostle observes) that are called Gods, yea (...), many Celestial and
Sovereign Gods, according to the Vid. Jamblich. de Mist. Egypt. sect. 5. c.
17. and M. Osyr. sub finem dissertationis primae.
Platonists, who never interest themselves in the Affairs of Mankind; and Many
subordinate and inferior Lords, or Demons, whose Office (as you have heard)
is to be Agents and Mediator between the Gods and Men; Yet shall no Man spoil
me through this absurd Philosophy, and vain Deceit, which is only after the
Tradition of Men, after the weak and beggarly Rudiments of the World, and not
after Christ. For to us Christians, says the same 1 Cor. 8.6. and 1 Timothy 2.5.
Apostle, there is but one (sovereign) God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and
but one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. This Himself
confirms in that Dialogue between Him and the Angels, recorded by the Prophet.
Who is this, say they in Rapture and Amazement, that comes from Edom, Isa. 63.
with died garments from Bozrah? This, that is glorious in his Apparel,
traveling in the Greatness of his Strength? I, that speak in Righteousness,
answers our Lord, Mighty to save. But wherefore, they humbly ask again, art
thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treads in the
wine-fat? I have trodden the wine press alone, says our Lord, and of the People
there was none with me. I alone am mighty to save, and besides me there is no
Savior. Good luck then have thou with thine Honor, O Lord; Ride on, because
of the Word of Truth, of Meekness, and of Righteousness, and thy Right Hand
shall teach thee terrible things. Terrible things indeed for the Kings Enemies,
who would have other Lords besides Thee to rule over them. But gracious and
comfortable things for thy Servants, the Sheep of thy Pasture, who know thy
Voice, and therefore come to thee, who alone can give Ease to our Troubled
Spirits, being that Lamb of God, which take away the Sins of the whole World.
And so I come to the third thing observable in the Text, viz. the Persons
invited, who are All Penitent Sinners in general; All ye that labor and are
heavy laden. All ye that sigh, and groan, and are bowed down, and ready to sink
under the grievous burden of your sins.

3. There is no Person, no Time, no Rank or Quality whatsoever, that is
excepted. God would have all Men come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and be
saved, says the 1 Timothy 2.4.
Apostle; there is the Universality of the Persons: And the Time, the Ezekiel.
18.27.
Prophet tells us, is as universal; it is not now and then only; but, whenever
a wicked man turns away from the wickedness that he has committed, and does
that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive. Accordingly we
find God, in the 1st of Isa. calling to all Sinners in general, without any
Distinction of Circumstances, Ages, or Conditions, to come, and be reconciled
to him. Wash ye, make ye clean, says he, put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well; and then, though neither
the Outgoings of the Morning, nor of the Evening, have praised me; but from
the Height of your Youth to the Declensions of Old Age, you have been taken,
and led Captive by your Sins at their will, I will do them all away: Though they
be as Scarlet, they shall be white like Snow; though they be red like Crimson,
they shall be as wool. And again, in the third of Jeremiah, he with Infinite
Tenderness and Affection courts his People to come to him, though they had most
frequently revolted, and infinitely offended his Divine Majesty. They say if a
Man put away his Wife, and she be joined to another Man, she shall not return
to her former Husband any more: But thou have played the harlot with many
Lovers, yet return again to me, says the Lord. Thus Absolute and Universal are
the Promises and Invitations God makes to Sinners. Thus solemnly and
pathetically does he declare (as you saw more at large in my First General
Head) his Good Will toward them; that he desires not the death of any of them
all; but had rather they would every one of them, from the Least to the
Greatest, turn from their evil ways, and Live.

And yet we meet with some Persons in the World, whose Ears are entirely
stopped against this gracious and ravishing Voice of the Heavenly Charmer. The
Suggestions of Satan, or the Unhappiness of an ill Constitution of Body, or the
unwarrantable Assertions of some ill-natured, surly and melancholy
Pseudo-Prophets, or possibly all these three together, have plunged their
tender Spirits in the profoundest Depth of Amazement and Despair. They think
they have committed a Sin unto Death, the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and
therefore that Salvation belongs not to them; but that, though at present in
different Mansions, they are reserved, as well as the Devils, for Everlasting
Chains of Darkness at the Judgment of the Great Day. The Case of these Persons
is sad and lamentable, and such as calls for our Prayers, our Sorrow, and our
utmost Assistance. And indeed for their Sakes I first made Choice of my Text,
though the second thing observable in it has hitherto interrupted my Prosecution
of this Matter. Have Patience therefore now, I pray, whilst for the Ease of
such afflicted Souls, and to prevent (through God's Blessing) such dangerous
Mistakes in others, I insist upon this Point.

Now the Sin against the Holy Ghost is generally thought to be irremissible,
and our Savior's Words seem to assert as much. All manner of Sin and
Blasphemy, Matt. 12.31, 32.
says he, shall be forgiven unto Men: but Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost
shall not be forgiven unto Men. And whosoever speaks a word against the son
of Man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost
it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to
come. And again in Chap. 3. v. 28, 29.
St. Mark, Verily I say unto you, All Sins shall be forgiven unto the Sons of
Men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme, but he that shall
blaspheme against the Holy Ghost has never forgiveness (...), but is obnoxious
to the Sentence of Eternal Damnation. And yet S. Chrysostom among the Ancients,
and In Matt. 12.
Maldonat, In Matt. 12.
Grotius, In Matt. 12.
Hammond, and Great Exampl. page 201.
Tailor amongst the Moderns, are so charitable, as to think, that this
Expression, shall not be forgiven, is to be Understood with a Qualification;
Impossibility in Scripture sometimes denoting no more, than an extreme
Difficulty. Thus our Lord expressly Mark 10.
declares, that it is easier for a camel to go through the Eye of a Needle,
(which is absolutely impossible) than for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom
of God. Yet he means not by this Assertion utterly to exclude all Rich Men from
the Hopes of Heaven; but only signifies to us, that it is a very hard and
difficult matter for them that trust in Riches, saying to Gold, Thou art our
Hope, and to the fine Gold, Thou art our Confidence, ever to undertake the
severer Discipline of the Gospel here, and consequently to be made Partakers of
his Glory in the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter. How hard is it, says he to his
astonished Disciples, for them that trust in Riches, to enter into the Kingdom
of God? In like manner, (say these Learned Men) when he positively asserts,
that all Sins and Blasphemies whatsoever shall be forgiven unto Men, but that
the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, he means not,
that it is absolutely impossible it should ever be forgiven; but only, that it
shall not be forgiven so easily, but more hardly, and with greater Difficulty,
than any other Sin or Blasphemy whatsoever, Non utique quod remitti non possit,
as the forecited Jesuit; not that it cannot he forgiven at all; but because
they who commit it, nullam peccati sui excusationem habent, are utterly
destitute of all Apologies and Excuses, and therefore are more unpardonable
than other Men.

I confess, I can determine nothing in this matter, whether this Sin be
irremissible or not; I can only answer with the humble Prophet, Lord, thou
know. God's gracious dealing indeed with David after his Adultery and
Murder, with Peter after his Denial of his Master, with Paul after his
persecuting the Church, and with a thousand other Sinners of the same
Magnitude, obliges me to believe, that there is no Sin or Blasphemy whatsoever
which is irremissible in respect of God; and that therefore if the Sin against
the Holy Ghost be indeed irremissible, it is only because it utterly excludes
those who commit it, from Repentance.

But tho I dare not be positive as to the Consequences of this Sin; yet (what
is a greater matter of Comfort to despairing Souls) I may venture to affirm,
that, as to the Nature of it, it is such as cannot be committed by any
Christian. If you ask me what it is, I briefly answer, That it is a Total
Apostasy, and Final Falling away from Christ and his Gospel. I say, a Total
Apostasy, and Final Falling away. And yet not every Total Apostasy, and Final
Falling away neither; For it is possible a poor, ignorant Soul may be so
decluded, as to Apostatize from Christianity to Mahometism, or some other
Imposture, and yet still believe Christ to have been a very good Man. But this
is such a Total Apostasy, such a Final Falling away from Christ and his
Gospel, as is attended with the greatest Virulency, Rancour, Spite and Malice
against both as can be imagined. When a Man not only utterly renounceth the
known Truth, but also does hate and abhor Christ and his Word; does revile and
spit upon him; does with the Scribes and Pharisees crucify and mock him; and
is so far from acknowledging him to be the Son of God, or indeed so much as a
good Man, who did all his Miracles by the Power and Assistance of the Holy
Spirit, that he most maliciously and despitefully, after full Conviction of his
Conscience to the contrary, pronounces him the greatest of Cheats, a most
grand Impostor, the Eldest Son of the Devil, who acted only by Commission from
Beelzebub, the Prince of the Devils.

This I take to be plain from our Savior's own Words, when he mentioned this
Sin. There was brought unto him, says the Evangelist, one possessed with a
Devil, blind and dumb: Matt. 12. compared with Mark 3.
and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spoke and saw. The
People, amazed at this great Miracle, gave Glory to him; confessing him to be,
in very deed, the promised Messiah, the Son of David. But the Scribes and
Pharisees, moved with envy, though they knew the Miracle to be the Effect only of
the Spirit of God; yet, to lessen his Reputation among the People, declared,
against their own Consciences, that 'twas not by any Divine Authority; but
purely by Virtue of a black Confederacy with the Infernal Powers, that he did
these things. This Fellow, say they with unparalleled Rancour and Disdain,
does not cast out Devils, but by Beelzebub, the Prince of the Devils: Upon this
says our Lord, All Sins shall be forgiven unto the Sons of Men, and Blasphemies
wherewith soever they shall blaspheme; but he that shall blaspheme against the
Holy Ghost has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation: And
then is added the Reason of this Assertion (which plainly shows what the Sin
against the Holy Ghost is) in these words, because they said, He has an
unclean Spirit.

Now then (My Brother) do thou believe and confess, That our Lord Jesus
Christ is, in very deed, the Eternal Son of the Living God? That when he was
here upon Earth he acted only by Commission from his Father; and that the
Mighty Works which did show forth themselves in him, were done by the Virtue
and Power of his own most Holy Spirit? If thou do, then be of good cheer,
that have not yet, and as long as thou continuest in this Faith, thou can not
commit this Sin against the Holy Ghost. Nothing now, but thy Impenitence, can
separate between thee and thy God. Thou have his own word for it: All sins and
blaspemies whatsoever shall he forgiven unto the Sons of Men; though perhaps this
Sin against the Holy Ghost (which thou have not committed) shall never be
forgiven. Break off thy sins then by Repentance, and they shall all be forgiven
thee, Depart out of Babylon, and come to Christ; and thou shall be refreshed,
and find Rest unto thy Soul. And so I come to the Last Thing observable in my
Text, viz. the Benefit of accepting our Lord's Invitation; I will give you Rest.

4. What joyful Tidings are these? What Ease is here to wounded Consciences?
what Comfort to Despairing Sinners? Cant. 2. v. 11, 12.
Lo the Winter (that dismal time, wherein Ignorance, Error, and Superstition,
like Floods in the Winter-season, overflowed the earth) is past, and the Rain
(those cloudy, uncomfortable days, wherein we could see, and enjoy but little
of him) is over and gone: All the tokens of a new World appear, and invite us
to come and partake of heavenly joys and pleasures. The Flowers appear on the
Earth; All manner of Blessings spring up in abundance, now the Sun of
Righteousness is risen upon us. The time of the singing of Birds is come, and
the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land: The heavenly Host sing for Joy,
and excite all Mankind to praise their Savior with joyful Lips. Is then thy
Soul full of Sorrow and Heaviness, and drooping under the Apprehensions of
thine approaching Judgment. Does thy Conscience tell thee, That Hell is thy
Portion; and thine Inheritance in the Land where Death reigns for ever and
ever? Is this, I say, thy case? Why, do not any longer despond, but throw away
thy Garments, thy Sins, that encompass thee about, and rise up, for thy Savior
calls thee. Behold, the Wise Men rise up at his Call; they acknowledge his
gracious Summons, and hastily come away from a far Country; and therefore are
kindly received, though their Vid. Justin. M. Dial. cum Tryph. Jud. page 304. and
Orig. cont. Cells. lib. 1. p. 45, 46.
Witchcrafts and Idolatries are so many. The humble Shepherd likewise obey the
Heavenly Vision; as soon as the Angels are gone to Heaven, they leave their
feeble Flocks, and tender Lambs, and therefore are graciously admitted to the
Presence and Adoration of the great Shepherd of their Souls. The Star out of
Jacob is risen upon thee also, and and if thou will follow its Light, 'twill
conduct thee to the Mansions of thy Lord and Savior. The Glory of the Lord too
is ready to shine round about thee; the abundant Visitations of his Grace from
Heaven will (if thou art willing) dispell the uncomfortable Darkness of the
Night; all the black Clouds of Melancholy and Despair, and enlighten thy
Understanding, and actuate all thy Faculties, till at length they happily bring
thee to Bethlehem, to the Presence and Embraces of the Holy Jesus. Come then, I
say, thou sinking, despairing Soul, unto thy Savior. Come to him, by Faith and
Repentance, and he will by no means cast thee off. Come to him, and he will
most tenderly receive thee. The Bowels of his Compassion will immediatel^ move
toward thee; and he will gently take thee by the hand, and guide thee into the
way, that leads to Sion. 'Twas his Meat and Drink, when he lived amongst us to
proclaim Liberty to the Captives; to loosen those, whom Sin and Satan has
bound; to bind up the Brokenhearted; to give Medicines to heal their
Sicknesses, and to preach the acceptable Year of the Lord. And though now he is
gone to Heaven; yet he has not left thee comfortless. He is abstracted from
thee as to his bodily Presence; but, his Divine Spirit and Grace still attend
and wait upon thee. Not all the Glories of Heaven, the Allelujahs of the
Angels, and the triumphant Songs of the Saints, can make him forget thee; but
the same Tenderness of Spirit, the same Mercy and Loving Kindness which he had
upon Earth he now in the midst of all his Glories, still retains for thee in
Heaven. We have not such an High Priest, says the Apostle, as cannot be touched
with the feeling of our Infirmities; but who having been tempted himself, is
able to succor them that are tempted. He sits in those glorious Mansions at
the Right hand of the Father, to make intercession for us. His Merits
continually plead the Pardon of Repenting Sinners at the Throne of Grace, and
he is able and willing to save all them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him: Nay, it is his Glory, his Joy, and Crown, to forgive Sins; It Is the reward
of his Sufferings, the Recompense of his Agonies, to Save Sinners. This he so
ardently desires and thirsts after, that he breaks not the bruised Reed, nor
quenches the smoking Flax; but still more and more softens and mollifies the
relenting Heart, 'till he sends forth Judgment unto Victory. He cannot be
always chiding, neither keeps he is Anger for ever; but though he cause Grief,
yet will he have Compassion, according to the multitude of his Mercies. Thus
when Ephraim turned and repented; when he smote upon his Thigh, and was ashamed
for the reproachful Sins of his Youth; how tenderly, how affectionately, does
his Maker deal with him? Is Ephraim Jer. 31.20.
says he, my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Child? that is Ephraim is indeed my
dear Son, he is a most pleasant Child; for since I spoke against him, I do
earnestly remember him still therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will
surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. In the same manner when Zion,
deeply sensible of her Sins grew disconsolate, and said within her self, The
Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me; he earnestly protests to
her, that his Heart was more tender of her than the Heart of any Parent could
be of the Child of Infant of her own Womb. Can a Woman, Isa. 49.15.
says she, forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the
Son of her Womb? Tea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold, I
have graven thee upon the palms of my hands. Nay farther is so pleased at the
Return of a Sinner that he assures us, there is Joy in Heaven over such a One;
yea more Joy among the Angels of God over one Sinner that repents, than over
Ninety and Nine Just Persons, who need no Repentance. When a lost Sheep of the
house of Israel is found; when it is rescued out of the Jaws of Death and of
Hell; Snatched out of the Paw of that roaring Lion who continually goes about
seeking whom he may devour, and safely brought back into the Fold of the great
Shepherd the Lord Christ Jesus; These Blessed Spirits are no sooner acquainted
with it, but they take into their hands their instruments of Music, and in the
highest Strains of Seraphick Joy contulate his Return. The Valleys (to speak
after the Excellent Bishop Tailor) are no sooner filled with Benediction, and a
fruitful Shower from Heaven; but these Mountains leap with Joy, even the Joy of
Conquerours. This he has sensibly represented to us in the Parable of the
Prodigal. Luke 15.
He had most grievously transgressed his Duty in every point, both to God and
Man. When his indulgent Father, upon his Request, had kindly Divided his Living
between Him and his Brother; expecting, you may be sure, no small Comfort and
Satisfaction from the joint Welfare and Happiness of his dutiful Children; this
ungrateful and inhumane Wretch not many days after gathers all together, and
gets him away into a far Country, where forgetful of his most tender Father,
forgetful of his sorrowful Relations, forgetful of his most gracious God, he
lies wallowing in the Mire of all Fifthiness and Debauchery, mispending his
precious hours in the Conversation and Caresses of shameless, prostitute,
abominable Strumpets, and wasting all his Substance in a most profligate,
brutish, and riotous way of living. Yet no sooner does his Father spy him
returning home, with a penitent Confession in his Mouth; but (notwithstanding
his great Unworthiness) his Bowels are moved toward him: yea, he becomes
impatient, cannot expect his near Approach; but his Joy and Affection give him
wings. Whilst he is yet a great way off, he runs, he flies to meet him; has not
Patience to stay for his humble Confession; but immediately, in an Ecstasy of
Joy, falls upon his Neck, forgives and kisses him. The best Robe, the fattest
Calf, Music, and Dancing, all the Expressions of the most solemn and
extraordinary Joy are hardly enough to entertain him.

Now then (my disconsolate Brother) who would not rather thus cause Joy to the
Blessed Choires above by a sincere and hearty Repentance, than by a Sullen,
unwarrantable Despair please the professed Enemies of God and Man, the Spirits
of Darkness? Who (I say) would not rather, by a timely Repentance, be the
occasion of a Jubilation and Festival both in Heaven and Earth; than by causing
Grief in both delight the sullen and destructive Powers of the Kingdom of
Darkness? A Jubilation, I say in Heaven and Earth too: For see, thy Mother the
Church, is highly concerned for thee, she mourns and laments thy unhappy State,
and daily offers up Prayers and Tears for thy Recovery. She longs to see thee
come boldly into her Courts, there with all her faithful Sons and Daughters to
worship the God of our Joy and Gladness; and to sing merrily, and to make a
cheerful noise unto the God of Jacob. Let then the Prayers and Tears of thy
afflicted Mother; let the Hearty Concern, and passionate Wishes of the kind
Spirits above, let the most gracious and tender Promises of Pardon which Truth
it self has made thee, work thee out of this groundless, this unaccountable
State of Despondency. Thou must not, thou can not surely, after all this,
despair. Thy Savior tells thee, thou art not thine own; but His. He made thee
at first, when thou wast nothing; and when thou wast lost and worse than
nothing, He Redeemed thee too with his own blood, and most solemnly swears he
would not have thee perish. Will thou not then believe Him, who has done so
many and great things for thee? Will thou not believe Him, who could even bleed
and die for thee? If any Man of known Integrity had given thee his word thou
would not Scruple to believe him: How then can thou thus affront thy God
who cannot lie, by thy Infidelity; when he not only says, but also swears, he
would have thee live? O! do not, do not thus evacuate all the gracious Methods
the Heavenly Father is pleased to use for thy Recovery; Do not thus foolishly
exclude thy self from Happiness, when God does not exclude thee. Alas! Thy God
is Omnipotent, and can most easily perform all his Promises, and therefore he
needs not deceive thee. He is good and gracious, and therefore he will not
deceive thee. With him is no Variableness, or shadow of Turning; but he is the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever, and therefore he cannot deceive thee.
Obey then his gracious Call; come to him; throw thy self into his Arms;
prostrate thy self with all due Humility at his feet; offer to him thy broken
and contrite Spirit; beg him to accept thee, who never yet refused any, and he
will most gladly receive thee. Though thou art never so heavy-laden, he will give
thee Rest. He will ease thee of thy burden; he will pardon thy sins; he will
quiet thy. Conscience here, and give thee everlasting Rest and Happiness
hereafter.

Which God, of his infinite Mercy, Grant unto us all, through the Merits and
Mediation of Jesus the Beloved. To whom, etc. A DISCOURSE Upon the Fifth of
November.
PSALM. cxviii. Ver. 24. This is the Day which the Lord has made, we will
rejoice and be glad in it.


THIS Psalm is supposed to have been compiled by the Royal Psalmist, when,
after a long Series of Troubles and Persecutions, he was at last both safely
placed upon the Throne of Israel and Judah, and had also subdued the proud
Lords of the Philistines, together with their Allies and Confederates; 2 Samuel 5.
who, in hopes to have crushed him before he grew too powerful, had rallied
their Forces, and invaded the Land. He had long grappled with the indefatigable
Malice of his envious, blood-thirsty Master; long encountered the fierce
Oppositions of Enemies abroad, but especially of Adversaries at home, some of
which (as he complains Psalm 64.) were Men of such sneaking, slavish, mercenary
Souls; of such beggarly, disingenuous, unmanly Spirits, that not daring to
appear in the Gallantry of open Enemies, they betook themselves to the little
Arts of skulking Revenge; endeavoring by all the sinister methods of clancular
hatred, by a long train of secret Calumnies and Reproaches, to blow up his
reputation, and at one Blast to deprive him both of Life and Crown. But now at
length had the good hand of Providence put a joyful period to all these
Troubles and Afflictions, and made him glad with the Joy of his Countenance.
His haughty Neighbors humbly pay him Homage, and he tramples upon the Necks of
his Domestic Adversaries. The Greatness of his Dangers endear him to the
People, who from his so many miraculous Escapes, conclude him the Peculiar
Favorite of Heaven and therefore receive him with the hearty and joyous
Reiterations of Acclamations and Hosanna's. Wherefore in a due sense of these
great blessings, he is not contented to offer only his own Sacrifice of Praise,
but likewise in the beginning of this Psalm excites all the people with their
Doxologies and Allelujahs to assist and join with him in these his grateful
acknowledgments. O give thanks unto the Lord, says he, for he is gracious
because his mercy endures for ever. Let all the Tribes of Israel, let the
Priests and Levites; yea let All them, that fear the Lord, confess, that he is
gracious, and that his mercy endures for ever. You need not recount the
Wonders he showed for your Forefathers in the Land of Egypt nor recall to your
Memories how after a Succession of Mracles for forty years in the Wilderness,
he at last with a mighty Hand and stretch'd-out Arm drove out the Nations
before them, and gave them this pleasant Land for an Inheritance; Look only
upon me, and you will see a most lively Instance of his Mercy and Goodness. For
when mine Enemies swarmed about me like Bees, and as one Man, conspired with
all their Might and Cunning to throw me down from the Throne to which I was
advanced; when I was invaded by vast Multitudes from abroad, and undermined by
the secret Treacheries and Machinations of more dangerous Adversaries at home;
even then, when there seemed no possible way for my Escape, was the Lord my
Helper, and is become my Strength, and my Song, and my mighty Salvation. So
that the Stone which these unskilful Builders would have rejected, as unfit to
be used, is, you see, become the head-stone in the Corner, whilst
(notwithstanding all the Attempts of mine Enemies to the contrary) I sit this
day safely on my Fathers Seat. Now then, it ever, present your selves joyful
before the Lord the King, and come with me into his Courts in the voice of
Thanksgiving; for This, of all others, is the Day which the Lord himself has
made; we will therefore rejoice and be glad in it.

Thus you have, in short, the occasion of these Words, which I shall no longer
insist upon, as they respect the circumstances of David; but consider them
wholly, as they reflect Luster upon the Solemnization of this present Day. A
Day, which, if any, may most properly be said to be made by the Lord, since it
bears the liveliest Characters and Impresses of his Power and knowledge, of his
Wisdom and Goodness, and of all those other glorious Attributes whereby we are
assured, that he governs the World. For trace the Histories of ancient Times,
turn over all Authors both Sacred and Profane, and (the Day of our Spiritual
Redemption excepted) produce me a Day like This, so memorable in its
Circumstances, so glorious in its Issue, and so unparalled in its
Consummation. Of all those Deliverances God in past Ages vouchsafed his Church,
methinks none ever amounted to the Wonder of this Day, when I consider;

1. The black and dismal nature of the Design, which was this Day framed
against us. And,

2. The Strangeness and Unexpectedness of our Deliverance from it.

1. I say, It will appear, that of all those Deliverances God in past Ages
vouchsafed his Church, none ever amounted to the Wonder of this Day; and
consequently, that this Day, of all others, may most properly be said to be
made by the Lord, if we consider the black and dismal nature of the Design,
which was this Day framed against us. As the Heavens rejoiced and the Earth was
glad to see the glory of the Lord in the uncorrupted Light of the Gospel after
a long Night of Ignorance and Superstition arise in Brightness upon us; so
those restless Spirits, who always bore Evil-will to our Zion, as though they
had received a second Downfall, in their undiscerned Habitations vented
themselves in nothing, but Lamentations, and Mournings, and Woe. They saw the
unparalleled Beauty of her Countenance, which, though long masked and clouded
with the Veil of Widowhood, did now at length break forth in such Splendor and
Brightness, that the Gentiles were coming to her Light, and Kings to rejoice in
the Brightness of her Rising. That therefore in this holy Mountain there was no
Den for such Beasts of Prey, but that they must either forego their beloved
Dainties, and peaceably lie down in the Pastures with the Lamb, or for their
own Security betake themselves to harder seeding in the barren Recesses of the
Wilderness. Wherefore, impatient both of Restraint and Exile, they
incontinently breathed out our Destruction; and to support and underprop their
sinking Interest, at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners, endeavored to
overturn the Foundations of our Felicity; sometimes, with the factious Son of
Sheba, they blowed the Trumpet of Rebellion, disclaimed their Right in David,
and endeavored by good Words, and fair Speeches, to persuade others also, that
they likewise had no Inheritance in the King. Sometimes, on the contrary, by
the terrible Assaults of Anathema's, Curses, and Excommunications, they
labored to scare and fright us into a Compliance. But when they found, that
(notwithstanding all their Craft and Subtlety) their Designs were still
defeated and unravelled, and all their most cunningly contrived Enterprises
dwindled into continual Disappointments; that their ravenous, woolfish Nature,
though never so close covered with Sheeps-cloathing, was always discovered, and
that none therefore dared to come in to their Standard, nor, though led on by the
Infallible Hero himself, to enter the Field against the Lords Anointed; so that
neither their Armado's from Spain, nor false Witnesses from St. Omers, nor all
those dreadful Thunderings and Lightnings from Rome could prevail any thing at
all; but that the Virgin, the Daughter of Zion, despised them and laughed them
to scorn, the Daughter of Jerusalem still shook her head at them; as Men even
encouraged by Disappointments, and emboldned by Repulses they start anew, and
rather than be for ever frustrated, are contented to divest themselves utterly
of their Humanity, and to embark into so barbarous, so savage a Design, as will
make the ears of all Posterity to tingle. Many Waters cannot quench their
burning Rage, neither can the Floods, how deep soever, drown their Fury; but
they resolve to tear in pieces the more excellent Prey, and one way or other to
take their Pastime in Rivers of Royal Blood. Flectere fi nequeunt Superos --
Since Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men, are against them they descend into the
Regions of Darkness and Obscurity, as if they designed to ask Counsel of the
Powers of Darkness. And indeed whoever accurately contemplates the nature of
this cursed Design, must needs acknowledge it to bear all the marks of a
hellish, diabolical Offspring. For where, but in the dismal Regions of
everlasting Malice and Cruelty, could be hatched so barbarous, so villainous a
Conspiracy? A Conspiracy so black and detestable, so hideous in its
Circumstances, so fatal in its Consequences, that it is hardly possible to
imagine, that it could have been invented by Man, unless (what the Jews of old
thought of their Daemoniacks) they had really been converted into the Nature
and Substance of fierce, implacable, destructive Demons. A Conspiracy, which,
if it had taken effect, would have utterly extinguished the Light of our
Israel, and overspread the Nation again with thick Darkness of Ignorance and
Superstition: which would have murdered the Lord's Anointed, and accomplished
the savage Tyrants most execrable Wish; at one Blow cutting off the Head even
of three Kingdoms: nay in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, have entirely
destroyed both Root and Branch, King and Parliment, Prince and People, Peers
and Prelates, Lords and Commons. A Conspiracy, that would have involved us all
in Blood, exposed our Wives and Children to the merciless Fury of our Enemies,
and enslaved our Lives and Fortunes, Souls and Bodies, to the imperious and
domineering Lords of monopolizing Rome. Lastly, A Conspiracy it was whose
teeming Womb was ready to bring forth the ghastly Issue of Blood and Fire, and
pillars of smoke, which would either have rendered our beautiful Cities a
Wilderness, or (which is worse) an Habitation of Dragons, and made Jerusalem a
Desolation. Alas! These unrighteous and cruel Men did not design only to shake
off the Leaves, or to lop off the Branches of this fruitful Vine, but entirely,
to pluck her up by the Roots Ps. 137.7.
(...), Lay her wast, and down with her even to the ground, was all the Cry. So
that not only our Land would have mourned for the Loss of her Gracious
Sovereign, our Cities of their wise and prudent Governors, our Countries of
their vigilant and powerful Guardians (which alone would have rendered us the
Wonder and Astonishment of Men and Angels) but (which is yet worse, if any
thing can be worse) our pure and undefiled Religion had also been lost in the
general Devastation. Those insatiable flames, which had devoured her noble
Patrons, would likewise unmercifully have preyed upon her drooping Vitals, till
they had rarisy'd her Substance into a mere empty Shadow, and changed the
Spirituality of her Worship into external, cumbersome, impertinent Ceremonies.
In short, Whatever the very Quintessence and Elixir of all villainy and
Barbarity, of Superstition and Idolatry, of Mischief and Immanity could have
imposed upon us, must (unless the Almighty hand of God would have wrought a
Miracle for their Rescue and Deliverance) have been endured by our Posterity
throughout all Generations; so that this Church, (I say) which is now the
Perfection of Beauty, and the Joy of the wholly Earth, had unhappily became the
very Scorn and Derision of her Enemies, and their Song all the day long. But
(Blessed be God) our Soul is escaped, as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler,
the Snare is broken, the Design blasted, the Plot unravelled, and we thereby
most wonderfully delivered. Which brings me to my Second Particular, which is
to show, that it will likewise appear, that of all the Deliverances God in past
Ages vouchsafed his Church, none ever amounted to the Wonder of this Day; and
consequently, that this Day, of all others, may most properly be said to be
made by the Lord, if we consider the Strangeness and Unexpectedness of our
Deliverance.

2. Many and glorious (I confess) have been the Deliverances which God in past
Ages has vouchsafed his Church. He has often deseated the Designs, infatuated
the Counsels, and brought to naught the Devices even of her most powerful
Enemies, upholding her, when just sinking by the hand of his Providence. But
yet when I seriously reflect upon the dismal Circumstances of this Day's
Design, how secret the Conspiracy, how little Prospect of a discovery, and how
ready the Execution, I am forced to acknowledge, that This, of all others, was
the Lord's own doing and that it is altogether mavelous in our eyes. The
Church of God indeed, in the Persian Monarchs time, was destined to Ruin, and
the black Decree sealed with the King's own Signet. But then (you know) the
Design was divulged, and the Day of Slaughter deferred, so that the Jews had
time to contrive means for their Preservation, which accordingly we find they
did, and turned the fatal Stroke upon the Heads of their Enemies. The Primitive
Christians likewise were often persecuted and devoted to Death. But then they
always, with the Prophet, foresaw the Cloud that threatened them. The Emperors
were Heathens, and so they could expect no better Usage from them, and
consequently had warning to provide for themselves. But now the case of our
Church was quite different at this time. Her Security was her greatest Danger,
and her implicit Faith like to have ended in her Ruin. No Storm threatened from
abroad, neither did any Cloud seem to gather over our Heads at home; but our
Air was as serene and quiet, as free from Storms and Tempests, as the
superlunary Regions. The Mercy of our peaceful Solomon, like the Sunbeams, did
(as we shall see more at large by and by) so plentifully diffuse its kind Heat
and Warmth to all sorts of Men, that 'twas generally thought, he had melted the
obdurate and inflexible Hearts of his most virulent enemies into reciprocal
Tenderness, Loyalty and Obedience. But, alas! the Event most truly
Demonstrated, that some of his best Subjects did not more frequently than
justly tell him, that he was merciful even to a Fault; and kind, though it were
to his own and the Kingdoms Danger. For when by these Means we were too easily
persuaded, that our Enemies were reconciled to us, and become our Friends, so
that we should never see the Sons of the Giants returning to defy our Israel
any more; and upon this account not only intoxicated our selves with present
pleasure, but entertained our thoughts likewise with the fair, delightful
Prospect of our future Felicity. Even then I say, when we thought our selves
most secure, was the Enemy within our Walls, and the fatal Sword hanging over
our Heads. The Snares of Death encompassed us about, and our Souls were even
hard at Deaths door. Strangers sought after our Life, and we knew it not; yea
they had caught us in their Nets; yet we perceived it not. There was indeed in
the Kingdom a confused Notion, and obscure Knowledge of some great thing, that
was suddenly to be done; But then, as King K. James' Works, page 291.
James assures us, 'twas only amongst the Papists, who likewise, for secrecies
sake, were not to be entrusted with the Particulars. But that the King and
Parliament were to be destroyed, and that by the quick dispatch of Gunpowder.
That the Enemy had so long sat brooding upon this wicked Design, that the
direful Offspring was almost come to the birth: This was a thing of that
nature, that no Protestant either feared, or so much as suspected it. 'Twas
locked up only in the Breasts of the Conspirators, who likewise, for the
greater Concealment, had bound themselves by an Oath of Secrecy; yea, under the
seal of the Holy Sacrament, not to reveal it directly not indirectly to any
without common Consent. So that as to all external Helps, our Case was as
desperate as possibly it could be, and we were even, like Sheep, bound ready
for the Slaughter.

Now then, did our own Strength or Policy bring Salvation to us, or our own
Right-arm obtain us this Victory? Did the wisdom of the Kings Counselors, the
Care of his Magistrates, the Subsidies of his Friends, the Fidelity of his
Servants, or the Courage of his Soldiers work for him this Deliverance? No. We
only stood, still and saw the Salvation of God. Though our hands were tied, God
fought from Heaven for us, the Stars in their courses fought against our
Enemies. When the Harvest was come, and they were just putting in the Sickle,
he turned the Edge against themselves, and cut them down in their Wickedness.
He so infatuated their Counsels, and turned their deepest Policy like
Achitophel's into so great Foolishness, that when they might securely have let
in the Floods upon us, they turned the Stream directly against themselves, so
that the Waters went over their own Soul: Had they but gone on with the same
Privacy they began, and not suffered the direful Project to wander beyond the
Limits of their own Breasts it had undoubtedly been crowned with wished for
Success. But as though the mighty Secret was too big to be long confined within
so narrow a Compass, and, like a boisterous Vapor shut up within a cloud,
strugled and was restless, 'till it tore its way through; of their own accord,
when no Man either desired, or compelled them, they disclosed their own
Wickedness; for by a Letter from one of them to the Lord Mounteagle (which yet
was wrapped up in Terms as dark and aenigmatical as the Egyptian Hieroglyphics
(was the whole Matter most happily discovered, and this horrid Design, which
had long been contriving, and was now just brought to a head, in a moment most
miraculously blasted and confounded.

Thus did He alone, who stilleth the raging of the Sea, curbing the Insolence
of its proud Waves only with Reins of sand stem likewise the impetuous Torrent
of our Enemies Fury, and set it its Bounds, which it could not pass. Thus did
He (I say) alone, who silenceth the raging Tempest, and commands the fighting
Winds to leave off their Contentions, snatching the Mariner, when at his Wits
end, from the devouring Jaws of the Deep, by the same Almighty Fiat still the
storm that was about us; after all its Rage and Fury, gently wafting us to the
Haven where we would be. Though we walked on still in Darkness, 'till the
Foundations of the earth were almost out of course, yet Hell was naked before
Him, and Destruction had no Covering. These black, obscure Chambers of Death
were as clear to him as the Light; and these gloomy Regions of inextinguishable
Malice as bright as the Noonday. He therefore laughed at their Attempts,
derided their Counsels, and only therefore suffered them to bring us into the
utmost Extremity, that when he should in due time deliver us, and we should
safely look back upon the Danger we had escaped, we might not possibly
communicate the Glory of our Preservation to any thing upon Earth, but be
forced to attribute it wholly and entirely to His Goodness who alone gives
Salvation unto Kings, and delivers his Servants from the hurtful Sword.

And thus does it appear, both from the black and dismal Nature of the Design,
which was this Day framed against us, and also from the Strangeness and
Unexpectedness of our Deliverance from that Design, that 'twas the Lord himself
who was on our side when Men rose up against us, and that we were delivered
from these Dangerous Waters, Zechar. 4.6.
as God speaks to Zerubbabel, not by Might, nor by Power, but by his Spirit
alone, which moved upon the Face of them, and that therefore upon all Accounts
we may say, This especially is the Day which the Lord has made, and
consequently that we ought to rejoice and to be glad in it. And so I come to
the duty contained in my Text, viz. the Obligation incumbent upon us of
rejoicing, and praising God for the Deliverances he vouchsafes us, implied in
these latter Words: We will rejoice and be glad in it.

Now I shall not encroach so much upon your Patience, as superslously to
enlarge upon the Obligation of this Duty, which I rejoice to find already
acknowledged. But since your Cheerfulness and Alacrity in its Performance has
left me nothing else to do, than to encourage and applaud you in so good a
Work, I shall only crave leave to propose two or three things to your
considerations, whereby, I humbly conceive, you may most properly discharge it.

1. Then. We cannot better express our Joy and Gratitude to God for the
transcendent Mercy of this Day, than by declaring our detestation and
Abhorrence of that Doctrine, which as though its Foundations were laid upon the
Traditions of Devils rather than of Men, countenanceth, nay, encourages Men in
such black, Antichristian undertakings. Of that Doctrine, I say, which, under
the venerable and sacred Veil of the best Religion in the World, authoriseth
its Professors to perpetrate such Villainies, as the Pagans themselves would
blush to have committed. Many indeed are the Outrages and Barbarities committed
by the Janissaries, and it is as ordinary for them amongst the Turks, as 'twas of
old for their Fellow-Praetorian bands amongst the Romans, to deprive their
Emperor of his Crown first, and then of his Life. But not to say, that these
are only single Persons, or at farthest but particular Orders of Men; the
things they commit will admit of Excuse and Extenuation. They never pretend to
do them upon the account of Religion, but purely for Politic Ends and the Good
of the State. Their Laurels fade and wither under the malignant Influence of
the present Governor, whose Fortune (like a direful Comet) threatens
Subversion to the Empire, wherefore in the Tempest of their Souls they set up
another in his place, whose happier Conduct, they hope, will repair the Ruins
they have suffered and settle the Greatness and Grandeur of the state upon a
sure, lasting, and immovable Basis. But now for a whole Sect of Men to be so
biggotted and infatuated, as to be even obliged by the Principles of their
Religion to dye their hands in the Blood of their Brethren; for Men of Reason,
Learning, and Conscience, to make it their Business to throw Kingdoms off their
Hinges, and to tumble them into a state of Anarchy and confusion: For
Christians even in cold blood to stab the sacred Persons of Princes, and
piously to Triumph in the Ruins of States and Nations. This when done, (and
This, you know, the Papists have often done) is enough to make the Sun once
more to draw in his Beams, and the Angels to veil their Faces in Abhorrence and
Detestation.

I know there are some, who have the Confidence to tell us, that this is not
the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, but the Presumptions only of some private
Persons. But not to reply, that it is at least the Tenet of the Jesuits, and the
concurrent Doctrine of all their Casuists: These objectors would do well to let
us know, what one solemn Declaration that Church ever made against it. Alas! It
was always so far from being discountenanced or exploded either by their Holy
Father himself or any General Council, that for six hundred Years at least it
has been, as it were the discriminating Mark of that communion from all others.
It has been adopted into their Laws both Ecclesiastical and Civil; and highly
approved and abetted by the Supreme Authority and Infallible Judgment of their
Popes and Councils. Else how came it to pass, that two of the Jesuits, which
were conscious of this Plot, upon their Arrival were made, one the Pope's
Penitentiary, the other a Confessor in St. Peter's at Rome? that Garnet's Name
as Appen. p. 150.
Widdrington witnesses, was inserted into the English Martyrology; and though he
confessed himself, that he died for Treason, and dehorted all others of his
Persuasion from such pernicious Practices, yet that his Bones were kept for
Relics, and his Image set over Altars, as that of a holy Martyr? In short,
It Is plain, that it is not spurious, but truly genuine, since it has been
abundantly confirmed by the general Practice of that Church, there being scarce
any Kingdom, or People, or Nation, where she has unhappily landed, but what
bears the most ample and indelible Characters of this Fundamental Article.
Witness the woeful and lamentable Stories of the Roman Inquisition in Spain, and
that brutish Slaughter of the innocent Waldenses in France, when (as it is
proved by our very Learned and Pious De Stat. and Success. Eccles. cap. 10.
Usher from their own Authors) they were, upon no other account whatever, but
purely for the sake of their Religion, butchered by these Bloodhounds in the
space of 36 Years to the Number of One hundred and four Thousand seven hundred
forty and Seven. Witness the frequent Attempts upon our Sovereign of Blessed
Memory, Queen Elizabeth, after Pius the Fifth had insolently thundered out his
Anathema's against her, and by a Bull fixed up by some Priests in London
pretended to absolve all her Subjects from their Fealty and Allegiance. Witness
that Unfortunate Prince, Henry III. of France, who within the Compass of this
last Century, was stabbed by one of his own Subjects, James Clement a Monk,
only for favoring the Protestant Religion. Which, though an Execrable,
Villainous, and Diabolical Act, was so far from being censured or condemned by
Sixtus Quintus then Pope, that his Holiness both approved, and also highly
extolled it in a long Consistory Oration, calling it an excellent, glorious and
memorable exploit, not achieved without the special Providence and Appointment
of the Great and Good God, and the Suggestion and Assistance of his most Holy
Spirit. Witness that grievous Massacre, which in our own memory, the Huguenots
suffered in France, which, though equalling at least the heat of any of the ten
famous Persecutions by the Heathen Emperors, was yet applauded by Innocent the
Eleventh as a thing pleasing unto God, a Sacrifice of sweet savor, which would
advance that bloody Tyrant to a very eminent Station in the Regions of
Immortality. 'Twould be endless to run through all the Butcheries they have
committed. No Design so horrible and bloody, no Attempt so mischievous and
treacherous, no Enterprise so base and cruel, but what you may find committed
by them under the sacred Name of Religion and Conscience. For Witness, lastly,
the black, unparalleled Undertaking of this Day, when against all the Laws of
God and Man, of Justice and Gratitude, of Humanity and Reason, one of the Best
of Kings and most Indulgent of Princes, was with the Queen and Prince at one
Thunder Clap to have been sent to Heaven.

One might reasonable expect to hear of some unusual Provocation, that raised
these Men's Spirits to such an incredible height of Immanity. But, alas! the
most enraged of them never seriously alleged any; and if they had, the very
Stones in the Wall would have found a Voice to have condemned them. For if
Mercy and Goodness if Kindness and Benevolence, if Paternal Care and Royal
Indulgence, have any Charms or Endearments, they all concentred in that
Excellent Prince they thought to have destroyed. Past Experience had richly
demonstrated, how impatiently these Bloodhounds thirsted after Royal Blood;
yet so gloriously did his Mercy triumph over his other Virtues, that he not
only winked at their Misdeeds, but gave them likewise free Access to his
Person, honored some of them with particular Dignities, and (as he declares
Page 253.
himself) so animated and encouraged them by his as much unexpected as
undeserved Favors, that they did directly expect, and assuredly promise
themselves Liberty of Conscience, and Equality with his other Subjects in all
things. And yet (as though we must first cease to be Men, before we can commence
Papists; and renounce both our Reason and Conscience, to become servants to his
Holiness) though under the benign Influence of his so happy Reign they bask'd
themselves in the pleasant Rivers of overflowing Felicity; though (I say) they
sat under his Shadow with great Delight, whilst his Banner over them was Love,
the poisonous Seeds of that pestilential Heresy, had (as appears from their
own Confessions) so infected, or rather quite choked the good Seed of Nature,
that (notwithstanding all the Obligations that Heaven and Earth could lay upon
them) Hell got the upper hand, and they thirsted after his Blood. Good God!
That Men, who profess themselves the Disciples of a poor, despised and
crucified Savior, whose Life, though he had all the heavenly Host at his
Command, was one continued Lecture of Humility, Meekness, and Self-denial, and
whose whole Doctrine resolvable into this one Precept, Love one another, should
be so far from following his Example in saving Men's Lives, and doing all the
Good they can, that they go about with his Professed Adversary, seeking whom
they may devour. That the Professors of that Religion, which is made up of
Purity, Piety, Peace and Holiness, should delight in cruel Treacheries, bloody
Massacres, and tragical Murders, nay think by so doing (...), as our Joh. 16.2.
Savior speaks, even to offer a Sacrifice to God, as though he would be pleased
with that sort of Worship which the most barbarous and brutish part of Mankind
used to give to the Devil. Does it not seize you with Amazement, to think that
the Servants of the Prince of Peace should delight above all others to imbrue
their hands in Blood, and that the Followers of the meek Lamb of God should
degenerate into ravenous Wolves and Tigers! That the Vicar of Christ, who
expressly declares that his Kingdom is not of this World, should magisteriously
take upon him to dispose of Crowns and Scepters, and insolently to trample upon
the Necks of Kings and Emperors? Certainly, if these things are indeed
consonant to the Principles of Christanity, I know no Reason that great Statist
Machiavel had to complain that it rendered Men unfit for cruel Undertakings; or
why those Heathen Emperors, which Persecuted it most, should not be canonized
for Saints, since they undoubtedly did the Office of good Patriots in
endeavoring to rid the World of such Men who made it their business to turn it
upside down. But, Quid Christiani laeserant Regna terrena? How the Christians
had caused any Molestation or Damage to the Kingdoms of the Earth, was justly
demanded by St. Austin. For though from their frequent Discourses of that Kingdom
which they expected hereafter, their Enemies erroneously suspected them to be
disaffected to the Government, it is abundantly evident both from their Writings
and Practice, that they were Caesar's best Friends. They did not indeed with
his other subjects exalt him above the Level of despised Mortality, and
therefore they neither gave him Sacrifice, nor swore by his Genius but (what
really became good and pious Men) they fought his Battles, honored his Person,
revered his Power, paid his Tribute, offered up Prayers for him, and obeyed his
Laws, unless where they evidently contradicted the Laws of Christ and where
they did, submitted to the most cruel Penalties they laid upon them, with the
greatest Calmness and Serenity of Soul. And when, notwithstanding all this,
they were accused (as indeed they often were) as Enemies to Caesar, they
thought it highly concerned them for the Honor of their Religion, by all means
possible to wipe off these Stains, which were falsely laid upon them; and
accordingly we find them in their Apologies and other Writings with all the
Zeal imaginable vindicating themselves from such malicious Aspersions. (...),
Cat. 10.
says St. Cyril, (...) We beseech God for the common Peace of the Churches, for
the Quiet of the World, for our Kings, their Soldiers, and Auxiliaries. And
Ap. c. 30.
Tertullian, Precantes sumus Omnes semper pro omnibus imperatoribus, and so on,
i. e. We all do continually pray, that God would give our Emperors a long
Life, a secure Empire, a safe House valiant Armies, a faithful Senate, a good
People, a peaceable World, and quaecunque Hominis and Caesaris Vota sunt, and
whatsoever Caesar either as a Man or Emperor, can wish. It Is manifest then,
that these Primitive Christians never thought it their Duty to assassinate
Princes, though Pagan or Heretical, for the Cause of Religion, or to excite their
Subjects to Rebellion for the Interest of the Gospel. They did not illuminate
Men's Understandings with Fire and Faggots, nor convince or silence Gainsayers
by the uncontrollable Arguments of Apostolical Dragooners. As their Battles
were Spiritual, so neither were their Weapons Carnal. 'Twas the peculiar Honor
of their Profession, that it grew victorious by Sufferings, and triumphed in
Persecutions: That Tears were its Jewels, and its Chains its chiefest
Ornaments: That whereas all other Religions, in the World did by a multitude of
Sacrifices as it were, train up and inure Men's Minds to Blood and Destruction
it was always (like its great Author) upon the Passive; not by Swords and
Daggers, by Fire and Faggots, by Plots and Caballs, but by enduring all things,
by bearing all things, recommending it self to the World. Now then, is the
Church of Rome this meek and gentle spouse of Christ, which is therefore comely
as the Curtains of Solomon, because black through the Heat of Persecutions? Is
she, I say, that Church whose Foundations are laid on the Blood, not of her
Enemies, but dearest Friends? However Bellarmine might pride himself in his
Notes of the true Church, yet surely her red and bloody Garments speak her to
be either that Beast in the Apocalypse, that kills all those that will not
receive his Mark in their Foreheads, nor worship his Image; or that great
Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, which St. John
saw drunken with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus. O my Soul then, come not thou into her secret, and unto her Assemblies
mine Honor be not thou united.

2. We cannot better express our Joy and Gratitude to God for the transcendant
Mercy of this Day, than by letting it remind us of his infinite Goodness in
calling us from the Tents of these wicked Men, who by teaching and maintaining
such pernicious Doctrines, do not only (as you have already seen) carry Men on
to the most heinous Immoralities, but also as a natural Consequence from such
Premises, wholly and entirely pervert the Simplicity of the Gospel of Christ.
To some unthinking Persons perhaps this may seem a bold Charge; yet I need not
be long in the Proof of it. For not to tell you, that these Men have set up
such a number of Intercessors, that as the Prophet Jeremy, speaks, according to
the number of their Cities, so are their Gods; though the 1 Timothy 2.5.
Apostle (for his Argument is levelled against the Heathens, who never so much
as heard of a Mediator of Redemption, and therefore did only acknowledge those
of Intercession) expressly declares, that there is but One. Not (I say) to
remind you, that though our Savior in his Farewell-speech most passionately
bequeaths to us mutual Love and Kindness, and the more to endear this Duty to
us, adds withal, that this should be so evident a Mark of our Profession, that
hereby should all Men know, that we are indeed his Disciples; yet Vid. Council.
Lateran. 4 Can. 3. de Haeret.
These Men teach, that if we will be Christians indeed, we must rifle and
plunder one another, kill and stab our Brethren, butcher our Benefactors, blow
up Parliaments, and destroy Heretical Kings and States; for this is not only
lawful, but also laudable, excellent, heroic, and meritorious. Lastly, nor to
say that they forbid their Priests to Marry, and condemn that Sacred
Institution in such Persons as impious, and damnable; though Heb. 13.4.
St. Paul assures us, that it is equally honorable in all sorts of Men; nay 1 Timothy 4.1, 3.
reckons the Prohibition of it amongst the Doctrines of Devils, and the
Primitive Church never thought the worse of her Bishops for it: What else speak
their taking the Cup from the Laity? though according to the positive command of
Christ, that they should all Drink of it, the Primitive Church (as they
themselves confess) allowed it them; and rather than not worship an Idol or
Image, their abolishing (as much as they can) the Commandment that forbids it?
What mean their Indulgences, their Fairs and Sales of Masses, and frequent
Prayers for the dead? by all which they have inverted the Assertion of our
blessed Savior, rendering it almost impossible for a Poor Man to be Saved or
for a Rich Man to be Damned? Why have they interdicted the Use of the
Scriptures to the People, when the 2 Timothy 3.15.
Apostle assures us, that they are so far from doing them harm, as they
pretend, that they are able to make them wise to Salvation? and the Psalm. 1.1,
2.
Psalmist, in an Ecstasie, pronounces the Blessedness of that Man unspeakably
great, whose Delight is in the law of the Lord, and who therefore with
unwearied Study meditates continually therein both Day and Night? Nay when Joh.
5.39. and Mat. 22.29.
Christ himself expressly Commands them to read them diligently, and attributes
the pernicious Errors of the Sadducees to their Ignorance of them? Are these
things indeed with their other repudiated Doctrines, built upon the Foundations
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the Head-corner-stone?
Alas! If you look narrowly into them, you will discern their Nature to be
aliene and extraneous, some of them being borrowed purely from the Heathens,
others from the Post of the Primitive Church, the Gnostics, and most of them
(as they themselves acknowledge) from Oral Tradition, there being not one Word
to countenance them in all the Scriptures. But is not this to invert the
Religion of Christ, and entirely to overthrow the fundamental and substantial
Principles of our Profession? Is not this, with the Pharisees, to make the Word
of God of none effect by humane Traditions, or rather to preach another Gospel
than what we have received from Christ and his Apostles the which though an Angel
from Heaven should do, the Gal. 1.8, 9.
Holy Ghost has long since pronounced him accursed? How they are like to escape
this Imputation at God's Tribunal, they would do well to consider; I wish it
could never be laid to their charge. To return then to ourselves: What infinite
Reason have we to bless God, who has graciously purged out this old Leaven from
amongst us, and made us a new Lump unto himself? Who, by the glorious
Instruments of our Reformation, has brought us out of the darkness of Error
and Innovation into the true and genuine Light of the Gospel; and for those
Leeks and Garlic our Souls so much abhorred, feeds us with heavenly Manna to
the full? Certainly, if Heaps of Mercies both Spiritual and Temporal; If the
free Possession of your Estates, and the Happiness of being Members of the most
uncorrupted Church in the World, are things that can in reason pretend to our
Gratitude, we, of all Men in the World, are the most indebted. O then, let us
never, with the ungrateful Israelites, hanker again after these loathsome
Fleshpots; nor when we have eaten and drank to the full, rise up to play with
this Harlot any more. She will often, no doubt, be tempting and ensnaring you,
and by her Paints and Colors, gaudy Shows, and Pompous Pageantry, endeavor to
entice you again into her Embraces. But remember, it is only a treacherous
Syren's Voice, which only therefore courts you, that she may make you her Prey.
She seeks not you but yours, and how Zealous soever she may seem for your
Welfare, the Term of her desire is only her own. She knows the Fruitfulness of
your Land, the Liberality of your Soil, and the Pleasantness of your Dwellings.
She remembers, how she once ranged without Control over all your pleasant
Pastures, and chose out the fattest of your Lands, for her to sport and play
in; and therefore, since for the foul Apostasy she made from her Primitive
Innocence, the flaming Sword and the Guardian Spirits debar her from reentring
this Paradise, it is no Wonder if, the better to deceive us, she transform her
self for a time into an Angel of Light. But I trust the wakeful eye of
Providence will still discover her Treacheries, and not suffer us any more to
be ensnared by her Smiles. And then for her Frowns, we are sure they cannot
hurt us. Those Curses she so liberally throws against us, will (I doubt not)
take wing and fly back upon her self; and all those Bulls and Interdicts,
Anathema's, Curses, and Excommunications which yearly in Passion Week, the
better to prepare her self for the Celebration of the Lords Supper, she
charitably denounces against us, either prove Bruta fulmina, Thunderclaps,
which indeed make a Noise, but want a killing Bolt, or by woeful Rebounds turn
the direful Execution upon her own Head. In a word, If we take care to walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith we are called, and not dishonor Reformed
Religion by the Deformity of our Lives, maugre all the Malice of Earth and
Hell, of Men and Devils, we shall undoubtedly be saved. Damnation will not be
inflicted according to men's Passions and Uncharitableness, neither will the
grim Faces, and dreadful Menaces of Romish Emissaries exclude us from the
Favor and Blessing of Heaven. Though they reject us, Christ will embrace us;
Though they turn us out of their Synagogues, God, will receive us under his
Wings; and provided we forfeit not his Protection by our Misdemeanors, the
Angel of his Presence will undoubtedly continue to save us, till Time it self
shall be no more. Wherefore, that we may not peculiarly incur this Judgment by
our Ingratitude, but duly express our Joy and Thankfulness to God for the
transcendent Mercy of this Day, let us

3. Take Care both to continue our selves, and also to bequeath to our
Posterity a grateful Remembrance of it. How near was the Daughter of Zion to be
covered with a Cloud, and to be trampled under foot by her treacherous Enemies?
The Net (you have heard) was cast about her, and the Fowlers even hasting to
the Slaughter. The Train was laid, all the Instruments of death prepared, and
there remained nothing to make us an Holocaust to the Roman Moloch, but just
putting the lighted Match to the Powder. And yet, methinks, I hear the Church,
full of Faith, saying, Though no Danger was ever like to any Danger, yet I charge
You, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the Hinds of the Field,
that ye stir not up, nor awake my Love, 'till he please. For how forlorn and
destitute soever I may seem to some, yet I am my Beloved's, and my Beloved is
mine, though therefore he tarries, he will not be long, but will in due time look
forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an
Army with Banners. And indeed her Beloved came, when she expected him not; He
was found of her, when she sought not after him. He awaked as one out of Sleep,
and looked and saw there was none to help, and wondered that there was none to
uphold. Therefore his own Arm brought Salvation to her, and his infinite
Goodness alone upheld her. May then that God, who has thus wonderfully wrought
for us in snatching us from the Mouth of the Lion, and the Paw of the Bear, be
ever blessed; and the Remembrance of this unspeakable Mercy never defaced, so
long as the Sun and Moon shall endure. May those glorious Spirits, which before
pitied our Danger, and now rejoice at our Deliverance, never be frustrated in
their Expectations; but see all our Members and Faculties, our Lips and Lives,
Hearts and Voices, harmoniously singing the Triumphs of the Lord, and in the
continual Order, Concord, and Congruity, declaring the infinite Goodness of our
God; that so our Candlestick may never be removed for our Ingratitude, but,
though Darkness cover the Earth, and gross Darkness the People, This Church may
still be a Crown of Glory in the Hand of the Lord and a Royal Diadem in the
Hand of her God, that the Gentiles may admire her Beauty, and the Sons also of
them that afflicted her, come bending unto her: and all they that despised her
bow themselves down at the Soles of her Feet: and all the Nations round about
call her the City of the Lord, the Zion of the Holy one of Israel, Lastly, May
she be covered with the Robes of Righteousness, and continually clothed with
the Garments of Salvation, 'till the Great Year of Jubilee, the time of her
final Redemption shall come, when God shall put an End to all Prejudices and
Animosities, all Struglings and contentions, and all the Elect with Crowns on
their Heads, and Palms in their hands shall make one perfect Harmony in singing
the eternal Praise of God and of the Lamb.

Which blessed time, God in his Mercy hasten, through Jesus Christ our Lord; To
whom, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, Three Persons and One God, be
ascribed, as is most due, all Honor, Glory, Power, Might, Majesty, Dominion,
and Thanksgiving, from this time forth and for evermore. Amen. FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for RICHARD SARE AND JOSEPH HINDMARSH.
FAbles of Esop and other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflections.
Folio.

The Visions of Dom Francisco de Quevedo. Octavo.

Seneca's Morals. Octavo.

Erasmus's Colloquies. Octavo.

Tully's Offices. Twelves.

Bona's Guide to Eternity. Twelves.

All six by Sir Roger L'Estrange.

The Genuine Epistles of St. Barnabas, St. Ignatius, St. Clement, St. Polycarp,
The Shepherd of Hermas, and the Martyrdoms of St. Ignatius and St. Polycarp.
Translated and Published with a large Preliminary Discourse, by W. Wake, D. D.
Octavo.

A Practical Discourse concerning Swearing, by Dr. Wake. Octavo.

Complete Sets, consisting of Eight Volumes of Letters, writ by a Turkish Spy,
who lived forty five years undiscovered at Paris, giving an Impartial account
to the Divan at Constantinople of the most remarkable Transactions of Europe
during the said time. Twelves.

Humane Prudence, or, the Art by which a Man may raise himself and Fortune to
Grandeur, the sixth Edition. Twelves.

Moral Maxims and Reflections in four Parts; written in French by the Duke of
Rochefoucault, now made English. Twelves.

Epictetus's Morals with Simplicius's Comment made English from the Greek; by
George Stanhop, late Fellow of King's- College Cambridge. Octavo.

The Parson's Councellor; or, the Law of Tithes; by Sir Simon Degge. Octavo.

Of the Art both of Writing and Judging of History, with Reflections upon
Ancient as well as Modern Historians, by the Learned and Ingenious Father Le
Moyne. Twelves.

An Essay on Reason; by Sir George Mackenzie. Twelves.

The Unlawfulness of Bonds of Resignation. Octavo.

The Doctrine of a God and Providence; vindicated and asserted by Tho. Gregory,
late of Wadham- College, Oxford; and now Lecturer near Fulham. Octavo.

Some Discourses on several Divine Subjects; by the same Author. Octavo.

Death made Comfortable, or the Way to Die well; by John Kettlewell, a
Presbyter of the Church of England. Twelves.

Dr. Gregory's Divine Antidote against the Socinians. Octavo.

Dr. Wake's Thanksgiving Sermon.

Dr. Gregory's Thanksgiving Sermon.


