The Dying Man's Last Legacy OR, PIOUS and AFFECTIONATE EXHORTATIONS TO A HOLY
LIFE.
AS IT Was left by a Dying Man to his Wife, Children, and Servants, for their
Improvement after his Death, and for the Advantage of every true Christian.
My Dearest Wife,
WEll might the Ancient Philosopher call Death, that Terrible of Terribles,
since it is so perfectly opposite to Nature; and Life is that which every
individual Animal so much covers to Maintain; for I would fain know and see
that Man that is a rational Creature, who when that Minute comes wherein there
will be a total Dissolution of Soul and Body, and a perfect Annihilation of his
Worldly Being, does not either recieve it with great Regret, or else with Fear
and Trembling; and if it be so that the Heathens had such a sense of this
dismal Hour, that knew nothing they were to give an Account of, upon their
Departure; well may those dread it who have heard of Christianity, since they
must know that there is nothing that they have been culpable of, or deficient
in through their whole Lives, but they must immediately upon their Expiration,
give a severe and strict account of. They further call Hora Mortis, Hora
Virtutis, and I am sure (and every good Christian will acquiess with me) it
ought to be so with every Christian, that intends to see the Face of God and
his ever Blessed Redeemer, with Comfort and Satisfaction. Upon this hour
depends the Being, and well Being of Soul and Body to all Eternity. Upon this
hour depends the everlasting Happiness, or Misery of unhappy Man: How much then
ought every Soul to look after, and hourly consider this fatal Hour, than which
nothing is more certain, than which nothing more uncertain; the eternal God
reserving it wholly to himself, that we might be always in a readiness and not
in the least Concerned, or dread it, when it shall please him to cause its
Approach.

But, my Dear, not to be too tedious in Generals, I shall descend to some
particular Considerations, which immediately concern you as a Wife, and a
Mother to Children; and I do not question your perusal of them, not only
because they were left you by one who, (...) so near you, but especially
because I leave them (...) ^^e last Legacy you ever shall recieve of me in thi^
(...) ^orld: and they say the words of Dying Men (...) ^e a greater Impression
upon the Reader, than any other whatsoever.

First then as a Wife, do not Lament and Grieve at the severe and heavy
dispensation of the Almighty who knows what is best for every one, and no doubt
lays it upon me, to bring me to himself, and has been pleased in his great
Wisdom to put a Period to my Earthly Being, in order to bring me home to him.
Therefore (...) ^e you do not Repine at that which it has pleased our Heavenly
Father to lay upon me. He always knows what is best for us, and has promised
not to lay more upon his Creatures than they are able to bear; and that if he
lays great Afflictions upon them, he will give them great Patience to undergo
them. When you find your Spirit sinking, Support it with the reflection of the
former great goodness of God, in making us amongst his rational Creatures, but
not only so, but also because he has been pleased to give us in a large measure
all those things that the World affords; not only Necessaries, (which
considered strictly in themselves, are much more then we could reasonably
expect at his Hands, I am sure much more than we deserve; for our manifold
Enormities, whereby we have so often offended so good and gracious a God) but
even Extraordinaries too, so that we may very well say with the holy Psalmist,
My Cup runs over.

II. Be always thinking what things he has done for others, and believe that he
is able to make up the loss that you at present undergo (if he sees it fit for
your good) for he has graciously promised, to bea Father to the Fatherless and
a Husband to the Widow. I say, undergo deprivation with patience, and consider
that this parting is but for a little time, it will not be long before we shall
again meet in Heaven, there to sing Eternal Hallelujahs to the ever Blessed
Trinity, with whom is Fullness of Joy, and at whose Right Hand are pleasures
for Evermore; where we shall ever remain in the fruition of all things that can
yield true satisfaction to the Soul of Man; and that not for an Hour, a Day, a
Week, an Year, but to all Eternity; where we shall never part more. Oh!
Blessed, and for ever Blessed be that God, that is so good to his Creatures, to
provide such a Place for them.

III. Let not the consideration of the Way being Strait and covered with Thorns
and Briers, in the least dismay or perplex thee; but consider that the
Happiness and Enjoyment will be much more sweet and pleasant; consider that
through this rugged Path God brings all his Servants unto their everlasting
Rest. And shall we repine at this his holy will, when he intends so much good
to us? Nay, when its duration is but short, and our Travel little, in
comparison of those innumerable Blessings and happiness we shall enjoy with him
for Ever and Ever.

IV. Let your private Prayers and Accesses to the Throne of Grace be often; be
no Stranger at the Gate of Mercy, while there is an Ear of favor open; and be
encouraged, since God hears the cry of the Widow to defend her from all
Dangers.

V. Be also frequent in reading and consulting the holy Scriptures; they are
the Oracles of Truth, and there you may find the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge; thence you may suck Promises, that will be as Milk flowing from the
Breasts of true Consolation. Oh! can I say it truly that from those Fountains
have streamed such Cordials into my Soul, as now enable me to go through with
this great sharpness of Death.

VI. Then for thy Servants, Besure that they that abide in thy House may be
such as are of Honest Conversation, that in their Lives they may Adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior in all things; and be sure thy own Example may be a
direction to them, and Reproof also if they do amiss. This I thought fit to
leave for your direction in the relation of a Mother and Governess of thy
Family. But because the Words of a Father Deceased may have some Influence on
my dear Children, to them therefore I shall leave something as a Fathers Legacy
among them.

VII. As a mother, Besure you bring up your Children in the Nurture and fear of
the Lord, and if so, you need not be Sollicitous for them, for God has promised
to provide for, and take care of those that fear him. Be not over Indulgent,
for the sparing the Rod, has often spoiled the Child. Let not thine Eye pity
the Correction of thy Children: First give it so that they may be sure to
enable all those Godly Exhortations and Admonitions, which you shall give them
from time to time, and when they come to Years it will never be forgotten; for
Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is Old he will not depart
from it. I could add many things, but my time being short, I am forced to be so
too; but because as I said before, the words of Dying Men have a more than
ordinary influence upon the Survivers, especialty where they admit of so near a
Relation; I shall therefore conclude with this short Moity to my Children.

My Dear Children,
THo you are but Young and tender, yet when you come to Years of Discretion,
then you may think of, and put in practice this last Advice of your Dying
Father: Be obedient to your Mother in all things, lest you add to her present
Affliction, to whom I refer you for all other wholesome Advice and Godly
Instructions, and shall only add this one particular Head: Besure to avoid that
Tympany of the Mind, I mean Ambition than which nothing is more Ridiculous, and
nothing more unbecoming a Man; that which has been the Ruin of Thousands,
which Phaeton like, soaring too high by the Wings of Ambition, have fallen
under hard Destinies; and let them be as a Sea-mark, that you may avoid
splitting on that Rock, which was their Ruin, and then you will be Happy. Besure
you remember this as the last Council of

Your Dying Father F. G.

depiction of F. G. (author)
His PRAYER.
O Most Gracious and for ever Blessed Lord God, I humbly beseech thee, through
the Merits and Mediation of thy Son Jesus Christ, to blot out all my
Iniquities, and not suffer them to rise in Judgment against me, but give me
such a portion of thy Grace, that I may withstand all Temptations, as well
Ghostly as Bodily. Give me, I beseech thee a sure hope and confidence in the
propitiatory Sufferings and Sacrifice of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Accept of his Death and Passion as an Atonement for my manifold Enormities,
and so purify my Heart from all sinful and Worldly Corruption, that after the
expiration of this Mortal Life, I may rise to eternal Glory. And with me, O
Lord, I beseech thee Bless the whole Race of Mankind, but in a more especial
manner all those to whom I am so near and dearly Related. Prevent them, O Lord,
in all their doings with thy most Gracious Favor, and further them with thy
conninual Help, that in all their Works they may Glorify thy Holy Name; Grant
this for Jesus Christ's Sake, into whose Hands I recommend my Spirit. Amen.

This may be Printed.

Rob. Midgley.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street, over
against Baynard's- Castle. 1685.


