An Epistle of tender Love, or cheerful Sound By the Breath of Life, to the
whole Flock of God, who have been Eye Witnesses of his Glorious Appearings in
these last days.
MOst dearly and well beloved Friends, Brethren, and Sisters whom the Lord has
gathered to be a People, to be to the praise of his Name, who once were not a
People, but were scattered as among the Tribes, and a certain dwelling place we
knew not, but went mourning as a Dove without a mate, saying, Where is our
Souls beloved? and when we were almost out of hope, then the Voice out of the
excellent Glory was uttered, and a Light began to shine in the midst of
Darkness, even when we were ready to say, We must now dwell in the house of
mourning, and the shadow of death must be our habitation for ever: Then, in an
acceptable time, when it was with us, as if it were neither night nor day, but
in the even-tide, then the Light appeared, and he was lifted up who has drawn
our hearts after him, even Christ the Light of the world, the Savior of all
that believe and follow him; this was he that we had heard and spoken much of,
yet then were strangers to him, though he was nigh unto us, and spoke with us,
showing unto us our lost and and undone estate; and sometimes made our hearts
burn within us: But now, blessed be the Lord, who by the Light which he has
caused to shine in our hearts, he has showed us our selves, our sins, and he
who is the father of them, and has, and is opening the Mysteries of his
Kingdom, which consists in Righteousness and Peace, for such a dwelling we
wanted: And he has, and is making known a measure of the Spirit, even of that
same Spirit which raised up Jesus from the dead, in the hearts of his People;
and this is that Gift that is Eternal Life, given of the Father to rescue, and
redeem, and save lost man, from the power of Death, to bring him out of the
house of Bondage and deep Captivity, into the glorious Liberty of his only Son,
who said, Father, I pray thee, let all those whom thou have given me, be where
I am; these alone reign and triumph in the Life Eternal over Hell and Death. Oh
Friends! surely we were that Multitude that was an hungry, which now our Lord
Jesus has caused to sit down, and satisfies us with the Bread of Life, many
times and often, that now we can say, The Son of God is come and has given us
an understanding, whereby we know him that is true, even the true God, and
Eternal Life, who is become our Leader and our Guide, even to us who once went
astray, as sheep w^^out a Shepher^ but how by his Spirit, we are brought to the
shepherd and Bishop of our souls, and now is he leading us in the way of
righteousness, and is teaching us according to his Promise, who said, All the
Sons and Daughters of the Lord shall be taught of him, and he is gently leading
the weak and tender ones, in a way that they did not know, which has caused
them to admire the goodness, power, and mercy o^ the Lord, who, in the greatest
trials, has been with them, and secretly has upheld them, and them delivered
many a time, out of the snares of the enemy of their souls. By him we have seen
the mountains removed and the very high hills laid low, at the sight of which we
sometimes were ready to faint, saying in our hearts, We shall never get over
them, then has he made the Mountains as a Plain, and the Hills as the low
Valeys: Thus he has prepared an even path for the just and upright ones to
walk in. Therefore fear not, neither be d^smayed, ye called* chosen, and
Beloved of the Lord, though your Enemies be many and mighty, and appear as the
sons of Ahab did to Israel, and you seem to them as Grasshoppers; of this be ye
sure, our God never changes, but is the same unto his people, yesterday, to
day, and for ever; who delivered David out of the mouth of the Lion, and out of
the paw of the Bear, and in the name of the Lord he ove came the great
uncircumcised Philistim. The Lord also preserved his Servant Daniel in the
Lions Den, and Job in his greatest trials, and Jonah in the Belly of a Whale,
and Paul in his dangerous Voyage at Sea* he also by his power brought Israel
through the Sea, as upon dry land* and gave them food from Heaven in the
Wilderness, he was as a Cloud to them in the day time, and as a Fire to give
them light in the night season. Oh great is the Lord, and greatly to be feared,
and admired in all his Saints, who is dreadful and mighty in power, who does
all things according to his pleasure: The Earth is his, he framed it, and the
great and wide Sea he has made, and by his power he rules it* he brings the
Wind out of his Treasure, and then the Sea is troubled, then he speaks the
word, and it is still again. Oh ye children of the Lord, have we not seen of
his wonders, and been eye witnesses of his mighty works? has he not heard our
cry, in the day of our d^stress, and given ear to our complaint? Yes, he has
heard from his Holy Habitation, and has answered in loving kindness; he also
satisfies the poor, and refreshes the needy with his presence, who without
him cannot live, nor be satisfied with any thing but the Bread of life, that
comes from him; and for those he spreads a Table, and feeds them, though they
are as in a wilderness, and gives them bread that the world knows not of. Well
my Friends, Did the Lord hear and answer our cries in the days past? when we
were as Ephraim, bemoaning our selves, and as David, thinking we were cast out
of his sight; yet did we look to that which was holy, which God had manifested
in us, and back again into the world we could not go, neither would the shadows
of the Heavenly things satisfy us, but the substance, that we earnestly
desired: And now the Lord, by the light of his Son* has made known himself
unto us, and has let us see, that he has waited long to be gracious, and has
watched over us as a tender Father; and since we knew him to be our God, he
has been good unto us, and has appeared for us, in rebuking our adversaries,
and in driving back and overcoming our Enemies within and without: And when the
Dragon has been has been wrath with us, his people, which he has gathered
and (...) up in his holy Seed, then he has caused the Earth to help us, and to
drink up the Fl^ods that the Dragon has cast out of his mouth, on purpose to
drown us. Therefore fear not, O Daughter of Zion, whose dwelling is outwardly
as in Sodom or Babylon, and thou at some times have been ready to say, Thy God
has forgotten thee, and the Lord has forsaken thee, because thou have been
derided of the wicked, and have been the Song of the ungodly all the day long,
and in departing from iniquity thou art made a prey; thou have been even as a
Chased Roe, or as a Sheep alone, that no man takes up; and thy enemies have
been many, that have compassed thee about, and pursued thee as Pharaohs Host.
Yet now arise Oh Zion, for thy light is come, and thy Glory is risen, and thy
enemies are men, and not God, and their Horses are flesh and not spirit:
therefore fear not man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for what is he before
the Lord, when he stretches forth his hand for the sake of his own Seed, when
he calls them from the East and from the West, and says to the North give up,
and to the South hold not back? then who can hinder the purpose of the Lord,
who does whatsoever pleases him. Therefore all ye tender Ones, and ye feeble
of the Flock, who are afraid of miscarrying, and cry because of your weakness,
and of the strength of your Enemies within and without, and are ready to say in
your hearts, we shall never hold out to the end, and this, even the thoughts of
it, is your greatest grief; for you matter not what you may suffer, so you may
hold out to the end, that your God may be honored, and his Truth, or which you
are made partakers, advanced, and many that yet are scattered, into it may be
gathered, by it to be set free from the pollutions of the world; this I know
you heartily desire. Oh ye tender Ones, whosoever ye are, lift up your Heads,
and let not your ponderous thoughts cause you to droop; for in weakness is God
ordaining strength, and out of the mouths of his Babes shall come perfect
praises, and power from him alone shall be received by the faithful, to answer
his requirings; For all our sufficiency is of and from the Lord, and they that
wait on him shall renew their strength. This I am a witness of: Therefore now
let Israel trust in the Lord, and know him to be all their stay, waiting
diligently in the meek and quiet spirit upon him, so shall they never be
confounded: For this is the day, wherein God is separating the Chaff from the
Wheat, and is putting a difference between them that fear him, and them that
fear him not; and them that Swear, and them that fear an Oath, though against
the last of these, even against those that fear an Oath, a grievous Law is made
and now is the cry, We have a Law, and by it you shall suffer, surely this is
not added, because of transgression, which the ancient Laws were, but because
there is a people that cannot transgress the Law of their God, therefore there
is a cry, Its not for our profit to let these abide in our Land. But this let
all know, That the Lord has called us to be a people, and has gathered us
into his innocent life of righteousness, and to this day has been our Defense,
when our Enemies were many. And this also is a great cry against us, because we
meet together, to wait upon, and worship the Lord in spirit and in truth:
Therefore are we persecuted, carried before Magistrates, and cast i^to Prison;
so that now it is with us, as it was with the People of God in the days of old,
when the snare was upon Mizpeh, and a spread net upon Mount Tabor.
Notwithstanding all this, ye dear Children of the Lord, meet together in Gods
Name, Fear and Authority, having the loins of your minds girded up, and your
hearts fixed on the Lord, and none forsake the Assemblies of the faithful,
neither let in the fear of Man, who can kill the body and can do no more; for
many of you has the Lord deeply tried, and many of our brethren have laid down
their lives, as the faithful* Martyrs of Jesus, giving glory to the name of the
Lord; and we know that the Lord was no hard Master, but has given us power
according to our trials, and in Prisons he has been and is with us; therefore
let none be troubled because of the Law for Banishment, neither let your faith
fail, because of the great and wide Sea: but now stand still and see the
salvation of God, which is to be revealed to those that faithfully follow the
Lamb wheresoever he goes. Be steadfast, and unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord, committing your cause to him, waiting in the meek and quiet
spirit upon the Lord, his counsel to receive, that as the heart of one man,
with one consent, ye may worship, and bless, and praise the Almighty God in the
sense of his love; so his blessing will rest upon the whole Camp, and his
invisible Power will be your Shield in the greatest trials, you to defend and
preserve in peace with your God; this my soul greatly desiers. This as a token
of my love unto you (by the breath of Life) for the stirring up of your pure
minds, and that none may fear those things which they may suffer, but that your
trust may be in the Lord, and your strength in the mighty God. Thus having none
other way to express what is in mine heart toward you, but in writing, I bid
you Farewell.

The 26th of the 4th Month, 1664. Given forth in the movings of Gods Spirit,
for the refreshment of the Flock of God, by a Friend of Truth. Thomas Green.
Let this be Read in the Fear, Dread and Wisdom of God, in the Meetings of the
Children of the Firstborn.




