Homais QUEEN OF TUNIS, NOVEL.

By Sebastian Grenadine,

AMSTERDAM, Printed for Simon the Afrikan, at the Prince in the Sun, 1681.

Homais, QUEEN OF TUNIS.
SInce the Amorous Adventurers have been beyond Sea, the Discoveries of Love
they have made in Africa, have been so Successful, that that Country (as
Barbarous as it is) does now seem to be become an inexhaustible source of
Galantry. Whole Fleets fraughted with Adventures are Arrived from thence; and
Love, that was never thought to be the Province of those People, in whom,
Cruelty is as Natural as Living, has a greater Influence there, than in any
other part of the World. His most Secret Mysteries are Revealed to them; and
there is no manner of Cunning, Stratagem, Delicacy, or Contrivance, for the
Carrying on a Gallant Adventure, but what that Nation, which we have ever
looked upon with some kind of Horror, does put in Practice. In a word,
Barbary, which in all other things is rightly called by that Name, is the most
refined part of the Universe, in point of Love: as if this God had taken
Delight to make Proselytes of so Barbarous a People, and so unfit to be His
Votaries.

Ali Bashaw of Tripoly being Besieged in the very Capital City of His
Territories, by a Famous Rebel called Sidi. Ackmet-Benoc, was reduced to the
Necessity of having Recourse to Caragus King of Tunis; with whom, though His
Brother in Law, His Correspondence for some time had not been very great. He
Resolved to send Him a signal Embassy, for the engaging Him to free him out of
so severe an Extremity. The Forces of that Rebel, who had Subdued almost all
the Moors of the Country, were in such a Posture, as that He must necessarily
have lost all, unless He received speedy Succors. But that His Design might
have the better Success; He Fancied, His best way would be to give that
Commission to the Sultana His Wife, who was that King's Sister; and being a
Witty Woman, and having great Power over Her Brother, She might with the less
Difficulty engage Him on His Side. All things were quickly prepared for this
Voyage. Three of the finest Ships of Tripoly were Ordered to Convoy the
Sultana; for only the Sea was open and free, and all those who were to attend
Her in that Embassy, being embarked, they set Sail in the finest Season
imaginable; and Arrived in Five or Six Days at the Port of Mahometa, which is
two Days Journey from Tunis. The King having had Notice of Her Coming, went to
Receive Her in that City; their Interview was full of Joy and Tenderness.
Caragus loved His Sister extremely, and seemed unable to express the great
Delights He took in seeing Her. The Sultana, being Naturally of a very
Caressing Humor, and having no less Affection for Her Brother, was inclinable
enough to make returns to all His Kindnesses, according as the Occasion of Her
Embassy Required. There was no Talk of Business during the first Day; She was
wholly took up with Civilities and Caresses, and in asking general News, that
are the first Discourses that usually furnish Entertainment in such Occasions.

Mahometa is a small Town, something unfit to entertain Persons of that Rank;
But the Grandees of that Country, who never Travel without their Tents, are
always well Lodged, wheresoever they come. The King had Caused One of the
Richest and Finest that had been seen, to be prepared for the Sultana. He had
no sooner learnt the next Day that She might be seen, than that He went to make
Her a Visit. The Sultana having Notice of it, and being willing to make use of
the good Dispositions She saw in Her Brother, had prepared (as is the Custom
of the Country) the Presents She was to make Him; amongst which were two
Slaves, the one a Jewess, the other a Christian, both of them were Young, very
agreeable and perfect Beauties. The Jewess was the livelier of the two, and
seemed to have a great deal of Wit; which made the Sultana fancy, that Her
Brother would like her better than the Christian; who, though very Waggish at
the bottom, and no less Cunning than the other had an Air something more
serious.

Caragus coming thereupon to His Sister, found Her in an Extraordinary
Magnificence in the midst of all these Fine and Rich Presents She brought Him,
and which She offered Him at His Entrance.

The King after having highly Valued, and extremely Commended them: Received
them with all the Acknowledgement as became the Affection He had for His
Sister: But She told Him, they were not the Finest, and that She had still
something more rare to give Him: Whereupon She Caused the two Beautiful Slaves
to come out; at the sight of whom, Caragus was immediately Charmed; being
really what suited best with His Humor; and His Sister knowing His Amorous
Complexion, had not without Reason, kept this Present for the last. He Eyed
them both for some time, without saying a word; and both extremely pleased Him.
The Christian, However contrary to the Sultana's Expectaon, Charmed Him most.
They were Both of them Dressed very Magnificently, and after the Franca Mode:
Insomuch, that the Beauty and particular Merit of each of them, could only
determine the Choice. The King declared His mind immediately to His Sister, who
could not forbear telling the Fair Christian. This Cruelly vexed the Jewess;
but some time after, she had wherewith to Comfort her self, for the Happiness
of her Rival, having been Chosen to be sent to the Grand Siegniors Seraglio,
whose Favorite she was. Her Reign however did not last long, by Reason of a
certain Defect, more usual to Fair, than Black Women.

Caragus would have been extremely well satisfied with His Sisters Presents,
and more especially with that of those two Charming Slaves, if He might have
enjoyed it, as well as the others: But the Ascendant of His Amors, did not
suit in His Birth with that of Marriage; and though Nature had endowed Him with
Gifts, and Inclinations that were disposed to Pleasures; yet it had not given
Him a Heart that could resist the Sallies of a Jealous, and an Ambitious Wife.
He was Married to the Sultana Homais, who was insupportably Nice in that Point;
and He knew not how He should make Her allow the Presents of those two Slaves,
who were so Beautiful, as that they could not fail of making a Woman Jealous,
who was so sometimes for no Reason at all. Not that She had too much Passion
for the King; Her Mind was only filled with Ambition; and Glory had in Her the
Effect, that Love has in the Hearts of other Women. Insomuch, that they were
very much perplexed how to find out the Means, that that haughty Princess might
suffer (without murmuring) those two Fair Creatures in the Seraglio. Rostan
Bashaw a Witty Man, having been long in great Favor with the King, who was
wholly led by his Counsels, was Consulted in this Affair; and his Opinion was,
that the best Course would be that the Sultana Her self should offer those two
Slaves to the Queen. But She knowing the Spirit and Humor of that Princess,
excused Her self from it; and desired the King not to expose Her to be ill
Received by the Queen, with whom She was altogether unwilling to have the least
Dispute; and indeed, the King did not think it Convenient She should. Wherefore
Rostan, promising himself a great deal of Pleasure in thus spighting a Woman
whom he had Reason to hate, offered to present them himself, either as from the
Sultana, or from the King. But neither did Caragus approve of this design,
knowing the Aversion they had for one another; and said, He would Himself think
of some other Means. Then they fell to Discourse of the Affairs of Tripoli; and
Rostan being already Gained by the Sultana, seconded Her Designs, and made the
King promise Her all manner of Succors, and that he would forget all the
Reasons of Complaint, He had had against the Bashaw Her Husband.

Nothing of Importance was done in the Kingdom, but what the Queen would have a
share in; and having had Notice as well as the King of the Sultana of Tripoli's
Coming, and of the Occasion of Her Embassy, She resolved to Accompany the King
to Mahometa, that She might oppose or favor the Bashaw's Design, according as
the Sultana should Carry Her self to Her. But She no sooner learnt of what
Nature one of the Presents was, that She had newly made Her Brother, than that
She fell into such a Passion against Her, as promised no less, than to Second
the Designs of the Rebel, that She might Revenge Her self on a Wretch; thus She
called the Sultana, who came to Insult Her, even in Her own House, when She
stood in most need of Her.

Caragus would willingly have Concealed this Intrigue from the Queen: But the
Beauty of those two Slaves had at their first Coming made so much Noise at
Court, that it was impossible to keep the Queen long in ignorance, and having
People about the King, who were wholly at Her Disposal, and who gave Her
account of all His Actions; She was quickly informed of what passed at the
Sultana's. She fell into a Rage against the King, and besides what She called
Him in Her Fury; She added Threatenings against His Sister, who going to justify
Her self, and endeavor to appease Her, was refused Entrance into Her Tent.
This too sensible Affront for a Person of the Sultana's Rank and Spirit, having
put Her likewise into an angry Humor, all the Court was soon Divided: and both
having their Partisans and Incendiaries, a great Disorder was upon the point of
happening, for the Sake of those two Women. The Peace was at length made; and
the Articles were, That the Sultana should carry Her two Slaves back with Her,
and that the Queen should desire Her to come and see Her, that She might repair
the Injury She had done Her.

Rostan Enraged at all this; could have wished the King would once have made
use of His Authority with the Queen His Wife; and that the Slaves, as was
Reasonable, should have stayed in spite of all Her Power: But Caragus a
peaceful Man, if ever there was one, chose rather to deprive Himself of that
Pleasure, than to see Dissension in His House. The two Princesses continued to
see one another, but not without Coldness; which rendered the Feasts and
Divertisements the less agreeable, that the King had prepared for His Sister.
The Queen not being able to be at Rest, as long as She saw those two Slaves in
Her Court, gave the Sultana as little Reason to be pleased as She could: and
indeed, She found there but little Divertisement, being obliged to pay
Civilities to an Imperious Woman, and whom She had Reason to hate; so that
having obtained of Her Brother, what She desired, and having nothing more to do
at Mahometa, She was very impatient to return to Tripoly. Insomuch, that the
Wind was no sooner Fair for that Voyage, than that She took leave of the King,
who did all He could to stay Her some time longer: But She alleged to Him so
many Reasons, as well upon the account of the Bashaw Her Husband, who
doubtless, expected Her with great Impatience, to know the Succe^s of Her
Voyage; as upon the account of the Queen, who did not Treat Her altogether with
that Honor that was Her due: that at length He let Her go, and having
accompanied Her to Her Ship, He took His Leave with a very tender Regret.

Roston, ever a declared Enemy of the Queen, and more concerned than any in the
servile Complaisances the King had for Her, seeing the Sultana thus depart with
those two Charming Slaves, He reproached Him severely with his
faint-heartedness and irresolution. The Power he had always had over Him, made
Him take that Liberty: And the King seeing He was in the Right, and that indeed
He ought not to let Himself be thus Governed by a Woman, suffered all this very
patiently. The Court returned to Tunis, where the haughty Queen entered as in
Triumph, taking a Pride, and valuing Her self highly every where, that She had
got the better of the fair Sultana of Tripoli, and of proud Roston; for thus
she called them out of Contempt. But the Bashaw being a Person that never
Pardoned any thing, could not long neglect to Revenge Himself. He knew Her, had
studied Her, and was not ignorant, that though Her Heart contained a vast deal
of Ambition, it had likewise at length a great deal of Love: And this was what
He waited for, as a certain means to ruin Her. She was Obliged to Him, for what
she was; 'twas He who made Her Queen, and being to recompense this Service with
her Affection, she had only repayed it with Ingratitude. But to be Regular, it
is requisite that I enlarge something more upon this part of the Story, that
will be very satisfactory to the Readers Curiosity.

Homais was the Daughter of an Eastern Turk, of a very Noble and Ancient
Family, Her Person Abounded in the Gifts of Nature, but wanted those of
Fortune. Rostan, being a Knight Adventurer, and having heard talk of Her
Beauty, longed extremely for a sight of Her, which was not difficult for Him to
Procure: For, besides that, She was something Related to Him, which was a
pretense sufficient enough to make a Visit to the Father; the Title of a
Princes Favorite is such a Pasport as will make Him who possesses it be every
where, welcome where He has a mind to go. Whereupon he went one Day to Her
House, and as Fortune would have it, the Father was gone out; and though the
Laws of the Country do not suffer a Man to enter a house when the Master is not
at home; yet it is long since Favorites have put themselves above all Laws:
insomuch that the Porter knowing Him, and not daring to refuse Him entrance, He
went in to the first Apartment, where as Fortune would still have it, He met
with Homais; She would have run away at first as the Custom is, being the
Honor of a Maid runs some Risque to be seen by a Man. But Rostan running after
stayed Her, and lifting up Her Barnus, with which She had hid Her self, He was
Charmed at the Sight of Her, and said to Her in that Moment, all that the most
Tender, and Passionate Heart on Earth is Capable of Inspiring so Beautiful a
Person. Homais deplored the outrage that Rostan had newly done Her, and though
these Tears were more feigned, than Real, they quite Inflamed the too sensible
Favorite with Love. He made Himself known to that Weeping Beauty, and fell to
persuading Her, that he being a Couzin, might take the liberty He had done,
without offending the Honor of a Maid. Homais believed Him, and was Appeased;
for, she was not willing to Weep any longer, but she wanted a Pretense to be
satisfied. Rostan had the most Wit, and was the handsomest Man of any in the
Kingdom; few Women were able to resist his Passion, when He had been Charmed
with the Beauty of any One, or that He seemed to be so: for, in Africa as well
as elsewhere, Men are very expert in those Cases, and there is often more of
Caprichio in their Amourous Designs than a real sense of Affection. However
Rostan was this time Smitten in good earnest; and as there is no Crime but what
must be Attoned for one time or other, Love outrages perhaps against Him, for
so many Treacherous prancks as He had played him, prepared to Revenge himself
by Homais means. He had heard much talk of this Illustrious Couzin, and had
likewise often wished that he knew Her; but Ambition alone Influenced all her
Desires, and She had not the least design of Galantry. Her Mother who had the
folly of all those who have pretty Daughters had put it in her Head; That she
was only born for a King: Insomuch, that she considered this Cousen, and wished
to see Him, for no other reason than that He might be a means of Raising Her to
that High Degree of Fortune. But Rostan only thought of Himself, and Love is a
Jewel we never care any one should share with us in. He speaks, he sighs, he
flatters, he promises; all this is kindly received; but she requires of Rostan
other proofs of his Passion. He employs his Credit with the King in favor of
the Father, and obtained for him the Office of an Aga in the Divan, under the
pretense of being His Relation. This procured him a great deal of
Acknowledgment from the whole Family; but was of little advantage to his Love.
Homais made no Account of the Honor and Riches that were heaped upon her
Father, and only thought her self obliged to People for what they did merely
for her. The Title of Sultana would have pleased her: Rostan, who daily became
more and more in Love, forasmuch as that he found Resistance, lets himself be
surprised, promises her that Title, goes Cunningly to work, and at length
procures her it. Thus was her Family loaded with Honor and Benefits, and it
seemed, that Love had nothing more to desire; for Homais being made Sultana,
was Arrived at the highest point of Glory she could reasonably Aspire to. But
who can content the Ambitious Heart of a Woman? Homais only considered the
Dignity of Sultana, as a Degree toward the Royalty, and was unwilling to
content her self with that. However she thought it the wisest Course, not to
discover yet a while her Design to Rostan, for fear of frighting him at once;
and lest He should prevent the Snare she laid for him, she was something
Complaisant, and bestowed upon him some Favors; so that if he was not
altogether happy, so neither had he altogether reason to Complain. This State
for a Lover, who is not yet Advanced very far in the Favor of a Mistress, has
something very sensible in the beginning; because it seems as if he had but one
step more to make, to Arrive at that Charming degree of Happiness, wherein we
have nothing more to desire; but how Insupportable is it when we are stopped
there too long! We are tormented Night and Day with vexations, impatiences and
disgusts; and it is almost better to be altogether Unhappy. Rostan did nothing
more than Languish and Complain of the heard h^^^tedness of Homais; You love
me, (said he to her) or at least, you say so; but for my part, I see no
appearance of it; How? (answered Homais to him) so much eagerness that I daily
make appear to see, and hear of you? So much pleasure that you see I take in
your Company, are they not marks sufficient enough to prove my Affection? No,
(replied that Lover) all this is only a mere Amusement, and to make our selves
the better known in the beginning of a Passion, but when we are or would be
fully persuaded of the Affection we have for one another, we not only proceed
further, but Consummate the business. How? (replied Homais) is it nothing to
love to that Excess that is so dangerous to a Maid? What other danger do you
run, (interrupted Rostan,) than that of losing, and seeing me Dye, if you do
not take more pity of me.

This Conversation, had somethi^^ so tender, as would have melted any other
Heart in favor of Rostan: but that of Homais, did but the more Animate this
Ambitious Woman in the Resolution of pursuing her Design, seeing her Cousin so
much in love with her as that he was no longer able to refuse her any thing:
Insomuch that Rostan* one day more Passionate than ever, having asked her, If
she desired his Death, for a trial of his Love? She answered him No, but that
she still desired something of him, that was above all He had yet done for Her:
That perhaps He would be surprised at it, and find it a difficult Task, That
however She must necessarily obtain it of Him, if it was true he loved her as
much as he said he did; and that her Heart was only to be given upon that
Condition. Rostan, who would have employed his life a thousand times for Her
sake, not believing there could possible be any thing but what he might do, and
being impatient to know the business, He begged her to tell him without making
Him Languish any longer, What service, what help, what hazard, what trouble,
and in what he might employ his Life for Her sake; protesting to her already by
way of Advance, That there was nothing but what he would do to please her, and
make himself altogether worthy of her Heart. Homais having got this assurance
from him, made no more difficulty to tell him what her Ambious Heart aspired
to, and that nothing but a Crown could content it, and that he should be Master
of every thing but that, in case he procured it her, and that then she would
satisfy his Longings, and Sacrifice all things to him, when ever he desired it.
Never did a Thunderbolt falling at the feet of a Man, cause such an Effect upon
a Heart, as this Proposition of Homais did upon that of the amorous Rostan. He
fancied his hearing failed him; and that he had not rightly understood what
that Ungrateful and Ambitious Creature had newly said. He was near upon a
quarter of an hour without being able to answer her, keeping his Eyes fixed upon
the ground, with an immovable Air, without once raising them up to her, who was
no longer in any perplexity. Is this (said he to her, after some great sighs,
with which he eased his Heart) what you desire from my Love? Is this, (repeated
he once more) the recompense that I am to expect for my Services: Can I only be
happy by rendering my self the most wretched of all Men? Cannot I please but by
Destroying my self. Ah, too Fatal Destiny! Perfidious Love, Ungrateful
Mistress! Saying these Words, he got up, all disordered, went away in a Pet,
and withdrew to his own House, where probably he passed his time but very ill.
Homais could have wished, that Rostan had not been so nice in Love, that he had
been more Complaisant, and that her Design had succeeded better; but she could
not Repent of what she had done: for her Ambition made her look upon all manner
of Conditions as beneath her, except that of being Queen; she fancied her Heart
deserved it, and that Rostan would but give her her due, though he Purchased it
at that Rate.

This Desolate Lover passed some Days without seeing the Ambitious Sultana; and
was so extreme Melancholy, that it Amazed all the Court; and likewise Troubled
the King very much, who could never learn the Occasion of it, though it had
almost brought him to the Grave. But at length, after having Consulted his
Heart again for some time, if it would not choose rather to Dye, than not be
beloved, but by seeing what it adored, enjoyed by another, he was loath to
leave this World; insomuch, that he resolved to Write to that ungrateful
Creature, which he did in these Terms.

IF the sad Condition (too unjust Homais) your Cruelty has Reduced me to, has
not yet been able to move you to Pity: you will at least be touched with my
blinded Passion; that to please you, forces me, not only to forget my self, but
makes me Sacrifice all my Happiness to your Ambitious Desires. Why did you not
Ask my Life? I should not have found it difficult to have satisfied you: I
fancy, I should not have dared to have Murmured: But require Love to betray it
self, to make my Heart help you to Stab me: Certainly nothing can be more Cruel
or Unjust. However, you shall be Obeyed; and I will make this Sacrifice to your
Beauty: Once Dying was not sufficient; and you have found the means of putting
me to Death every Day. You shall have suddenly that Pleasure, for I am going to
endeavor your Satisfaction: Adieu.

This Note, which he was about to put an end to, being delivered to the Sultana
by a faithful Agent, she made him this Answer.

I Do not desire your Death. Heaven is my Witness, nothing is so Dear to me in
the World, as you are: But if you have a mind I should excuse the Weaknesses of
your Heart, why will not you excuse those of mine. You are Governed by Love,
and I am by Glory; Our Ascendants are equally Powerful. Favor mine, and I
shall take Care to Satisfy yours. What a Delight would it be to me to be
Obliged to so Dear a Lover, for all the Greatness I can hope for in this World?
How Great will your Joy be, to have made her Happy you Love; and to have fixed
your Heart in the highest Place you could Mount it to. Never were these two
Passions at so great a Distance; and never will they be so well United. You
have made an excellent Beginning: You Love me as much as I desire; but Complete
what you have begun, and let Us make appear in Us two a Mavelous Example of
two Real Lovers. I Repeat it to you here again, that I Love you; and as you are
ready to do all for me, so you will likewise ever find me ready to do all for
you: Farewell.

Rostan Trembled when he Received this Letter, and Read it with extraordinary
Motions of Joy, and of Love. There was more of Glory in it, than Kindness; but
all that came from that Beautiful Sultana Charmed him, he would have Loved it,
though it had been Poison: and indeed, nothing could be more Bitter to the
Heart of a Lover, than what she exacted from him. He however Resolved to do it;
and from that Day beginning to Recover, he made secret Practices and Cabals,
for the bringing his Design to Effect; and the King knew not that it proceeded
from him, and indeed the Marriage was Consummated in a very few days, and
without his being the least suspected. Some of the Chief of the Divan, were
deputed to represent to this Prince, that it was time he should think of
leaving them Lawful Successors, that it would be the Glory of his Race, and
the Benefit of his Kingdom; and that he needed only to choose which of the
Sultana's he liked Best. The King having thanked them for their Zeal for the
Good of the State, and the Affection they had for his Person, made them this
Answer, That he had no other desire, than that of satisfying them; but that, as
it was an Affair that demanded some Reflection, he could not give them a
positive Answer at that time; but that he would in few days, and then dismissed
them.

He then Consulted some of his Confidents upon the Choice he was to make, who
being all gained by Rostan, to whom they almost all owed their Fortunes, made
him cast his Eyes upon several Sultana's, but Extolled none of their Merits so
much as they did that of Homais, who was the most perfect Beauty in all that
Country. The King being very sensible on that side, was easily taken; and
having likewise Consulted therein his dear Rostan, who was the Sovereign
Arbitrator of all his Wills: He was confirmed more than ever in that Choice;
this Favorite thanking him, that he Condescended of himself to do this Honor
to one of his Relations, whom he was not Acquainted with, but whom he had heard
talked of with great Admiration. This Prince being already in Love, upon the
Reports of others, with a Creature he had not yet seen, impatiently longed to
Content his Heart, as well as satisfy the desires of his People: and having
called a Divan the next Morning, he concluded the Marriage, and Consummated it
that very Evening. They go to Work in that Country without much Ceremony; and
all Business is both quickly Resolved on, and quickly put in Execution. Thus is
Homais Raised upon the Throne; her Ambition had nothing more to pretend to: and
all she had to do more, was to satisfy Love. Though Rostan might now hope to be
suddenly Happy, yet he was not Capable of Joy; and not being yet perfectly
Recovered, the Remnants of his Disease served for a pretext to help him Conceal
all the Torments of his Heart, while all others were full of Joy and Mirth. The
King, who kept nothing concealed from him, took Delight in acquainting him as
his Confident, with the secret Beauties of Homais, which had Charmed him: but
which almost Madded the unhappy Rostan. In a word, never had Lover more Reason
to complain of his ill Fortune, than that Favorite had; but his Sufferings
were not yet at an end, and Love was preparing him some that were much more
Stinging.

The Haughty Homais being naturally Proud, found Greatness her Province, and
easily Acted the part of a Queen. She had all her Lifetime promised her self to
be so one Day, and except a certain Joy, for being Arrived at the highest Point
of her Desires, there was not any Alteration in her. Rostan, whose Amorous
Policy required he should behave himself so as to give no suspicion, more
especially in the beginning of this Marriage, when the King was all Flame, and
would have been Jealous of nothing, shunned seeing her; and likewise, avoided
the Occasions of following that Prince, when he went to the Queen's Apartment,
where having nothing yet to do, it would have been a Torment to him, to have
been there. But at length, some time being thus passed in these precautions,
and without Summoning her to perform her Promise, Love spurring him on, told
him, That the Hour was come, to put Homais in mind of it, and of the
Acknowledgement she owed him. The Queen standing no longer in need of him, and
fearing to subject her Grandeur to a Favorite, who acted the Master but too
much already, was very far from having those Amorous Complaisances for him,
that would render her his Slave. However, as her Authority was not yet so well
Established, as not to be afraid to have him for her Enemy; prudence required
she should dissemble, and she chose to weary him by much waiting. Insomuch,
that she daily Entertained him with puts-off and delays, taking sometimes one
pretext, and sometimes another. Rostan not wanting penetration, quickly
discovered what all these Shifts tended to. He fell immediately into a Rage;
but it was not yet time to make it appear. He returned to the Charge, he asked,
he pressed, he sighed, talked of Dying. All this did him no good: She pitied
him; but was yet more afraid of ruining her self, and the King's Jealousy was a
pretext she made use of, and which served for Answer, to all the Reproaches he
made her; from Reproaches he proceeded to Threatenings: but she Laughed both at
his Reproaches, and his Threatenings, and believed she had Reason to Treat him,
as he did her; for being seduced by too much Vanity, and daring to aspire to
Favors, that he ought only to expect from the mere Grace of her, who was above
him. How great was his Despair, to see himself thus deceived: he was so
outraged against himself, that considering himself as the main Criminal; for
having trusted in the most Traitorous, and Ambitious Woman under the Heavens,
he had like to have turned his Vengeance upon his own Person: but considering
how great a Satisfaction, and Kindness it would be to that ungrateful Creature,
to free her from such an Enemy as himself; staying him, he turned all his
Choler against her, and prepared her all the Effects of an invincible Hatred.
The Truth is, Nothing is so dangerous as a Lover outraged, to that point. He
passes usually from one extremity to another. But Homais fancyed her self
already above such kind of attempts. She begun to Rule the King, whose ordinary
Weakness was to let himself be Governed, though he was Born to Govern others.

In the mean time, Rostan kept a watching Eye over the Queen's Actions.
Caragus, whose strongest Passion lasted seldom above Four and Twenty Hours,
began to have less eagerness and kindness for her. Her Pride, and her Haughty,
and imperious Manners something displeased him; and Rostan, whom he told his
Mind to in that Case, was very instrumental toward the disgusting him all
together. He had often talked to him of Ozira's Beauty, the General of the
Galeyes Daughter; and engaged him to make her a private Visit, which was
followed by several others. The Queen was not long without observing this
Change, or divining from whence it proceeded. The King was of the Nature of
several People, who have more Will than Deed, and having got a Mistress, that
pleased him better than the Queen; he was more than usually absent from her,
which others would have been more troubled at, than Homais was: But her Heart
had had a Destiny, that not only Comforted her for the King's Negligence; but
made her find it to be her Advantage, not to have him so often near her.

Ibrahim, a young Favorite of the King had that Liberty in the Serrallio, that
only a Man of Caragu's Humor was capable of giving to a young Man so handsome,
and well made as he was, and in whom nothing was wanting, as is usually in
those, who are encharged with keeping those Prisons of Love. He had leave to
enter into all the Apartments of the Women; and even to have Adventures there,
with which he every Evening entertained the King, who took a Delight therein
it. Homais would not suffer him at first to come into her Lodgings, as he did
into all the others; but the King not being able to Live without seeing him,
and loving him with an extraordinary Kindness, begged her not to deprive him of
that Satisfaction, which he obtained without difficulty; for what the Queen had
done, was only to insinuate her self the more into the King's Confidence- She
had seen young Ibrahim in two or three Occasions; she had found him very
Handsome, and of a very Charming Wit; and the pleasant Stories the King told
her of him, sometimes having extremely Diverted her, she would willingly have
had that Pleasure oftener, had she not been afraid of making the King Jealous.
Wherefore, she made use of this Address, and seemed not to Care for this young
Favorite, who might perhaps one time or other have told Stories of her; to the
end, the King whose weak side she knew might interpose, and procure her
Consent, that he might have free Access to her Apartment, as well as to the
others of the Seraglio.

Ibrahim being not Cunning enough to penetrate into the Thoughts of such a
Woman as Homais, bore her a grudg for the Contempt she seemed to have for Him,
and notwithstanding all she could do afterward, there still remained a Rancor
in His Heart against Her, which He did not think He should be so suddenly
Cured of. Rostan wanting such a Man as Ibrahim for the carrying on his Design
of ruining the Queen, did not find it difficult to engage Him on his side, and
still animating him more and more against her, he was well assured that having
such a Spy, she could neither do, nor say any thing that might be turned to her
Disadvantage, but he should be immediately informed of. That was true, if Love
had not been stronger than Hatred; but where are those irritated Hearts that
can resist a pretty Woman, especially when she makes use of Complaisance.
Homais did not fail to observe the Effect, that Her seeming opposing of
Ibrahims coming into Her Apartment had had upon his Spirit; and that he was too
young to be able to unravel Her real Designs; but she was in hopes of making
him return to her very quickly, and be at her disposal. The employ this
Favorite had near the King in the Wardrobe, and all that concerned his Person,
gave her opportunities enough, being often all alone in her Apartment:
Insomuch, that she took delight at those hours to come up to him, and ask him
very often useless questions; which served her for a pretext to take and
endeavor to reduce him. All this however was not yet Powerful enough, and the
Spirit of the haughty Ibrahim was too prepossessed against her, for him to
yield to such weak Baits; on the contrary the more Advances she made of that
Nature, the more aversion he seemed to have for her, for Ibrahim without being
wanting in the respect he owed her, seemed to be very hard-hearted. Nothing
stings so much the haughtyness of a Beauty as Resistance. It often netled her
to the very Soul; and she would sometimes have willingy been angry, had she not
feared to spoil all. Insomuch, that she wholly employed her mind in
Stratagems, and engaging Artifices to soften the savage humor of this handsome
young Fellow, sometimes she suffered her self to be surprised at the hours she
knew he was to come, in postures that were capable of inflaming with Love the
most insensible hearts in the World, and sometimes she employed him to dress
her, and sometimes to undress her under different pretexts, wherein she did not
at all manage her self, that he might see Beauties, that are the true Poison of
the eyes, there is not a man whose heart is proof against these kind of
Assaults. Ibrahim blushed, and sometimes grew pale on those Occasions, and when
she asked him what he ailed, he knew not what answer to make, but Sighed.

Things were much in this posture when news came of the Sultana of Tripoli's
voyage, and that the Court went to Mahometa, but Ibrahim did not go, having had
some business that stayed him at Tunis. The Queen being extreme uneasy by
reason of his absence, impatiently longed to see him; but to see him in
private, counting all the rest for nothing. Rostan had of late observed, that
Ibrahim was no longer so exact in giving him an account of the Queens carriage;
that he spoke of her with more Moderation, than he used to do; that he stayed
longer, than was requisite in her Apartment, that he even passed whole Days
there. All this I say, having caused him to make some Reflections, he fancied
he was none of the Cunningest; and that so subtle a Woman, as Homais might
easily have Corrupted the Fidelity of such a young Man as Ibrahim. He knew that
though a Woman was Haughty, she might not be insensible, and that he ought not
to Judge of her, by her Carriage to himself; that there are Hearts that love to
stoop, as others do to mount; and that what he had not been able to Effect by
his Services and his Love, another might have brought to pass by his Youth, and
other Qualities that he had not; that every Woman had her weak side, and that
the Secret was to find it out, or rather to be made for it, there being
certainly Hearts that absoluetly depend on the Caprichio of the Stars. He would
have the Pleasure of clearing this Point, he studied Ibrahim, who was not upon
his Guard, not thinking he was so narrowly observed, and he found at length
what he sought for. But he would make no noise of it, till he had wherewith to
convict those, he would accuse; well knowing that in these kind of things
nothing ought to be done by halfes. At the Courts return from Mahometa, He
fancied that the juncture would be favorable enough for him, and that the
Queen who had not seen her dear Ibrahim in a long time would not fail to seek
for an oppertunity; wherein indeed she was not mistaken; for he was no sooner
arrived, than that she let him know by a Mooress who was their confident that
she must absolutely see him that evening, and that she was well assured the
King would not lie in the Seraglio. Ibrahim made Answer, that he would not fail
to come: he knew the Hour and Place of Assignation; those things having been
long Regulated between them. Rostan having only that Affair in his Head,
watched him Incessantly; and perceiving he did all things in have that Evening,
he did not doubt, but that there was some Design of an Amorous Interview:
Insomuch, that the King having a mind he should be of a Party, that was to go
Sup at the General of the Galleyes House, he desired to be Dispensed with all,
having Affairs of great Importance to do; not being willing to lose so fair an
Opportunity, as he fancied was then offered him. And indeed, she could not have
escaped him, had he not had to do with the most subtle Woman that Heaven ever
Created, and with the Blindest Prince that was ever upon the Earth. He caused
Ibrahim to be watched, to know when he went into the Queens Apartment, and
having learnt that he was there; he did not think of taking the ordinary way to
surprise them, well imagining that the Door would be shut, and that Means would
be found out to make the Gallant escape before it should be Opened; and that
this would only make a Noise, and turn all to his own Confusion. He had too
much Experience in those kind of things to undertake them so indiscreetly. The
Queens Chamber joined to a Terrass, which indeed could not be got upon, being
it was Bordered by the Walls of the Castle, and was so High, that it was only
to be Attained by a Ladder; but from the Garret that was over Homais's Chamber,
one might come down by a Rope, yet not without Pain and Hazard; but when a
Person is spurred on by Jealousy, and the Revenge of an outraged Love, he is
willing to undergo all manner of Trouble, and ready to attempt all Hazards,
provided he may bring to pass his Designs. Our Lovers fancied themselves very
secure, not suspecting to be surprised on that side. All the other ways were
Locked up, the Terrass was a Place that was looked upon as inaccessible; and
they had not so much as thought of shutting the Door, because there came a
fresh Air from thence, which in those Hot Countries is something very Charming.
The Beautiful Queen, and happy Ibrahim had not been long together, when the
enraged Rostan came down upon the Terrass. His impatience did not permit him to
wait till they had Wantoned, and Toyed a little together: they were only at the
Preludiums of an Amorous Interview, that are very sensible between two Lovers,
after more than a Fortnights Absence. He was willing (however) to have the
Complaisance of Listening to them a Moment, because he heard them Talk of him,
and that he made part of the Conversation they had together. I never Diverted
my self worse in all my Life (said the Queen) than I did at Mahometa; not only
because you were not there my dear Ibrahim, but for that I was Constrained to
suffer near me, and see daily before my Eyes that Haughty Sultana of Tripoly;
who in Concert with Rostan, had a Design to have played me a base prank by the
means of two Slaves, she brought with her; and by whom they would have
infeccted the easy Humor of poor Caragus, under the pretext of making him a
Present of them. Thou know how little I care for my Husband, how little
those two wretched Slaves could have Disturbed me; I would even Furnish him
with Prittier than those my self, if it was necessary; but as they came from
the Hands of my greatest Enemies, I was not willing they should Triumph over
me. In a word, I got the better of that proud Sultana, and that insolent
Rostan; she was obliged to return with her two Slaves, and he staid with shame,
for having had such ill success in his Design. But Madam (Interrupted Ibrahim)
who can assure me, That the Hatred you have Conceived against Ibrahim can last;
for he is both the Handsomest, and Wittiest Man in the Kingdom, and has the
most Power with the King: In a word, a Man you are Indepted to for all you
have? Thou say true (Answered the Queen) but it is for all these very
Reasons that I hate him: he fancies he Merits all things, and that there is not
a Woman's Heart that can resist the Advantages he has; and that all the World
ought to submit to that Favor, which he unworthily Usurps over the King's
easyness: And for my part, I am Resolved to let him see to the Contrary: I
Laugh both at him, and all his Power; and my Affection, that he considers as
the utmost Triumph of his Fortune, has not found in him, what it finds in thee.
It is for thee Dear Ibrahim (Added she) that it has kept it self all entire.
The King his Throne and Crown are not worth the Pleasure I take in seeing, and
being alone with thee.

Such passionate Words as these were Accompanied as is easy to believe, with
several sorts of Tendernesses, and followed, I shall not say by what, it is
sufficient to have a Humane Understanding to Comprehend it, and a Heart
something less sensible than Marble, to have a Sense of it. I leave you to
Imagine what a Rage Rostan was in. I fancy, that though the most Complaisant of
all Men had been in his place, he could not have forborne disturbing so
agreeable an Entertainment: Neither did he wait till all was done; he entered,
and found our Lovers in great disorder; and doubtless, very much surprised at
the sight of him. Rostan took his Sabre in his Hand, and the poor Ibrahim
fancied he was then a Dead Man; but the Queen being the boldest Creature that
eever was, flew upon Rostan, not without being Wounded, gave time to her
Gallant to Recover himself out of his Fright, and make his Escape; and she
likewise, made a Thousand Reproaches to the insolent Rostan, for the boldness
he had taken to enter at that Hour into her Chamber, and of his baseness to
make use of his Sword against a Woman. Rostan, who was not himself in his Fury,
was however stayed by the quantity of Blood, that he saw run down the Queen's
Face, though the Wound was not very great; but seeing that the Gallant was
Escaped, who was the most Essential Party, he would have Run after him, to have
stayed him. However something too late, for the Sultana foreseeing his Design,
was Nimbler than he, and having shut the Door she took the Key, and cried out
Murder withal her force. The King having for some Reason put off the Party he
had made, till the Night after, being by chance in his Apartment, was much
surprised to hear all this Noise, and Running in all have toward the Queen's
Chamber, he Knocked at the Door, and hearing still a Crying out, and they not
Opening the Door, he caused it to be broke Open, and found the Queen all
Disheviled, her Face all covered with Blood, and Rostan with a Sabre in his
Hand. Never was Man so Amazed; but Fury succeeding Surprise at the sight of so
strange a Spectacle. Ah Traitor! (said he to Rostan, and Drawing his Sabre) Is
it thus that thou dishonourest thy King, or do thou Attempt the Life of what
he has most Dear? And Running on a sudden at him, one would have said that he
was going to Cleave him in two; but the good Prince not being of a Bloody
Humor, and having never done so much in his Life before, as to Draw his Sword,
surprised to see with what indifference, and without moving Rostan stood him,
though he might have Run away, or defended himself, stopped, and considering
him from Head to Foot: What came thou to do here? (Added he) and if thou art
Guilty, as thou really art, Why do thou not steal from my Vengeance? It is
because I am not Guilty, Answered Rostan with a firm Voice) that I do not fear
that Vergeance; for it is not upon me that you ought to vent your Fury: There
is the Criminal (Added he, pointing at the Queen) and the Object of her Crime
is so base a Subject, that I should not dare to name it. Homais, as soon as she
had seen the King, seemed to Faint away, that she might Animate him the more
against Rostan, Recovering from the pretended Swoon, just as the Bashaw had
done Speaking: Ah Sir! (Cried she with a Languishing Voice) What an Abominable
Man is that? He is not Contented with having endeavored to Ravish from me my
Honor; he would likewise Ruin me in your Opinion, which is more Dear to me
than the Life he would deprive me of, for not consenting to his infamous
Desires. Base Wretch! and thereupon a Torrent of Tears stopping her Voice, she
gave the King time to vent himself in Injuries, and Reproaches against Rostan.
The Truth is, that Women for the most part are very subtle Comedians, and that
in some Occasions it is difficult to prevent, being deceived. Caragus was not
much Enchanted by Homais, and in any other Encounter, Rostan would have had a
Thousand times the better of her: But here all spoke against him, the Hour,
Place, the Sabre in his Hand, the Blood that Ran still from the Queen's Head;
and moreover, all her Grimaces and Postures: for she Acted her Part so to the
Life, that it would have raised Pity in Tigers, and said not a Word to him: Nor
would he give himself the Trouble to Accuse her; and much less to Defend
himself. And indeed, what likelihood was there in what he said, that it was not
he but another, who would have dishonored the King, seeing he only was shut up
in the Queens Chamber; and that poor Princess in the most pitiful Condition
that it was possible to see a Woman in. And this was what the King represented
to him; but he Answered, That it was not then a fit time for him to Clear that
Mystery; and that it was Requisite that the Man he Mentioned, should be first
Seized, and from whom he might Learn all that Adventure; that he would go use
his Endeavors, and bring him to him as soon as he could. What Man will he
bring? (said the Sultana) without it be some one that he had doubtless Bribed
against me; and who is it that can enter my Chamber, he having the Key in his
Pocket. I the Key, (Replied Rostan, looking upon her with Indignation) I the
Key of your Chamber? Yes you (Replied she;) And Sir (Added she, turning toward
the King) be pleased to Search him, and you will find it. Which the King being
pleased to do, did not fail to find it in his Pocket; which was an Evident
Proof of Rostan's Crime: but it was the Queen who striving with him had put it
there. Well Rostan (said the King to him, with his Arms-a-Cross) What do you
say now, and who are those People you can bring? who shall justify you for the
most Horrid Perfideousness, and the falsest Attempt that such a Man as you
could Commit. Be gone (Added he) your Head shall Answer for it. The Unfortunate
Rostan, without being concerned at these Threatenings, lifting his Eyes up to
Heaven, O God (Cried he) can there be such a Wicked Woman upon Earth; having
said these words, he withdrew to go seek out Ibrahim; but there was little
likelihood he would stay the Issue. Men never Sleep when they have been
Surprised in such an Action as that; and Fear is almost inseparable from Crime.

As for Homais, who had had the Happiness, and Address to turn the Advantage on
her side, she had not so much to Fear; the King stayed with her to Comfort her,
promising her no less, than to cause Rostan to be Hanged the next Day, at one
of the Corners of the Castle, being the usual Place for such kind of
Executions. Homais, I say, being willing to make use of the Conjuncture, for
the securing to her self entirely the King's Confidence, cast her self at his
Knees, and after having Obtained from him, that he would not be Angry with her,
for what she was a going to tell him; she confessed to him, after what manner
she came to the Happiness of being his Wife, what Rostan pretended to upon that
account; and how that all the Rage, and all the Hatred he had against her,
proceeded only from her refusing ever to Consent to so infamous a Proposition;
and for that she had always been Faithful to him. Caragus was so Astonished at
this piece of News, that he could hardly believe the Queen; but she Confirmed
what she said with so many Oaths, and added to it so many particular
Circumstances, offering to maintain all this to his Face, and that he durst
not, disavow it; that at length the King could not forbear giving Credit to
her, seeing that all these Accusations suited very well with the Adventure of
that Day. The Resolution of putting him to Death was already taken; and it was
a thing certain, that he should be Executed the next Morning at break of Day.
Thus you see Resolutions quickly taken, and Sentences as quickly past; but the
Minds of some Princes, as well as of some other Men, cannot answer much for
their Resolutions. And indeed, this was none of the most Just that ever was. He
Condemned a Man without hearing him: a Man, who in Truth seemed to have
Offended him in the most sensible manner; but whom he had ever Loved more than
himself, who was the Master of his Wills; and to say all in a word, the King's
King: As indeed happened the Day after, when he came to the King's Dressing.
How dare you appear before me (said the King to him) after what you have done?
Do not you know (Added he) that I have caused a Gibbet to be prepared for you?
Yes (Answered Rostan boldly) but it will be for a Faithless Queen, and her Dear
Ibrahim. Why Ibrahim? (Replied the King) and what Concern can that poor young
Man have in the Queen's Crime, if it is true that she is Criminal? Nothing Sir
(Answered Rostan in derision) without it be, that last Night I found him in a
fair way to do you a great deal of Honor; but I fancy it is not the first
time, and you would not have had any Reason to doubt of this, had he not
escaped from me; and that the Queen having shut the Door, seized on the Key,
and Maliciously put it into my Pocket. The King, all easy as he was to
Impressions, and especially in regard of things that Rostan told him, did not
however believe it at first; but when he had Related to him all the
Circumstances of that Adventure; and that he had learnt that Ibrahim was gone
aside, he begun to suspect something; yet he had such a kindness for that
Handsome Young Fellow, that he laid nothing so much to Heart as his Absence. He
Asked Rostan, If he knew not whither he was gone; and if they had not sent in
search after him: He Answered, That he had caused above a Hundred Spahy's to
Pursue him; and that he hoped to see him Hanged before Noon. Why Hanged?
(Replied this weak Prince) How! Shall I put to Death for the sake of a Woman, a
Man who perhaps has no other Crime than his Weakness? No, (Continued he) I
should Condemn my self, who have much greater Failings in that kind than he
has. If Ibrahim has injured me, it is without doubt the Queen who brought him
to it: and what can we expect from a Woman, but all manner of ill, as Our Law
tells Us? No, no, Ibrahim merits some excuse; and if the Queen is Culpable, we
must make use of the Privilege we have, which is to put her away, without
staining my Hands in the Blood or Life of People, who would Accuse me before
Mahomet of my own Crimes. Such Morals as these are owned by the Turkish
Divinity; and I find them agreeable enough in what Concerns the Failings of
others, and especially those of Women: but few Husbands in Europe would Comply
with them, or be content to follow the Example of Caragus. They would have
talked immediately of Daggers and Poison; and there is no kind of Death but
what they would have made use of, to have made away both the false Wife, and
her Gallant. But this is but a Folly, and the greatest that can be Committed. A
Wife is a Wife; and though her Husband be never so Prudent and Careful, if she
has a Mind to Honor his Wife Pate with a fine stately Branch, she will find
the means to deck him, notwithstanding all his Obstinacy and Precaution.

Thus when the thing is done, the best way is to Comfort ones self as the King
of Tunis did. Rostan however was in a Rage; but notwithstanding all he could
say to Animate the Spirit of his Master to Revenge, Ibrahim was too Dear to
him; and he would rather have lost a Thousand Wives, than that Favorite. The
Africans are strange People in certain Cases. They have Inclinations, and
Humors that raise Horror in all other Mortals. And yet it is but mere,
Gallantry amongst them; and they make Songs and Romances, after the Moorish
manner, as we do in Europe, upon a fine Mistress. Let us leave this Point which
is too Odious for Rational People, and return to Rostan, who not being able to
persuade the King to take a vigorous Resolution against Persons, who had so
cruelly Offended him. Left him, to go know if there was no News of Ibrahim. He
learnt that he was newly Seized. He caused him to be brought before the King,
all Bound, and Fettered as he was; who was sensibly touched to see him in that
Condition; and falling into a Rage against Rostan himself: he caused him to be
unbound, took him aside, and made him confess more things than he was willing
to know, He returned to Rostan, and asked his Pardon for Ibrahim, though it
belonged to him alone to Grant it him; and that the Offense purely concerned
him, and not Rostan, who had no other share in it, than what his Jealousy made
him take. Now all Rostan's Love being turned into Fury, he did not find it
difficult to Comply with the King, in Pardoning Ibrahim, seeing he would have
it so, expecting that he would at least give an example of Justice on the other
Party; and that he would Revenge them both on the haughtiest, and most
ungrateful Woman upon the Face of the Earth, which the King promised him to do;
but more to pacify him, than with any Design to keep his Word; for he knew
hemself well enough And indeed, he had no sooner seen the Queen, than that she
got him on her side against Rostan, persuading him that there was Treachery in
her Case, and that he had Corrupted Ibrahim, who ever having had a spite
against her; for that in the beginning, she had refused him Entrance into her
Apartment, had taken at length that Occasion to Revenge himself. The King after
all, knew not what to think of it; he saw on all sides probability enough in
what was told him, without knowing who had reason, and who not: But he still
bore all the Burden; and therefore, could have wished that all Parties could
have been as well satisfied, as he was. He desired the Queen not to speak to
him any more of Rostan, and then Rostan to leave the Queen at Quiet; and that
he would leave to him himself the Care of her Conduct, that he would have an
Eye over her; and that it would be so much the worse for him if he was
deceived. As for Ibrahim, he was expressly forbidden upon pain of Hanging, ever
to enter the Seraglio, but with the King, nor to have any Commerce directly or
indirectly with the Queen.

At that time Caragus being obliged for some Affairs of State, to send an
Ambassador to Tripoly; he gave that Character to Rostan, not so much to render
it the more signal, being one of most magnificent, and pompous Men of his
Kingdom, as to be then rid of him; and enjoy a little Repose for some time in
his Family, hoping that this Absence might likewise in some manner, stifle the
Hatred of those two irritated Spirits. Wherefore Rostan departed for Tripoly,
and Arrived at that Court with an extraordinary Train of People, all well made,
and with an Epuipage more becoming a Prince, than an Ambassador. The Rebel was
retreated toward the Mountains, whither the Forces of the King of Tunis joined
with those of the Bashaw, pursued him: Insomuch, that the City was open, and
they only thought of Diverting themselves for that Happiness, which passed for
a kind of Victory. Rostan's coming did not at all diminish the Divertisements;
on the contrary they were Augmented for his sake, who not only Loved them, but
whose Humor and Wit, was even proper to invent New Ones, as he did. At length,
after having passed some Months in all manner of Pleasures, and dispatched the
Affairs with the Bashaw, He was sent about, he took his Leave; and did not fail
to take with him out of Revenge, which he was never wanting in, that Christian
Slave, who had so Charmed the King his Master; and whom the Sultana his Sister,
would have made him a Present of. Wherefore, he returned very well satisfied to
Tunis; but not so much for the Glory he had Acquired in that Embassy, as for
the joy he had upon the account of that Fair Slave, for whom he did not doubt,
but that the King would take Fire more than ever, as soon as he saw her; and
that by this means he should almost Mad the proud Queen. The Truth is, she did
not expect such a blow; for having taken Advantage of her Enemies absence, she
had made such progresses over the King's Mind, whose Destiny was to let some or
other ever Govern him, that she fancied her self above all his Enterprises: she
had likewise seen, contrary to his Order, her Dear Ibrahim; and this good
Prince was so lulled asleep, or rather so insensible, that he did not see, or
would not see what passed before his Eyes. At length Rostan Arrived; and as he
never went by-ways to Work in all he did, and that he Loved to do every thing
so, as to be talked of; he had not the precaution that others would have taken,
which was to have Concealed that fair Slave; and have showed her to the King,
before the Queen knew any thing of her. He caused her to enter with him into
Tunis with a Queenly Pomp; nothing being more Rich, nor better Suited than his
Train. Homais had no sooner the News of it, than being Transported with
Passion, she ran to the King's Chamber, who knew nothing yet of this business,
and so well persuaded him, and Represented to him the Malice of Rostan; that at
length she obtained his word, that he would not see that Slave. And indeed, the
King was so Resolved, if he had not had to do with a Man, who knew him better
than he did himself; and who would have made him done things more difficult,
than those that were according to his Inclination. He saw him enter his
Chamber, coming to Kiss his Hand, and give him an Account of the Success of his
Commission. Immediately the Affection he had for him, and which was as natural
to him, having made him forget part of the things he had newly promised the
Queen; he Received and Embraced him, with all the Caresses imaginable,
Repeating to him several times, how tiresome his Absence had been to him; and
that he had hardly Relished any real Joy: but then Proceeding from these
Tendernesses to the News he had newly Learnt, that he had brought with him that
Christian Slave; he represented to him as seriously as he could, the fault he
had Committed, to seek thus for Occasions to fall out again with the Queen,
that he knew very well, he Loved to be at Peace; and that he had desired him to
Live in good Correspondence with her: and in a word, he might be assured that
it was to no purpose, he had given himself the Trouble of bringing with him
that Creature; for he had made an Oath not to see her. But Sir, (Answered
Rostan) What Reason has the Queen then to Complain of me? What Injury do I do
her? That Creature has Charmed me, as well as she did you; I offered her to
bring her with me, and take care of her; and she was willing I should. How do I
Wrong the Queen? And you Sir, Who desires you to see her? How! A Beauty whom I
will make the sweetest Charm of my Life of, whom I only brought for my own use;
and whom I am already Jealous of to Death; Should I desire so Handsome, and
Amorous a Prince as you are to see her? Pardon me if I tell you, you are too
Wise, and know me too well to have only such a Thought; but I perceive what
your Address Aims at. I am too good a Servant of the Queen, I will not make
new Quarrels between you. She is a very good Princess, she deserves all your
Affection; and even to Morrow, in Compliance to her desire, I will send my
Beautiful and Dear Slave into such a place, as no Body in the World shall know
what is become of her. The King, who knew Rostan as perfectly well, as Rostan
knew him, perceived his Malice, and the Sense that was to be given to his
Words. However, he could not forbear; and the thought that this Malicious Man
was going to divert himself agreeably to his Costs, if he let him proceed,
having brought into his Mind, all the Graces of that Charming Slave, whom he
could not see without Grief, and Jealousy in the Arms of another, making him
repent the Reproaches he had newly made him; he told him (not without Blushing)
that he should not be so hasty, and that he would speak to the Queen, and
endeavor to make her give her an Apartment in the Seraglio. An Apartment in
the Seraglio (Replied the Cheating Rostan) Why so? May not I have to my self
(Pursued he) a Maid whom you Despise; and will you have it said, that it is
always I who put your Royal Family into Disorder; and have me bear the brunt
of all the Queen's Anger, who has already but too great an Aversion for me. Ah!
Send me back with that Slave to Tripoly: For I should choose rather to be
unhappy the rest of my Days, with that Beautiful Creature, than to give you
more reason of reproaching me, as you now do. The King was in such a Confusion,
that he knew not what Answer to make him; for he easily perceived that he
Triumphed over his Weakness. But at length, the Love he had formerly had for
her; and which got Ground on his Heart by the degrees, that Rostan seemed to
Oppose his Design, having made him break through all these Obstacles: He told
him, That it was absolutely his Will, that this Slave should stay; that he knew
very well, that it was for him he brought her; but that some Measures were to
be taken with the Queen. Rostan Vowed, that what he had said, was the naked
truth; but that he was his King, and the absolute Master of all that belonged
to him; and that thus he might dispose of her as he pleased, provided he would
Answer for all that should happen; and especially on the Queen's Account, whom
he knew to be his Sworn Enemy, and that she would not fail to Accuse him, as
soon as she should know the Amorous Commerce he had with that Slave. The King,
having taken upon himself, the Care of all these Things, went at that Instant
to find out the Queen; and told her, That he came again to Confirm to her the
Protestation he had made her, not to see that Slave; but that for her greater
Security, and their mutual Repose, it was requisite she should take her to her
self, and give her some small Apartment, such as she thought fit in the
Seraglio; because that as long as she should be in Rostan's Hands, he could
neither see him, nor go to his House; but that she would fancy, and be jealous
it was upon that Slaves account. The Queen was easily Trepanned; hoping indeed,
that having that Slave at her disposal, and in her Eye both Night and Day, it
would be more difficult for the King to see her, than at Rostan's; who having
her in his House, would not have failed to make the King break his word at
length. Insomuch, that she considered the Proposal he made her, as much to her
Advantage; and she desired him, That if he was willing to set her Mind at Rest,
he would let her come as soon as possible, and not stay till the malign
Persuasions of her Enemy, had made him change his Resolution again, as they
already had so often done. The King promised her, That she should be in the
Seraglio that same Day; and that he was going to give Orders for that end.

Clarice, (Thus was this Beautiful Slave called) was not one of those sparkling
Beauties, that surprise people, as far off as they see them. Her Air was Sweet
and Modest, the Face of a Child; but of a Child that has a Thousand Charms,
Brown, fine Blew Eyes, and a Complexion Whiter than is possible to be Imagined.
Her Shape more especially was extreme Delicate and Fine. She had something
Cunning in her Mouth, and which was suitable to the Character of her Soul; for,
notwithstanding all her Innocence, which her Air of Youth was Accompanied with;
she was more subtle and dissembling, than any Creature of her Age. She was then
Twenty Years Old at least, and seemed not to be Sixteen. She was a Native of
Chio, an Island in all Ages Fruitful in Beauties, and is at present under the
Dominion of the Grand Seignior. Her Father, who was of a pretty Considerable
Family in the Island; but whose Estate and Fortune was but small, Sold her to
the Admiral of Tripoly, who made a Present of her to the Sultana. But now
Clarice was sent to the Seraglio of the King of Tunis; where the Queen, to
whose Disposition it was left to give her an Apartment, Lodged her as meanly as
she could, and all the rest of her Equipage; and as her Entertainment was
answerable to her Lodging, it is easy to fancy what kind of Life she passed,
being a Stranger, and in a Place where she neither saw nor knew any Body. This
Life was very different from what Rostan had promised Her at Tripoly, having
given her hopes, That if she managed her self right, and made good use of her
Charms, she would become absolute Mistress of the King; and that there could
not be with such an Amorous Prince as he was, a more happy Creature than she.
Rostan was not a false Prophet herein; but the time was not yet come, and Love
has his Hours.

In the mean time, Clarice Lived with a great deal of Grief, and in a sad
Melancholy in this Seraglio. Caragus, whose Prudence required, for the Curing
the Queen's Jealousy, that he should dissemble, and not see (at least in the
Beginning) that Slave, that he might have the more Liberty to do so afterward,
constrained himself for some time, not without Violence; but by much
Constraining, he at length forgot her; being of a Humor, that such things as
put him in pain, displeased him quickly; and the Flame of his Passion being
only like a Fire of Straw; it was often almost as soon out as kindled. He
hardly remembered the fair Clarice was in the Seraglio, when Rostan came one
Morning into his Chamber, and showed him this Letter that he had newly received
from this Slave.

AM I then Condemned, My Lord, to Dye like a Criminal; and did you only bring
me into this Country, to make me end my days in a Cruel Prison? for, it is thus
I may call the sad abode I am Confined to; and where I have less Liberty, than
the worst of Prisoners. But can you be Ignorant of this? And have you so far
Abandoned me, as to take no Pity of me? Rather cause me to be sent back to
Tripoly, where I was Happy. You know it, and you ought not to abuse the
Confidence a Young Maid put in you, who did not fancy you would have thus
deceived her. You see how little the King esteems me: He hardly knows where I
am Lodged; for I do not doubt if he did, he would be so Generous, as to take me
from hence. Be so kind, as to represent it to him your self; and demand of him
my Liberty, or at least, that he would suffer me to go to Tripoly; for
considering the Melancholy that Oppresses me here, I do not believe I can live
Three days longer.

Clarice.


The King was moved at this Letter, and looking upon Rostan with some
Confusion, he declared to him how much he was concerned at it. But Rostan not
Contenting himself with that, told him, That he desired him to restore that
Slave; and that he did not see for what reason he had forced from him, as he
might say, a Creature he Loved so dearly, if he had a Design to make her Dye
with Grief. God forbid (Answered the King) that I should have such a Thought;
her Death would cost me too many Tears. What Pleasure do you then take (Replied
Rostan) to have her in the Seraglio, where you see how she is Treated? The King
falling to Excuse himself, upon the Measures he was obliged to keep with the
Queen. O Heavens! Is it possible (Cried Rostan) that you should have more
regard for a Wife, than she has for you? For in a word, do not you know, that
her Commerce with Ibrahim continues still; and has she blinded you to that
point, as that you do not see, what all the Seraglio sees? The King Blushed at
this Reproach, not but that he had some suspicion of what Rostan told him; but
because, that indeed he almost made himself blind, that he might not see
further, than was necessary for his repose into the Queen's Affairs. He cared
not for her; and had on the contrary a very great Affection for Ibrahim, of
whom he would have been more Jealous than of his Wife. And for this reason, he
was afraid to be thoroughly Informed of this Affair, lest it might oblige him
out of Honor to Punish, or at least to put away this Dear Favorite; and the
one was almost as Cruel to him, as the other. Rostan came very unseasonably to
acquaint him with more than he was willing to know; and quickly breaking off
this Discourse, he told him, to Appease him, That he would see Clarice that Day
without fail. The Queen being something indisposed, gave him a very fair
Opportunity. He had been told before where that Slave was Lodged; and for the
more Precaution, and that his Visit might make the less Noise, he resolved to
stay till it was Night, and go thither all alone. He came thither, but was
strangely disapointed; for entering the Chamber, he found the Queen there
instead of Clarice. They were both extremely Surprised; for as they sought not
for one another, they did not think to have seen one another in that Place.
They were both of this Opinion, that their coming thither, was not with design
to have met together; and having been some time without speaking, and the Queen
as the boldest, breaking Silence, I Imagined Sir, (said she to him) that I
should Surprise you here, at one time or other. And for my part (Answered the
King) the Truth is, I did not think to Surprise you here. How! What have you to
say? (Replied she) Is it a Crime to watch you, having such Reason to distrust
you? No (Replied he) but it is a very great one, to pretend to be indisposed in
the Morning, and come to an Assignation in the Evening. I Sir, to an
Assignation (Replied she) O Heavens! Is it to save your self from my just
Reproaches, that you begin thus first to accuse me? I perceive what your
business is here. And I (Answered the King) suspect no less of you; but I shall
Remedy it. Ah! I shall Remedy it too (Answered she, Rising up hastily to have
gone away) I will not be played upon by a wretched Slave; and be looked upon
more as a Cipher, than a Queen. No Body has a Right over my Actions, Madam,
(Replied the King with something a fierce Tone) but I have over yours. Over
mine Sir, (Answered the Queen again) you have, it is true; but be assured, that
I shall ever Regulate my self by you. You are too good an Example (Added she,
as she was going away) not to be followed. The King weary of seeing, as well as
hearing her, made her no Answer, and let her go; but not knowing where to find
Clarice, seeing she was not in the Apartment that was given her, he was obliged
to return to his own, and make inquiry after her. It was Ibrahim's Misfortune
to meet with him in the way, as in all probability he was going to the Queen.
He was Amazed to see the King, who Eying him with some indignation. You will at
length weary my Patience Ibrahim, (said he to him) you abuse my good Nature;
and you do not remember how often, and what I forbad you. This young Favorite
not wanting Wit, seeing the King came from Clarice's Apartment, made use of
that pretext to justify himself; and told him, That having learnt that he had a
desire to make a Visit to that Slave, he came immediately after him to acquaint
him, how that the Queen had, two days before, given her a better Apartment
than the former. Though the King had no reason to give Credit to what Ibrahim
told him, who could not divine his Design, being he had mentioned it to no Body
but Rostan. He contented himself however with this Excuse; because he was not
willing to have any reason to be displeased with him, and having asked him
whither they had removed that Slave; he referred his Visit till the next day,
for fear the Queen should come and disturb them.

It was not to oblige Clarice, that this Jealous Princess hnd given her another
Apartment; but because that she had Being in a retired place, where there was
no likelihood the King would come, and find her; without that he had a Design
to see that Slave, which she did not expect; she fancied it would be more
convenient for her Amors, than her own Apartment, where she was afraid of
being Discovered; and did not enjoy in repose the pleasure of seeing her Dear
Ibrahim, as she hoped to do with full Liberty in Clarice's Chamber. But she had
but ill Success the first time, which did not however much Trouble her, being
very glad to have found the King in a way to break the Oaths he had made her,
of not seeing that Slave; fancying that this alone might serve her for an
Excuse, if she for Her part, was not found so very Faithful.

Rostan was at the King's Rising, to know how that first Visit had passed. This
Prince, who could not keep any Secret from him, not only acquainted him, that
he had not found Clarice in her former Apartment, but that he had met the Queen
there. Whereupon Rostan did not fail to Penetrate immediately into the Truth of
this Change; and to Animate the King at the same time, both against the Queen,
and for Clarice, whose Life he rendered him Responsible; for, if he did not go
and see her, Caragus, who was already all disposed to it, was easily persuaded
to follow Rostan's Counsel; and as soon as he was Dressed, he went to that Slaves
Apartment, whom he found at her Toylet, and in an Undress. She was (as I have
already sad) a very pretty Creature; but more especially in a careless Habit,
and never was Woman so Charming as she in that Condition. The King was in a
Surprise; the Truth is, that considering the Complexion he was of, there needed
not much to Charm him; but he was this time quite after another manner, than
ever he had been before; and to that Degree, that he knew not what to say to
her, in the perplexity that sight cast him in at first. Clarice not expecting
this Honor, seeing the little Notice that Prince had taken of her; Blushed as
soon as she saw him, and her Cheeks Glowed with a Red, so much the more
Charming; as that it admirably well became the Whiteness of her Complexion, and
that it was Natural. Is it for such a Person as you, Sir, (said she rising) to
Surprise People? I come here (Answered the King) with a great deal of
Confusion, to ask you a Thousand Pardons for my Negligence. I fancied, I had
Reasons enough to justify my self; but since I have seen you, I know not any,
but what Condemns me: For nothing ought to be capable of making me forget the
most Charming Person upon the Earth. Clarice, who had Evidently observed the
Effect that her Beauty had produced upon the King's Heart, was extremely
delighted to see him Confirm it by his Words. She Answered him with her tender,
and innocent Air, That the Honor was too great that he did her: And in a Word,
the Conversation proceeding much further, it ended by a New Apartment, which
the King promised Clarice; and he only left her to go and give Order to prepare
it for her that very day.

The Queen having had Notice from Ibrahim, of the Visit the King had made that
Slave, was extremely Alarmed, to hear that one of the finest Apartments of the
Seraglio, was Furnishing for her. She guessed what this tended to; and
Attributing all to Rostan her Mortal Enemy, by whose persuasion the King did
all things; she sent to desire this Prince to do her the Favor to come one
Moment to her Apartment, that she had something to say to him. The King made
Answer, He was something Busy then, and that he would see her another time. The
Queen more outraged than ever, could hardly curb her Rage; but as it was not
yet time to show it: and that she did not Despair of reducing the King. She
resolved to Dissemble, and knowing that he was in the Seraglio, seeing that
Apartment preparing himself: She without further waiting, went to find him out.
As soon as she appeared, all the Company in the Room withdrew, and she cast her
self at the King's Feet, with a sad dejected Look, and a very humble
Countenance; but yet Majestic, Grandeur being as inseparable from all her
Actions. She held a great Handkerchief before her Eyes, with which she seemed
to dry up some Tears; and using the Tone of a very Afflicted Woman: May I Sir,
(said she to him) ask you one Favor more? I am so Unfortunate, that having
made all my Happiness consist in possessing you, I am not capable of procuring
yours; and that you seek elsewhere, wherewith to Content your self; My Presence
would disturb your Pleasures here: I cannot see a Blessing that belongs to me
in the Arms of another. Give me leave to withdraw, and go pass far from hence
the remainder of a wretched Life. The King, who had expected, and prepared
himself for some Action of Fury from that haughty Princess; against which, he
would perhaps have resisted, found himself Surprised with so much Humility; and
was almost half Vanquished with only seeing at his Feet a Creature of that
Humor. The Truth is, that nothing has so great an Effect upon a Heart, as the
Humble Returns of those Proud Spirits, because they are unexpected; and that
they are known to be very Rare, and that they cost them Dear. The King (as I
have newly said) wholly Changed with this only Action; and already forgetting
Clarice, he spoke to her with so much Sweetness, as made her discover all his
Weakness. The dissembling Homais did not fail to take Advantage of it, and told
him all that was capable of Engaging him, and making him abandon the Design he
had in Favor of the Slave, not ceasing to protest to him, That she had neither
Titles, Honors, Estate, nor Life, but what she would willingly Sacrifice to
him: but that he ought to Consider, that for a Moment of Pleasure he might have
with a Slave, he was going to Render her the most wretched Woman upon the
Earth, in the sight of all his Kingdom; though all the Divan had deemed her
Worthy of sharing with him his Crown. The King, as if it had been a great
Crime, to have once wronged a Woman, whom he knew was not very true to him,
denied he had ever had any such Design; and did all he could to set her Mind at
rest. But the Queen still seeming very much disquieted, told him, That there
was only two ways to pacify her, which was either to send that Slave back to
Tripoly, or Marry her to some one of her Religion. The King was Troubled at
this Proposition; but not being able to Excuse doing it after the Advances he
had made in that point; He chose rather to get her a Husband, than deprive
himself all together of the sight of so Lovely a Maid. Wherefore he told her,
He would Marry her; and that he would Endeavor to find some Christian that was
a fit Match for her. The Queen satisfied with this Assurance, though it had
been more safe for her, Clarice had been sent back: she only desired the King,
he would once keep his word with her; and that for their Mutual Repose, this
affair might not be deferred; to the end, that Slave might leave the Seraglio
as soon as possible. Caragus promised her to do it; and parting, he went to
Clarice's Apartment, to acquaint her with this News, and see how she would
Receive it. But she could not fail of being Surprised, after the Obliging
things he had said, and the Promises he had made her, to see so sudden, and so
great a Change: She could not forbear shedding Tears, and desired the King,
since it was left to her choice to Marry, or to return to Tripoly, she might
have leave to go thither; not being willing to redouble her unhappiness, by
Marrying a Man, whose Fortune was as much to make as hers. The King being moved
with her Tears, and Charmed more than ever with her Beauty, was now much less
willing, than before, to part from her. But means were to be found to Appease
the Queen, or at least to stop her Furies: for he Dreaded her violent Spirit;
and therefore, had occasion for Rostan's Counsel.

The Queen had been so often deceived by the Promises the King had made her,
that she would have had Reason to fear, he would have failed her again this
time, if she had known the Passion he had for that Slave; but as the King had
seldom seen her, she fancied it was only a slight Amor, which he would make no
difficulty of Sacrificing to her Satisfaction: Insomuch, that she expected to
see Clarice suddenly Married, which she thought would put a stop to his budding
Desires, which might have been disadvantageous to her, if she had not bethought
her self betimes of preventing it; for by removing that Creature out of the
King's sight, and Marrying her with a Christian, was not only the means of
making him slight her, but forget her altogether: the force of his Passion
never Proceeding so far, as to Love People long, that were out of his sight.
She was expecting with great impatience the Conclusion of that Affair, when she
saw the King come into her Chamber, who told her smilling, That it was a thing
Concluded on, that she should be satisfied; and that Clarice was going to
Marry, not a Christian, but a Turk; because there being in that Country only
wretched Slaves of that Religion, she chose rather to turn Turk, than be
Reduced to so miserable a Necessity. The Queen, after having thanked the King
for his Complaisance; and having declared to him, through a Zeal of Religion,
the joy she had of that Conversion, asked him, Who it was he designed for her
Husband? The King made Answer, That it was Ibrahim; and that Clarice, who had
seen him two or three times by chance, having found him to her Mind, had made
Choice of him her self; and that he had given her his Word that she should have
him. The Sultana not expecting to be Attacked on that side, was in an instant
so full of Grief, that she was not so much Mistress of her self, as to prevent
showing it in her Looks. She was even quite out of Countenance; and
notwithstanding all the boldness of her Spirit, she remained mute, and without
reply. The King, whose Design was to observe her, took great Delight to see her
in that Perplexity; and that he might quite Confound her; I do not see, Madam
(pursued he with a Rallying Tone, which however was not usual to him) how a
fitter Husband for that Slave can be found. She is Pretty, Ibrahim is Handsome;
and I am sure all the Earth will approve of so Accomplished a Match. As for you,
Madam, -- For me, Sir, (Interrupted she) I shall not Oppose it: but I perceive
your Design; you would give that Slave to Ibrahim, because that, being Master
of the Husband, you might easily have the Wife at your disposal: Thus you are
willing enough to Consent to it; because by this means, you Dispose of her so,
as to see her with the more Convenience: But Alas! All the Misfortune will fall
upon me. Ah! No Madam, (Interrupted the King Her) If that Reason only makes you
fear the Union of those two Persons; For your Satisfaction, I will send them
both far from hence; and I will go this very Instant to make them Consent to
it. The King, who never knew how to Dissemble, Acted his part so well this
time, that he deceived the Queen, as subtle as she was; for all he had said to
her, came purely from Rostan, who knowing the weak side of the Lady better than
the King, had given him his Lesson; being assured, she would sooner Consent to
all things, than this Match. And indeed, the Queen Loved Ibrahim with such a
Passion, or rather such a Rage, that there was nothing but what she would have
done, to have prevented losing him; and the King had no sooner left her, than
that all Alarmed, she ran to her Closet, to Write to that Dear Gallant; which
she did in these Terms, in the Emotion and Trouble she was in.

WE are Ruined my Dear Ibrahim, if I do not see thee immediately. The King
Designs to part Us, and give thee to a wretched Slave. Think but how great my
Grief will be, and thy Misfortune. I should Dye of Regret, and thou would not
have any great Satisfaction with her; for it is not for thy sake that she is to
be Married to thee. The King is in Love with her, and he knows that I Love
thee. He makes use of thee, to Favor his Desires, and Revenge himself on me at
the same time. Be upon thy Guard; I fancy that thou have that kindness for me
as not to quit me for another: But herein thou must show Resulution, and be
assured, that I will never abandon thee; and that I will sooner lose my Life,
than lose thee. Farewell, I expect thee, that we may take together the Measures
that are necessary for the Triumphing over our Enemies.

This Letter was safely Delivered to the most Dear Ibrahim; but came a Moment
too late, because that Rostan, whose stirring Humor, when any Malicious Prank
was to be undertaken, especially against the Queen, had already prevented her.
He had spoke to Ibrahim, and secured all: Insomuch, that the Answer he made
Her, was thus:

I Am the most Unfortunate of all Men, Madam, for I see nothing but Death on
all sides. I am ordered to Marry a Slave, and am Condemned to Dye, if I do not
Obey; and yet how wretched shall I be if I Marry her: I lose you, and that is
more than Dying. Alas! If I might at least see you one Moment, and take my last
Leave of you, Death would seem less Cruel to me; but I am so strictly Guarded
in the Prison of the Seraglio, that there is no way for me to come, and lay my
self at your Feet. Nor can I imagine by what happiness your Letter came to me,
nor how you could Bribe the Sentinal, who brought it me; and who likewise
promises me, to Charge himself with my Answer; for the Guards have orders not
to let any one speak with or see me. Endeavors must be used to procure him to
help me out from hence, which is the only way for Us to have the better of our
Enemies. Consider this, Madam, it is our Mutual Interest, and if Love inspires
you with some happy Design, let me know it as soon as possible: for I
impatiently long to hear what Resolution you will take as to my Misfortunes.

The Queen having read this Answer with the most tender Sentiments imaginable,
asked the Mooress who had carried her Letter, and in whom she put great
confidence; How she had procured it to be delivered to Ibrahim? Who told her,
That not having been able to get to speak to the Prisoner her self, she had
found the means of Bribing one of His Guards, being an acquaintance, that he
had promised to deliver it faithfully into his hands. Whereupon a thousand
designs came into to the Queens mind, without knowing at first which to stick
to.

The Sentinal, who had served her so well, was a perfect Cheat, and a Creature
of Rostan; who having instructed him with all he had to do, charged himself
willingly with the Letter, and the Answer; Both which passed through the King and
his Favorites hands, before they came to those of the Parties interessed.

This was a great Triumph for Rostan, which the King bore all the burden of,
and could not rejoice as he did; but he comforted himself with the reprisals he
had upon Clarice, whom he hoped to have suddenly an entire, and free
possession of: Wherefore, having not the scruples and delicacies of other
Husbands, and a Mistress being dearer to him than ten Wifes, he was not
concerned for all the Queen could do, having even wished she might have done
more, if more could be done, that he might have had the more Right to
Reprizals. And indeed, so passionate a Creature as Homais, could not well stop
in so fair a way, and the nooze was already so wide, that she could not forbear
venturing through it.

As the King was discoursing about this business with Rostan the faithful Guard
came in, and told them, That the Queen had newly sent for him; Whereupon they
not doubting, but that it was upon some new Design, gave him leave to go to
her; putting him still in mind, to behave himself according to his
instructions, which were to grant her all she should require, and give them at
the same time notice of all that passed.

The King had been that day at the Queen's to tell her, That he was going
without farther delay, to marry Ibrahim with Clarice; and that the nuptials
would be about the Evening, which she was to prepare her self for. The Queen,
who since the News of this Match, had been in fearful Apprehensions and
Torments, and which had wholly changed her countenance, fancyed she had found a
very plausible pretext to defer it, by telling him, That she was not very well,
and that she desired him to stay some days longer, if he had a mind she should
be at the Wedding, as for Decency it was requisite she should. But the cunning
Caragus made Answer, that he was so earnest to satisfy her, that he had not the
patience to wait any longer; and for the sake of so faithful a Wife as she was,
he chose rather to be wanting in the Rules of Decency, than in those of the
duty of a good Husband.

The Queen, who was too cunning to let her self be trepanned by words, which
were too obliging for her, whom the King had no reason to be satisfied with,
easily perceived, that there was malice couched under; and that the conclusion
of so sudden a match, had other ends, than only to please her. But she thought
fit likewise to dissemble: Nor indeed had she any apparent reason to oppose it,
after what the King had said to her, without making known to him how much her
Heart was interessed in it. How-ever, she prepared to set all at work, to
prevent it; and to dye, rather than see her Dear Ibrahim in the Arms of that
Slave. Insomuch, that the King had no sooner left her, to go give an account to
Rostan of that Visit, but that she sent for the Sentinal, who had already so
well served them in the business of their Letters; and beginning at the first,
by the Presents which the Sentinal still accepted, she Communicated to him her
Secret, and the design she had of causing Ibrahim to escape; and that if he
would serve her in that, she would give him wherewith to make his fortune
elsewhere, much better than he could do with the King her Husband; and that the
Presents she then made him, were only an acknowledgment for the care he had
taken of her Letter, and bringing her an Answer.

The honest confident having made some profound Bows to the abused Queen, to
thank her for the favors she heaped upon him; and more especially, for the
Confidence she put in him, seemed to be extremely grieved, that he could not
serve her in that occasion; there being invincible difficulties to perform what
she desired of him; because it was impossible, to let Ibrahim out of the
Seraglio by day, and that by night she knew very well, that the Gates were all
shut.

The Queen replied, That the difficulty of letting him out by day was easy to
be overcome, by disguising him in some Moorish Woman's Clothes, by which means
he might easily get out of the Seraglio: The Keeper made answer, That that was
true, if he alone had the keeping of him; but as there were others besides
himself, who were continually coming into his Chamber to have an eye upon his
actions, as soon as they should see he was gone, they would immediately allarum
all the Castle; insomuch, that he could not fail of being taken again.

The Queen, Whose passion would have furnished her with a thousand inventions
upon that Subject, found out quickly what was requisite to deceive the Keepers,
by putting some Body in his place, who should put on his Clothes; but the
difficulty was to find this some Body, who would thus sacrifice his life for
his sake, the danger being as inevitable: Insomuch, that she chose rather to
run that risque her self, than lose that occasion; not seeing any surer means
to free her Gallant out of so cruel a perplexity, and set her own mind at rest.
She knew what answer to make in case she was surprised there: For the jealousy
she had seemed to have of the King, for his Marrying that Slave to one of his
Creatures, that she might be the more at his disposal, furnishing her with
pretexts enough for all that she could undertake.

The Rogue of a Keeper, fancying the business to be come to the Point, that
those who set him to work, were willing to have it, was immediately of the
Queens Opinion; and told her what she had to do, that it was necessary she
should put on the Mooresses Clothes who carried Meat to Ibrahim; and that she
her self should carry him his Dinner; and when she was come into his Room, she
might give him hers, and take his Clothes at the same time, and act the part of
a Prisoner till the Evening; and that when the Gates of the Seraglio were shut,
and the other Keepers were gone, he would let her out, and she might return to
her Apartment.

Things being thus regulated, they followed the measures they had taken; that
is to say, this Rogue having left the Queen in the greatest joy imaginable, in
the hopes she had of the success of her designs, he went immediately to the
King, whom he found still with Rostan, and gave them a faithful account of all
that had been concluded between him, and the Queen; from thence he went to
dispose things to bring upon that poor Lady, the greatest affront she could
have received. He fetched the Caiterers Clothes; who being an under Cook, they
could not smell very agreeably; and having dispensed her from carrying any
thing that day to Ibrahim, he went immediately to the Queen; who, though used
more then any Woman in the World to perfumed Robes, was not in the least
disgusted with these, though they smelt so of Oil and of Spices, as to have
turned any ones stomach; and she put them on with more joy, than she did the
Royal Robes on her wedding day with Caragus.

The Keeper, being the sole confident in this intrigue, helped to dress her;
after which, he put two Dishes into her hands; and walking first, he ushered
her to the Prison; leading her through a Court where the King and Rostan, who
would have the pleasure of seeing her, stood in a place where they could not be
perceived. The truth is, it was something pleasant, to see the haughtyest
Creature upon the Earth, in that Equipage.

The King who was naturally inclined to compassion, took pity of her at first,
but the share he had in that disguise, having made him recover from that tender
sentiment; and Rostan, who managed to the utmost the least opportunity he had
of revenging himself upon his Enemy, having raised his Choler to the higest
point, he was fully resolved to rid himself of her.

In the mean time, our Adventerers pursued their way to the Prisoners Chamber;
who was at first the most surprised imaginable, to see, that this Woman, who
daily brought him his meat, hung about his neck, repulsed her two or three
times to have got rid of her; But, How was he amazed, when he discovered it was
the Queen?

Ah! Madam, (said he to her) to what end do you expose your self! must you
reduce your self to this condition, in the behalf of an unfortunate wretch, and
take so little care of a Life, in whose service I would sacrifice mine a
thousand times? It is for that very reason (Answered she him) My dear Ibrahim,
that I ought not to make any difficulty of exposing that life which is wholly
thine. I should be sorry (added she) that thou should owe thine to any other
than to me; But let us make use of the time, for we have not a moment to lose;
and give me thy Clothes, and take these I have here, and save thy self with
the Keeper, who has wherewith to carry thee to a Place from whence I may hear
of you, and come to you very suddenly: For I will quit all, to follow thee.

Ibrahim had not the patience to let her make an end, and interrupting her at
that proposition; He told her, He would never do so base an action; knowing
very well, that the King would put her to Death, or cause her to be shut up in
some place, from whence she could never get out; and that he would rather
expose himself to the most cruel Death, than give the least occasion, that any
mischief should happen to her for his sake.

But the Queen knew so well how to represent to Him, That she had nothing to be
afraid of; that things were so well contrived, that there would not be the
least appearance, that she had any way contributed to his escape; and that
there was no going back in that business; that at length, this too generous
Lover was persuaded to obey her: Insomuch, that he put of his Clothes, and put
on the Sultana's; in which, after mutual Caresses, Tears, and the most tender
fare-wels imaginable, he went out of the Room, being conducted by the same
Keeper. But they were hardly out of the Seraglio, e're he was seized, and
likewise the Keeper for forms sake; and were carried into another Prison,
where Ibrahim had time enough to despair and complain, and accuse Heaven,
Destiny, and even his Prophet Mahomet, of his misfortune.

The Queen dressed in Ibrahim's Clothes, and wrapped up in her Barnus, with which
she hid her face, kept lying upon the Bed, that the Guards who came in and out,
might not stand to look on her; and that she might with less trouble act the
part she did, She already took an extreme delight in imagining she had freed
her dear Ibrahim, and that he was out of the Castle, gone from Tunis; and that
he would be quickly secure from the designs of his Enemies; that she might go
to him her self, as she was resolved to do, not being able to live without that
Dear Gallant.

She thus employed her mind with a thousand agreeable thoughts, that the time
might not seem Teadious, till the hour the Keeper had promised to come, and
fetch her from thence, and conduct her to her Apartment.

But this Comedy was not to be yet at an end. One of the finest scenes was
still to come, which she did not in the least expect; and wherein the King,
Rostan, Clarice, and Her self were to be the Principle Actors. It passed about
the Evening, and they all Three came into the Prisoner's Chamber. Ibrahim (said
Rostan, who had Charged himself with that Adventure) here we are to Conclude
the Match, you have been spoke to of; for you are not to come out of Prison,
till you have Married Clarice: It being necessary for the Repose, both of the
King and Queen, who both desire it, and will see it Finished this Evening; that
Clarice may go out of the Seraglio to Morrow; and that you may depart together,
and retire into some place out of the Kingdom. Come, Rise, and give me your
Hand, Swear here before the King, that you receive this Maid for your Lawful
Wife; and that you will never Abandon her, in what part of the World so ever
you go.

It is easy to imagine, what a perplexity the unfortunate Queen was in, seeing
her self upon the point of falling into the cruellest Confusion that could have
befalled her. But as it was already Late, and there being no Light in the
Chamber, she fancied, she might perhaps avoid it, and not be known: She Rose,
gave her Hand to Rostan, for this pretended Marriage, and prepared her self no
less, than to Stab that Slave with a Poniard she ever carried about her, if for
her sake she received any Affront; as indeed she had like to have put it in
Execution; but she would have paid Dear for the Stroke.

Thereupon two Flambeus being brought in, to give Light to this Fine Ceremony;
the King, who till then had walked in the Room without saying a Word, come near
those that were to be Married, and seeing that the false Ibrahim hid himself
under his Barnus, that his Face might not be seen, he bid one of the Guards
take it from him, being People were not used to be Married without being seen.
Insomuch, that they then discovevered the fair Queen in Ibrahim's Clothes; who,
all of a sudden Transported with Motions of Rage, Shame, and Jealousy, was
going to Revenge her self with her Poniard upon that poor Victime, if he had
not Cried: Ah Madam! What do you do? It is Ibrahim.

At that Voice, fixing her Eyes upon him, she knew him; and her Poniard falling
out of her Hands, she had occasion for help to hold her up from falling upon
the Floor, being ready to Faint, through such quite different Motions, after
the Risque that this Dear Lover had Run, of Dying by her own Hands.

Rostan took a great Delight in all this Adventure; but the King, whose Nature
was not so Cruel, though most Concerned, resolved to withdraw, after having
given Order that the Queen should be Lead to her Apartment; and that Ibrahim
should be kept more Narrowly than ever.

Rostan was extremely Delighted with all this Encounter; but it had only filled
Ibrahim with Vexation and Grief: yet as the King was one, who laid not things
much to Heart; and besides the Treachery of Women, being not of so great
Consequence to Husbands in Africa, where they are Acquainted with their
Weaknesses; as in Europe, where they expect more Virtue, though Women every
where, there needed no more than the sight of Clarice to put him in a better
Humor. To that intent, he went to see her, and passed some Hours with her,
with so much the more Joy, as that he did not fear the Queen would come, and
disturb him. This Visit Augmented his Passion more than ever: He expressed it
to Clarice in such passionate Terms, that she was not altogether insensible:
And as there was to be a Feast the next day, at a Country House, of the General
of the Gallyes, who was desirous to Treat the King, He desired her to be there,
or otherwise he would not go himself, though he had given his word; not being
able to pass an Hour, much less half a Day, out of her sight, without Trouble
and Disquiet.

The fair Clarice consenting to it, the King told her, that the Chious of
Tripoly's Wife, would carry her thither; a very Honorable employ for that Lady,
and which she acquitted her self of, like a Woman of Wit and Courage. The
Entertainment was very Magnificent.

Rostan who considered that day as a day of Triumph for him, and the entire
ruin of the Queen put all the Company in a way to divert themselves, there was
nothing but Joy and Pleasures: The King was in the best Humor Imaginable; and
with Reason, for it is said to be there, that he first gave Proofs of his
Passion to his Dear Clarice, who appeared in a Pompous and Magnificent Dress.

The Desolate Queen did not pass her time so agreeably. She was not only to
bear the Grief of seeing her Ambition overturned; and a Slave, who had at
length got the better of her: but she was likewise to support the cruel Destiny
of her Love. Ibrahim was in Prison, and she in fears of what would become of
his Life: But that which Grieved, and Stung her most, was the Remembrance of
the Affront she had Received, by the Prank that that Traitor Rostan had played
her; and which she would willingly have been Revenged of, at the Peril of her
Life. In a word, Glory, Ambition, Love, all was Ruined in her; and only Death,
could Comfort her in so much Affliction. But she was not willing of her self,
to give that Triumph to her Enemies, and she hoped, that as long as she should
Live, she should be Powerful enough, or at least, Ingenuous enough to repay
them sooner or later, part of the Ills they made her Suffer.

In the mean time, she had not that command of her self, but that the great
Disorder there was in her heart, troubling extremely the good disposition of
Her Body, she fell sick; and in a few days, was reduced within an Ace of the
Grave. The King not knowing what it was to keep Resentment against his greatest
Enemies, could not preserve so much hatred against a Woman, whom he had in some
manner loved; but that the pity he had, to know she was in that condition,
brought him back to her. He was even so concerned at the sight of her, and so
moved with the sensible and pittyful things she said to him, that if this
unhappy Queen had asked him to have abandoned his dear Clarice, he would
without doubt have promise her he would; but I know not, if he would have kept
his word Homais more discreetly, asked him only; If he would pardon what had
past, and live with her in the same good understanding as they did together,
for some time after their Marriage? Which the King granted her with more
Goodness, than she could have hoped for; and likewise declared to her, in a
very caressing manner, how extremely he was grieved, and how sensible he was to
see her so ill; and how joyful he should be, to see her recovered. And this
assurance was so great a Cordial to that poor afflicted One, that since that
Visit, her Fevour, as well as her Trouble of mind, diminished every day. The
King came often to see her; but that was of no disadvantage to Clarice: On the
contrary, she continually augmented in Authority and Favor; and though he had
a great deal of Kindness for her, before he possessed her entirely; yet it
seemed, that since this Union, his Love was become more ardent than ever;
Contrary to the custom of all other Lovers, who are often sensible of the
diminishing of their flames, by the degrees they continue to enjoy what they
love; the Habit of Pleasures disgusting them from that of loving still the same
thing. This Prince, I say, who passed for the most fickle of all Lovers,
appeared now the most constant of all men: his Cares, his Assiduities, his
Eagernesses for the fair Clarice, had no bounds, and he still found some new
Charm in her: From thence may be concluded, that this Maid, with her little
Air of innocence, was the most subtle Creature that ever was to have found the
way to fix the Kings heart, who nothing pleased but she. This did not fail to
make some envy, and others jealous of her: But the Power she had got over the
King having insensibly made her haughty, she came to have many Enemies; for she
despised those she was most obliged to: she neglected Rostan, to whom she owed
all she had; and having been made Sultana through the Intercession of the
General of the Gallyes, who was her particular Friend, she fell out with him
about a thing of small consequence; which caused several Rumors to run of her,
which were not to her Advantage. There was a report, that the Admiral of
Tripoly knew what stuff she was made of before he gave her to the Sultana; that
an Aga of the Bashawes had found her as kind as that Admiral had been; and
Rostan likewise had been paid for the pains he had taken, in bringing her to
Tunis; yet all these Stories, and all the other Tempests, which rose up against
her, blew over, and rather turned to her Advantage. The King had not those
Delicacies of other Lovers; He had declared more than once, that in point
Mistresses, he loved them best at second hand, and that he ever found enough
for him to do; that is to say, he loved to have way made for him, and to enjoy
pleasure without pain.

It was the Queen, who countenanced most these Rumors, and fomented them by
the means of her Creatures; She did all she could, to be reconciled with
Rostan; whom she knew had reason enough to complain of Clarice; but she was
never able to effect it: Rostan was not to be pacified after that manner; and
he perceived what obliged the Queen to make those Advances she did. Insomuch,
that this Princess, having entirely lost that great favor she had formerly
been in, and the King never seeing her but out of Civility; the World
considering her but as the shadow of what she had been; and having nothing more
to comfort her, either in point of Glory, or in point of Love, Clarice having
obtained of the King that Ibrahim should be banished to Tripoly; she asked her
Husband leave to make a Voyage to Mecqua; which he not being able to refuse
her, she took with her all the Jewels, and most precious Movables she had; and
being imbarqued with some of her faithfullest Domestics, she accomplished her
Pilgrimage: After which, instead of returning to Tunis, she went directly to
Constantinople; where her beauty, as well as her Amorous Intrigues, having at
first made a great noise, the Chronicle says, that the Mufti, though
notwithstanding his Character, and the Religious Life, he made Profession of,
was no Enemy to pretty Women, fell in Love, and made Court to her; But the
Memoires of this last Intrigue, are not yet come to our hands.

Thus you must be satisfied with these I put forth, as the most sincere that
have been made Public.

FINIS.

