CHARITY AND Integrity of Life THE Pure ESSENTIALS OF Christian Religion: OR
MEDITATIONS On James 1.27.

By T. G. M. A.

But to do Good, and Communicate, forget not; for with such Sacrifices God is
well pleased,

Heb 13.16. LONDON, Printed by J. Bradford, for the Author, 1696.

To the Most Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, by Divine Providence, Archbishop
of CANTERBVRY.
REligion being of that great Excellency as to teach us the Love of God, and
our Neighbor, how to Reverence him, and how to be tenderhearted to our
Brethren, so as we may best enjoy our selves, and benefit others, I hope you
will be pleased not to refuse this ensuing Discourse a just title to your
Patronage. It Is true, they who go back from these Duties of Exemplary Piety and
Charity, neither regard what Rules they have prescribed, nor what Practice they
have directed, nor do they regard any thing that carries the face of Love and
true Munificence, and are only valiant in breaking those Laws, which Heaven
has made Eternal, such a sort of Men have commonly great Judgments denounced
against them. They are deprived of the Divine Protection here while they live,
and after their Death no Man lamenteth. But on the contrary, many Blessings and
Rewards are Entailed upon Pious and Liberal, the Favor of God in pardoning our
Sins, a promised Security from Incumbent Evils, a bountiful Support under
Afflictions, and at length a certain Reception into Eternal Glory. Cornelius
was heard for his Devout Life and Almsgiving. But that I may not be too
prolix, if you discern any Imperfections in the Copy, let not these Celestial
Graces, for my sake, fall under any Imputation, that need no such Advocate as I
am, or such a common Pen, but one from an Angel's Wing to advance their Esteem.

There Is a Beauty in Holiness beyond that of State, and a Glory in Humility
above the proud Inscription of Monarchs; both these wait upon Charity and
Integrity of Life, and are the only Ornaments of our Christian Profession. But
here that Disrespect you have to the Disregarders of these Duties, puts a stop
to my Pen, forbidding me to be too curious in the description of these Graces,
which are so eminently visible in your Life and Conversation. So that hoping
your Candor and Good Temper will give a favorable Reception, to what I have
Offered, I humbly take my leave to Subscribe my self

Your GRACE's Most Obedient and Faithful Servant, T. GREGORY.

JAMES 1.27. Pure and Undefiled Religion before God and the Father, is this, to
visit the Fatherless and the Widow in their Afflictions, and to keep himself
Unspotted from the World.


WHoever he be that looks into his Bible, with a sincere design, of receiving
any benefit unto himself by so doing; ought in all reason, to avoid all foolish
and unprofitable Disputations, things that gender Strife: and in good earnest
apply himself to the Practice of his Duty, to obey when God calls for his
Obedience; for the Scripture was not written to beget Pride and Disputes, but
Charity and Humility in the Minds of Men. The Gospel was designed, not only to
Exercise the Understanding, but also to influence the Will, and entirely to
engage the Affections in Heavenly Matters, in a practical System, wherein we
are told that our very Thoughts are to be subject to the Obedience of its
Author. And if we heartily believe and consider, that nothing else but
Unfeigned Purity can recommend us unto God, if we take it for granted, that
without Holiness no man shall see him: We have little reason to admire our
Savior calls his People little Flock, and that but few enter in at the
straight Gate; for if so be Religion is to Overcome the World, to be Heavenly
minded, or in few words, to be like God, what will become of the greater part
of Mankind, who are so much unlike him? What man is instructed for the Kingdom
of God? Who then can be saved? Shall we rise again to the Resurrection of the
Just? Lord thou know! If so be Religion be pure and undefiled, and admits
not of the least vicious Immorallity, it is to be feared that many men continue
very wicked, while they go under the sacred Names of Christians. For How is the
faithful City become an Harlot, it was full of Judgment, Righteousness lodged
in it, but now Murder. Thy Silver is become dross, and thy Wine mixed with
Water. Thy Princes are Rebellious and Companions of Thieves; every one loves
gifts and follows after rewards, judge not the Fatherless, neither does the
cause of the Widow come before them, Isa. 1.21, 22. What then shall we say?
shall we condemn the Religion of the blessed Jesus, because Iniquity does so
much abound? God forbid; his Religion is like himself, without spot or wrinkle,
it is holy, just and good, but men corrupt it to their own destruction. If you
cast an Eye back upon the 13th Verse of this Chapter, St James will tell you,
that no man must say that he is tempted of God, that is, let no man charge God
with his Sins; if men engage in any wickedness, be it to themselves, for God
cannot be tempted, neither tempts he any one; but every man is tempted when
he is drawn away by his own Lust and enticed. We may therefore spare our selves
the trouble of searching out the Causes of our Miseries, the Plague is in our
own Heart. The lust of our mind when it has conceived, brings forth sin; and
sin when it is finished brings forth death. This Text is very full and
comprehensive, denoting the whole of the Christian Doctrine in very few words,
and also of admirable weight to fortify the Christians against the Errors and
Heresies of those times, particularly to oppose the prevailing Sect of the
Gnostick Heresy, which our Apostle here refers to, and which for Sensuality
and open Wickedness was the greatest Deformities that ever clouded the beauty
of the Church: For this Sect were a People that did allow their Converts a
greater liberty in their Life's, than Christians did admit. The Apostles preached
up a good Life as necessary to Salvation, but these on the contraty did assert,
that a man might be a Christian, and at the same time use the utmost freedom
with the greatest Epicure: Upon this score they gained ground in those early
times, they found the People very tractable and easy to be wheedl'd to such a
licentious Creed, when they did affirm that a man may love the World more then
God, it was no hard matter in those times to gain Proselites; such pallatable
pleasing Drines were swallowed without much Consideration. But the Apostles of
our Lord, who had conversed with their Master, and had the greatest reason to
know his Sense of things, are clearly of another mind, which all have with St
James in Opposition to these Libertines, acquainted us, that Religion which
must render every man acceptable to God, is pure and undefiled, and consists in
visiting the Fatherless and Widow in their Afflictions, and to keep himself
unspotted from the World. The words will oblige me to do these twothings. 1 st,
In general to show that Religion which we must ever hope to please God with, is
pure and Spiritual, without mixture of Hypocrisy or Sensuallity. 2 dly. That
Charity to the Needy and Purity of Life are the Essential parts of this
Religion, which are explicitly delivered in the Text: The former in these
words, visiting the Fatherless and Widow: The latter in these, keeping himself
unspotted from the World. First, I am to show in general that the Religion
whereby we must ever hope to please God, is of untainted Purity, without any
mixture of Hypocrisy, or Sensuallity. In order to which I hope I may take for
granted the Being of a God, which thing being pre-suppos'd as a truth, it is
hardly to be conceived, how a man can well satisfy a brutish and irrational
Deity, that will be imposed upon by his Creatures, and worshipped at any rate.
How is it possible for a Man to believe that God should approve of Vice, or any
wise connive at the practice of it. But admit a Man be so absurd, and so offer
Violence to himself, the Scripture is so plain and convincing, proclaiming the
divine displeasure against every thing that is Evil, Hypocritical and
Unsincere, that he that owns the former, cannot deny the latter, that is in
words at length: He that believes the truth of the Scriptures, that God does
not equivocate with Mankind, but speaks as he means; that Man must of necessity
confess that nothing can be a pleasing Sacrifice to God, but what is Spiritual
and Holy, and by strong consequence that every thing of what stamp soever that
is not real and honest, is an abomination in his sight, and is so very plain
that he that runs may read it. For how often does the Almighty declare by the
Mouth of his Holy Prophets, that no Wickedness shall dwell with him, For thou
art not a God that has pleasure in Wickedness, neither shall Evil dwell with
thee, Psalm. 5.4. Whoever has been acquainted ever so little with the Holy
Scripture, cannot but have observed it to be the usual Style thereof, even
under the Jewish Dispensation: Though the outward Worship for some reasons,
which I cannot now stand to repeat, was different from that now required at our
hands in the Christian Church. God made a solemn declaration against
Sacrifices, Isa. 1.12. When ye come before me, who has required this at your
hands to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations, etc. Which was to show
that this was not that which God required of them alone; for by reason of the
Jews obstinacy, the gracious and merciful Lawgiver was pleased to condescend to
their Capacities, and to command them the Observance of those things as were
most likely to keep them in a tolerable subjection, the primary Institution of
those Spiritual Observances, was no otherwise designed then to gratify their
Pallates; for even under the Law, Obedience was most suitable, most acceptable
to the Divine Nature, and therefore we find that God calls for other things
from them, such as these, Wash and be clean; put away the evil of your doings
before mine eyes: Cease to do evil, learn to do well: seek judgment, deliver
the oppressed; judge the Fatherless. These are substantial Duties, such as
became the Majesty of a wise God to demand, and an obedient People to perform.
And if the divine Wisdom exacted Internal Holiness from the stubborn
unmannagable Jew, much more now from us under the Gospel. When our Savior
discoursed the Woman of Samaria, John 4.23. he was pleased to say that the hour
was come, when the true Worshippers should worship the Father in Spirit and
Truth: whence it is natural to infer, that the Religion which we ought to pay
to our Heavenly Father, is not born of Noise or Art, but a new Nature in
forming the Minds of Men, whereby we are taught to know him; and knowing God,
to love him with all our Soul, and with all our Strength, and to conform our
selves as much as we can to that Perfection which is eminently in God, the
imitation of him in Living well, being the best means of arriving to some
likeness, Beholding the Glory of God, we are transformed into the same Image.
It Is true indeed, the Jews did expect the Messiah should have alarmed the World
with Drums and Trumpets, and that he should have marched through the World, as
it is reported Victorious Hannibal did sometimes through the Alps, making way
where he found none, planting his Gospel by force of Arms; but judging this way
to be more Military than Religious, he publicly declared before Pilate the
Governor, that his Kingdom was not of this World, Joh. 8.36. 'Twas not such a
one as the Jews were afraid of, a Government set up to destroy that of Herod,
but a Spiritual Throne to be erected in the Hearts of his chosen People, to
influence their Lives, and make them fit Heirs for the Kingdom of Heaven. That
Religion which the most meek and innocent Lord planted in the minds of men,
obliges its Professors to pass quietly and inoffensively through this World,
and by the most safe and prudent, the most pious and excellent Methods, to
steer their Course to Happiness, to lay hold on Eternal Life. This engages men
heartily to the Obedience of their Superiors, it possesses the mind with
Universal Charity, with the most profound Meekness and Humility, it does not
gratify any impotent silly Passion in Man: we are all by Nature inclined more
or less to that dreadful act of Revenge; we are apt for every trifling disgust,
to call to the Earth to swallow up our Adversaries, as it did sometimes Korah,
Dathan and Abiram. But it is the singular prerogative of the Gospel, to quiet
and allay even this troublesome vexing Inclination of Revenge, by teaching us
to overcome Evil with Good* Well then, suppose a Man to be Rich and mighty in
the World, and to be affronted by a poor Creature. Let him call to mind, that
he is a Christian as well as a Rich Man; and what his greatness as a rich man
might justly abhor, his Charity as a Christian might be willing to bear what
his power as a great man might tempt to revenge, his Charity as a Christian
might teach him to forgive. This is the Condescending Spirit of the Gospel,
different from that which by Nature we can have. There is no Wickedness which
is not effectually restrained by it, not the least Virtue which receives not a
generous encouragement from it. And now does not this Religion sufficiently
recommend it self to mankind? Need it any thing else to court our Affections?
The Heathen were so very sensible of the worth of Religion, that they always
styled their denfensive War, pro Aris and Focis: They placed their Altars
before their Hearths, their Churches before their Estates and Houses. And if
they so highly valued a false foppish Religion, how shall we ever set a just
value upon the true, the pure, the undefiled Religion of Christ? That Religion
which we contend for before God, that which spreads it self through all the
parts of the Soul, engaging the whole man in a fixed, steady, and constant
course of Righteousness. And now I am come to speak of the parts which are
Essential to it, the First of which is Charity to the Needy. Upon which the
Holy Scriptures throughout do give a higher preference than any other Duty.
Solomon himself, the richest Monarch that ever reigned in Jerusalem, and the
wisest of the Eastern Sophies, no less a Prophet then a King, teaches us,
Eccles. 11.4. Cast thy Bread upon the Waters, and after many days shall thou
find it. Commentators agree; that these Words of the Preacher, Cast thy Bread
upon the Waters, exhort us to the Relief of all such as are distressed. We may
find that Bread may be taken for Alms, if we converse with the Hebrews the
Original (...); Lehem, which we commonly translate Bread, is taken in the
Scripture for all sorts of Provisions; in that sense you may read in Deuteronomy. 8.3.
Lehem signifies the Flesh of Beasts sacrificed. Lev. 3.11. It is used for the
Fruit of Trees, Jer. 11.19. Lehem is taken for the Fodder of Cattle, Psalm.
14.7. because the Hebrew Language consisting of few words, one Word did bear
many Significations. So that this word Lehem amongst the Jews, did import all
manner of Subsistence, every thing that Man or Beast used to live upon. In
which sense it is taken in the Lord's Prayer, and in a larger sense, there
implying not only the Necessaries of our Body, but also that Angels food, (that
(...), Luke 12.13.) the Blessed Sacrament, by which our Souls are nourished to
Eternity. The word Waters also admits of diverse Interpretations: Yet without
doubt all Objects of Charity are here designed by it, that is the several parts
of Mankind, all such as appear poor, infirm, or any way miserable, all that are
destitute of Friends and Comfort, that with dejected Countenances implore your
Pity. You shall find it after many days. For encouragement, their are present
Remunerations for those that are Charitable; they shall have their Wishes very
much gratified in this World, and in the World to come, their Hopes shall
expire in a happy Fruition. Thou shall live many days to do Good with thy
Riches, and when thou have finished thy Course of multiplying good Offices to
thy Brethren; then after many days thou shall find an Heavenly Treasure, to the
Accomplishment of thy felicity. If we come into the New Testament, we shall see
it full and replenisht with frequent Exhortations to this Duty, and
proportionable Rewards annexed. If you are pleased to read over the Writings of
St. Paul, especially his 13th Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
you will find that the glorious Fabric of Christianity is founded upon
Charity; it is not only a single Grace without, but all the Virtues wrapped up in
one Word. This does all the Work. It is the Salt wherewith we are seasoned.
Without Charity we can neither be good Christians, nor dutiful Subjects:
Without this, we do expunge our selves even out of the Catalogue of Christians,
and de facto, put our selves into that of Infidels. So true is that of the
Eloquent Apostle, If we have all other things in a most ample exquisite manner,
and have not Charity, we are as sounding Brass, and a tinkling Cymbal. But it
is not my design to speak of Charity in so large a sense, as it condemns all
unmerciful censuring of other men's Actions, or as it forbids every pitiful
Unchristian Revenge, but as it particularly relates to the Relief of our
Brothers Necessities; and that taken in this sense, is a considerable Branch of
our Religion. But some may peradventure think that Rich Men are only concerned
in this Duty, as having wherewithal to exercise their Charity, and consequently
that the poorer sort are excluded from having any share in it, being themselves
mere Objects of Pity. But did we allow of this foolish way of arguing, we
should be forced to confess, that our Savior Christ was the most miserable
Person upon Earth, who was so very poor, that he had not where to lay his Head.
Past all peradventure, God who is the Author of our Faculties, every Man in
some measure may be beneficial to Mankind. Insomuch that Men of all qualities,
high and low, rich and poor, are to their power concerned to consult the
Necessities of mankind. Many are the Afflictions which are incident to Man in
this Life. When the unjust Man enters into the Field of the Fatherless, and
removes the Old Landmark. Here is an opportunity for the Statesman to show
himself a Pattern of Good Works, in being like God, who helps those to Right,
who suffer Wrong. When the Simple is out of the way, that is an occasion
offered to the Learned to recover a Soul, which our Savior died for. Let him
restore such a one in the Spirit of Meekness, by Advice and Counsel. Let him
endeavor to turn the Hearts of the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just. This
is to be like him who came to Preach the Gospel, who came not to call the
Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance, and went about doing Good. When the Aged
and Orphans are in want, then let the Rich Man glory in his Riches, by filling
the empty Bowels, and relieving the gaping Necessities of the Poor, and to lay
up a good Foundation for the time to come. And now what can the Fatherless and
Widow do? are these poor Creatures capable of being useful in their Generation?
can they make any grateful Compensation or Return to their Benefactors? Yes,
certainly, the meanest Peasant in his Cottage may in some sense oblige the
Prince in his Throne, that is by their Prayers, to which the Divine Goodness
seems to bear an extraordinary regard in Scripture, Psalm. 69.33. The Lord
hears the Prayer of the poor and destitute, and their Cry is not hid from
him. And did we thus in our several Stations and Capacities, study and delight
to do good, and promote the welfare of our Brethren, how happy should we be?
There would be no leading into Captivity, no just matter of Complaint in our
Streets. It Is our duty to act thus, 1 st. As we are Men. 2 dly. As we are
Christians. First, Nature it self has made such alliance between Man and Man,
as are not to be broken upon every trifling disagreement. If there were no
other tie than that of common Humanity, it is plain that that will highly
oblige us to stand in the Gap, to prevent, if we can, a Brother's ruin. It Is
not below any Man, to stoop to kind and neighbourly Offices. Nam pari sort
nascimur. Virtute distinguimur. Nature has placed all Mankind upon a Level.
Though Providence, for some wise and necessary ends, has distinguished our
Stations, placing some upon plain, others upon rising Ground: Some in a high,
others in a low Condition: Yet we are all placed within the reach of God's
Power, he that may humble the most proud and lofty. It may be one Day or other
our own Case to be in want, and therefore it is an Act of Common Prudence and
Policy to Relieve a Brother: And this is not a thing spoken at a venture, but
upon sound deliberation, and from the Nature and Circumstances of our state
here below. Heb. 13.3. Remember them that suffer Adversity, as being your
selves also in that Body. This is so reasonable a duty, as to neglect it, is to
sink below Nature, and to be inconsistent with our selves, as we are Men. And
if so, then it will be unnecessary to heap up Scriptures, to prove it our Duty
as we are Christians, for from the beginning it was not so, though the Gospel
has much enlarged and improved it. Abraham, Lot, Job, these were very eminent
Examples of this Duty under the Law, in entertaining the Fatherless into their
Houses, and inviting the Poor to their own Tables. But if any pretend that this
is of Jewish concernment, and not so much relating to the time of the Gospel,
which is not a Law of Works. Our Savior will reply, That he came not to
destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill; not to banish Charity out of
the World, but to improve it, to enlarge its Empire among the Sons of Men. So
that to exercise Charity, is to follow the very Steps of our Savior, and to
obey the dictates of our Supreme Master. Of so great worth and truth was this
Fundamental Truth in his account, that he seems to assign Men's Portion in the
next Life, according to their Charitable Acts in this, Matthew. 25.35. For I was
an hungered, etc. The Pharisees, those devout Hypocrites, were seemingly exact,
dividing the Hair in Religion; but our Savior was pleased to give them a more
Compendious, as well as a more safe way to be Religious, Luke 11.41. Give Alms
of such things as you have, and behold all things are clean to you. They are
efficacious to press and exhort us, as it is possible for Words to be, or Men
to conceive. How comes it to pass then (that considering the frequent
Inculcations of the Gospel to this in every page) Men are generally so
Uncharitable. Chiefly from these two Reasons. First, Because Men entertain a
false notion of Charity, placing of it purely in bare Wishes and Compassionate
Affections. Secondly, Because Men are pleased to pass by Charity as no part of
Religion. Both are absurd and very prejudicial to the growth of Piety amongst
us. Some Men are apt to style themselves Charitable, when they do no harm, by a
mere abstinence from Evil; but let no Man deceive himself. When we are
commanded to love our Brother, it is not only forbidden us to hate him, but we
are commanded to omit no opportunity of expressing our Love by our Actions; to
love in Deed and in Truth. Certainly, you would judge that Man Unchristian, who
seeing his Neighbors House on Fire, would not assist and contribute his
Endeavors to the quenching of it. It is preposterous for us to hug our selves
with the thoughts of being Righteous, when really we are not; not to relief the
Poor, is to oppress him; not to heal his Sores, in a Scripture dialect, is in
effect the same, as to wound and lash him. You know the Parable, Luke 10.30. He
that went down from Jericho, and fell among Thieves, stripped of his Garments,
and half dead; the Priest went that way, saw him, and passed by on the other
side; the Levite also came and looked on, and that was all. These men, the
Priest and Levite, added nothing to his Miseries, they left the Poor Man as
they found him: And were they Charitable? They were so far from being
Charitable, that to my apprehension, they were little better then the Thieves
that robbed him. This I mentioned on purpose to let you see that Religion does
not consist in pure Negatives. It Is not enough to shake our Heads at the
Calamities of our Neighbor, and to please our selves that we were not
accessory to his Ruin; we are to behold the good Samaritan, that took
Compassion on him, that bound up his Wounds, brought him to his Inn, and took
care of him. We are commanded by the great Exemplar of Charity, To go and do
likewise. Some are pleased to pass by that Duty, counting it an undervaluing of
the Blood of Christ, and a beggarly way of going to Heaven. But I think it is
very sad, if we can find in our Hearts to part with nothing for his sake, that
parted with his Life for ours. Prayers alone cannot atone his Displeasure,
though we are not to look upon them as fruitless and unnecessary; however, I
speak this to stir up your minds, by way of Remembrance, that we are not to
expect the favor of a holy and wise God, by the mere importunity of our
Devotion, without Conscience of Obeying his Commands. These two have a
Reciprocal influence upon each other. The Worship of God without Obedience, is
vain. So Obedience without Worship is impossible. Though we break our Hearts in
Prayer, all our most zealous passionate Addresses without Charity and Purity of
Desires, will infallibly perish in the Air: So true is that of the Psalmist, If
I regard Iniquity in my Heart, God will not hear me. To do good therefore, and
communicate, forget not; for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. And so I
am come to the Second Essential Part of Religion To keep himself Unspotted from
the World, which consists in Purity of Life. This is a precept which seems at
first sight to stagger the best Christian; for considering all the inviting
allurements of this world, the Pleasures and the Profits of it. Who among the
Sons of Men can believe himself able to renounce all? Is it possible for Flesh
and Blood to forego Houses and Estates, is it seen to attempt it? This seems to
cut off the Sinews of our Endeavors, and to lay asleep the Powers of the Mind.
With Men this is impossible; but if we look up, with God all things are
possible. To prevent misapplications therefore, two things are necessary to be
considered: First, That there is no absolute state on this side Heaven: no
(...) in Religion. I mean a Hitherto thou shall go in Holiness, and no further.
The Apostle says, Grow in Grace. But how long, not a word of that; we are to
be still doing, till we come to Heaven, whose happiness consists in Vision. We
are not to pretend to Apostles purity, as the Blessed Angels are called Pure.
While we are in the Body, corruption will be found in us. It was the peculiar
of Christ, who was God as well as Man, to say, The Prince of this World has
nothing in me, John 14.30. 2 dly, We need not employ our Care to keep our
selves from all the things of this World; for it is not the property of every
thing in it to stain and defile the Soul. We are allowed a free genuine
Converse to Love as Brethren, nay to love the World, but always with this
proviso, that we do not equal that with our Love of God. We are then to use our
utmost endeavors, to bring the Body under the command of the Spirit, by
keeping our selves free from Worldly Pollutions, that is the Lust of the Eye,
the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life. This being well considered, we
cannot despair of attaining a perfect Conquest over the World; for whatever
ought to be the Object of our just and reasonable Desires is allowed us in it.
But with what Armor shall we fight? By what means shall we lay hold upon the
Crown? St. John will tell you, that it is by Faith, in the Son of God. Who is
he that overcomes the World? It is He that believes that Jesus is the Son of
God. The Israelites as long as they thought upon the Giants and Anakims, were
not convinced of the possibility of Conquering the Land of Canaan: So may it
fare with us, if we insist only upon the difficulties of our Christian Warfare,
that there are strivings without, and strivings within: our Spirits may flag.
But if we muster up the Auxiliaries of our most Holy Faith: when we compare our
Assistants with the difficulties: that as their is a Devil without to tempt us,
so their is a Spirit within to help our Infirmities, and a God above to
intercede for us, we have just reason to be of good Cheer, to deny our selves,
and to go on to perfection, knowing that we shall reap in due time, if we faint
not. It was an excellent Advice of the Son of Sirach. My Son, if thou come to
serve the Lord, prepare thy Soul for Temptation, Eccles. 2.1. He that desires
to arrive at a good degree of Holiness, must call in all the Forces of his
Soul, for so noble achievements, prepare himself to go to Battle against his
Enemies. To subdue our Passions, to break off old Habits and Customs, is not a
work so easy, as that may be effected in a moment: all which is included in
this, in keeping our selves unspotted from the World. We cannot do all this in
a Hurry, but must be exercised in this great work Day and Night. It must be
confessed that our Savior's own Disciples were not so mortified to the world,
but they did contend among themselves, who should be greatest, being bred in
the Jewish Religion, which was attended with temporal Promises, but having
fully understood the design of their Master's Coming, how holily and humbly,
how meekly and inoffensively did they walk through this treacherous world. The
Heathens called the Christians a company of Idiots, for abandoning the
Pleasures of this World for some future Contingencies, as they termed those of
the World to come. This may be tolerable in Pagans, but their are no motives
that a Christian should be in love with this Life. For he that believes that
eternal damnation is due to any Sin, cannot consider this, and gratify a Lust.
He that steadfastly believes that the Wrath of God shall be executed upon those
that obey not the Gospel, will not, if he might be Master of the whole World,
lose his own Soul; such a Man is above Temptation, will resist all the charms
of Sensuallity, as Religious Joseph did the Importunities of Potiphar's Wife,
with a How shall I do this wickedness, and Sin against God? So remarkable and
Heroic was the Mortification of the Primitive Christians, so little regard had
they to the concerns of this Life, that as soon as they were convinced that
there was another, immediately upon this Joyful News, as many as had Lands and
Estates, sold them, and brought the Money and laid it at the Apostles Feet,
Acts 4.34. And if believe the same blessed Resurrection, why are we so
concerned for our Lands and Possessions? why do we tremble every moment least
the Darlings of ours be snatched away from us? is it not because our Affections
are not yet on things above, but on things on Earth.

And now having done with the Text, and seen that the Religion which must fit
us for the Kingdom of Heaven, is holy and undefiled; What remains on our parts,
but that we seriously engage our selves in the actual practice of it, which
will bring us in many and mighty advantages, 1 st, Besides the particular
influence it will have upon our selves, by establishing a firm Peace within a
Good Conscience, of having done our Duty, which is the most sure Refuge in time
of need. It will also have a mighty force upon Strangers to the Commonwealth of
Israel; If we delight our selves in doing good. Those Men that will not come to
our Churches to hear us what we speak, may in our Streets, by seeing what we
do, in a manner convinced of the truth of our Doctrine; when they see that our
Eyes are lent to the Blind to direct them, when they see that our Feet are lent
to the Lame to support them, when they see that we part with a Coat to him that
has none, they will say God is in this People of a Truth, surely the Fear of
God is in this Place. So that what our Doctrines can neither convince nor
convert, our Actions may do both, our Lives serving instead of Arguments to
convince Unbelievers, that we are of the Household of Faith. 2 dly, If we cannot
arrive to this, to gain Proselites to the Faith by our Exemplary Piety, yet
this at least will be the blessed effect of it, we shall thereby infallibly
stop the Mouths of Gainsayers, and defeat the Hopes of our Adversaries, if so
be Charity spreads it self like the thriving Mustard Seed in the Parable, in
our Cities, and in our Families. How happily, how safely, should we lodge in
the fruitful Branches thereof. If we strive like the Angels of God, to love
each other; if we sincerely practice this pure Religion, our Adversaries shall
never prevail against us. This little Island shall continue as it is this day,
the mark of Envy to all the Nations round about us. The Abominations of
Desolation shall never stand in the Holy Place. If we do our Duty, God will not
fail to manifest his Care for Sin; he will show that he loves the Gates of
Sion more than all the Dwellings of Jacob. 3 dly, and lastly, the Practice of
this most Holy Religion, will not only secure us from danger, but also procure
us everlasting happiness hereafter. Charity and Purity of Life are (...) things
that accompany Salvation as the Apostle speaks, without these and the benefits
of his Death, we cannot be saved; and with these we cannot be damned: These
will seal Happiness to our Dust and make us immortal in the Grave. By the
tenor of these Graces we are in actual Communion with the Church militant here
on Earth, and without which we must never hope to be made Members of the
Triumphant in Heaven.

FINIS.

