Christ a Christian's Life: Or, A Practical DISCOURSE OF A Believer's LIFE,
Derived from Christ, and Resolved into Christ. BEING The Substance of several
Sermons Preached by the Author upon his Recovery from a Fit of Sickness, and
now extorted from him by the Importunity of Friends.

By JOHN GAMMON, Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of a Congregation in
White-Chappel.

Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our Life shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with him in glory.

Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

Romans 14.8. For whether we live we live unto the Lord; and whether we die we
die unto the Lord; whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for W. Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street. 1691.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To the little Flock of Christ, over whom the Holy Ghost has made me Overseer.
The Father of Mercies, and God of all Grace, who has called you to his Eternal
Glory by Christ Jesus, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you, and
make known to you that Mystery, which from the beginning of the World has been
hid in God, who created all by Jesus Christ.
Beloved in the Lord,
I Have in some measure been acquainted with the longing Desire of most of you
to have these Sermons Published, by whose Importunity I have been prevailed
with to Print them, against many Struglings, and much unwillingness in my self
to go forwards with the Work; for some of you well know how much I was set
against the Printing of them, and that for several Reasons.

First, Knowing that there are plenty of good Books, the Works of worthy
Learned Men, extant: That there was no need of my unworthy Labors. Secondly,
Knowing how little the best of Books are valued by most. Thirdly, Knowing the
Scorn and Contempt not only of profane and wicked Persons, but many that
profess a great Zeal for God, do contemn those principal Gospel Truths,
Justification by Christ alone: But if persons were truly wakened, they would be
of the Mind of Bellarmine, That it will be best to rest upon Christ alone for
Salvation when they come to die: They will then see that they have had no cause
to abuse the Servants of Jesus Christ, that have made it their business to
exalt Christ and Free Grace. Fourthly, Knowing my own Insufficiency for so
great a Work, as to appear to Public View. Fifthly, Because of many things
that might be lest out in the Printing that was Preached, I not Preaching by
Notes, cannot remember many things which were delivered to you when the Sermons
were preached; but here you will find the principal Heads of what I delivered,
being taken from my mouth by a Servant of the Lord when preached. I have done
my endeavor to supply what I could that was wanting, and to correct what I saw
out of order; but it cannot be expected so well as it would have been if I had
writ the Sermons I had preached at length; yet finding the earnest desire of
most of you to have them printed, and the many Arguments you used to have them
hastened to be published, notwithstanding the many Struglings I have had against
the Work, yet the dear Love I bear to you, and the earnest desire I have to
serve you in the Lord, has overcome my unwillingness in this Work, having
received an account from several of you the sweet comforts many of you received
when you heard them preached, and have also declared how much it would add to
your comfort and edification if they were printed; I hope through Grace that
you will not be disappointed of your expectation. Some of you have declared
that the Preaching was as Marrow and Fatness to your Souls; I hope that you
will suck out some Spiritual Sweetness in the reading of them. As God was
graciously pleased to answer your Prayers, in raising me from a sick Bed to
preach these my sickbed Meditations amongst you; so I hope, through mercy,
your longing desire to read them will be satisfied, in receiving that comfort
you expect to reap to your Souls in reading of them. What is said of Money, that
it answers all things to the subsistence of the Body, may be much more said of
Christ to them that live upon him, he answers all their Wants, supplies all
their Needs: He that has Christ wants not, he that has not Christ inherits
not what he seems to have. Christ enjoyed in the Soul makes bitter things
sweet, heavy things light; where Christ's Presence is, Darkness is made Light,
and Sorrow turned into Gladness. How precious are the enjoyments of them that
have such a precious Pearl as Christ is! He is the chiefest of ten thousand,
he is a most excellent and lasting Good, Heb. 13.18. All the hid Treasure of
Wisdom and Knowledge is in him, Col. 2.3. What an excellent knowledge have ye
attained unto, that truly know Christ! How does this transcendent worth affect
your Hearts, changing them into his own Image and Likeness! When a Soul comes
to a saving knowledge of Christ, he is changed then from Vir Terrenus an Earthly
Man, to Vir Coelestis an Heavenly Man. Ignorance of Jesus Christ causes Men to
rest in Shadows and Forms, in poor and low things, compared with Christ and his
Excellency, are all but Dross and Dung, so the Apostle esteems them, Phil. 3.8.
It is only a real saving knowledge of Christ, can draw the Heart of a vain and
perishing World to seek things that are above. It is not a Speculation, but an
Application of Christ, that brings home to the Immortal Soul what it stands in
need of, Life, Light, Pardon, Peace, Purity, Righteousness, Counsel, Comfort,
Healing, Deliverance, Grace, Glory, all flows to the believing Soul from
Christ, in whom all fullness dwells. The Soul that lives Christ has a good
Livelihood, John 6.51. He shall live well for ever. It is not an outside show
of Religion will be to the Soul what it stands in need of, as Redemption,
Forgiveness, Reconciliation, Sanctification, Consolation, Salvation. Christ is
the Believers safe Sanctuary in all their Troubles and Temptations, Isa. 8.14.

In this small following Treatise I hope you will find some Discourses of the
fullness of Jesus Christ, and the emptiness of the Creature, for that is my
Desire in all my Labors among you, to get an esteem in your Hearts for Christ
above all other things, and that the Name of the Lord Jesus may be glorified in
you, and ye in him: I hope I need not doubt of your acceptance of those plain
following Truths. I do not think that you will refuse it for its plain Dress,
but rather embrace it; for I know, as for the most part of you, that you had
rather have Christ plainly preached, than such Discourses that are bedecked
with Rhetoric, or painted over with curious Words of Arts. I may expect it
will not be free from the Slighting Scorn, and Contempt of many, that are ready
to undervalue every thing but what they do themselves, and to find fault with
that they cannot mend. But I have learned not to value any of their
undervaluings: For if a thousand to one slight it, yet if one in a thousand get
good to their Souls' by it, I shall bless God that ever it was printed; what
evil Report soever I may receive from evil Men of evil minds for the Works
sake: I hope I shall not value the Frowns of Men, as one well says, Better to
lose the Smiles of Men, than to lose the Souls of Men; and I am sure without
Christ be our Life, we are poor undone dead Sinners. I know I have many
Enemies, who have through their Envy and Malice raised many false Reports of
me: But I desire to be an Enemy to none, but those that are implacable Enemies
of Christ in Doctrine and Practice; but tho they are my Enemies, yet I freely
pray for them. But I cannot expect to fair better than those that have
abundantly excelled in Grace and Knowledge, that were both burning and shining
Lights, whose Works praise them in the Gate, and their sweet Savor in Christ
made known to Saints and Sinners; many hundreds, I believe, have cause to bless
God that either heard them preached, or have read their Works: And yet how are
these Men railed against as not worthy to live, and their Works to be burnt by
the common Hangman, as one with more Zeal than Knowledge declared: Because Men
have not received that measure of Knowledge and Experience as those Men had,
they rail against them as ignorant unlearned Men, their Books not safe for any
to read. Do not these Men go quarrelling along in the Dark, because their
Brethren have received more Light than they? Persons are grown to such a fond
conceit of themselves and their own Opinion, they will not hearken to
Gospel-Experiences; they will not so much as try those Truths they revile by
the Scripture, but proceed with Lies and Slanders against those good Men,
though they never knew their persons, nor read their Books. I am Persuaded if
these persons had knowledge of those persons, and Truths they speak against, if
the Lord were pleased to reveal himself to them, had they a taste and sight of
the Lord Jesus, who reveals himself how and to whom he pleaseeh, insted of
biting and devouring of them, and spending their time to raise evil Reports of
them, they would enquire after the knowledge of Christ, as the Daughters of Jer
did of the Spouse, Whether is thy beloved gone, that we may seek him with thee,
Cant. 6.1. If Christians would spend that time in enquiring after Christ, and
receiving and imparting their Experiences to each other, as they spend in
Contentions, and taking up and carrying about evil Reports of them that excel
themselves in Godliness, they would find more Peace and Comfort to their own
Souls, and bring more Glory to God, bring more Souls to Christ, and would be a
means for the Beauty of Holiness, and Power of Godliness to shine with a
greater Luster to the World.

This is my comfort, whatever Men's Thoughts or Words, Censures or Contempt are
of these my poor Labors, I can truly say, I seek not my self, but the exalting
of Jesus Christ, and his Truths and Kingdom in the World. In singleness of
Heart I have imparted Truth to you, as I learned them in Jesus: I had rather
have the Scorn of Men for the plainness of Truth, than you should have plain
Truths hid from you. If I am the Object of Worldlings Scorn, so Christ be the
Object of your Faith, therein I shall rejoice.

Beloved, as I have granted your Request in Printing my unworthy Labors, which
were done chiefly at your Request, and for your sake, I pray grant me some few
Requests, which I beg of you for Christ's sake.

First, That you seriously and carefully peruse these Plain Truths that I have
Dedicated to you. Secondly, That you go to the Throne of Grace, and there
earnestly beg a Blessing on what you read. Thirdly, If your Souls receive
benefit in the reading of it, ye ascribe all to God alone; it is he alone that
teaches to profit by all we read or hear. Fourthly, That you would study and
love Christ more, let his Glory be the end of your Actions; you never seek your
own interest better, then when you seek Christ's above all: Your Excellency
most appears when Christ and his Excellency is known to you: When your Eye is
singly set on Christ, then is Christ admiring your Beauty, Cant. 4.7. The
single Eye took away Christ's Heart, then the Chain of Obedience ravished him
also. Without a pure Intention, aiming at the Glory of God, to exalt Jesus
Christ, there is no Action, be it never so excellent in its self, is accepted
of God, Hos. 10.1. Israel is an empty Vine, he brings forth Fruit to himself:
He weighs out his Fruit to himself, he proportions his Religion to himself; all
being for himself, God accepts him not. Such Fruit and mere Emptiness is much
as one before God: It is not enough that a thing done be materially good, but
because God commands it, and that it is to the glorifying the Lord Jesus: He
that is Alpha must be Omega; He that is the Supreme Good must be the ultimate
end of all things. Let all your good Works fall in Christ's Bosom, and center
in his Glory. They that do not with a single Eye look to Christ in all, they
make as if there were something more excellent than Christ to look unto. Since
Christ is a Believers Life, from whom he receives all the good he enjoys, his
Life, and Strength, and Comfort depend upon him for the Influence of his Grace
and Spirit, to have daily Supplies and Waterings from him, that you may
continually live to him, Psalm. 119.32. He prays for Heart-enlargement to run
the way of God's Commandments. Psalm. 119.173. Let thy hand help me, for I have
chosen thy Precepts: We have need of continual Supplies of Grace: If you be
never so well furnished with Divine Grace, it will not be in exercise without
fresh anointing, and fresh Gales of the Spirit, Cant. 4.16. Awake, O
North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof
may flow out; let my Beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant Fruits.
Ordinances are but Mediums and Channels of Grace; we had need to look to Christ
to fill them with Divine and Spiritual Blessings. It is not a Sanctuary of
Ordinances will do our Souls good, it is the Power, and Glory, and Goings of
God in it is the Life of the Soul: It is the Drops of the pure Rivers of Life
above dropping upon the Soul refreshing it in Ordinances. Ordinances are dry
and empty things, if the Lord Jesus by his Spirit does not breath upon the
Heart. O then lie down at the Feet of Christ, and look up to him in all, above
all, for all, casting our selves and Burdens upon him, that we may be
supported under all our cares, and fears, and temptations, and be relieved in
all wants and exigencies. Do all through the influence of that Spirit that
comes down from the Head, that with St. Paul you may live, yet not you, but
Christ. Paul owned his Life was bound up in Christ, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me.

Sixthly, The Sixth Request is, That your Conversations be only as becomes the
Gospel; let not the Doctrine of Free Grace be abused by your unholy
Conversation; see that ye be not of the number of those Atheists, that say, Let
us Sin, that Grace may abound: Let the Enemies of the Doctrine of Free Grace
reproach the Doctrine, and the Christians that own it a their pleasure; I am
sure there are none that are acquainted with the Free Grace of God can live a
loose Life; neither was any known that taught that Doctrine feelingly, or
learned it truly, that were ever known to be wicked persons. The Grace of God
teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts. Indeed the Notions of
Free Grace may leave persons with unsanctified Hearts and Lives, but the true
Knowledge of it leaves so sweet a Savor upon the Heart, that the Soul cannot
willingly embrace Dunghill Lusts. When the Soul knows the whole of his Salvation
is of Free Grace, that Soul is drawn forth to love, admire, glorify and praise
God, who has done such great things for him.

Let me beseech you, let not the glorious Gospel suffer Reproach by your uneven
Conversation. You know, you that profess the Truth, Truths of Christ have many
Enemies. You had need pray earnestly to be led in a plain Path, because of all
your Enemies: You have given up your selves to the Lord in your external
Dedication, see that it appear in your Conversation. The Life of an Holy Man is
(...), according to God, 1 Pet. 4.6. That God, you have given your selves up
to, is an holy God, the Lord Jesus that redeemed you, is the Holy one of God:
The Spirit that leads the Children of God is an holy Spirit; the Covenant that
you are in is an holy Covenant; without Holiness none of you shall see the
Lord. Then let me prevail in my Request, Pray live holy Lives, let your
Conversation be as becomes the Gospel only, then no matter what Men say of you,
you will have great peace in your own Souls, Psalm. 119.165. Great peace have
they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. It is better to be
holy, than to be thought holy; no matter if you are outwardly black, so you are
inwardly beautiful.

Seventhly, Walk in love, imitate the Lord Jesus, whose love overcame all our
infirmities; love brought him out of his Fathers Bosom, love caused him to be
born in a low condition, to bear our sorrows and grief, he taught love, he
practiced love, he died for love, he left pledges of his love to comfort his
Spouse in his absence, and will shortly come and fetch all his Redeemed home to
Glory to have their fill of love. Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear
Children, and walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and given himself for
us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.1, 2.
These will demonstrate that you are Christ's Disciples, John 13.35. The Lord
Jesus Christ spoke these words a little before his Death, that they might be of
the more force, and make the more Impression upon the Souls of his Disciples,
as if he should say, Remember my dying Love, and let it live in your Bosoms as
a precept and example to love one another. And this is a certain Character of
Love to Jesus Christ, when we love Christ's Disciples for Christ's sake, not
because we are of the same mind in our Judgment, but because we are Christ's
Disciples, and bear his Image; and then you may assure your selves, if you love
upon such grounds, your Love will not be restrained only to each other that
walk in Church Fellowship, but to all Saints as Saints, of what denomination
soever they go under, which is much wanted in this day we live in. It is much
to be lamented that persons Saint themselves more by their own Opinion, than by
their Interest in Jesus Christ Saints should love as they are Children of one
Father, and in their way to Heaven, and all that are in that way have Union
with Christ, and are Members of one glorious Head, therefore we ought to love
one another; why should Brethren fall out by the way? Nothing does more
manifest that the power of Godliness is in a People, than when they love for
Saintship rather than for Judgment. If you read the 13th Chapter of the
Corinthians, the Apostle gives the true Characters of Love. The first
description of it is, That it suffers long, that is, Not hasty to take
Revenge on them that offend them, nor rash in Expressions to threaten Revenge.
Secondly, It is kind, ready to do any good Office. Thirdly, Envieth not, is not
troubled at the Prosperity of others, however it go with himself. Fourthly,
Vaunteth not it self, does not ambitiously glory in himself, does labor to
exalt himself. Fifthly, Not puffed up, not swelling with Conceits of himself.
Sixthly, Does not behave himself unseemly, would not do any unseemly Action,
nor behave himself in an unbeseeming manner. Seventhly, Seeks not his own,
has not an Eye to his own profit, as to make it his end, but eyes God's Glory
chiefly, and the good of Zion, more than carnal Interest. Eighthly, Is not
easily provoked; though there may be Passions, yet is not governed by them, it
is an Evil much to be lamented: Passion so governs some, as if their Tongues
were set on fire from Hell. Ninthly, Thinks no Evil; he would do Evil to
none, nor readily take up Evil of another, to have uncharitable Thoughts of
him; he will not be ready to charge his Brother rashly upon every Report.
Tenthly, Rejoices not in Iniquity; he does not rejoice in the Faults of
others. Elevently, He rejoices in the Truth; he rejoices that Truth
prospers, and that an innocent persons Righteousness is cleared up. The
Apostle in winding up the marks of it, shows it is every way excellent; it
bears all things, believes all things, hops all things; he bears all
things, all Evils he meets withal; he believes all things good of his Brother,
so far as Charity may not injure Truth.

There be many that account themselves to have passed from Death to Life, which
fall short of those Characters of Love: We may all lament we find it so cold in
our selves to them that bear Christ's Name and Image. I beseech you, dearly
Beloved in the Lord, be much in Love, and you will be much in God, for God is
Love: To be a loving Saint is a sign of a lively Saint; many Waters cannot
quench the fire of Love.

Eighthly, Let me beseech you in the Name of the Lord, that you would set up
Godliness in your Families; we can never expect Holy Assemblies while Godliness
is neglected in Families. Children and Servants not being instructed at home,
is a great cause of their being unprofitable under the Word preached. Godly
Instruction is too much neglected both to Children and Servants by Professors
in our Age; I am afraid there are some that scarce a savoury Word drops from
their Lips all the Week to their Family. How can it be thought that unsavory
Spirits ever got good to their own Souls! They that keep all to themselves it
is to be feared have got little for themselves; the good Man brings forth good
Treasure, new and old. Let me entreat you, dear Christians, whatsoever station
you are in, whether Parents or Masters, whether Children or Servants, that you
do not neglect private Prayer twice in the day at least; if you have
opportunity to pray oftener, do not slip such fair seasons. The Mother would
think the Sucking Child not well if it should forsake the Breast a whole day;
so may thou think thy Soul is not right, that can pass a day without craving
any Spiritual Repast in Prayer. Mr. Gurnal' s Complete Christians Armor.
If you neglect private prayer, do not expect to thrive in Godliness; God gives
his Alms at Wisdoms Gate: And let me beseech you that are Parents or Governors,
keep up public Prayer in your Families, look to it, that you are not numbered
among the cursed Families that call not upon the Name of the Lord. The private
House is the Christians Chapel of ease to Worship God in daily with his Family:
The Church begun in a Fanily, and is upheld still by the Piety of private
Families. If the Nursery be not preserved, the Orchard must needs in time
decay. We cannot expect that Family to thrive in Godliness, where public
Prayer is neglected. What praying persons might some Children or Servants have
been, had they been called to that Duty by Parents or Masters when they were
under their Government! Methinks if persons love their own Souls, it should
cause them to love and pity the Souls about them. It would be great Cruelty in
Parents to spend all they get upon themselves, and let their Children starve.
Employ some of that Talent that you have got for the furtherance of their
Salvation: Should not you be willing that they should find the way to Heaven as
well as your selves? they have as precious Souls as you, and if you have tasted
sweetness in drawing nigh to God, will you deal so unkindly to hinder your
Family of partaking of the Blessing with you? If you complain of your weakness
in parts, or Bashfulness makes you backward to this Duty, I answer, It is not
your weakness in parts will be any hindrance of your Prayer's Acceptance with
God, nor will it prevent a Blessing from your Family; God looks at the
uprightness of your Hearts, not at the excellency of your Expressions; but if
you would study your own and Families Souls wants, you would as well know how
to go about this Duty, as you know in their necessities in the World, how to go
about your worldly business to maintain them, and supply their outward wants.
And as for Bashfulness, if your Children were perishing for Bread, you would
put on Courage to beg with them, rather than let them perish; how much more
should you put on Courage to go with your prishing Childrens and Servants Souls
to the Throne of Grace to beg Grace for them, as ever you would have your
Family thrive under the Public Ministry, as ever you would have them in their
Duty toward God and your selves, as you would have obedient Children and
faithful Servants, as ever you would have your Children and Servants separated
from a vain, wicked World, as ever you would bless God that you were their
Masters or Parents in a dying hour, keep up constant and public Prayer with
them in your Family.

Ninthly, Let me entreat you to love the Truth for Truths sake; think not the
worse of it because most undervalue it; let not their low esteem of the Truths
of Christ damp your Affections to it; enquire not who is on your side, before
you take it up, as the Pharisees did, Have any of the Rulers believed on him?
Some, if they have not the most and highest on their side, think Truth not
worth their owning. It is the misery of many, they never made their Faith nor
Religion their own; what is accounted best among men is always best to them; it
is what Men teach that are accounted best by the most of people they most
adhere to, more than they will to the Truths of Christ, though the best Men
teach them. They that are most for Sinners Good, are not counted good with
Sinners; they that preach Christ freely to the worst of Sinners, are accounted
the worst of Men: Though Truth is come to a bad Market, and sold at a low rate,
and few Buyers, I beseech you have never the lower Esteem of it, buy it as your
choicest Crown; if you hold fast the Crown of Truth, when Christ comes he will
give you a Crown of Glory. Many, I am persuaded, that are convinced of the
Truth, do not own it, because it goes in a mean dress: Many will hold with
every thing the Church that they are of holds, though they know nothing aright
they hold: Such are for Performance or Omission, they will do as others do, but
nothing from a right Principle: Beg of the Lord that you may see the Beauty and
Glory that is in the Truths of Christ, that you may highly prize Truth, when
you suffer the greatest Reproaches and Evils for owning the same.

Love Truth for its own sake, honor it for Christ's sake, commend it for
others sake, follow it for your own sake.

Lastly, Let me earnestly entreat you to pray for me, that I may both in Life
and Doctrine be a burning and shining Light, that I may find the power and
relish of things upon my Heart that I give out to you and others, that I may be
an Instrument in the Hand of Christ to bring many Souls to him, and build up
those that are brought in in their most holy Faith, and that utterance may be
given me with a Blessing from Heaven upon my unworthy Labors, that they may
not be in vain, but that I may daily see the Travel of my Soul; it is God alone
can open Hearts, and unlock the Treasury of Grace in the Gospel, and make known
the Mystery of the Gospel. It is not the hand that sows the Seed, but God's
Blessing that gives the Increase. And if you would have me bear you upon my
Heart before the Lord at the Throne of Grace, pray give me a meeting oftener
there, if you expect me to water you, pray that I may be watered. People little
consider what good they keep back from their own Souls in not praying for their
Ministers: Many are readier to reproach them than to pray for them, and to
rejoice in their Falls, than to pray that they may be upheld. How many that
have excellent Gifts and Parts do little Work for God, bring little Comsort to
Souls? If shining, they are not burning Lights, they leave cold earthly proud
Hearts: I think one Cause may be, they have not been earnest at the Throne of
Grace that a Blessing may attend their Labors. People may be much in admiring
such Ministers Gifts, when the Word they Preach takes little effect upon their
Souls. Ministers have a great Charge committed to them, a great Work to go
through, many Trials and Temptations in their Work, they had need be daily the
Subject of your Prayers and Pity. Your strangeness to the Work may cause their
Work to be much a Stranger to your Souls. To be a Minister, says Luther, is
nothing else but to derive the Worlds Wrath and Fury upon himself. The Dirt of
Reproach, says one, lies no where so thick as on Ministers Coats. How many
would count themselves happy in their ruin, that bring the Tidings of Peace and
Salvation to their Souls! A miserable Happiness that rejoices in the
Destruction of them that bring Salvation to them: As the People would have
their Ministers good Nurses to their Souls, and good Examples to their Flock,
as they would not have them pervert them by their Error in Doctrine, nor be
Temptations to them by their Falls, they should pray hard for them, that they
may neither miscarry in Life nor Doctrine, that God's Urim and Thummim may be
with them. I hope, Beloved in the Lord, you will not shut me out in your
Prayers, as you would have the Name of Christ honored by me, your Souls well
fed with wholesome Spiritual Food; as you would not have my Enemies have the
desire of their Hearts that wait for my Halting. Alas! I am a poor frail
Creature that am encompassed about, it may be with as many Temptations, if not
more, than many others are, and I fear have less Strength to go through them.
Pray for me, that while I preach to others I may not be a Cast-a-way my self.
It is dreadful to drop into Hell from under the Pulpit, but more dreadful to
drop out of it into the Bottomless Pit. It is sad for Ministers to be without
the Grace of God and true knowledge of Jesus Christ, they press others upon pain
of Damnation not to neglect: Like one that should spend time and strength to
draw Water for others, and perish with Thirst himself: Or as one that directs
many the right way, and yet does lose his own way. As you would have me a
faithful Labourer in the Harvest, to bring full Sheaves to your Souls, pray the
Lord of the Harvest to give me Skill and Strength to bear the Burden and Heat
of the Day. As you would have the Word which I preach drop upon your Souls as
the Rain, and distill as the Dew and small Rain upon the Herb, and as the
Showers upon the Grass, beg of God to pour out a double portion of his Spirit
on me. As you would have my Preaching powerful, my Life teaching, my Sermons
Heaven-born, my Lamp burning, my Heart engaged, my Talent improved, my self to
spend and be spent for your Souls good, pray forget me not at the Throne of
Grace.

I shall now take my Leave of you, and subscribe with my Hand the Reality of my
Heart, your Loving Pastor and faithful Servant for the Lords sake,

JOHN GAMMON.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE subsequent Tract being sent down to me in the Country, I did, as my other
occasions would admit, (for I have not had time for a strict Perusal) cursorily
look it over, and finding to my great satisfaction such a sweet breathing in
every part of it, I do joyfully recommend it to thy serious View, as a Jewel
not common, or easy (among the multitude of Books this Age abounds with) to be
found: And that thou may know the Cask that has sent forth such precious
Wine, I will give thee a brief Account of the Author; tho indeed, ex pede
Herculem, his own Work portrays him, and delineates the frame of his Spirit far
beyond what my feeble Pen can do. But being well known to me (perhaps better
than to any besides) I think it my Duty to wait upon him to the Press in this
his first Essay, with this just and impartial Character of him -- He is an
holy, serious, good Man, abounding with the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, and
every way fitted for that Great Work he is called to. Prayer, Meditation, and
the sanctified use of Affliction, ( Luther's three Ingredients to make a
Gospel-Minister) few has a greater share of. He is one of an excellent Spirit,
of great Faithfulness and Courage, a perfect Hero in his Ministerial Work; none
of those Rattle-Snakes that hiss and sputter in warm Sun-shiny Weather, but
durst not peep out of their Holes in a Winter Season. This worthy Champion,
(for which his Praise is, and will be in the Gates of Sion) bore a glorious
Testimony in the late horrid Persecution; he stood manfully to his Arms when
the Bulls of Bashan encompassed him about, he never quitted the Field, nor
flinch'd from his Posts, notwithstanding the imminent Danger himself and Family
were daily exposed to, but as one unconcerned in any Terrene Events, he went on
in his way, in his Work, and verily the Lord was with him, he crowned his
Labors with extraordinary Success, and (as a Token of his special Favor) gave
into his Bosom a most sweet People to be a Nursing-Father to, whose Unanimity
among themselves, and Fervency of Love to their endeared Pastor, whatever
others may, I am sure I cannot match in the Sphere of my Acquaintance. But to
pass from the Workman to the Work -- His Book will exactly show him, such an
one as I have hinted. Read it but seriously over, and thou will be under no
Temptation to think me a Flatterer, but count me as much too low, as the Queen
of Sheba did the Relators of Solomon's Court. Thou will meet with no uncouth
Phrases, no Logical Whimsies, no Flashes of wanton Rhetoric. But here, Oh!
here thou will find the refined Language of Canaan, the Dialect of the New
Jerusalem, and such a melodious Consort of Divine Music, as (if the Lord set
in with it) will warm thy Heart, refresh thy Spirit, and ravish thy Soul, as
the Spouse was ravished with the Rays of Christ's Glory, I am

Thy Soul's well-wishing Friend, C. N.

Christian Reader.
THE Author of these ensuing Sheets desired my Perusal thereof, that afterward
I would give my Judgment of the same to the World, the former of which I easily
granted, and have Sheet by Sheet, as they were done, perused the same, and
suppose that thou have them entire without Typographical Errors (so far as we
observed they are very carefully corrected.) However, if some have escaped the
Press, they must be (as is ordinary) imputed to the Printer, and not to the
Author, or any of us who have read the Original Copy thereof, (as I may say for
my self) with pleasure and profit.

Touching the latter, scil. commending it to thee, I most declined, partly
because I esteemed it needless, in regard that the matter thereof sufficiently
commends it self; and partly because I did not think my self so fit (as some
fitter might be) of doing such a kind of Work. However, I thin my self bound in
Justice to say something hereof, which I shall reduce to two Heads. 1.
Concerning the Author. 2. The Book it self. 1. The Author, of whom I must be
sparing, because he is alive, (though otherwise I should not) remembering also
the words of the Wise Man, As the Fining Pot for Silver, and the Furnace for
Gold; so is a Man to his praise.

As the Furnace will discover what Dross is in the Metal when it is melted, so
may Praise and Commendation draw out the Pride that is in the Heart of him that
receives them; nay, which is more strange, this Corruption may be felt in the
Heart, even when the last Breath is ready to expire, according to the Saying of
one of the German Divines in his last Sickness, when those about him recounted
(for his great Encouragement) the many Services he had done for God, Auferte
ignem (says he) adhuc enim paleas habeo, Take away the fire, for there is
still the chaff of pride in me. But nevertheless I hope I may give this Account
of him without any Temptation, that I esteem him a good Christian, and a
Gospel-Minister, one who has endeavored to keep a good Conscience, walks
close with God in his Personal and Relative Duties in the worst of Times, of a
Catholic Spirit, loving all that have aliquid Christi in them, making
Saintship the Ground of Church Communion, and avoiding all factious
Singularity, which beside his Ministerial Abilities, were the Grounds of my
intimatest Correspondence with him. 2. As for the Book it self, thou will
(Reader) if thou savourest the things that be of God, and not of Man, perceive
an Evangelical Strain of Spirit throughout the whole. Ever since I knew him he
was highly Evangelick, but I never thought him so much as this ensuing Tract
shows him to be, the matter whereof was preached by him in sundry Sermons after
a great Fit of Sickness, when we have reason to think his Spirit was very warm.
In sum, the most excellent Subject to Discourse or Write of, is Jesus Christ,
(says a Modern Author of our own.)

Austin having read Cicero's Works, commended them for their Eloquence, but he
passed this Sentence upon them, They Dulces non sunt quia nomen Jesu non est in
illis.
are not sweet, because the Name of Jesus is not in them. Parallel with which
is that of Bernard, If thou Si disputes aut conferas, non sapit mihi nisi
sonuerit ibi Jesum, in 1 Cor. 2.2.
writest it does not relish with me, unless I read Jesus there; if thou
disputest or conferrest, it does not relish well with me, unless Jesus sound
there. This I can assure thee, Reader, to the best of my Remembrance, there is
not a Page in this Book without the Name of Christ, either once or more, and
not impertinently or unnecessarily mentioned, at which I much wondered. Not that
I am of the Opinion of some, as if Christ could not be preached, if he was not
mentioned in totidem verbis; but to be sure when he is so much mentioned, not
in a way of vain Tautologies, but every way according to the Revelation of him
in his own Gospel, as I do count he is in this Book, surely then we may say
Here is a Book that treats of Christ. I shall not therefore any longer detain
thee from the Book it self, but commend It and Thee to the Blessing of God, who
is ambitious of nothing else, but to be

All in Christ, and nothing in Self, Thomas Powell.
Jan. 21. 1691.
Christian Reader.
THe foregoing Epistle of my Respected Friend has given an account of the
Author and his Performances of this Undertaking, the Author himself declaring
the Causes and Occasions of the Publication thereof; that which remains to me
is to commend the Diligent Attendance on the Duty here, exhorted unto of Living
upon Christ by Faith; and because a fixed view of Christ, as he is Revealed in
the Scriptures, is an instituted means whereby in and through him there is
conveyed unto us Strength and Ability to live unto him as we ought, I shall
therefore only show the Reasonableness and necessity of living to him; as it is
an Argument that may induce us to live upon him, who is the Fountain in and
through whom all Ability is conveyed unto us by the Grace of God, whereby we
may comfortably walk with God, and live unto his Praise, and our own Peace. All
I have to say on this Account therefore may be reduced to these three Heads.

1. The Reasonableness. And 2. The Necessity of Christians living to Jesus
Christ. And 3. The grievous neglect hereof in the times wherein we live,
endangering our Ruin unless we repent and reform.

First, As to the first Observation, That it is most reasonable to live unto
Christ, this does hereby appear, in that whatsoever it is that is meant by
living to Christ, whatsoever is included and comprised in it, or can be
understood by it, the Lord Jesus is every way worthy of it; it is all his due,
and no more than our reasonable Service; and this will further appear by an
Induction of these three particular Properties, and most eminent Instances of
this living to Christ. First, As it is an Act of Divine Honor and Homage that
is paid unto Christ by living to him; this he is worthy of as he is God.
Secondly, As it is an Expression of the greatest Love to live to him; this he
is worthy of, who died for us while we were Sinners. Thirdly, As it consists in
a Resignation of our selves to the Will and Disposal of Christ, by living to
him; this is most reasonable also because he has redeemed us to himself, we
are his, and not our own.

First then, as it is an Act of Divine Honor and Homage that is paid unto
Christ by living to him, to devote our selves to the Lord, he is worthy of the
same, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, Col. 2.9. To make any
thing the Object of Divine Honor but God alone, is Idolatry; the highest Love,
Fear, Reverence, Trust and Obedience that our Natures are capable of
performing, is the Homage that is peculiarly due unto God, as he is the Author
of our being; the difference between the Respect we owe to God, and what we are
allowed to show unto Creatures, is stated in this Law, that requires us to
Love the Lord our God with all our Heart, our Might and Strength, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
And our Neighbor as our selves, Mark 12.30, 31. But the Glory and Homage which
is peculiarly due unto God, he will not give unto another, Isa. 42.8. and
48.11. For what else do we by performing Divine Honor to any? but own and
acknowledge such to be God, unto whom we thereby ascribe Divine Excellencies,
with respect whereunto, we yield that peculiar Reverence which is due to God
alone as such.

And seeing he dwells in the Light which none can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6.16.
is infinite, invisible and incomprehensible in his Being, it has pleased God
to condescend to give forth such a Representation of himself, and such evident
discoveries of his Divine Excellencies, as might be a meet Object of Divine
Honor, and worthy to receive the Homage due from Creatures unto their Creator.
This was the Shekinah^, or Divine Presence of old, evidencing it self by Divine
Operations. Hence Jacob says of it, Genesis 28.16, 17. Surely the Lord is in this
place and I knew it not, and he was afraid; and he said, How dreadful is this
place! this is none other but the House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven.
The Egyptians said of the Plague of Lice. Exodus 8.19. that it was the Finger of
God This Divine Presence in the burning Bush obliged Moses to pull off his
Shoes, Exodus 3.5. and Joshua to the like act of Reverence, Josh. 5.14, 15. unto
the Lord as Prince of the Lords Host; unto this Glory of God, as discovering it
self at the door of the Tabernacle in a Cloud, Exodus 33.10. The people bowed
their Heads and worshipped. This Divine Presence of God dwelling between the
Cherubims, and filling the Temple, 1 King. 8.10, 11, 12, 13, 27, 28, 29, 30.
obliged Israel to Worship toward that Holy Place, there being discovered the
Tekmeria, or evident Marks of the Divine Glory; and to pay the same Respect to
any other place, or to that place now God is not there, is Idolatry, Deuteronomy.
16.5, 6. and 12.13, 14. 1 King. 12.28, 29, 30. Now proportionably unto that
degree and measure of the Discovery which God is pleased to make of himself to
his Church. As to the Obscurity or Clearness of it, such is the Glory or Defect
of these Dispensations, 2 Cor. 3.9, 10, 11, 14, 18. Heb. 1.1. In this respect
therefore it is that the Dispensation of the Gospel is so far excelling the
Glory of all former times, in that by the Incarnation and Exhibition of Jesus
Christ God is manifest in the Flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. is most clearly, fully and
gloriously revealed in the person of Christ. No Man has seen God at any time,
but the only begotten Son that dwells in the Bosom of the Father, he has
declared him, John 1.18. He was declared to be the Son of God with Power, by
the Resurrection from the Dead, Romans 1.4. God who at sundry times and in diverse
manners spoke unto our Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken
unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he
made the Worlds, who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the Character or
express Image of his Person, and upholding all things by the Word of his Power;
when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the Right Hand of the
Majesty on high, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. Who thought it not robbery to be equal with
God. Phil. 2.6. Seeing it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness
dwell, Col. 1.19. All the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge being hid in him,
Col. 2.3. And the infinite, eternal, unchangeable Excellencies of God in his
Counsel of Peace, his Love, Grace and Mercy to lost Sinners, being revealed by
him, and represented in him, 1 John 3.16. 1 John 4.8, 9, 10. By him is Glory
brought to God in the highest, on Earth Peace and good will toward Men, Luke
2.14. Hence it is that all Idolatry is now more inexcusable than ever, Men
being not now left to grope in the dark since Christ is come a Light into the
World, John 3.19. John 15.22.24. Acts 17.30, 31.

So that we may conclude, as this living to him is an Act of Divine Honor,
That he is worthy of it, and we may say, Rev. 1.5. Unto him that loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests
unto God and his Father, to him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever, Amen.
And Rev. 5.12. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Wisdom,
and Riches, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing. John 5.23. That
all Men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father.

Secondly, Another Respect, on the Account whereof this Living to Christ here
pressed appears reasonable, is as it is an expression of the greatest Love
and highest Esteem of him to whom we live, and this he is most worthy of, being
incomparably lovely in himself, and having loved us with an infinite and
everlasting Love; who has died for us while we were Enemies and Sinners, and
washed us from our sins in his Blood. And

Thirdly, As this living to Christ is a Resignation of our selves unto the
disposal of another: He is most worthy of it, who has redeemed us with the
price of his precious Blood; therefore ought we to honor him with our Lives,
seeing we are not our own, but his purchased People. So that to live to Christ
in the constant performance of Divine Honor to him in the highest Expressions
of the greatest Love unto him, and in the fullest resignation of our selves
unto this Jesus our dear Redeemer is entirely his due, and no more than our
reasonable Service.

Secondly, As it is in reason due to Christ, so it is most necessary for us.
This being the Fruit God expects at our hands for this great Cost he has been
put unto for our Redemption from Wrath to come. 2 Tit. 14. Christ gave himself
for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of Good Works. Romans 14.8, 9. To this end Christ both
died, and arose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and
living. Therefore says the Apostle, None of us lives to himself, but whether
we live we live to the Lord, and whether we die we die unto the Lord; whether
we live therefore or die, we are the Lords. The like we have in the Text
whereon the following Discourse is raised, Phil. 1.20. and 21. His earnest
expectation and hope was, that Christ should be magnified in his Body, whether
it be by Life or by Death; for, says he, to me to live is Christ, and to die
is gain; that is, says Piscator in Loc. Vita mea est occupa^a in promovenda
Gloria Christi, my Life is employed in promoting the Glory of Christ. Indeed
the Syriack Erasmus, Beza, and others render this 21st Verse otherwise; yet all
allow this matter to be thus stated in the Verse before it; nay, the whole
current of Scripture manifests this to be the great Testimony of Gratitude
for our Redemption that God expects at our hands. 1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a
chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that
ye should show forth the Praises of him who has called you out of Darkness
into his mavelous Light, Luke 1.74, 75. That being delivered out of the hands
of our Enemies, we might serve him without fear in Holiness and Righteousness
before him all the days of our Life. This therefore being the great thing that
is required, it is that for which we shall be called to a strict account before
the Tribunal and Judgment Seat of Christ at last, and therefore is most
necessary to be faithfully performed now, that we may give up our Accounts with
joy at that day.

Thirdly, But notwithstanding this living to Christ is so manifestly his due,
and so indispensably necessary a Duty incumbent on us, yet is it most generally
neglected by the most of those very people who are called Christians, as the
open Profaneness that has overspread the Nation, and the Covetousness,
Unfruitfulness, Formality and Decay of first Love to Christ in the generality
of those of the strictest Professions of Religion in the Land, does too
apparently manifest: And to that degree has all Flesh corrupted its way
amongst us, that without a speedy and general Repentance and Reformation we
must expect a speedy and general Desolation to befall the Nation; for God is
the same holy, sin-avenging God that ever he was, when he destroyed the World
with a Flood, Sodom and Gomorrah with Fire from Heaven, and is no Respecter of
persons, but will cause Judgment to begin at his own House, 1 Pet. 4.17. Am.
3.2. Ezekiel. 9.6. and therefore destroyed Shilo, Jerusalem, and the Churches of
Asia, etc. for their unfruitfulness, Isa. 5.5. Heb. 6.8. Luke 13.6. Their
Covetousness, Isa. 57.17. Their loss of first Love, Rev. 2.4, 5. And all these
things are found among Professors, and in the Land the Sins of Sodom. What
therefore can we expect but what our Lord told the Jews, Luke 13.3. That unless
we repent we shall all likewise perish; for none can deliver us out of God's
Hand, which is stretched forth against us for our sins; nor is it like to be
turned back, but increased, until we are reformed or destroyed, Isa. 9.10, 11,
12, 13, 14. The Lord tells Israel for their Stubbornness under his afflicting
hand, That he would go on and set the Syrians against him before, and the
Philistines behind him, and that they should devour Israel with open mouth: For
all this, says he, his Anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still; for the people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they
seek the Lord of Hosts. Ver. 14. Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel
head and tail, branch and rush in one day, Lev. 26.18. And if ye will not yet
for all this hearken unto me (viz. when afflicted) then will I punish you seven
times more for your sins. The like is showed by the Parable of the Pot, whose
Scum goes not out of it, Ezekiel. 24. He that being often reproved hardneth his
Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove. 29.1. Thus
was it with Eli's Sons, 1 Samuel 2.25. and with Israel, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. and thus
is it like to be with us unless we repent.

Now this fatal Neglect of living to Christ has been occasioned very much by
those Diversions that have turned our minds from that fixed View of Christ
which is necessary to enable us comfortably and steadfastly to live to him and
walk before him, by being taken up in vain Jangling about the lesser matters of
Religion, or filled with the Gares or Pleasures of this present evil World. Our
best way therefore to live to Christ, is, to get our Minds steddily fixed on
Christ; this will change our Hearts into the same Image, and enable us to live
unto his Praise, and our own Peace. When it pleased God, (says the Apostle,
Gal. 1.15, 16, 17.) to reveal his Son in me, I conferred not with Flesh and
Blood. 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face beholding as in a glass the Glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to to Glory, even as by
the Spirit of the Lord. 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it
does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear we
shall be like him: (And how does he know we shall be like him?) Why, says he,
we shall see him as he is: And if a clear view of Christ in Glory as he is,
shall translate us into Glory like unto him, then may an open view of him, tho
but as in a Glass by Faith, change us in a lesser measure into the same Image
in degrees of Grace here, which shall be perfected by the Beatifical Vision of
him into full Glory hereafter. Now it is the great and principal Work and Duty
of all the Ministers of the Gospel to preach Christ Jesus, to publish and teach
the Glorious Excellency and Riches of the Love and Grace of God in Jesus
Christ, to the Conversion of Sinners, and Edification of the people of God; and
this ought to be the great concern of all that hear the Word, to hear Christ
preached by such Workmen as need not be ashamed, that have Wisdom, Skill and
Knowwledge rightly to divide the Word of God; (for who is sufficient for these
things?) To conclude, that the ensuing Discourse, or the sincere Endeavors of
any that love the Lord Jesus Christ may be successful to induce others to live
to him, and that by a constant fixed view of Christ, as he is revealed to us in
the Gospel, we may be made more like unto him, and more conformed to his Will
in all things, is the desire of

Thy Servant in the Service of our Lord Jesus, J. W.

CHRIST A Christians Life.
Phil. 1.21. For me to live is Christ.
THE Lord that kills and makes alive, that brings down to the Grave, and
brings up, through his goodness has raised me up from a sick Bed, and has
brought me once more among you to speak in his Name: I have thought meet to
offer to your Considerations what were my Meditations from this Portion of
Scripture that I have named unto you.

First, What vain and empty things the highest of our enjoyments in this World
are, without Christ be enjoyed in them, and exalted by us above them.

Secondly, Consider, all that we have done, or can do in our whole Life, we are
undone without Christ: When we come to lie upon a dying Bed, there is no
enumeration of Works or Duties will give Comfort or Satisfaction, if we do not
savingly know Christ.

Thirdly, To consider what a poor thing Head-notions, Gifts, Parts, Knowledge,
and all the Learning in the World is, without Christ. If a person dye with his
head filled with the best of Notions, and be empty of the Treasures of Grace
and true Knowledge of Christ, what a poor miserable Wretch will he appear to be
in a dying hour! Alas, how poor and low a thing is health, strength, riches,
parts and gifts, if we are ignorant of Christ?

Fourthly, Consider what a blessed Life they live, that live in Christ, and
upon Christ: What a blessed Life it is to live to Christ! There is no Life like
it: and that is a Believers Life.

Fifthly, Consider, and this has been much my Meditation, How terrible would
the thoughts of our life past be when we come to dye, since our best actions
have been mixed with sin, were it not for this glorious Name the Lord has
revealed to sinners, the Lord our Righteousness? All the names of God would be
astonishing to poor sinners, were it not for this, to know the Lord, a
righteous God: That would be a terrible name; Enter not into Judgment with thy
Servant O Lord: but the Lord our Righteousness! poor sinners Righteousness!
this Righteousness is made mine: This makes the thought and name of Christ
sweet to a poor sinner.

Sixthly, Consider there is no dying comfortably, if we have not lived on
Christ. If we have not lived to glorify Christ, all things we have enjoyed
will leave us wretched, poor and miserable.

Seventhly, Consider, all our Reading, Praying, Ordinances, will be but like
withered Leaves, if they are not kept green and flourishing in Christ our Life.

Eighthly, All the actions of our Life that are good, are all in, and from, and
through Christ that glorious Vine, that bears the Branches, and causes them to
be fruitful.

In the Verse before the Text, you find the Apostle resigning himself up wholly
to Jesus Christ: According to my earnest expectation, and my hope, that in
nothing I shall be ashamed; but that with all boldness, as always, so now also,
Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death. Says
he, I have resigned up my self, I am not afraid of death, neither am I careful
for this life. Whatever God will do with me, so I may but glorify him. I am
not careful about this body, whether I live longer here, or whether I lay it
down in the dust. Paul as it were stands a Tip-toe, (says Mr. Trap) to see
which way he may glorify Christ. I am ready to dye; it will be for my profit;
it will be best for me to go to Glory. I am sure it is best for me to go home
to my dear Lord, there to sit with him on the Throne, and receive the Crown of
Immortal Life and Glory: but for you it is best to continue here.

Let his name be exalted, and his Glory made more known to his Church, however
he deal with me: I am not careful in any thing, neither am I ashamed, but that
with all boldness, as always, so now also; Christ shall be magnified in my
body, whether it be by life or by death; that is it I live for, that is it I
dye for. I would live, that I might glorify him; I would dye that I may enjoy
his Glory: But which way his Glory may be most exalted, that way have I
resigned up my self to the Lord Jesus to dispose of me which way he pleases,
so his Name may be magnified in Life or Death: I desire nothing more than the
exalting of Christ in all.

The matter contained in the words of my Text, is of as high Concernment, and
of as great a Consequence as the Soul of man can be taken up with; and indeed
so great, that all things in the World are but Trifles in comparison to it:
What was the sum of the Apostles desire and business of his Life, to serve and
enjoy the Lord Christ, ought to be the business of every one that will be
everlastingly happy: This Life only can bring true Peace, Treasures, Pleasures,
Wisdom, Grace, Glory to the Immortal Soul of Man. Whether we read the words
actively or passively of his receiving Life from Christ, or acting for Christ
in his Life; it plainly appears in either sense, That Christ is the Sum and
Substance of a Christians Life. If the Apostles meaning was, That Christ was
Life to him, or that he would live to Christ; in either sense Christ is a
Believers Life. Some do expound it efficiently, others objectively; I think the
meaning of the words may not be mis-placed, if both be understood; for Christ
is that inexhaustible Fountain and Treasury of Grace that a Believer receives
his Grace and Holiness from to act for Christ: We cannot move toward Christ but
as we are moved by Christ; we must have our Life from Christ, before we can
live to Christ; he is the Fountain from whence the Believer has his Life; the
Sun from whence he has his Light and Glory; the full Treasure of Grace from
whence a Believer receives a holy heart and life.

He that is the Image of the Invisible God, renews them by his Grace in that
Image; he purges Conscience with his Blood to serve the living God the Lord
Jesus; being formed upon the heart, the desires and delights of the heart are
changed, the bent and bias of the heart is carried after Christ: it is Christ
must kindle the holy Fire upon the Altar of the heart, before the Believer can
act from a true Zeal for God.

So whether the words be taken disjunctively from the Verse before, That he
would magnify Christ, because he had received his Life and Salvation from
Christ: He would magnify the efficient cause of his Life, whom he was united
to. Or whether conjunctively, He would live to glorify Christ, as he had
resolved in the Verse before; in either sense this is plain, The Apostles heart
was wrapped up in Christ more than any thing in this World.

There are many precious Truths to be sucked out of this blessed portion of
Scripture: But I shall only through Gods assistance, draw from the words this
point of Doctrine:

That a true Believer desires not Life, nor the things of Life, whatever they
are, no further than he may glorify and enjoy Christ in them.

Or thus, The Aims and End of a Believer in Life or Death is to glorify the
Lord Jesus Christ: Or, Christ a Christians Life.

I. By way of Explication, wherein Christ is a Believers Life; or how a
Believer is thus wrapped up in Christ.

II. Show the Reasons why they are so.

III. Apply the whole.

There are four things wherein a person is chiefly concerned as to Life.

First, His dependency upon his Life: Ask a Man to do any thing, yes says he,
if I am alive or in health.

Secondly, In our natural Actions: If a Man eat, drink, put on Cloths, take
Physic, Food, or any thing, it is that he may live.

Thirdly, Take Life for the Comforts of Life: A Man's Life is a burden to him,
when his Comforts are gone; a Believers Life is a burden to him when he does
not enjoy Christ.

Fourthly, For the Aim and End of Life: Persons that are tractable and
industrious desire to live here, to be uselful in their places they serve their
Generation; so a Believer desires to live for this end, to serve the Lord Jesus
and to glorify his Holy Name.

First, To take the dependence upon Life: James corrects the manners of them,
that said, I will go into the City, and buy and sell; they should have said, if
the Lord will, we shall live and do this or that: So a Believer living
depending on Christ, says he, in my self I am a poor dead Sinner; I am dead to
my self and in my self; but I depend on Christ for Life, I depend on Christ for
Wisdom, for Righteousness, for Sanctification, for renewed Strength, I live
upon him for all: For I am dead, I am dead to the Law, I have no Action to meet
the Law with, nor the Law has no Action against me; I am dead to Sin as to the
Life of it, and to its condemning Power, and to its Malignity and Guilt; and I
am dead to the World, I depend on Christ says the Apostle, that Christ might
be all in all. Alas! what can I do, all my Suits are ended in Law: it is Life
we depend on for the enjoyment of our Friends; Oh it is Christ for all, says
the Apostle, ye are dead, what then? your life is hid with Christ in God,
Colos. 3.3. Ye are dead, ye are crucified with Christ; dead to your own
Righteousness. An Unbeliever, what ever good he does, exalts himself and his
own Righteousness; but what good a Believer does, is to have Christ and his
Righteousness exalted; he says no more I but Christ; but one ignorant of
Christ sets the crown of all he does upon his own Head; I fast, I pray, I give
Tithes, says the Pharisee; but when a Soul knows Christ, No more I, says he;
you are dead, but your life is hid with Christ in God; what then? when Christ
our Life shall appear, we shall also appear with him in Glory: The Believer is
wrapped up in Christ living, wrapped up in Christ dying; if it were possible, a
Believer could be separated from Christ, he would be lost and undone for ever;
what a poor sinful naked Creature is he? No, says the Apostle, you are dead,
and where is my Life? safe enough in Christ, my Life is hid with God in Christ:
When shall my Life appear? Why, when Christ who is our Life shall appear, we
shall also appear with him in Glory. The Saint lives upon Christ; when he dies,
he dies in Christ, when raised up, is raised up by Christ, clothed with
Christ's Righteousness, when Christ who is our Life shall appear, etc. A Saint
cannot be separated from Christ, but shall appear with and in Christ; all the
Formalists, Legalists and Moralists in the World shall appear at the Great Day,
but it is without Christ; you know a Man cannot speak, act, nor do any thing
when his Life is gone: So says the Apostle, As you are dead to the Law, dead
to Sin and dead to the World, so you are dead to your own Righteousness, when
Christ who is our Life shall appear, we shall appear with him in Glory; you
shall not go one step further than Christ goes, you are Members of his Body: My
Friends, there is a great difference between a Man hearing and praying, and
knowing Christ only by reading; and a Saint living upon Christ in every Duty,
in every Affliction, living upon him in Life, living upon him in Death, says
our Blessed Lord, John 6.9. Your Fathers eat Manna in the Wilderness, and are
dead; they depended on the Manna for life; but he that eats this Bread shall
live for ever, (as if he had said) you that depend on any thing below me shall
die: When persons live on any thing below Christ, they have dead Souls living,
and damned Souls dying: If any depend on me as the living and immortal Food of
their Souls, they shall live for ever; your Fathers eat Manna and are dead;
Ordinances perish with us, Duties perish with us, and all below Christ will
perish; the Believers All is to have Christ in them, Jesus Christ the Bread of
Life that came down from Heaven: I am the living Bread, that came down from
Heaven, if any eat of this Bread he shall live for ever! and this Bread the
Spirit of the Lord in the Word reveals to the Soul, and the believing Soul
lives by it for ever; it is the Spirit of Christ that reveals and applies to
the believing Soul the Righteousness, Grace and Blood of Christ, to justify
and cleanse them from all Unrighteousness, and makes known to them, that their
Name is written in the Book of Life; the knowledge of which does draw forth a
Believer's Heart to depend upon Christ for daily Strength to exercise Grace in
every condition. Says the Apostle, Phil. 4.12. I can do all things; Paul, you
are a brave man indeed, what can you do? I can do all things, I know how to
want, and how to abound; you hear me speak, what I can do pray don't mistake
me, I depend on Christ for it; I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me. The Believer lives through Christ: You may see a natural Man
praying, a natural Man hearing or performing a duty; but this Man depends on
his own strength and on duty; and you may see a Believer in Duty, and it may be
the natural Man has greater parts and finer expressions than the Believer; but
the Believer lives on Christ for all, and the other on himself: Says the
Believer, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me; he would have
Christ in all, he would have Christ foremost in all; so that a Believer is girt
with the Strength of Christ: Persons may preach, others may hear, pray,
discourse; we may have fine Matter, curious Divinity wrapped up; but if Jesus
Christ is not preached to poor Souls and depended upon, it is all nothing; what
can this poor Creature do when he comes to die, and look Death in the Face,
that strong Champion, that King of Terrors? he cannot see him but in great
horror and fear. A formal Christian, that strives to speak fine words, have
fine expressions, learn something by rote; they can dispute of Religion,
therefore think they are brave Christians; but comes a Temptation or a Trial on
them, they know not how to go through the Battle: But take a real Christian
that is meaner in expressions, that lives on Christ, and is girt about with the
strength of Christ, how does he go through the Battle? 1 Samuel 17. What Armor
was there put on to go out against that mighty Champion? That which girt him
with Strength was the glorious Name of the Lord; the Men of Israel, though Men
of War, were afraid; but comes David without Armor, and he would encounter
him; Verse. 45. Then said David to the Philistine, Thou come to me with a
Sword, and with a Spear, and with a Shield; but I come to thee in the Name of
the Lord of Hosts: David had made the Lord his Strength, he was girt about with
the Strength of the Almighty Lord; the Name of Jehovah was the Breast Plate he
put on; but the Men of Israel that were great Warriors, were afraid to meet
this Champion: So persons that have been great Disputers, great Discoursers,
persons that have been great in Knowledge in the Letter, shall be afraid to
meet Death that great Champion; when a weak Believer that has made Christ his
Life, shall go through the Battle with Courage; so I say, a Believer depends on
Christ for Life, for the Life of Grace, for the Life of Righteousness, being
girt about with the Strength of the Lord.

Secondly, Take Life for the Actions of Life: While a Man lives, he acts; when
a Man is dead, he cannot act; says the Apostle, first negatively, and then
affirmatively, None lives to himself, none dies to himself; and then
affirmatively, living or dying we are the Lords, Romans 14.8. So if we ask a
natural Man, why do you eat, drink, put on clothes and work? that I may live:
And if we ask a Christian, why do you pray, hear, wait on God in Ordinances? O
that I may live on Christ, enjoy Christ: You see me (says Paul) live, as you
think, but you are mistaken, I do not live of my self, it is Christ that lives
in me, and the Life I live is by the Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. I am
crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live; I am dead, yet I live; I am dead to
the World, yet I live in Christ; I am a dead condemned Sinner by the Sentence
of the Law, yet I live in the Righteousness of Christ; I am dead to my own
Righteousness, to my own Works, but I am alive in Christ; I am crucified with
Christ, nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me; though I am
dead to Sin, I am alive to Christ; though I am a dead Sinner, I am a living
Saint; I am pardoned in Christ, beloved in Christ, made alive through Grace in
Christ, clothed with the Righteousness of Christ; therefore I live though dead;
as if a Man should say I am a Man sentenced, yet I am a Man absolved; I am a
Man dead in the Eye of the World, yet I am a Man acquitted, here is my Pardon;
so says a Believer, the Law condemns me, the Law judges me, but I am alive in
Christ, pardoned in Christ; Now Law thou have nothing to say to me.

Well but Paul, do you live? You have got your Pardon, will you live now to
your self? Nay, says he, do not mistake me, though you hear me say, I live,
yet not I live, but Christ lives in me; I do not say, I am pardoned and
absolved to live to my self; No my Life is none of mine; though you see me a
living Saint, yet I have my root in Christ; it is not I, but Christ lives in
me: When I was a Pharisee it was I, then I prayed, I repented, I humbled my
self, I did this or that, I lived zealously to the Law; but now it is no more
I, though I do the action of a Man, as before, I spoke as the Pharisee, I did
so and so in my self; but now it is changed, now it is in Christ all; before it
was my own Righteousness, now Christ's Righteousness; before it was my Duty,
but now it is Christ; Christ lives in me, Christ reigns in me, Christ is all
in all; therefore not I, but Christ; therefore look not on me; do you hear me
pray, preach, do any action, it is no more I but Christ in me, and the Life I
now live is by Faith in the Son of God. If a natural Man cats, drinks, puts on
cloths, it is that he may live: but all that I do, is that I may enjoy Christ:
Some poor Creatures think when they have done some duties, they have done
enough to justify them; but if they have not Christ their Life they will
appear in as bad a state as the profanest Wretches on Earth: But I put on
Christ to be my Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, in all my Duties I am
putting on Christ. It is a hard matter to turn persons from Profaness; but when
they are turned from Profaness, and rest upon their Reformation, it is an
harder matter to turn them to Christ: Now all the Actions of a Believer are
still that Christ may be his Life, acting in Christ and for Christ.

Thirdly, Take Life for the Comforts of Life: What is a Man's Life to him, if
his Comforts have taken their leave of him? So it is with a Believer, says he,
if I cannot enjoy Christ, I have no Comfort in praying or hearing, I have no
Comfort, but as I meet with Christ: What are Sabbaths or Ordinances? though I
use them, I cannot rejoice in them, till I meet with Christ; he is my Comfort;
when he shines on my Soul, then all goes well with me: He is the health of my
countenance, says David, Psalm. 43.5. How do Saints return mourning and
sorrowing, and what a sorrowful story will they tell us, if they have not met
with Christ in an Ordinance? A formal Professor, he is content, if he has been
at an Ordinance, whether he meets with Christ or no: But come to a Believer,
ask him, how does it go with you? says he, I have waited on God (and I bless
God that he has brought me to wait on him) but I have not met with God; and he
sorrows and mourns with the Spouse, I called but he gave me no answer, I could
not hear one comfortable word from him, Cant. 3. I went to the Watchmen, but I
could not find him. Oh what sorrowful stories will Believers tell, if they do
not meet with Christ! If I could meet with him then should I rejoice; though
you may see me perform Duties, what is this, if I do not meet with Christ, and
have him shining upon my Soul? Thus take Life for the Comforts of Life; and the
Believer has no Comfort when Christ withdraws; when they come from an
Ordinance where they have met with Christ, they will come leaping like an Heart;
Oh I met with him whom my Soul desired! and that is to make Christ our Life, to
depend on Christ, and in the Actions of all our Duties draw life from Christ,
and then our Souls have no comfort in Ordinances without Christ: So therefore
the Spouse invites Christ very friendly; for she knew, that if she had not
enjoyment of him she should have no comfort; she invites him in Cant. 7.11, 12.
Come my Beloved, let us go forth into the Field, let us lodge in the Villages;
let us get up early to the Vineyard; let us see if the Vine flourish, whether
the tender Grape appear, and the Pomgranates bud forth; there will I give thee
my loves. Oh come, says she, my Beloved, let us go forth; if I go without
thee, I shall have no comfort in my walk: Lord Jesus, says a Believer, come in
this Ordinance, come in this Duty, reveal thy Grace and Righteousness; without
that I have no comfort: Come, my Beloved, let us get up early to the Vineyards,
let us see if the Vine flourish: I am sure if I have not thy presence, I shall
have a dead and dark time, a dismal walk of it: Come Lord Jesus in the
Revelation of thy Grace in my Heart, then will my Soul thrive in Grace; then
shall I receive comfort.

If I have but the Buddings of Grace, if I have thy presence, I shall make a
good construction of it; if I have but a little Grace and Christ's presence? I
can rejoice in a little Grace: A little Grace when Christ appears, is more to a
Believer, than a strong Faith when Christ withdraws: The Spouse would not bring
discomfort to her self; Come let us see if the Vine flourish, whether the
tender grapes appear; if there be but the least Grace in my Soul, what will you
do? there will I give thee my loves, there will I give thee my delights, there
will I embrace thee with open Heart, with warm Affections; there will I give
thee my praises; there will I exalt thy name: Come let us see whether the
tender grape appear and the Pomegranates bud forth; see how my Soul thrives;
let me take comfort though there be but the least budding forth of Grace;
though I have but a dram of Grace, let me have thy presence; there will I give
thee my loves: First, My Soul shall have heart-joy, and be full of delight.
Secondly, Then will I give thee the glory of thy Grace. Thirdly, There will my
Soul be endeared to thee: When thou art present the very buddings of Grace will
be sweet: The strongest Believer cannot take comfort in his Graces till Christ
appear in the manifestation of his Love to the Soul.

Fourthly, Take Life for the end of Life. The end I live for, pray for, hear
for, is, that I may enjoy Christ. My Friends, Pray look to the end of your
actions, and see that your aim and desire in all, is to glorify and enjoy the
Lord Jesus; for it is but a few days, and you will come to your last day; a
little time, and you will have time no more; a few Minutes before you will draw
your last Breath; a few Sabbaths, and you will have no more; and whatever you
have done, if you have not made Christ your life, you are undone for ever. That
is an excellent question the Lord Christ puts to the multitude, Mat. 11.7.
says our blessed Lord concerning John, What went ye out into the Wilderness to
see, a Reed shaken with the Wind? John that had Preached of the coming and
appearing of Christ, there was abundance of People flockt about him to hear
him, as if they would all have been his Converts: but alas, they did not know
him, nor wherefore they went after him. Many poor sinners seem to be taken with
the Ministers, and ways of God for a time, but they do not know why nor
wherefore; as if the Lord Jesus should say, if you are only taken with his
Preaching as a Man, and only the words of his mouth, you will but see a Reed
shaken with the Wind: If a person goes to hear the best man upon earth Preach,
a man of the greatest Fame and Name, and go barely for his Learning or
Eloquence, or to hear some new thing, alas, you see but a Reed shaken with the
wind, a poor mortal man, a poor earthen Vessel; the best of Ministers and
Christians when under temptations, are but Reeds shaken with the wind; but if
you come out to hear Christ Preached, to enjoy Christ, to meet with Christ, and
can say I come to hear Christ Crucified and Preached, Christ's Righteousness
revealed, then indeed this is the aim and end of a Believer: But says Christ,
What came you out for? we may say to many Professors, What come you out for?
notwithstanding the means you have had, the mercies you have enjoyed, you are
in the old way that you were in; how blind and ignorant are most of the
Doctrins of Faith in Christ, of that Doctrine that alone will save them, of that
Righteousness that will cover them in the day of Battle? Some are taken with
one thing, some with another; some to get Notions in the Head to maintain
Disputes: But few come to enjoy Christ, and meet with him; but what went you
out for, O believer, to enjoy Christ? and if Christ is not your aim and end in
every Duty and Sermon, what a sad disappointment will you meet with at last!
Will you not do that in a spiritual action, as in a civil action? You eat, you
drink, that you may live, says Christ, Mat. 6.25. Take no thought for your
life, what you shall eat, or what you shall drink, nor yet for your body what
you shall put on: is not life more than meat, and the body than raiment? So I
say, is not Christ more than life? Is not Jesus Christ more than all the things
that appertain to life? So says a Believer, I do all that I may get Christ. So
much for those four things in the Explication concerning Life.

The next is, the reasons why a Believer enjoys Christ.

First, Because of that Union there is between Christ and every Believer. As
there is an Union between a man and himself, so is there an Union between
Christ and a Believer: You are dead, and your Life is hid with Christ in God;
not I live, but Christ lives in me: I am not on my own bottom; I am not a man
living of my self; they that are joined to the Lord are one Spirit: Christ is
made my own: he is made to me Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption: Christ and I am one; I am a Member of his mystical Body, so that
wherever I live, I live in Christ, and Christ in me; and I live to Christ. A
Believer is the very Image of Christ's Goodness, the very Impression of Christ's
Mercy, the pledges of Christ's Love: Says a Believer, I see Christ's Conquests
is my Conquest, his Life my Life, his Righteousness my Righteousness, his
Victory my Victory. I see him dead for me, risen for me, at Gods Right Hand for
me, appearing in Glory for me, raising me up at the last day, John 6.44. No man
can come to me, except the Father which has sent him draw him; and I will
raise him up at the last day. There is such an Union between the dust of a
Believer in the Grave, and Christ, that he will raise him up in a close and
near Union, his Body like Christ's glorious Body: Says Christ, though a
Believer dies, there shall none of his Glory be lost; the Grave is a perfumed
Bed, to take a sweet Nap, till Christ calls in the glorious morning of the
Resurrection, then he will raise up every crum of his dust, there shall none of
him be lost; for there is such an Union between Christ and a Believer, that a
Believer may meet death and not fear: Death is but a messenger of Peace to you,
though he is the King of Terrors to most of the World: he comes with an Angels
Face to the Believer, tells you sweet news; tells you, you must go to your Beds
of Dust, where you shall rest in Peace for a time, and then be raised up to
Glory; as we do our Children, wrap them up in their swaddling Clothes for the
Night, and dress them fine in the Morning: Death might say, come you are only
to go to your bed of Dust, and in the Morning when you awake, the Bridegroom
will come and attire you: here you are desiring and longing after Christ; you
would have more of God, more enjoyment of Christ, more comfort in your Spirit:
well, you shall have it in the other World. It is true, Christ will raise up
the wicked to judge and condemn them. Union with Christ causes the Soul to cry
out, O for me to live is Christ: O let me live to thy Glory Lord; O let not a
moment of my Life be without the enjoyment of thee! What is the Preaching of
the Word, why are the Ambassadors sent forth, what are a multitude of mercies,
if I do not enjoy Christ? O that I may magnify Christ, glorify Christ, says
a Believer, that is it I press after more than any thing I here enjoy.

Secondly, A Believers desire is, that he may live to enjoy Christ, because of
the blessed Supplies he has from Christ; says the Prodigal, In my Father's
house there is Bread enough; O says the Soul, my Grace and Peace, and Comfort,
and Righteousness, and Joy, is all from Christ: Says the Psalmist, He led me
in the Paths of Righteousness, and caused me to lie down in green Pastures: O
says the Believer, It is from Christ alone that I have supplies of Grace, of
Peace, of Strength: Says Austin, I wish I had seen three things, That I had
seen Rome in its Glory; That I had seen Christ conversing with Men; and that I
had seen Paul, and heard him Preach! But says another Father, I desire to see
the King in his Beauty, the Lord Jesus Christ in his Kingdom of Glory. Many
have spoke of him, yet never received Grace from him; but to have Supplies from
Christ, to be watered from him, that a Believer desires.

Thirdly, A Believers desire is to live to Christ, because all means and
mercies are all too low for a Believer without Christ: Ah, says the poor Soul,
What is this Ordinance but a dry Well, if I have not Christ! what is my Life,
my Friends, my Comforts, without Christ! It was asked one, where lay his
Jewels, my Jewels are in my Husband and his Conquests. Another, where lie your
Ornaments? my Ornaments, in my two Sons. But ask a Believer, Where are your
Jewels? my Jewels are in Jesus Christ the Pearl of Price: ask another Believer,
where are your Ornaments? O it is in Christ, I put on Christ, I wear Christ, I
enjoy Christ, Christ is my Ornament: ask another, where is your Treasure? in
the unsearchable Riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me who am less than the
least of all Saints, is this Grace given, that I should Preach among the
Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of Christ; there is a Believers Riches: Now
the World is too low a Region for a Believer to live in, were it not that he
enjoys Christ in it; Meat and Drink, and Honors, are too low for a Believer to
live on; but to enjoy Christ in all, is that which he aims at.

I hope that I may say that it is your earnest desire to enjoy Christ; and that
any thing below this would have been too low an end for you; in your earnest
desires for me to be restored to you, and to have me among you once more; to
see me in the Flesh only, was too low an end; but your end I hope was, that you
might enjoy Christ: That I might be spared to Preach Salvation in Christ to
you, what your Souls had formerly tasted of: The Lord wiped away your Tears,
and took away your sorrowful Spirits, O that you may meet with Jesus Christ
whom your Souls long for, and long to hear from! O that he that is the Life of
Saints, may come with quickening Life to your Souls, that you may know your aim
and end was, that you might enjoy Christ: The Lord has heard your Cries, and
the Lord grant your Weeping and Sorrow may be turned into Joy while you live,
and that we may meet together before the Throne, where you shall have your
Tears wiped away.

Fourthly, The fourth Reason is, The endeared Love of Jesus Christ constrains a
Believer to desire nothing in this Life, but what they may enjoy Christ in: O
says a Believer, Lord let me dye in thy Embraces, rather than to live with the
hiding of thy Face; I had rather dye in thy Arms, than to live with thy Arms
clasped against me: The love of Christ constrains me, as 2 Cor. 5.14. Friends,
have you tasted of the Love of Christ, and can you desire any thing that you do
not enjoy Christ in? What a poor heap of nothing is all in the World without
Christ? A Saint will tell you if you ask him, that he never lived a good day
while he lived without Christ; why the Love of Christ is shed abroad in his
heart, for the Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if
one died for all, than were all dead: Says the Apostle, The love of Christ
constrains me; why if one died for all, then were all dead in sin; what shall
we do then, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves,
but unto him which died for them, and rose again? When a Soul by Faith sees a
dying Christ, methinks he should say, The love of Christ constrains me: He
lived Love, and taught Love, he died in Love, and sits at Gods Right Hand in
the infiniteness of his Love, to intercede for his redeemed ones: Says the
Apostle, The love of Christ constrains me. If we ask some, Why do you so long
after the enjoyments of Christ? O says the Soul, the Love of Christ! The Love
of a bleeding dying Christ, constrains me! How lovely are his embraces! He has
called me, loved me, washed me a dead sinner, a wretched sinner: O the love of
Christ constrains me! I am in a strait! I would not ask for Life, if I might
not enjoy Christ. Not Christ only as he was King of the Jews, as he conversed
here on Earth, but a crucified bleeding Christ. Paul goes through the World as
a Man minding nothing: I don't know any man after the Flesh, nor I do not
regard what man says: No, nor I do not know Christ as he came of the Stock of
the Jews; but I know Christ as my Redeemer, and that he died for me. He goes
through the World as a man that has lost a rich Pearl, he goes looking for
that Pearl, so that he minds nothing else. But if I could find this Pearl, It
is the love of Christ constrains me to live to him: I go through the World
taking notice of nothing else, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ,
nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me; who loved me a wretched Sinner, who loved me an undone
Sinner, who loved me a condemned Sinner, who loved me a dead Sinner. O the love
of Christ constrains me, that if I live, let me live in him, let me live to
him! O how can I live without him! O stay me with Flaggons, comfort me with
Apples, for I am sick of love, Cant. 2.5. The love of Christ constrains a
Believer; it is not the Law; it is not because else I shall be damned without
him; no, no, if I do Duties, enjoy Sabbaths, it is all nothing to me without
Christ.

Fifthly, A Believer fears nothing more than the withdrawings of Christ; of all
the tidings and news that can be brought to him, nothing does he fear so much
as Christ's withdrawing from him; he fears lest the Sun should withdraw, that he
should see a dark Day; though Christ will never be gone totally, yet he fears
the hiding of his Face.

Sixthly, A Believer has a new principle, a principle of Grace, the Kingdom of
Heaven within him, that he cannot live without Christ, the new Creature, the
new principle, is Christ possessing the Heart, and when Christ possesses the
Heart, it puts all things at Arms length; so Christ may be enjoyed, Gal. 1.16.
I conferred not with flesh and blood, when God revealed his Son, then I was off
of my old principle; I did not confer with flesh and blood, with fleshly
principles: I was not only off from my own righteousness, my own works, my own
Prayers and Duties, but I come to live upon Christ. I come to have a new life
within, a new glory revealed to my Soul; I come to live upon Christ, to drive a
new Trade for Heaven. When once the Lord revealed Christ to me, I conferred not
with flesh and blood: Now conferring with flesh and blood is the ruin of many
Souls. First, take conferring with flesh and blood for the World, and all the
enjoyments of it, how many turn their back on Christ, and ruin their Souls for
the love of the World? 2dly, Take flesh and blood for all the performances and
duties that Persons can do, when Persons take this for their Righteousness, how
do they split their Souls on it? When Paul was a Pharisee, he thought his own
duties would save him, but when Christ was revealed to him, then says he, I
count all but dung and dross that I may win Christ; one that was righteous, a
praying Paul, one that had enough to carry him to Heaven as he thought; alas
says he, all this was but flesh and blood when I came to know Christ.

3dly, Take Believers with what they have to oppose them, take Believers under
their doubting, then they will consider what they have of their own to help
them to Heaven; but says Paul, I conferred not with flesh and blood.

The 7th Reason the Believer by Faith has found Christ the Pearl of price, he
has found enough to live upon: The Merchant goes seeking goodly Pearls, but
when he has found the Pearl of great price, he sells all to buy that Pearl.
Mat. 13.46. Who when he had found one Pearl of great Price, he went and sold
all that he had and bought it. He was seeking goodly Pearls: There are many
good things that Persons seek, but not the good; I confess they are goodly
Pearls. Praying is a good duty, Hearing is a good duty, the Lord's Supper and
Baptism are good duties, and they are the Believers privilege and are not to
be omitted. But Christ is the Precious Pearl, the Pearl of great price: There
is not one of these Pearls will open the Kingdom of Heaven, or give you access
to the Throne of Grace, or Crown you with everlasting Glory. The foolish
Virgins had these goodly Pearls, but not the Pearl of great Price; they went
along with the Wise Virgins, they were called Virgins, they were without spot,
but when the Bridegroom came, they wanted the Pearl of price; when Christ came,
they cried, Give us of your Oil; if they had had but one dram of Grace, they
had entered in with the Bridegroom, but we see they were shut out. Many go
through the Field of the Gospel, and take up many goodly Pearls; Praying,
Hearing and Fasting are goodly Pearls, but when the Soul comes to find Christ,
to know him, he sells all for that Pearl of price: Sell them, how? does he part
with his duties? no, no; does he neglect Praying, Hearing and other duties and
ordinances? no, but he sells them, as if a Man should bind up all his goodly
Pearls together, and give them all for one Pearl of great price. So a Man sells
all his duties and performances, as that which does nothing in point of
Justification, but all for to glorify that Jesus Christ, that precious Pearl of
price. He sells his sins and his righteousness too; many think if they part
with their sins, they have found the Pearl of price; it is a good thing to turn
from sin, but truly there must be another turn; you must turn from your own
righteousness too, as to resting on it, and trusting to it. Many are troubled
for these goodly Pearls, and say, O if I could but pray as some can, I should
have a great deal of comfort; if I could mourn as I see some do, I should be
encouraged to come to God, in hope he would pardon me; these are goodly Pearls,
but here is a Pearl must brighten all these; the Blood of Christ must wash away
the filth of these Tears, and the guilt of your Duties, and make you clean, or
you are undone for ever; for these Pearls though they go through the World,
they will not go in Emmanuel's Land, not one drop of your own righteousness in
Heaven. Phil. 3.8.9. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and
be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but
that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith. And be found in him, all that is done by a Believer on earth, is to
bring forth fruit to God as a meet Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven; as one
made holy and blameless, and sanctified to bring forth fruit to this glorious
Christ. But is this Fruit once to be mentioned in the Kingdom of Glory, as the
cause of our being glorified? it is not there, Lord I have Prayed, or I have
been at the House of God, or I have Fasted; no, if that had been, might not the
Foolish Virgins have entered into Heaven as well as the Wise? But it is to have
this name on us, the Lord our Righteousness; it is what Christ has done, you
being found in him, what he has performed, what he is, that Believers shall
be, as being Members joined to their Head. Well, have you found this Pearl of
great price, though there be not such great inlargements, such great gifts? And
do your Souls wrap up your selves in this righteousness of Christ? And do you
lay hold on him to be Wisdom and Righteousness, and Sanctification and
Redemption to you? Has God brought you off from your own bottom? Do you no
longer stand on your own Legs? Do you trust to nothing that you can do? What if
you could pray as an Angel, the Heavens are unclean in his sight, and the
Angels he charges with folly. Though Praying, Praising, Hearing, Reading, are
duties, yet when the Souls find not Christ in them, they are Broken Cisterns;
but when thy Soul has Christ, there is Faith and Love and Delight in the Soul
rejoicing in God, admiring the wonders of his Love. Alas, to think that outward
Duties make up a Christians happiness, then how often would a Believers
comforts fail him? for how often are we at a loss here, and nonplust here? but
here is the joy of the Soul, I have found the Pearl of price: As for my own
duties and performances, these good Pearls though I have them and rejoice in
them in Christ, yet I will not Plead to be Justified by them; I will not so
much as say when I have been performing the best duty, Lord remember me for my
Prayers sake: But I desire to be found in Christ, for the Lord Jesus has
bought all, purchased all. And so now the Lord is my righteousness, my care is
to be found in him: Now I have a rich Pearl, though I have poor duties and
Prayers; indeed they are good and useful and glorious in their places, but I
have found one Pearl worth all, one Christ worth all, and this Pearl I live on
for all, and live on in all: Now says the Believer, I have enough, I have got
a Christ, and I will live upon him, I will live to him, and I will rejoice in
him; now I desire to enjoy nothing here below, if I don't enjoy him; for first,
Christ is a rare Pearl, Whom with thee can compare? who in the Heavens or among
the Sons of the Mighty can compare with Christ? Among all the Angels in Heaven,
who can be compared to Christ? Take all their Praises and Triumphs and all the
Services of those glorious Spirits, are they to be compared to Christ? Then how
low and mean are our best Services? I am sure, if the Service of the Angels
cannot compare with Christ, much less can ours: Will you come at last and
measure with God? Will you measure God's Justice and your poor Duties? There is
not, the most Righteous Man living on Earth, but it will be said, Thou art
weighed in the balance, and art found wanting; but to the Man that knows
Christ, Christ is weighed for him, and Christ is full and perfect Weight:
Justice has good Satisfaction; therefore well did Paul to cast off all: Says
he, I desire to be found in him; he is a rare Pearl; well may a Believer cast
off all and desire to be found in Christ. Psalm. 89.6. Who in the Heavens can be
compared unto the Lord? Who among the Sons of the mighty can be likened unto
the Lord? O what striving is here for Kingdoms and Crowns? but put all the
Kingdoms in the World, and if there were ten thousand Worlds more, one Christ
is more worth than ten thousand times ten thousand Worlds. But Soul, if thou
art but poor in the World, have but little here, yet if thou have a Christ,
thou art rich enough; then well may a Believer say, O let it to me to live, be
Christ; let me enjoy no good Means or Mercies but in Christ, because he is a
rare Pearl: To see a Soul in Christ, what a rare Portion, a rare Mercy is
bestowed on that Soul? We may see a Multitude hearing, praying, seeking goodly
Pearls; but it is rare to see a Soul that has found this Pearl of great price,
selling all for Christ, casting away all as Dung and Dross for Christ; selling
all, that is, not as if a Man that knew Christ were to run out of house and
home, but so to live upon Christ, as to trample on the World; so to use his
Blessing in the World, as that he may have his Heart ready to leave them when
ever he is called to it; and to sell his Righteousness, that is, not to trust
to it. Do not mistake me, to think the Knowledge of Christ makes you less in
Duty; it makes you more in Love, more in Delight, and more in Praises and
Prayer: For, says the Soul, though I have prayed, or heard, or been at the
blessed Supper which of all these may be compared with Christ? Therefore I will
sell all for this goodly Pearl, that I may have this Pearl of Price. When you
come to dye and leave this World, if you have this Pearl of great Price, you go
boldly to the Throne of the Father: O whatever other goodly Pearls you have,
you are lost for ever, if you have not this Pearl of Price. A Believer performs
Duties as they are commanded of God, and as the way wherein God meets his
People; but to his acceptance he has his Eye upon Christ alone; for the best
of Duties are but Dung and Dross to compare with this precious Pearl. When
Satan comes with his Temptations and tells the Believer, what a poor unworthy
Creature he is; the Believer that has his Eye upon Christ for acceptance, he
may boldly answer Satan, though I am poor and unworthy, he through whom I am
accepted, is precious and dearly beloved of God the Father, who is well pleas
(...) with him and in him.

Secondly, Christ is a rich Pearl; therefore you may well live upon him, you
may well say, for me to live is Christ; if you know Christ aright, your Hearts,
Words and Lives cry out, for me to live is Christ; Persons for want of knowing
Christ, remain poor and blind and miserable, and naked; Col. 1.19. For it
pleased the Father that in him should all Fullness dwell: All Fullness of the
Godhead, all Fullness of Grace, Peace, Glory dwells in Christ; when you have
Christ you have enough to live on, for you have a rich Pearl. The Rich Man is
covetous for more Riches; the Believer is covetous for more of Christ; he would
enjoy nothing but he would enjoy Christ in it, Christ above it. O Soul, here is
enough to enrich you! It is for want of knowing Christ, that poor Sinners stand
off from Christ: For first, Mr. Sedgwick 's Fountain opened.
though Sinners are very poor, they are very proud. Secondly, Though they are
very poor, they are very ignorant. First, though Sinners are very poor, they
are very proud; they would fain be doing something rather than (...) to Christ;
they would fain be trading for goodly Pearls: As if a Man that was adry, should
be going through a Field, where there was much Water, that was pure and clean;
and the Man should say, I shall dirty my Cloths to come at it, and in the clear
Water my Face will be seen, and therefore I will rather drink of some muddy,
dirty Water, that I may not see my Face: So it is with poor Sinners, they would
fain drink the Kennel-Water of their own Duties; for they are afraid to come to
Christ for fear of seeing their own Faces, for fear of seeing themselves undone
and miserable; and therefore the Soul cries out, Will God look on me? Will so
righteous a God entertain me? If I were better, if I could but get my Heart to
break, and could have my Heart enlarged, I would come to Christ; but shall I a
filthy Sinner think to have Grace and Righteousness? Thus poor Sinners would be
trading with their own Coin and with their own Duties; they are very unwilling,
that all their own Duties should be cast down; but says Paul, That I counted
to be gain, I found loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ. O let me
be found in Christ now let me put off my own Rags; now let me live on nothing
of my own, but on Christ; Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of God's
Righteousness, and going about to establish their own Righteousness, have not
submitted themselves unto the Righteousness of God. And in Romans 9. They were
prone to their own Righteousness and would not come to Christ for
Righteousness; in Verse. 31, 32. But Israel which followed after the Law of
Righteousness, has not attained to the Law of Righteousness. Wherefore?
because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law;
for they stumbled at that stumbling-stone. They stumble, they could not lay
down all their own Works, all their own Righteousness. In point of
Justification, they stumbled at the Righteousness of Faith; they would be
justified by the Deeds of the Law, which justify no Man, but condemn every
Man. All Sinners are proud and poor; they would not be beholding to Christ for
all. They would apprehend some worthyness in themselves to be accepted of God.
Secondly, Sinners are very poor and very ignorant; they think to get out of
debt some other way than by Christ, or by the help of Christ; they are like a
poor man that is in debt, he trades and thinks to get out of debt; but the
business is so carried, that he runs further in debt; so one comes to him, and
tells him, you do not get at all out of debt by your trading, pray consider how
poor you are, and rest no longer on your own trading to bring you out of debt;
but if you will come along with me, I will bring you to one, will pay all your
debts for you. The glorious Gospel that reveals the Lord Jesus Christ, calls
Sinners to accept of him, as poor, miserable, undone Sinners, who are deeply
indebted to God, acquaints them that Jesus Christ has paid a full price for
them to set them free. John. 8.36. The Son shall make you free, then shall you
be free indeed. Yet poor Sinners, they think they have something to trade with;
they think if they could but pray more, or remember Sermons more, they should
get out of God's Debt; but they take a wrong course, for all that they can do,
they do but run further into debt; by all that you can do, you will never get
out of debt, if you have not a Righteousness in Christ, you will never be
accepted of God; you must lay down all your own, and as a poor Sinner lay hold
on Christ; as the Merchant-man sells all the goodly Pearls to buy this Pearl of
Price. Well might Paul say, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; I live
upon him, to him, I live in him; I was so poor I could never get out of debt by
all that I could do; therefore I desire to be found in Christ alone. Many are
complaining, they cannot do this or that, as if they would get out of debt by
their own Works; but now Christ is rich enough to make up all your losses: When
a Man has one to repair and make up all his Losses, he may well depend on him.
Romans 5. from 15th Verse to the end. But not as the offense, so also is the free
gift. For if through the offense of one, many be dead; much more by the grace
of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one Man, Jesus Christ has abounded
unto many. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift; for the
Judgment was by one to condemnation; but the free gift is of many offenses unto
justification. For if by one man's offense, death reigned by one; much more they
which receive abundance of Grace, and of the Gift of Righteousness, shall reign
in life by one, Jesus Christ. Therefore as by the offense of one, Judgment came
upon all men to condemnation; even so by the Righteousness of one, the free
gift came upon all men unto Justification of Life. For as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, shall many be
made Righteous. Moreover, the Law entered, that the offense might abound; but
where Sin abounded, Grace did much more abound: That as Sin has reigned unto
Death, even so might Grace reign through Righteousness unto Eternal Life, by
Jesus Christ our Lord. Here you see, whatever the Offense of Unrighteousness
and Sin and Condemnation is; there is Life and Righteousness by Jesus Christ to
make up the breach: All that lay hold on Christ shall have Righteousness and
Life by him: For as Sin and Death reigned in Adam, so Life and Righteousness
reigns in Christ, and is imputed to the Sinner by him; so that Christ is rich
enough to make up all Losses. Alas! It is not in our selves to do this. In the
first Adam there is Death and Condemnation, and Unrighteousness, and Guilt and
Wrath; here now must be one to satisfy, here must be one to bring in
Righteousness, and Life, and Grace, and that more than sin; but where is that
Man that has Righteousness and Grace abounds more than Sin? Man cannot do this
himself, he must have one that has an All-sufficient Righteousness and
infinite Grace that may present him to the Father to be accepted, that the
Grace of God, the Gift of Life and Righteousness may overcome and wrap up the
poor Sinner wholly in it, that he may be without spot or wrinkle. If it be so,
that in Christ you shall have all your Losses made up and repaired, should you
not live on Christ for all you want? are you sinful? Christ is Righteous; are
you dead in Sin? Christ has brought Life and Immortality to light; have you
sinned to a great height? Christ's Merit is above all your Sin; where Sin has
abounded, Grace does much more abound; where Sin has abounded, there is a
superabounding Grace, superabounding Righteousness, and superabounding Life.
Adam received the Promise of the Woman's Seed before he had done any Work or
Sacrifice, to the end that God's Truth might stand fast, namely that we are
justified before God altogether without Works, and do obtain Forgiveness of
Sins merely by Grace; who so were able to believe this well and steadfastly the
same were a Doctor above all the Doctors in the World, said Luther. Again, All
Heretics have failed in this point, that they do not rightily understand nor
know the Article of Justification; how we are justified before God: for if that
were lost, then manifold errors of necessity would ensue. O then, how rich is
Christ! How rich in Merit to pay God all that is due to him from the Sinner! O
says one, I am a great Sinner; says another, I have great Imperfections in my
Duties; I am so carnal, so dead, so wandering, so indifferent; I am afraid to
come to God, I am so sinful: Why, poor Soul, here is a Christ for you to live
upon; here is Righteousness for Sin, Life for Death, Pardon for Condemnation:
Then go to Christ, lay hold of him by Faith as given of God to you, and then
you will say with Paul, For me to live is Christ.

Secondly, As Christ is rich enough to repair all your Losses; So you are
inricht with all the Treasure of Christ, 1 Cor. 3. ult. For all is yours, and
ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. As if he should say, have you a Christ with
God? Is your Christ God's Son, and is he Heir of all things? Then all is yours;
Paul and Apollos and Cephas are all yours; all the Ministers of Christ are sent
for the good of the Redeemed ones, all that are Christ's: Then the Saint may
say, Is all mine? Is Life mine? Yes, Life is yours; for while you live, you
shall live a sanctified Life: Well, but is Death mine? many are afraid to die;
Yes, Death is yours; Death is made your Friend; Death is conquered in Christ;
and when Death comes, you need not be afraid to entertain your Lord's
Messenger, that he sends to fetch you home to his Glory: Death is sent to fetch
you out of your Houses of Clay to meet your Redeemer, and sit on the Throne
with him, and to enjoy your Lord in Glory. Says the Believer. But how comes
all this to be mine? Why, your are Christ's and Christ is Gods: All things are
yours, the Crowns above, the Thrones above, the Saints above, the Angels above,
Fullness of Joy above, Rivers of Pleasure above; and how comes all this to be
yours in Christ? Because Christ is Gods, and God has possessed him with all
things, and made him Heir of all things; therefore he enriches his Members with
all things: Then well may a Saint desire neither Life, nor any thing in Life
any futher than he enjoys Christ.

Thirdly, As Christ repairs all your Losses, and as you are enriched with the
Treasures of Christ, so he enriches your Souls also: As you have Riches above
and Riches below, so he enriches you within. When a Soul knows Christ, what a
glorious Knowledge of the things above comes into the Soul? He enriches your
poor, dark, beggarly Understandings; for while a Man is ignorant of Christ,
what poor, low things does he study and seek after? but when a Soul comes to
have Christ revealed to him, then the Soul comes to aspire and inquire after
God and Christ, and the things above; he enlightens the Understanding, that
before did lead on the Affections to grasp after a little vain Pleasures and
Honors, and Profits in this World, and now causes the Soul to pursue after
higher things; then he enriches the Will, I will make them a willing people in
the day of my Power, Psalm. 110.3. It is a glorious thing, to have the Will
subdued, the Will renewed; to have a perverse, stubborn Will, now to serve in
the Beauties of Holiness.

Secondly, he enriches the Affections with Joy, and Peace, and Delight: O what
a Glory is it, to have the Affections raised up! the Heart set on things above,
on Jesus Christ! the Soul is seeking after Glory, the Heart is seeking after
Heavenly things. When Jesus Christ comes, he enriches all the Affections of the
Soul; The Kings Daughter is all glorious within; Christ is so rich a Pearl,
such Riches in him, that he sets open Doors to all that come; whoever come
shall find welcome; there is enough in him, for the Sinner to live upon, while
he lives here and to all Eternity.

Thirdly, Christ is an Heart-chearing Pearl: O says the Soul, could I but have
Christ for mine, enjoy Christ, how would my Heart rejoice? Now when Christ
shines with a glimps of his Righteousness into the Soul; O says the Soul, that
I could enjoy more of this Christ, more of his Grace, of his Love! Says the
Spouse, He brought me into the Banqueting House, and his Banner over me was
Love, Cant. 2.4. Banners of Love, O what a cheerful Feast I have now! I think
all the Afflictions and Temptations I have in the World can never cast me down,
the Heart is cheared: What, is Christ mine? What, is God mine? Is Grace mine?
and Righteousness mine? and Glory mine? This is an Heart-chearing Pearl; O it
is such a Pearl, drink it in all your Potions, and bring Christ in every Duty!
Then a Soul may take comfort and reason thus with himself; though I am dead in
Duty, Christ lives; though I am sinful, Christ is righteous; though my
Corruptions abound, Christ's Grace does much more abound: Take Christ in every
Portion, and in all Duties, let Christ be there still: I have set the Lord
always before me (says David) so should you set Christ always before you, and
when Satan or Conscience accuses, set Christ before you as your perfect
Righteousness. Says the Plalmist, Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always
before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. Verse 9.
Therefore my Heart is glad and my Glory rejoices, my Flesh also shall rest in
hope. Verse 10. For thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, neither will thou
suffer thy Holy One to see Corruption. If Christ shall be raised up to Glory,
then I will live in hope of being raised up to Glory with him: The Psalmist
speaks Prophetically of Christ; Neither will thou suffer thy Holy One to see
Corruption. Now says the Believer, if Christ conquers Death, and Hell, and did
not see Corruption, I may well rejoice, for I set the Lord always before me,
and whatever he enjoys I shall have a glorious share in.

Fourthly, He is an Everlasting Pearl: Many have rich Pearls, live on them, and
spend them; but live on Christ as long as you will, you will never waste
Christ's Stock: All the Sinners, that ever came to the Gate of Mercy, and have
been supplied with Mercy, ever since the Drawbridge of Mercy has been let
down, never diminished or lessened Christ's Mercy: No, he is an Everlasting
Pearl; for he that believes in Christ, shall have Everlasting Life: God so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son to die, that whosoever
believed in him should not perish but have everlasting Life, John 3.16. There
you see is a Pearl that will last you for ever; when Friends fail you, and the
World fails you, he will not fail you. For he that believes shall never perish,
but have everlasting Life.

Fifthly, He is a most glorious Pearl: If ever you would live a glorious Life,
live on Christ, who is the Brightness of his Fathers Glory; We see his Glory as
the Glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of Grace and Truth. He is a
glorious Pearl, therefore see to it; in all you enjoy, let Christ be the prime
principal thing, to be the all in all, and more than all in every thing you
enjoy.

The 8th reason: A Believer desires not Life, nor nothing in Life, no further
than he enjoys Christ; for he knows that Christ is better than Life, Psalm. 63.
O God thou art my God; early will I seek thee, my Soul thirsts for thee, my
Flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty Land where no water is; to see thy
power and thy Glory, as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. Because thy loving
kindness is better than life, my lips shall praise thee: Thus will I bless thee
while I live, I will lift up my hands in thy Name. Thou shall be the Object of
my Worship, thee alone will I trust in, thee alone will I rest on, because thy
loving kindness is better than life; thy Grace, and Mercy, and Love in Christ
is better than Life: God is very gracious to give us our Lives; he did not owe
us one moment of time. When we came into the World he might immediately have
sent us to our Graves. First, God's love in giving of Christ is better than
Life: How gracious is God to preserve us hitherto? But what an Act of Grace to
give Christ; when poor Sinners lay weltering in their Blood for the love of
God, to pity them, and look on them, and bestow Christ upon them!

Secondly, Christ is better than Life, because of the Wonder of God's Love; the
Love of God in giving Christ is more wonderful and admirable than Life it self.
This is a wonder of Mercy; but the wonder of God's love in giving Christ, that
is a greater wonder. O the Height! O the Depth! O the Length and Breadth of
the Love of God, in giving Jesus Christ! O the riches of his Grace! His love is
past finding out: In giving Jesus Christ there is height of Love, depth of
Love, length of Love, breadth of Love; it is higher than Heaven: Though our sins
have reached to Heaven, yet Christ's Love is higher than our sins; it is deeper
than Hell; Hell shall never prevail; all the Plots of Hell shall never prevail
against a Believer: Then as to the breadth of it; Spread our Thoughts as far as
we can, we can never reach the Love of Christ to poor Sinners, it passes
knowledge. Then as to the length of it; It is longer than Time, for it is
everlasting.

Thirdly, It is better than Life, if we consider the Bounties of it: How
bountiful is God to give us means and mercies in our life? But Jesus Christ is
better than all, better than Silver or Gold, or all things that can be desired;
who with him can compare?

Fourthly, He is better than Life, in regard of the Delights of Life; though we
may enjoy all Comforts and Mercies of this Life, if we have not Peace with God,
what good will they do us? A wounded Spirit who can bear? Who can stand against
a sin-revenging God? Then is not Christ better than Life?

Next, Christ is better than Life, if we consider, that the Believer will never
be separated from Christ: But as for our Life, though we live a while, e're
long we must lay down our Lives, we must all e're long away to the House
appointed for all living. But now as for Jesus Christ, where there is Union
with him, and the Soul lives to him and upon him, there is neither Life nor
Death, things present nor things to come, shall separate a Believer from
Christ. Romans 8.39. Neither height nor depth, nor any thing shall be able to
separate him from Christ.

Ninthly, A Believer is well acquainted what it is to be without Christ, and
know what it is to have Christ: For me to live is Christ: (as if he should say)
I knew what it was once to live without him, to trust to my own Works, to live
on any thing without him; I knew once what it was to be without Faith, and
without God, and without true Hope, and without true Joy, and without true
Consolation; now I know what a wonderful Change there is in me, and what a
wonderful difference there is between my living in Christ, and my living
without Christ; before, if I had any hope, it was false; if I had any Comfort,
it was perishing: But now my hopes are built on another Foundation, and all my
Comforts spring from another Fountain. Oh I would not live one day without
Christ, I would not have one Mercy or Duty without him! While I lived without
Christ, it was all lost time, I lived on Vanity and Folly; now I have many a
weeping Eye, and sighing Heart, for those things I once took delight in. O my
Vanities! my lost days! O that I knew Christ no sooner! O that I got not
acquaintance with him before!

First, The Believer will tell you, all the days of his Life before he knew
Christ, were spent in Folly and Vanity. O the time that is run out in Vanity! O
let me not live in any Comfort or Enjoyment where I do not enjoy Christ! O,
says the Soul, the difference that is between the Joy I have in Christ, and
the foolish mad Pleasures I enjoyed when I lived out of Christ! Now Lord, let
me not live but to glorify thee; Lord, I would be with thee, and glorify thee
in all; let Christ be all in all to me: What weeping Eyes and wounded Hearts
will Sinners have that live without Christ, when once they come to know Christ,
that they lived so long without him? O how ready are poor Sinners to think we
do them much Wrong in wooing them to come to Christ, and accept of him! But
poor Sinner, when thou come to know Christ, thou will then with a weeping Eye
and Heart cry out, O let me not live, but to Christ. A Believer will say, It is
high time for me to awake, and to be serious and earnest in seeking Jesus
Christ: Many are turned from vain Sinners to foolish Professors; but take a
true honest-hearted Believer, and ask him, what would you have? O that I may
enjoy Christ, says he. What would you have in every Duty? What would you have
in Ordinances? O let me have Christ, or else they will be poor empty Wells
without Water, Clouds without Rain to my Soul!

Secondly, He will tell you it was not only vain and foolish, but altogether
unprofitable. Says the Apostle, What I counted gain I found loss: What will it
profit a man to gain the whole World and lose his own Soul? Mat. 16.26. Says
the Apostle, What I counted gain I found loss. Alas! What Profit shall I have
of my Education and Learning? I thought once I was as happy as another, and a
little Duty would make me happy for ever; but I see without Christ I am undone
for ever: I thought if I gave God something of his due, if I did some Duties,
and was something beyond the vain World, I should be happy; but I see nothing
will do, or can profit me without Christ; for without I live in Christ I cannot
enjoy Christ, I cannot enjoy Grace in Christ, Righteousness in Christ, Faith in
Christ.

Thirdly, I see all my Duties are poor worthless things out of Christ; I
thought to have prayed my way to Heaven, but I see all my Duties are Dross and
Dung, let me not meet one of them without Christ: I had lost my Prayers and my
Soul, had not I been shipped in Christ, had I not had Christ to be my all, and in
all; I see all would have been unprofitable if I had not had Christ; Prayers,
Sabbaths, Hearing: What is all my Hearing, if I have not Christ? So also the
Supper of the Lord, and other Duties, what would they be to me without Christ?
they would be as whited Sepulchers, which within are full of dead Men's Bones
and all Uncleanness, Mat. 23.27. O how miserable was I before I knew Christ,
and lived to Christ! Nay, says a Believer, I cannot tell you how wretched I
was; but I can tell you three things, First, I had been unprofitable, I had
never brought forth fruit to God. Secondly, Uncomfortable in Life, and Death,
and unto all Eternity. Thirdly, I had been wretched and miserable. O then, Come
to me, I will tell you what God has done for my Soul, Psalm. 66.16.

Tenthly, A Believer desires neither Means, nor Mercies, nor Comforts, but what
he may enjoy Christ in; because a Believer has experienced how sweet the Life
of a Believer is. O taste and see that the Lord is good, Psalm. 34.8, 9. O taste
and see how precious Christ is! how rich in Mercy! how wonderful in Love! O
taste and see that the Lord is good; blessed is the man that trusts in him. O
fear the Lord, ye his Saints; for there is no want to them that fear him. I
will tell you what Christ has done for me; I cried unto the Lord and he heard
me, I have experienced it; O taste and see that the Lord is good, blessed is
the man that trusts in him, that lives upon him. So in 1 Pet. 2.2, 3 As new
born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word that you may grow thereby. If so
be that ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. O says the Soul, I desire I
may live upon Christ, upon the Promises of Christ, upon the Love of Christ:
What, if you have tasted that the Lord is gracious? Then let Christ be one at
my Table, one in my Prayers, one in every Ordinance, one where ever I am: What
have I tasted? That the Lord is gracious, that is the best Sauce to my Meat,
the best Comfort to my Soul; O I have tasted! What have you tasted? That the
Lord is gracious, I experience; I know what he is, he is the chief of ten
thousand, I cannot live without him, I cannot enjoy any Mercy or any Comfort
without him. Says the Soul, What is this Friend? This is not Christ; and what
is this Ordinance? This is not Christ: What can I take Comfort in, if I have
not Christ? The Saints can experience, how precious Christ is; to them that
believe, he is precious. Mary came to the Sepulcher, there was the place where
her Lord lay, there were the Grave-Cloths, the Sepulcher, but her Lord was
gone; where have you laid my Lord? There Mary stands weeping, I cannot live
withou Christ: So a Soul comes to an Ordinance, Here is the Tomb! Here is the
Grave Cloths! but where have they laid my Lord? What comfort is this or that?
What is a Sabbath? What is a Sermon? What is a Sacrament? What are Means and
Mercies without Christ? Where have you laid my Lord? Why, do you know him? Yes,
says the Soul, he is the Chief of ten thousand, I heard him speak to me, my
Sister, my Spouse; and I have felt the sounding of my Bowels toward him, he
has moved my Heart and I cannot be satisfied without him; I am sick unto
Death, if I do not enjoy Christ: Thus the Soul experiences what Christ is, he
is the Chief of ten thousand: Why, he has done more than ten thousand Worlds
could have done: What is he? I have tasted that he is gracious; I have
experienced the Bowels of his Mercies, the Wonders of his Grace; therefore
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 116. I belived, therefore have I spoken, Verse. 5.
Gracious is the Lord, and righteous; yea, our God is merciful. 6. The Lord
preserves the simple; I was brought low and he helped me. Says the poor Soul,
I was as low as the Gates of Hell, I was as one without hope till Christ raised
me up; Christ was my helper; God laid help on one that was mighty, what then?
Now will I live upon this God; Return unto thy rest, O my Soul; for the Lord
has dealt bountifully with thee. For thou have delivered my Soul from death,
mine Eyes from Tears, and my Feet from falling. Thou have delivered my Soul
from Eternal Death, mine Eyes from Tears of Sorrow, which I had, while they
said, Where is my God? My Feet from falling into Sin. I will walk before the
Lord in the Land of the Living; I will live upon the Lord, to the Lord in the
Land of the Living. I believed therefore have I spoken; what I set forth of the
Wonders of the Lord, that have I experienced. And says the Apostle, 1 John
1.3. These things write we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us,
and truly our fellowship is with the Father and with the Son Jesus Christ; and
we would have you live as we do, live on Christ as we do. O says the Believer,
that all persons did but know Christ and live upon Christ: We write unto you
that ye also may have fellowship with us; for truly our ends and aims are that
you may live as noble lives as we do; and truly our fellowship is with the
Father and with his Son Jesus Christ: It is God in Christ that we live upon and
have Communion with: O the Soul that experiences what it is to live on Christ,
desires in all things to enjoy Christ. The Spouse would not step a foot without
him, Come my Beloved, let us go forth into Field; let us lodge in the Villages;
let us get up early to the Vineyards, let us see if the Vine flourish. Ah you
that have experience of Christ! methinks it should be your voice always on your
Beds, and in your walking, Come let us go, come my Beloved, and wake with with
me, come and watch over me; Come my Beloved, let us go forth into the Field;
let us lodge in the Villages; the Spouse knows the Sweetness of his Company,
the Excellency of his Presence, the Glory of his Holiness. Without Christ, what
would a Sermon or a Sabbath be? What though I could lay up Silver like Dust; if
I could heap up Gold like Pibble Stones; if I could gain all the Riches of the
World, what is it all without Christ? But the Believer knows what it is to
enjoy Christ, and live in Christ, and therefore cries, O let him be with me in
all I do, in all my Undertakings. Lord, my Soul waits and Watches for thee.
Psalm. 130.6. My Soul watches for thee more than they that watch for the
morning. As a Man that is in sorrow all Night, he longs for the break of the
day. Says the Psalmist, My Soul does wait for the Lord. I am not an outside
Professor, my Soul is engaged in the Work. I wait for the Lord more than they
that watch for the Morning. What stirs up the good Man to this earnest longing
for God? Oh, he had the experience of the sweet Comforts he had found in
Communion with the Lord! That Soul must needs be dead and careless in seeking
the Lord, that experiences not what it is to enjoy the Lord in Duties and
Ordinances. O that it might please God to convince all you that hear me this
day, that have been formal, careless Professors! Had you ever had a taste of
Christ, you could not be content to go on so cold and careless as most of you
do in your Profession.

The 11th Reason or Ground is this, A Believer knows it to be a glorious Life:
We are changed from Glory to Glory into the same Image. Now the Believer knows
it to be a glorious Life, because he has received, and does expect great
things from Christ. Says the Soul, I will live upon Christ, for I have
received great things from Christ.

First, I have received the Pardon of my Sins from him; I was under the Wrath
of God, but now I have Redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 1.7. I am a pardoned Soul; I am
saved from Wrath by him, even that Jesus that saves from wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.

Secondly, I have received Justification by him; a Righteousness to stand
before God, being justified freely by his Grace, Romans 3.24.

Thirdly, I received Sanctification from him, Acts 26.28. Who were sanctified
through faith in Christ Jesus.

Fourthly, I have received Consolation from Christ; and then I expect great
things to come, I expect when this poor earthly Tabernacle is laid down, for
Christ to raise me; not only to raise my Body out of the Grave, but to change
my vile body, and fashion it like unto his glorious body, Phil. 3.21. I do
expect to see my Lord coming with his glorious Train, when the last Trump shall
blow, awaking me out of my sleep, and raising up my dust at the last day, John
6.44. I expect at Christ's appearing a great Glory, Tit. 2.13, 14. Looking for
that blessed hope and glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Says the
Believer, I live upon Christ, because I expect great things from Christ when
Christ comes; I have a blessed hope, I desire he may be my Life, all in my
Life; I look for great things when Christ comes; it is a blessed Hope that I
have: When will you have your Hopes accomplished at the glorious appearance of
the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ? Why do you expect such great
things? I will tell you, Because he gave himself for me, and redeemed me. You
that have low Thoughts of Christ, can you expect great things from Christ? Can
you say even Amen, so come Lord Jesus; you that seldom invite him into your
Closets now, Can you expect his coming will be joyful to you? Will you not
rather say, Let not thy Chariot Wheels make such speed, for I am not ready.

What, is he a coming? Have you a blessed hope in him? If one of you should go
to many and say, Do you hope for Christ's coming? They would say, Yes; but have
a care, for many have a cursed hope, a vain hope, and a bad hope, a Devilish
hope I fear. When Christ comes many will be dreadfully mistaken. What can you
expect at Christ's coming, when you do not desire Christ here? A little thing
takes their Hearts off from Christ; their Hearts are more set on other things
than Christ; they have not invited Christ, nor have a blessed hope in Christ:
But all you Saints that have made Christ your Life, will have a blessed hope in
Christ at Death. You that can speak with comfort, you desire not Life, nor any
means nor mercies but what you enjoy Christ in them. You will have a blessed
Hope when the glorious Trump is sounded before him; you will say, What, is that
the Voice of my Lord? Is this Trump for me? must I awake, be raised up, be
glorified with my Lord; go in with the glorious Church Triumphant, and set upon
the Throne with them? But for the poor, careless, lifeless, legal, formal
Professor, the dead-hearted and trifling Professor, Christ's coming will be a
dreadful appearing to you: What is Christ's appearing, when I have not made him
my Life, I have not lived upon him, I have not lived to him? I am at a distance
from him, I am a Stranger to him. O see how furious are his Chariot Wheels! Is
that him in Flames of Fire? that makes the Mountains tremble? O my Heart, how
can thou but shake at the sight of him! But the Saint he rejoices, and he
hopes and waits for the glorious appearing of Jesus Christ. O Saint, have you
but little here? but short hints here? but little comfort here? The great
comfort is, That you make Christ your Life, that you live on Christ; and though
you do enjoy but little now, I tell you there is great things for you when
Christ appears: looking for that glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior, who gave himself for me. O, says a Believer, I long to see that Face
that was spit upon for me: I long to see that Glorious Body that was pierced
for me; that glorious Head that was Crowned with Thorns for me; those Hands and
Feet that were nailed to the Cross for me. It will be a blessed, a glorious
hope, the Lord Jesus's appearing, Oh I long to see him: I expect glorious
things; I expect a glorious Crown, Glorious Robes, a glorious Throne; I expect
everlasting Joy, and I expect Rivers of Pleasure. Is not this an Inducement to
a Believer to make Christ his Life? When we expect great things, how does it
cause us to be intent about them? Where a Soul expects high things, and great
things from Christ, they will live upon Christ, and to Christ, make Christ
their All: In all Mercies, and Comforts, and Enjoyments, what is the reason
many are poor, carnal, dead Professors, and have low Thoughts of those things
that are Preached in the Gospel, but because they never relished Christ? And it
is as much as ever they can do to creep along in the ways of God; and may be
something of Conscience causes them to perform Duty. But where the Soul has
glorious and high Expectations, it is otherwise; great things he has done for
them, and great things he is doing; he is advocating and interceding with the
Father, answering all Accusations, and pleading for poor Sinners. I go to
prepare a place for you, says Christ, and will come again and fetch you, that
where I am you may be also. I am going to prepare for you Mansions of Glory,
Robes of Glory, Crowns of Glory, immortal Glory: Is not this, Lord, to be lived
upon? and to be desired more than all things that can be desired? Therefore had
you ever experienced what it is to enjoy Christ, and live on Christ, you could
not but have high and glorious Thoughts of this blessed Jesus; you could not
but have your Hearts raised up with high expectation what he will do for you.
But poor trifling formal Professor, whatever thou professest, I fear thou
know not Jesus Christ. Ask your Heart, Have I glorious hopes of Christ's
appearing? Have I glorious hopes of reigning with him in Heaven? Does he reign
in my Heart now? Do I prize him, and make him my All, desire him in all, and
glorisie him above all? I believe, should you put this Question to your Souls,
you would many of you know that you are great Strangers to Christ. But a
Believer that can experience the Love of Christ, is lifted up in admiration of
the Wonders of his Grace, crying out, Oh what Wonders of Grace! What glorious
Love! What a precious Redeemer is this! Did he die for me? Did he cry out, my
God, my God, and was I on his Heart, when he drank of the Brook by the way, and
lift up his Head, and was it for me? He went out of the World by a cursed
shameful Death up to his Fathers Glory, and said, that he would come again to
fetch me; he will make Death to be a sweet Ambassador for me, the Angels will
come and convey my Soul to Glory. O what will be your Thoughts when you shall
see your Lord coming in the Clouds, when you shall hear him say, Come you
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the
Foundation of the World; and sit down with Palms in your Hands and with Crowns
on your Heads; surely believing that he is your Lord, and that his Glory is
your Glory, and that he will come again and fetch you, then you shall be for
ever with the Lord, 1 These. from 13. to 18. But I would not have you to be
ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even
as others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose
again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. For
this we say unto you by the Word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and
remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep.
For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the Voice of
the Archangel, and with the Trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise
first: Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with
them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air; and so we shall ever be with
the Lord. So much for the eleventh Reason, This is a glorious Life the Believer
has experienced, and that because he has great expectation of what Christ
will do for him, as well as what he has done for him; therefore desires to
make this blessed Christ his Life.

The Twelfth Reason is, because a Believer can see no object so glorious as the
Lord Jesus Christ is: And says the Soul, all I can see I count it all empty,
in comparison of Christ; for to see the Father in the Son choosing me in
election before the World was, to see this glorious Love out of the Bosom of
the Father, to be given for me, to be my Ransom and Salvation; O how glorious
an Object is he to behold! O how glorious is the Sun in the Firmament that
lightens the whole World! But then, O how glorious is he that came out of the
Bosom of the Father, the Brightness of his Glory! O my Soul, let me behold him,
and live upon him! I can see no way but he is glorious; O love for Delight!

The Thirteenth Reason, A Believer desires to live on Christ, because the Lord
Jesus Christ has paid all and done all for him, he has bought all for him;
and says the Believer, all I have is from Christ; have I Peace, Hope, Joy? It
is all bought by Christ: I might have had a desparing Soul, or a cursed Hope; I
might have been under the Curse and Wrath of God; I might have been among the
damned Souls, that are roaring in Hell: But have I Peace of Conscience, Joy in
the Holy Ghost? Christ has bought and brought me to the hope of an
incorruptible Kingdom of Glory; and as he has bought all and paid for all, I
live upon him for all: As the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has
begotten us again unto a lively hope. All the Joy I have, and hope I have of
Heaven is bought by Christ; all the Enjoyment of God I have, all the Glory my
Soul is crowned with, all the Joy my Heart is filled with, is bought by Christ;
therefore says the Apostle, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ who has begotten to us a lively hope by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead. It is Jesus Christ has ransomed me from Death, from
Hell, from Guilt of Sin; he has bought an Inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, therefore I desire to live upon him.

The Fourteenth Reason, The Believer desires to live upon Jesus Christ, because
he works all his Works in him: There is not a good Motion in him, but Christ is
the Worker of it; not a good Thought or good Action but all is from Christ.
Isa. 26.12. Lord, thou will ordain Peace for us; for thou have wrought all our
Works in us. The Lord has wrought for me Redemption, Salvation,
Sanctification, Consolation and Hope of Glory; therefore I will live upon him
for all.

So much for the Doctrinal Part, and Reasons of the Proposition, why a Believer
desires to live upon Christ and to Christ in all: The Application follows.

The first Inference from the Point is this, If it is so, that the desires of a
Believer run out in all after Christ, to enjoy him more than all. If Christ is
a Believers Life, then a Believer must needs live a very fruitful Life: A
Believer's Life is no barren nor unfruitful Life, he cannot be a barren Tree;
there are no unfruitful Branches in Christ, that fruitful Vine: He that chooses
Christ with his whole desire, to make Christ his all, he must needs be a
fruitful Liver, increasing in the Grace and Knowledge of Jesus Christ. Indeed a
Believer may have some dark Days that look gloomy, he may have some Summer
Droughts may make him look withered; notwithstanding he is sound at Root, he
has rooting in Christ; for me to to live is Christ, says the Apostle; while I
live I will have my Life bound up in him and expect all from him: A Soul that
does thus, cannot have an unfruitful Life; there may be some Summer Droughts:
But is Christ your Life? and do you expect him to be your All, and wrap up your
selves in Christ, it is impossible for you to be barren; for I tell you, you
that look up, expecting to have your Life of Grace and Comfort from Christ, he
will not let your Expectation fail. I do not speak, what you are sometimes in
your sense and feeling, but what you are by Faith in Christ. As that good Mr.
Peacock, he had a Summers Drought. Says he, I feel an Hell in my Conscience,
crying out of the woeful burden of his Sins, saying, how woeful and miserable is
my state, that thus must converse with Hell Hounds! the Standers by asked him
to pray, I cannot, said he; suffer us to pray for you; he replied, Take not
Gods Name in vain for a Reprobate as I am: Yet after these grievous Pangs this
blessed Saint found much comfort as did appear by his Expressions: I have been
far led and deeply troubled with Temptation and Sting of Conscience, I thank
God, they are ceased in good measure; I desire I may not be branded for a
Castaway or Reprobate. He declared, that he renounced his inconsiderate Speech
in his Trouble and Temptation, humbly and heartily asking Mercy of God for
them; and after receiving a little more Light, that through Mercy did arise in
his Heart, he brake forth in such Speeches as these: I do feel, God be praised,
such comfort, that if I had an hundred Worlds I could not make satisfaction for
such an Issue; the Sea is not fuller of Water, nor the Sun of Light, than God
is of Mercy; his Mercies are ten thousand times more: What cause have I to
magnify the great Goodness of God, that has humbled, nay rather exalted such
a wretched Miscreant, one of so base a condition to a state so glorious and
stately; the Lord has honored me with his Goodness, I am sure he has
prepared a glorious Kingdom for me; the Joy I feel in my Heart is incredible.

Mr. Glover in his trouble and casting down, thus complains: What he felt
inwardly in his Spirit, no Speech was able to express; he lay langushing in
trouble for the space of five years, he took no comfort in Meat nor Drink, nor
any pleasure in his Life; being under the sense of some Backsliding, was
perplexed, as if he had been in the deepest pit of Hell; he did not eat his
Food from any Appetite, but for this end, to defer his Damnation, thinking with
himself that he must needs be thrown into Hell so soon as his Breath was out of
his Body; yet after this Summer Drought, this Servant of the Lord had sweet
showers of Mercy from Christ his Life; after his many years Buffetings and
strong Temptations he received great Comfort, and afterward lived altogether an
Heavenly Life. No Art of Man, no Arm of Flesh, no Earthly Comfort, no Earthly
Power can possibly heal or help in this condition; neither Men nor Angels,
Friends nor Physic, Gold nor Silver, Pleasures nor Profits, Preferments or
Favors; Mr. B's Cases of Conscience.
infinite skill must take this in hand or else never any Cure and Recovery can
be had.

A poor Believer may be brought so low through Temptation and Desertions, that
they that behold them may think they are cast off by God; but the Believers
Life is hid in Christ, and does yet hope for a time of Refreshing; as one that
stands by the Trees and Plants perceiving them to look withered, tells the
Gardener that he had as good cut them down as let them incumber the Ground, for
he believes they are dead; but says the Gardener you are mistaken, the Root is
alive in the ground, I hope for a good shower from Heaven to revive them; a
Believer by Faith beholds his Life in Christ expecting for the dropping of his
Spirit to revive his drooping Spirit. Says the Saint you think, because I am
under temptation and burdened with Sin, my hope is gone; no, in Christ my Root
is green, and I wait to have his Grace and Comforts poured out, and I shall be
raised up again. Says David, I look to the everlasting Hills from whence my
help comes, Psalm. 123.1, 2. Unto thee lift I up mine Eyes, O thou that dwell
in the Heavens. Behold, as the Eyes of the Servants look unto the hand of their
Masters, and as the Eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress; so our Eyes
wait upon the Lord our God. (how long?) until that he have mercy upon us, Psalm.
121.1. I look, says David, to the Hills, that is, to Sion Hill, where God
meets his People, through Faith in God by Christ: David did not look to the
Tabernacle barely, but to God in Christ figuratively. Psalm. 18.24. Our help is
in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth; and do you behold that God,
that made the Heavens, that made all things? Do you see the Clouds? Do you see
the glorious Sun? To that God will I look, till he break the Clouds and send
down Streams that glad the City of God. I lift up my Eyes to God in Christ, I
lift up my Eyes to the everlasting Hills, to the Eternal Love of God in Christ
and Everlasting Righteousness of God in Christ, till he look down on me, and
look into my Soul; therefore though you see me look like a barren Tree in
Summer Drought, it does but make me long the more for a shower for watering,
that is it, I look up for. O Saint! What do you expect to see? O says he,
though Satan tempt me, and Conscience may trouble me, and my Soul be cast down,
that I am a sinner, a condemned sinner; but I will look up, till God reveals
Christ's Righteousness to be my Righteousness, Romans 1.17. For therein is the
Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith, as it is written, The Just
shall live by Faith.

A Believer must needs live a thriving Life, that lives on Christ: The truth of
which among the rest that might be brought to prove this, I shall only lay down
three things to demonstrate, That every true Believers Soul is in a thriving
and prosperous state, that can neither fall from the State of Grace nor lose
any one Grace.

First, Christ is the Fountain of Life whom they are united to.

Secondly, Rain from Heaven to water them in time of Drought.

Thirdly, The Sun of Righteousness to revive them in Winter Seasons.

First, Jesus Christ is the Fountain of Life, the vital Fountain from whence a
Believer has a continual supply of Grace to maintain his Spiritual Life, John
14.19. Because I live you shall live also. We may ask them that talk of falling
from Grace, what the Child told the Mother. I have heard of a godly Woman,
being left a Widow in great Distress, the Children crying for Bread and she
having none to give them, says the Mother, Children be comforted for God
lives; the Child sometime after saw the Mother cry, Mother, says the Child, is
God dead? We may put this Question to the Arminian, when he pleads for falling
from Grace, Is Christ dead, that a Believer can fall from Grace? Who has said,
Because I live, you shall live also; while Christ has it a Believer shall
never want, Phil. 4.19. But my God shall supply all your need according to his
Riches in Glory by Christ Jesus. A Believer shall not want Grace to maintain
his Spiritual Warfare; if he live fighting he shall dye conquering; John 1.16.
Of his fullness have we all received, Grace for Grace. The Believer has all in
a way of receiving; Adam had his Stock in his own Hands, he lost it; but a
Believers Stock is in the Hands of Christ and shall never be lost; He is the
Author and Finisher of their Faith, Hebrews 12.2.

As the first Adam, that we by Nature are all in, is the Original of our Death
and Misery; Mr. Gale 's Summary of Mr. Strong 's Book on the Two Covenants.
so is the Lord Jesus Christ the second Adam in Believers and they in him, who
is the original cause of their Restoration and Life, who gives daily supplies
to them out of his infinite Fullness. What good is there in Man, but what is
first in Christ, as the original Head of the Covenant and public Receiver?
Would thou see Gods Love and Grace streaming toward thy Soul, must thou not
see it first lodged in Christ as the Fountain of all? Do thou desire to see
all thy sins wiped off? Must thou not first see them wiped off from Christ thy
Representative? Would thou by a Prevision of Faith see thy self in a
glorified State? O then by Faith look on Christ the Head of the Covenant
glorified for thee: Alas! If thou look on thy self in thy self, growing out of
thine own natural Root, what art thou but as a Branch cut off from the Olive
Root? But how comfortable and sweet it is to see thy self crucified, acquitted
and glorified in Christ the Head of the Covenant!

The Soul that lives on Christ shall neither lose nor lack Grace, but shall
have daily supplies from Christ, who is an Everflowing Fountain of Grace and
Comfort. So long as there runs Oil from the Olive Branches, there shall never
want Light in the Lamps: This Oil from the Olive Branches that runs through the
golden Pipes is the Emblem of Supernatural Grace filled from the true Olive
Tree, Mr. Pool 's Annotations.
ever emptying themselves and are ever full; so are Gospel Ordinances filled by
Christ, always filling his Members true Christians, and ever full for all
Believers: It pleased the Father that in him should all Fullness dwell; and that
the Lord Jesus Christ is both active and willing to communicate it to Believers
according as their want requires. He also may be pointed at in his two Offices
by the two golden Pipes conveighing the Oil from the Trees to the Candlesticks,
Mr. Hutcheson 's Exposition on Zechariah.
it being through his Merit as Priest, and his Efficacy as King, that the
Fullness in him becomes ours; it is the enjoyment of Christ in Ordinances that
does refresh the Believers Soul with the Joys of Gods Salvation and causes him
to flourish like a Palm Tree in the Courts of their God, Psalm. 92.13. If the
death of Christ has brought unto us Righteousness and Life, what shall his
Life do? If our Savior dying paid the Price, what shall he do now being alive
and interceding for us? For Christ lives and dwells in the Heart: If the
Remembrance of his most holy Merit live and flourish in it, draw me Lord Jesus
that I may be possessed in the Truth of the thing the which here I expect by
the firmness of Hope. Let thy Servant I pray thee be with thee and behold thy
Glory, John 17.23. And let him inhabit the Mansions which thou have prepared in
thy Fathers House, Gerard's Meditations
John 14.2. Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, O Lord, they shall praise
thee for ever and ever, Psalm. 84.4.

The Lord Jesus Christ in his Discourse with Martha about Lazarus, declares
himself to be the Fountain of Life, Grace and Glory. John 11.21. says Martha
to Jesus, Lord, if thou had been here my Brother had not died. Here is 1. Her
sensibleness of their own Weakness and Frailty. 2. Of Christ's Power, If thou
had been here my Brother had not died. Jesus says unto her, Thy Brother
shall rise again. Christ speaks in general, to bring her Faith to her
particular Case. Martha said, I know it, he shall rise again in the
Resurrection. It is an easier matter to believe future things many times than
present, because future things are put off by supposition. Many say, they
believe the Resurrection of the Body; but if they did really believe that their
Bodies should be raised up and stand before God's Tribunal, would they live
quietly in a Christless state, or mistrust God in present streights? If we did
but stand on the Graves Mouth, and consider. Shall all this Dust be raised up?
Shall every person be raised up in order? Cannot this God deliver out of all
streights? Said Martha, Lord, if thou had been here my Brother had not died;
(but that was more than Martha knew) she depended too much upon his bodily
Presence. It may be that she thought Christ would have prayed for her Brother,
and so he would not have died; but Christ comes to take her off of some
depending on sensible things, and to live by Faith. Jesus says unto her, Thy
Brother shall rise again. Says she, I know at the Resurrection he shall rise.
Jesus says unto her, I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes on
me though he were dead, yet shall he live. Martha had a general Faith of the
Resurrection, but how to believe at the present that her Brother should be
raised up again, she knew not. When Jesus told her that her Brother should
live; says she, Lord, he has been dead four days; it seemed an impossibility
that he should rise again; yet before she believed the Resurrection of the
Dead. Was it a greater impossibility to raise him up when no part of him was
diminished, than to raise him up at the last day? Says Christ, I am the Life,
I will raise him up at the last day; and am not I able to raise up thy Brother
that has been dead but four days? So should a Believer say within himself
under his Doubts and Fears: Did the Lord convert me? bring me out of a state of
Sin and Misery? quicken me when I was dead? and will he not give me Life? Can
he raise up Lazarus when dead four days, and cannot he raise up my dead Heart?
Says Christ, I am the Life, I am the Original of Life; I am the first that
gives Life; all are dead Sinners till I come to quicken them, till I come to
bring Life to your Souls. Whosoever lives and believes in me shall never die,
for I am the Principle of their Life; as I gave them Life at first, so do I
also continue their Life, they shall never die.

When Death comes the Immortal Soul is alive; it is but the Body that is gone
to the Dust that will be raised up again; that will be a glorious Body for the
Soul to live with in Eternal Glory.

What an exceeding Joy is it then for a Believer, that Christ is the Vital
Fountain of his Life! Though Death be at the very door it shall never come into
the Soul: Though there may be a Separation for a time, the Soul is with Christ,
and the Body united to Christ, that the Believer may be rather said to sleep,
than die. The root of his Comforts are alive. There may be a Death on a
Believers outward Mercies and Comforts, yet it shall never come into his Soul.
As we see the Trees in the Winter seem to be dead, so the Believer; they may
fear the Death of their Comforts or Graces; though they may have the
Withdrawings of God's Presence, yet as the Trees in Spring, they revive and
sprout forth; so shall they revive, and Death shall not enter into their Souls.
Says Paul, Who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? I thank God for
the Victory through Christ. There is Death in my self, but Christ gives me
Victory; he removes it, he carries it away; though it be at the Door, it shall
never come in at the Door; if there be deadness upon the Heart, Christ is Life
to my Soul; if there be Corruptions strong and great, Christ is the Fountain of
Life, to innoble me to outgrow all: As we may say of young Children that are
weak and infirm, they will outgrow their Weaknesses. So a Child in Christ will
outgrow his Infirmities; they will outgrow their Corruptions and inward
Weakness, they shall have Victory over them, they shall be Conquerors at the
last. Christ being the vital Fountain of Life, a Believer must needs live a
growing flourishing Life, the Lord Christ does water them at the Root, Psalm. 1.
The godly man is like a Tree planted by a River of Water, which withers not,
but brings forth Fruit in due season, because there is a vital Fountain,
there is Life at the Root. Isaiah 41.18. The Prophet speaking of Christ's being
Life to his Church, he is said to be Rivers of water in high places. Were not
Christ Rivers of Water, the Saints would be dry at root; but he is Rivers of
Waters in a dry place. Small Rivers may flow from a Fountain that may be stopped,
Mr. Robinson's Christ all in all.
but Christ is the ever-flowing Fountain that none can stop. Other Rivers may
be stopped in time of Drought, but nothing shall stop the Grace of Christ. Cold
Weather may freez up Rivers, but the coldest, deadest Heart that is, shall not
freez up Christ's Grace; he will be Rivers of Water in dry places. Other Rivers
may dry of themselves, but all our Unworthiness shall not bar Christ's Grace
from the Soul.

Christ is set forth excellently by that Rock our Fathers drank of, and the
Rock followed them, and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 20.4. How did the Rock
follow them? The Water that was in the Rock followed them by some Channels or
little Rivers in the Wilderness: So does the Lord Jesus Christ his poor
bewildered people; he not only is ready to give them Grace, but follows them
with Grace, and follows them with Mercy. Goodness and Mercy shall follow me all
the days of my Life, Psalm. 23.6. Alas, if we should stand by the Rock never so
long, could we by smiting cause the water to gush forth? But this Water is so
free, that it flows to the Believer: Christ follows the Believer with his
Grace, follows them with his comforts, follows them with supports, follows them
with new refreshments. If this Rock did not follow us, it would be long enough
before we should go to this Rock: Christ follows the Soul with Divine Grace as
the Soul stands in need of it. The Rock smitten by Moses supplied the
Israelites, and Christ smitten by the Curse of the Law supplies the Church, not
with Earthly Water, but with Heavenly Rivers of Grace and Comfort, following
Believers not for a time, but indeficiently and for ever. Christ told the Woman
of Samaria, He that drinks of this water, it shall be a Well of water
springing up unto eternal Life. I am the resurrection from the dead, the
Resurrection from the Death of Sin, and also the Life of the Soul, to live in
and upon Christ. He that believes in me shall never die, no Death shall lay
hold on him to ruin him, nor separate him from God; and though Death come on
the Body, he is said never to die, because he shall live for ever. Therefore
the Saint in Christ every day he lives; he is living so upon Christ, that he is
daily getting on his way to Glory, and is nearer to Heaven and Happiness.
Christ says, Because I live, ye shall live also: If the root die the branches
must needs die; but the root cannot die, and the branches shall not die; while
the root lives the branches shall not die: Therefore in John 15. he says, That
he is the Vine, and the Believer is the Branch; that is the reason the Soul
that lives in Christ, and one in Christ must needs live a flourishing and
increasing Life, because Christ is the vital Fountain of Life, to keep the Soul
of a Believer flourishing and green at root; it shall not be like the Barren
Hypocrite or barren Apostate.

Secondly, Christ is said to come down as Rain upon his Church and People, to
keep them watered, to keep them fresh and flourishing. Now you must note, there
must be a good root, a living root, or otherwise all the rain that is, will do
no good to the Soul. Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell; as he is the vital Fountain from whence their Life is derived,
so is he manifesting his Grace to them, and so is said to come down as Rain on
them, in Psalm. 72. This Psalm was penned when David was on his Death Bed, and
he orders Solomon to be Crowned, he speaks of Solomon, Give the King thy
Judgment O Lord, and thy Righteousness unto the Kings Son: And then he speaks
Prophetically of Christ and of his Kingdom, He shall judge thy people with
righteousness, and thy poor with judgment; the mountains shall bring peace to
the people, and the little hills by righteousness. He shall judge the poor of
the people, he shall save the children of the needy, and shall break in pieces
the oppressor. They shall fear thee as long as the Sun and Moon endure,
throughout all generations. Now that cannot be spoke of Solomon, that must be
of Christ. Then Verse 6. He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass, and
as showers that water the earth; in his days shall righteousness flourish, and
abundance of peace so long as the Moon endures. Speaking of the Prosperity and
Glory of Christ's Kingdom under the Gospel: He shall come down as rain. While
there is Rain from Heaven there will be Fruits on the Earth; while Christ is
Rain to a Believer, he shall never die, though there may be some Limitations,
and some restraints in his exercise of Grace, yet he shall not die.

First, Christ came down in his Incarnation; when he came to take our Nature
upon him, he descended from the Bosom of his Father, Mr. Robinson's Christ all
in all.
descended from the Crown to the Cradle, from the Glory of his Father to the
Manger, from Angels and Glorified Saints to converse with poor Man.

Secondly, he came to live here an humble and debased Life; he came here to
bare our Infirmities, and to take our Sicknesses.

Thirdly, He came down very low; when the blessed Lord of Glory came to the
Cross; when he that was the Fountain of all Life must die the cursed Death of
the Cross.

Fourthly, He comes down in descending into the Hearts of his People by his
Holy Spirit, in the Revelation of his Divine Grace; he comes down when he
reveals from Heaven his blessed Grace and Consolation to his People: The River
of Life that is above, drops down many sweet drops into the Soul. When a
Believer is gasping and thinking, I will hear this Sermon and die; will God
ever speak peace or comfort? As the Woman, she would bake her Cake, eat it, and
die; but when that was gone she had a supply. The Believer is ready under
Doubts and Fears to say, Has God forgot to be gracious? but he has a supply
from that River that comes from the Throne of God. Rev. 21.1. And he showed me
a pure River of water of Life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne
of God and of the Lamb. He showed me a pure River; there is in Christ no
Impurity; he is the Lamb of God without spot; what he gives to his People are
pure Mercies, choice Mercies, pure Blessings; when we drink of other Streams
they are mixed with Mud; all your Comforts below, Mr. Durham on the Revelations.
yea all Ordinances and Duties are mixed with Corruption; but Christ is the
pure River; it is a River, no small Brook, but a River, running and always
running, flowing and always flowing, giving and always giving. It is not only a
River flowing, but Waters of Life to the Soul that lives on Christ. Those that
drink of this Water of Life shall never die: He that desires to drink of these
Waters of Life, that thirsts for them, cannot but live; they are as clear as
Crystal. That is an Emblem of the Saints Life, a Life of Grace, and Life of
Glory. Here we have these Waters in Ordinances through Pipes; here we see them
through a Glass, but there you will see them Face to Face; there the Saints
shall solace themselves as Celestial Fishes in that pure River. In Ordinances
we have some sweet drops and streams, Psalm. 46. the Church being under trouble,
speaks of her help in God, Though the Earth be removed, that is, though there
is a change of times and revolution of things, though the Mountains be carried
into the Sea, we will not fear: So though we have many Temptations, many
Troubles; though we have many Discouragements we will not fear; though the
Waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the Mountains shake with the
swelling thereof: There is a River, the Streams whereof make glad the City of
God. This shows forth, in the letter, the Tabernacle, where the Presence of God
was, and his Glory appeared. Though we have swelling Waves, great Temptations,
great Troubles, yet we have a Stream that makes glad the City of God, for God
is in the midst of her: He was in the midst of Jerusalem that was called the
City of the great King. Psalm. 48.1, 2. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be
praised in the City of our God, in the Mountain of his Holiness. Beautiful for
situation, the Joy of the whole Earth is Mount Sion, on the sides of the North,
the City of the great King. So that the City of Jerusalem where the King of
Glory had his Dewlling Place, where he met his People between the Cherubims and
the Mercy-seat. God did dwell in the Tabernacle in Jerusalem, but Christ is the
glorious Temple wherein the Godhead dwells, being in the midst of his Church by
a Divine Union, is their Life in the midst of their Troubles: Here are sweet
Streams that flow from him. There is a River, and this River is in the midst of
her: Christ is in the midst of his Church, watering of his Church, giving new
Streams to it daily, that makes Glad the Heart of his People. How does Rain
rejoice the Heart of the Husbandman in a dry time when it comes unexpected? So
a Believer receives the Streams of Comfort unexpected under the Ordinances. An
Experimental Believer longs to be under the Enjoyments of all Ordinances, and
would be hindered from none, though the Heart may be back ward to Duty. A poor
Believer will cry to the Lord in secret, Lord, let not this wicked Heart hinder
me; it may be I may have a Stream from Christ that may refresh my thirsty Soul,
and make it glad; for Christ is in the midst of his People, and my Soul desires
to enjoy him, my Soul desires to live upon him: There is a River makes glad the
City of God, the Church of God. And why may not my Soul receive Comfort? Thus
Jesus Christ comes as Rain from Heaven to make Glad the City of God: Though
there are swelling Waves of Temptation and Trouble, there are Streams that make
glad this City. The Wrath of God is made known from Heaven to Unbelievers, and
his Love is made known from Heaven to Believers; though indeed the Believer may
not always have the Comfort of it. But the Believer that lives on Christ, whose
Desires, and Thirstings, and Ends and Aims are, that in all he may enjoy
Christ: I say, when they are under Fears and Doubts, they seem to be in a
withering state, but when Christ, as the Rain descends down, the Believer is
revived and refreshed. As Gideon's Fleece was wet when the Ground was dry, so
has a Believer Heavenly Enjoyment and Communion with Christ, when all the
World is barren. When the Believer is under fear, and says, I fear I am a
withered Plant, that I am not watered; Says the Lord, He shall come down as
rain. If we ask many, where is your Comfort? They will tell you, here and
there. But say to a Believer, Where is your expectation? My Hope is laid up in
Christ, my expectation is from him. To such says God, he shall come down as
rain, that is, with his Spirit revealing his Love and Grace to the Soul, as
Rain comes from the Clouds: So through the Clouds of Darkness does Christ
reveal his Grace to poor dark doubting Saints.

When the Lord Jesus pours out his Holy Spirit into poor doubting Souls, to
comfort and refresh the weary and heavy laden Soul, to give a Testimony of the
Love of God to your Souls; the efficacy of God's Holy Spirit revives the
Saints, and begets Life in dead Sinners; Christ comes down to them and causes
them to live that never lived before. Indeed I confess there Christ is
wonderfully beyond all showers of Rain; for if we plant and sow, Rain brings it
up; but Christ brings up Seed, brings forth Fruit where it was never before. So
says the Prophet, Isa. 32. from the 12th to the 16th. They shall lament for
the Teats, for the pleasant Fields, for the fruitful Vine. Upon the Land of my
people shall come up Thorns and Briers; yea upon all the Houses of Joy in the
joyous City; because the Palaces shall be forsaken, the multitude of the City
shall be left, the Forts and Towers shall be for Dens for ever, a joy of wild
Asses, a pasture of Flocks: Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on high,
and the Wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a
Forest. This indeed was literally spoken of the Captivity of the Jews; says
he, All their pleasant places shall be filled with desolation, and their
Palaces shall be forsaken. How long? until the Spirit be poured upon us from on
high. But how should this be? Why, it might be supposed that the Spirit of the
Lord came on Cyrus, and those that gave the Jews Liberty to go and build the
City of God. But shall we think that this is the whole? No, every sinner that
lives upon the face of the Earth is a barren desolate wretched Creature till
the Spirit of God is poured upon him. How long shall these sinners continue so?
Until the Spirit of the Lord be poured from on high. And what then? Why then
this Wilderness shall become a fruitful Field, the Wilderness becomes a Garden
or Field. The old ignorant poor carnal sinner becomes now a gracious Saint.
Does he stand at a stay? No: And the fruitful Field be counted for a Forest?

When the Spirit of the Lord comes down, then the Wilderness becomes a fruitful
Field, and the fruitful Field is counted for a Forest. Many Professors there
are that hear Christ preached, hear what it is to live upon Christ, but they,
not knowing Christ, not having the Spirit of God poured out upon them, are the
same as ever they were. Now how long will it be that you will hear of Christ,
and not live on Christ? I can tell you, until the Spirit of the Lord be poured
upon you from on high; until the Spirit be revealed from on high, it signifies
a plentiful communication of the Spirit; it has a respect to the times of the
Gospel; for although God gave his Spirit in some measure before, yet he poured it
not out before he was first anointed with his Fullness; a larger measure of
God's Spirit is now given then was before. Then we shall return and say, Lord,
the Wilderness is become a fruitful Field, and the fruitful Field is counted
for a Forest; but the mean time you sit unconcerned, while you send us home
mourning; you sit on your Seats unconcerned, and go home so; but your poor
Minister goes with sorrow to the Lord.

How long, Lord, shall I preach before one Soul be converted by my Ministry?
How long shall I teach before one Sinner is converted? Dr. Owen on the Spirit.
The Lord answers, Until my Spirit be poured out upon them from on high. Many
Sermons may be poured out, and Hearts and Lives of Ministers poured out, before
your Souls are converted, except the Spirit of God be poured upon you. How much
do they err that tell you, If you will you may believe; and that there is no
such thing as an irresistible Power put forth? But let them that know Christ,
speak, whether the Arminians speak Truth or no. You know you were barren before
the Spirit of God came; you that are rushed into a Profession of Religion, that
are barren, and dead, and carnal, and live so still; I profess you are in a
miserable condition, you never did know Christ; if you did, you would lead
other kind of Lives; but those that have received Christ, that live upon
Christ, and thirst for Christ, Christ comes down and revives them with new
showers from Heaven, Isa. 44.3, 4, 5. I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed,
and my blessing upom thine Offspring: And they shall spring up as among the
grass, as Willows by the Watercourse. One shall say, I am the Lord's; and
another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe
with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel. These
Words call for your attention; the beginning is, Jacob was afraid he was
forsaken of God; Israel of old was under Discouragements; and the Evangelical
Prophet reaches to all the Israelites of God, Verse 1. Yet now hear, O Jacob
my Servant, and Israel whom I have chosen: Thus says the Lord that made thee,
and formed thee from the Womb, which will help thee; fear not, O Jacob my
Servant, and thou Jesurun whom I have chosen. We see here plainly, that which
many of our Age do deny, God's choosing of one more than another. God lays the
Foundation of Israel's Comfort in his peculiar choice of them. Israel whom I
have chosen: If God has not chosen Israel, what is all Blessings or Mercies?
But Lord, if I am chosen, yer I am under Trouble, Straits and Fears. Says God,
I will pour Water upon him that is thirsty, and Floods upon the dry ground; I
will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thy Offspring: That is,
all that are in Christ: If you are Christ's, then you are Abraham's Seed; and
what then? they shall spring up as among the Grass, as Willows by the
Watercourse; by the Waterside they shall grow, I shall see my people grow:
And what then? One shall say, who shall say? why the poor doubting Soul, that
has long cried out, O that I could but know Christ were mine! O that I could
but make mention of him as my Lord and my Redeemer! My Soul even faints with
expectation, for his loving kindness to be revealed! What, shall these
flourish, and grow, and thrive? Yes, they shall. One shall say, I am the
Lord's, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall
subscribe with his hand unto the Lord. When the Spirit of the Lord is poured
out, then the Soul comes to have the Revelation of the Love of God to it.
Before he was drooping, hanging down his Head, fearing himself a withered Soul.
But now says the Soul, When I read the Love of God, I can subscribe my self
the Lords, and I can call my self by the name of the God of Jacob. I will set
Heart and Hand to it; as that good holy Man of God Mr. Peacock said, Let it be
preached at my Funeral, that I am no Castaway. How comes this about? A poor
Soul, longing for Christ, waiting for him, desiring nothing more than to live
on Christ, and with Christ, yet under much doubt and fear. Why? the Believer
wanted these Heavenly Showers to be poured out, the Testimony of the Spirit:
But when the Spirit is poured out, says the Soul, I can call my self by the
name of Jacob, and subscribe with my hand, I am the Lords. Say to a Believer,
What do thou desire, Soul? Nothing more than to live to Christ, nothing more
than to enjoy Christ, nothing below him will content me: Where will you wait
there? Where the Lord comes: And how long? Till the Spirit of the Lord is
poured out; and then I shall call my self by the name of the Lord, and not be
ashamed.

This has relation to the righteous and gracious Act of God in delivering a
righteous and oppressed Nation from cruel Tyrants and Oppressors. This Work
shall be so great and illustrious, as if God had rained down showers of
Righteousness out of Heaven. But this is not all the meaning, the Mystery of
the Sinners glorious Redemption through Christ is here included, and also God's
gracious Acts of Righteousness, Isa. 45.8. Drop down ye Heavens from above, let
the Skies pour down righteousness, let the Earth open, and let them bring forth
Salvation, and let Righteousness spring up together; I the Lord have created
it. Here is the Lord's Command, and the Church's Prayer drop down ye Heavens.
Let the Skies pour down righteousness, the Lord commands it, the Church and
Prophet prays for it. When a poor Believer is praying, sighing, looking up to
Heaven, O that I might have a glimpse this day of the Love of God! O that I did
but know that I were redeemed by thy Blood! Says the Lord, Drop down ye
Heavens. For until the Spirit of the Lord come, there will be cold hearing and
praying until the Lord reveal himself to the poor sinner. A poor doubting Soul
in his own imaginations is undone. God's delivering his people from Temporal
Miseries, was but a Drop in comparison of his giving Christ for poor sinners to
satisfy Divine Justice; then he poured down Righteousness! Says the Lord, You
shall not want a Righteousness: I will send down a Righteousness to that Soul,
Drop down ye Heavens, and let the Skies pour down righteousness: As the Sky
when it is clear gives Light, so does the Lord by his Spirit reveal to the Soul
his interest in Jesus Christ, and his love to his Soul. That is a poor Life
indeed, or Profession, that you live on your self, and your own performances,
and not on Christ. You see when Christ comes down, he comes with the Power of
his Spirit on the Hearts of sinners in their Conversion, and on Saints in their
Desertion, and then you shall go away rejoicing. O with what cheerful Hearts
have we had many gone from an Ordinance! They have been complaining in the
Morning, and have been rejoicing in the Afternoon. And how comes this? Did it
lie in the power of a Man? Could an earthen Vessel give this? No, the Heavens
dropped down; and then what praising and blessing God is there in the Soul, when
the Spirit of God in the Word is poured out on a poor Believer that was in
Fears and Doubts? While the Hypocrite never questions nor fears his Condition.
The Believer fears nothing more than decaying, tho he is established that he
shall never fall from Christ, yet he would not be barren: As it is the desire
of a Believer to be glorified with Christ, so to glorify Christ while on
Earth. Here a Believer has many Fears and Doubts: First, he fears that God is
not reconciled to him; but the Spirit of the Lord comes to water the poor
drooping Soul. Christ manifests to the Soul that God is reconciled: I am at
peace with thee, says the Lord, Isa. 27.2, 3, 4, 5. In that day sing unto her,
a Vineyard of red Wine. Truly it is red Wine must make the sinners peace; it is
the red Blood of Christ, a bleeding Redeemer, must give Peace unto the doubting
Believer. Sing ye unto her, a Vineyard of red Wine; Redemption through the Blood
of Christ is the sweetest Song that ever sinners can hear; it is not a Vineyard
to work in, but a Vineyard to sing in, a Vineyard of red Wine; without this red
Wine, our red sins would undo our poor guilty Souls: But Lord, How shall I know
that this red Wine, this Blood of Christ is made mine? How shall I know that I
am reconciled by the Blood of Christ? Says God, I will water it, I will pour
out my spirit to reveal it and manifest it. And what then Lord? Shall I know
Fury is not in me, who would set the Briers and Thorns against me in Battle? I
would go through them, I would burn them together: You shall know that I am a
reconciled God unto you, I am at peace with thee; How shall I be at peace with
thee? Says God in the fifth Verse, Let him take hold of my strength that he
may make peace with me, and he shall be at peace with me. In that day sing ye
unto her a Vineyard of red Wine. Says the Lord, I will sing her a song; every
Sermon you hear of the Love of Christ is a Song to every doubting Believer.

When poor Souls come to have the Spirit of the Lord poured out upon them, to
reveal that God is reconciled unto them, then the Soul goes on in the ways of
God cheerfully; before the Believer was doubting, and fearing, and questioning.

But what do desire, O Soul? I desire nothing more, I crave nothing more,
than to enjoy Christ. Then says God; I will sing you a Song under the Gospel,
the Lord does not come to call you to Mount Sinai, he does not speak with
Terror and Horror; but he comes to sing a glorious Song of Redemption, that is,
red Wine to poor undone sinners, and to poor doubting Saints: But I tell you,
we may sing and preach till we come to the Grave, and not one Soul be converted
and brought home to God, except the Spirit of the Lord come and work with us.
For I durst speak it, if I could but have acquaintance with you to know your
Minds, there is not any one of you that will draw near to God, while you think
God is an Ene^y unto you; but if any thing draws (...) to God, it must be the
Song of red Wine, Redemption through the Blood of Christ. And then as for the
drooping Saint, he is afraid to come before God while he is under his Fear and
Trouble; then what shall I do Lord? Take hold of my strength, that is, on
Christ, and be at peace with me. The Spirit of the Lord reveals to the Soul a
reconciled God, that God is at peace with them, and has pardoned all their
sins. But before the Soul cries, What am I, an unpardoned Soul? I am afraid I
shall meet my sins, that they will stare me in the face another day. O that I
did but know that Christ was mine! That my sins were forgiven me! That I had
but the Love of God in Christ! I have been looking, says the Soul, when God
will come and say, Thy sins are forgiven thee. David, Psalm. 32. was greatly
troubled, he said, The Lord's Hand lay day and night heavy upon him: And how is
it now, I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I
said, I will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. I found great Comfort, I had a sweet shower, Christ came
down as Rain upon my Soul, God revealed his pardoning Grace. I said, I will
confess my Transgression unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the Iniquity of my
sin. What, was David's sin never forgiven before? Yes, all his Transgressions
were done away, and his Soul was pure in the sight of God, through the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ. But David had doubts on his Soul, Fear on his
Soul, he had a Summers Drought; would I had a shower of Mercy: I confess I am a
poor wretched Creature, I am a vile sinner. I will now look to the Lord; and he
did not look in vain. Are not Believers sins pardoned? Yes, they shall never be
remembered more. But the Believer does not know this always; and when he does
not know it, he begins to cry out, Is thy Mercy clear gone? But then he calls
to mind, this is my Infirmity: Then he cries to the Lord, and in comes
pardoning Mercy, Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. O what a
refreshing shower is this! It is this I have looked for, longed for, waited
for. Then next says the Soul, I desire nothing more than to enjoy Christ, yet
I am so unrighteous, I question whether his Righteousness be mine: Now comes
the Lord by his Spirit, and reveals to the Soul, that it has a righteousness
to stand before the Lord in. Now the Soul can say, The Lord my Righteousness.
Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption; he is made of
God to me. O now he is made the Lord my righteousness. How shall I know this?
The Spirit of the Lord reveals this to the Saints in the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. Now I can go boldly to God, and ask mercy boldly of God. Psalm. ^26.4.
Turn again our Captivity, O Lord, as the Streams in the South: As the Streams
in the South refresh the dry and barren ground, so does the Righteousness of
Christ revealed comfort my Soul. How barren was I in Duty! I was afraid to come
to God, I was afraid whether my Wanderings would not cause God to turn me out of
his Presence; but God has prepared Christ to be my righteousness, therefore in
him I come without Spot. Indeed when I am out of frame, it is without Comfort
to my self, but I have always Righteousness before God, I have always boldness
to the Throne of Grace through Christ. Many Prayers that have been made when I
was out of Frame, have been no small Trouble to my Soul; but when it was
revealed to me, that Christ was my Righteousness, that he was made sin for me,
that I might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. that is, tho
Christ was a Man without sin in himself, yet our sin was imputed to him, and he
was by God reckoned as a sinner; and then he kills him, putting our Curse upon
him; so that to us that are free, Christ was made so, that God looks on us as
if we had performed perfect Righteousness, Dr. Preston on Romans 1.17.
and when that is done, he saves us You that have lived and not made Christ
your Righteousness, you will want a Righteousness when you come to die: But
they that have made Christ their Righteousness, though their sins be as heaps
of Sand, yet through the Righteousness of Christ you will stand as spotless
before God, as if you had never sinned. Now how do you know this to be your
Righteousness? Why, the Spirit of God reveals this to your Souls, and you can
as boldly call him, the Lord your Righteousness, as you can call your House and
Land, or any thing you enjoy, your own. If you go to God in Christ, whatever is
needful for you, you shall as surely have it as if you had it already. Then
next, the Spirit of Christ flowing from the Heart of a Believer gives the
Believer sweet Communion with God. The Soul thinks it is at a distance from
God, the Spirit comes down in a sweet shower and brings it near to God. O,
says the Soul, that I could but enter within the Vail to have Communion with
God! But methinks God and I stand at a distance; he is in Heaven, and I am (as
it were) in Hell: I am as one forgotten; though I lay claim to him as my God, I
would have the Knowledge of him that he is my God, and God of my Salvation,
Psalm. 88. O God of my Salvation, let my Prayer come before thee, incline thine
ear to my Cry, for my Soul is full of trouble. Sometimes a Believer is full of
Trouble. And what is the next? And my Life draws nigh unto the Grave, I am
counted with them that go down into the Pit. That is dreadful, when the fear of
Death and of Hell meet together. I am as a Man that has no strength to
believe, yet I have some glimmerings that thou art the God of my Salvation: But
Death and Hell is approaching to me in my apprehension: will thou show Wonders
to the dead; shall the dead live? Is it not possible I should live? Shall I
have a Shower of Mercy? Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the Grave, or
thy faithfulness in destruction? Shall I have a shower upon my dying Soul?
Shall I be brought to have Communion with God? Thus when the Lord seems to
stand at a distance from the Soul, he comes down in a shower by his Spirit,
that he finds very familiar Communion with God: Therefore the Apostle, when he
prays for the Corinthians, he prays, That the Grace of the Lord Jesus, the love
of God the Father, may be communicated unto them by the Holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 13,
14. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the Communion of
the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. The Grace of Christ your Life, the Love
of God in Christ, communicated to you through the Holy Ghost: So when the Love
of God is come down on the Soul, then the Soul comes to have sweet Communion
with God; before the Soul was afraid to come to God, but now it can say, Lord,
thou know me, and I know thee; Lord, thou know what is in me, and what
thou have wrought in me. Thus the Soul goes on knowing and being known: So the
Soul is carried on in this sweet Frame, with that familiar sweet Communion with
God, that the Soul wishes it might always be employed in God's Service. Again,
When Christ is revealed by the Spirit to the Soul, the Soul comes to know its
Adoption, that it can and does know God to be his Father, the Spirit of the
Lord poured out, crying Abba Father. Gal 4.4, 5, 6. But when the fullness of the
time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, to
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
Sons. Christ comes to redeem us, the Holy Spirit comes to reveal to the Soul,
that you are no more Servants, but Sons, that we might receive the Adoption of
Sons: Sons of God redeemed by Christ's Blood; but the Soul seems to be doubting
whether it be so or no: Well, says the Apostle, because ye are sons, God has
sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying Abba, Father. O what
would many a poor doubting Soul give to call God Father! Though many a Wretch
calls God Father. But a poor Believer, if all the World were given him to be
his Portion, he would trample on all to call God Father in deed and in truth;
to go to God as a Father, to have God for my Father, that glorious God that
made Heaven and Earth, that glorious God that turns Men to Destruction, and
says, Come again ye Children of Men, who feeds the Saints above with eternal
Pleasure: This God I can call my God, my Father, my Portion; my Portion living,
my Portion dying; a Portion beyond all the World. This God by the Spirit the
Soul comes to know to be his Father, and the Soul is never well but when he is
speaking to his Father, there is such a Converse between the Father and the
Child. Again, The Spirit when it comes with its revealing Evidence, comforts
the drooping Soul, that Jesus Christ is everlasting Life to him. They that live
on Christ shall have everlasting Life from Christ. The Believer has many sweet
and comfortable showers, many precious drops flowing into his Soul, that he can
witness the Prophecy is come to pass. The Prophet Joel says, Joel 3.18. And
it shall come to pass in that day, that the Mountains shall drop down new Wine,
and the Hills shall flow with Milk, and all the Rivers of Judah shall flow with
waters, and a Fountain shall come forth from the House of the Lord. The Prophet
alludes to those Waters that were conveyed from some Spring through Conduit
Pipes toward the Altar, Ezekiel. 47.1, 2, 3. for the use of the Temple, in which
Water the Priests washed what was to be washed. This no doubt is a shadow of
the purifying Blood of Christ, and his sanctifying Spirit and Word; and in that
it is said to come from the Lord, it intimates that these glad Tidings, this
saving Grace shall be first Preached from Jerusalem, and by the Church, which
is the House of God, shall be published to others. The Valley of Shittim that
this Fountain shall water, the meaning is, it shall refresh, purge, and make
fruitful all holy Works. It was on the Plain of Moab, on the Borders of Israel,
toward the South-East, Numb. 33.49. Josh. 3.1. not far from the Dead Sea. These
Waters shall flow down to the dry and thirsty, Mr. Pool's Annotations.
the barren and fruitless Gentiles, and make them fruitful. And it shall come
to pass in that day, in the day of the Gospel, in that day that a Soul believes
in Christ; what shall come to pass? In that day the Mountains shall drop down
new Wine, the new Wine of the Gospel, not the old Lees of the Law, but Wine
upon the Lees. The Law may fret and grind your Spirits to Powder, Mr. Strong 's
Treatise of the two Covenants.
but what can melt them but the Covenant of Grace? Isa. 25. new Wine, new
Comforts, new Peace and Joy; that the Law could never bring, Christ brings; and
the Hills shall flow with Milk; the glorious Promises of the Gospel, that shall
be as Milk to the poor Soul, Milk to poor Babes in Christ. But then a poor Soul
may object, Truly I have desired Christ, if I know my own Heart I would fain
live upon Christ; but yet I find my Heart very barren, I do not find my Soul
flourishing, nor increasing, nor growing, but I find Comforts are absent from
my Soul, that I may say still, the Comforter that should relieve my Soul is far
from me. To this I answer, Soul, you that desire Christ, nothing in the World
is like Christ to you; you shall not miss of growth in Grace, you shall not
miss of this blessed Life; though the Lord may not give it to you according to
your Measures, but according to his own good Will, Grace and Wisdom; for God
has very glorious Ends that you have not your Vessels full at once.

The First Reason is, That you may depend upon Jesus Christ for daily incomes
and supplies. Alas! while you are in this Life your Vessels are always filling,
and you are always to live in a way of dependence on Christ, not only for that
Grace you have received, but for daily manifestation of Grace to your Souls,
for the grace of Faith, and for the love of God to your Souls. You are to wait
daily on the Lord for strength. Not I live, says Paul; I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the
faith of the Son of God, 2 Gal. 19, 20, 21. I depend on Christ for all, I live
by the Faith of the Son of God; and one that lives by Faith does not live by
Sight. There is something absent that a Man waits for; for what we enjoy what
need we hope for, and what need we act Faith for what we possess? We are to
depend on the Lord Jesus Christ, so as to act Faith in him for new supplies of
Grace. We are to set our selves under those golden Pipes that do convey the
golden Oil; you are to be looking to the everlasting Hills from whence your
help comes, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 123.22. Behold as the eyes of Servants
look unto the hand of their Masters, and as the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand
of her Mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have
mercy upon us. Psalm. 121.1. I will list up my eyes unto the Hills from whence
comes my help. The Hills where the Temple was built, Sion and Moriah, there
will I look, from whence comes my help: Now we must look unto God in Christ
for supplies of Grace, and Peace, and Comfort; we are to expect our Comfort
from those Mountains that drop down new Wine, and the Hills that drop down
Milk; the Skies that pour down Righteousness, and the Heavens that rain down
Grace. Were your Comforts always flourishing and green, were you always filled
with Joy, would there be such a dependence on Christ, where you are daily
supplied and renewed? When persons are waiting for Rain they set their Vessels
forth day and night, and when they are full they take them in again; but
persons that turn the Cock to let it run into their Cisterns, it fills them
presently, they wait no longer. Alas! many run to their own Cisterns, their
own Duties, walk by the sparks of their own kindling, to what they can perform,
which the Lord complains of, Jer. 2.1. My people have committed two evils, they
have forsaken me the fountain of living water, and hewed to themselves
Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no water. Alas! their Cisterns will not
hold, there is brackish Water in all their Springs; broken Cisterns that hold
no Water, their Vessels will quickly be empty again; but the Soul that waits on
Christ will be like the Husbandman that waits for Rain, is glad when he sees
the Clouds are gathering; the Husbandman is glad, he looks on his withered
Grass and Corn, but, says he, the Clouds begin to gather, and I wait for Rain,
and that will revive them again: So says a poor Soul, I do expect, yea, I do
wait for the Lord to come with new Light, and new Love, and new Peace, and new
Comfort, and new assurance of his Love, and that I may read my Pardon in his
Blood, and my Comfort in his Love. Says the Lord, I will be a dew to Israel,
Hos. 14.5. In the mystical and spiritual sense it signifies Christ, who does by
his Holy Word and Heavenly Grace drop down and distill upon the Souls of
Believers by his Princely Favors and loving Countenance, which is as a Cloud
of the latter Rain: That which Dew is to Fields, Gardens, Vineyards, Flowers,
Fruits of the Earth after an hot and scorching day; that the Favor, Word,
Grace, loving Countenance and Holy Spirit will be to the drooping and afflicted
Conscience of his People. Dr. Reynolds.


A Believer has his dependence on the Lord Jesus Christ, who is appearing
before God for him, pleading the Sinners Cause, presenting his own Wounds
before the Father, till he pours down his Grace into the Soul, and drops down
showers of Grace into the Heart. But a Soul that feeds himself with his own
Gifts and Parts, he does his Duty, and is gone, therefore he does not wait for,
nor depend on Christ. But, says a Believer, I would be in a Believing Frame,
though I do not find Christ coming, I will look up, Psalm. 5.1, 2, 3. Give ear
to my words, O Lord, consider my meditation. Hearken unto the voice of my cry,
my King and my God, for unto thee will I pray. My voice shall thou hear in the
morning, O Lord; in the morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee, and will
look up. There are many go to their own Cisterns in the Morning, performing
Duty, exercising what Gifts and Parts they have, or what they remember; they do
Duty, but it may be think not on Christ one Moment more all the day: These are
poor empty Cisterns that can hold no Water: But, says the Psalmist, I will
pray and look up; tho I am come off from my Knees, I have not done looking up,
expecting or believing, for I wait for the Lord's Answer, I look for a Return
of Prayer, I look for supplies of Grace, for supports of Faith, for comforts to
my Soul. Many pray, but do you look up, do you believe, do you make Christ your
Life, depending on him for the showers of his Grace to come into your Souls?
That may comfort you, and quicken you, and may be matter of praise, not only
that you may quiet Conscience, but that you may enjoy God. When the Earth is
dry, if a drop does but fall, our Hearts begin to be glad, we hope to have
showers from Heaven: So when a Soul finds but a drop of Comfort, a drop of
Love, a little taste. Says the Soul, Christ is coming, now he is revealing
himself; I will depend upon him as long as I live; as Job says, Though thou
kill me yet will I trust in thee; so says the Soul, I will depend on thee: And
as Luther said, Though Christ come against me with a drawn Sword, yet will I
run into his Arms.

Secondly, The second Reason is, That as you should depend on Christ, so you
should be waiting in the way of Duty, waiting in Ordinances. What Confusions
have come into the Minds of Persons, throwing off Ordinances; pretending they
had the Light within them, and were come to perfection, and had no need of
Teaching, pretending they knew more than could be taught them? But speak with a
Believer, he will tell you another thing, he will tell you he wants Comfort, he
wants Grace, he wants teaching, and that he wants new reviving, Isa. 26.8. Yea,
in the way of thy Judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee; the desire of our
Soul is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee. With my Soul have I
desired thee in the night; yea, with my Spirit within me will I seek thee
early; yea, in the way of thy Judgments have we waited for thee: Though thy
Hand has been as it were against us, though thou have afflicted us, though
thou have seemed to frown upon us, yet we have waited for thee; though it be
dark with us, whether it be the Night of Affliction or the Night of Desertion,
as well as in the Night of Trouble and Adversity; though our Souls are in an
afflicted state, or a discomforted state, we will wait till thou return; we
will wait for that God that hides himself from the House of Jacob: Not like
some that are seeking purer Churches through the deceivings of Satan and their
own Hearts. Many there are that think they have Knowledge enough, and Peace
enough; but these are the Delusions of Satan, that they may not wait upon God
in the way of his Appointment; they think they need no more Teaching. But the
Lord will not leave his People to these Delusions; for they shall, through his
Grace, be so kept; they shall be kept waiting on him in his Ordinances and
Appointments; so from Ordinance to Ordinance, from Duty to Duty, carried on
strength to strength. If you had a full Harvest presently, you would be ready
for Glory; and if your Vessel were filled here, you would be ready for an
immortal Life; you would be ready for your Life to be swallowed up in Victory;
as when you are distilling Aqua Vitae, or any other Spirits, you set a Bottle
under it, and that drops in drop by drop, and when it is full you take it away;
and if it had been filled at once you would have took it away. The Lord Jesus
Christ could fill the Vessel at once: But what then? Could you contain your
Joy? You must enter into the Joy of your Lord. When the Bottle is full it is
taken ^way, it can hold no more; so when a Soul is filled with Grace, and
Comfort, and Assurance: What is he fit for but Glory? To go to enjoy God in
that full measure that the Saints and Angels do? But you have Mercy distilled
out, some drops in one Sermon, and some in another, that your Souls may be
still filling up till you are fit for Glory: If you were full at once, you
would not need any more Ordinances. But now the Soul says, I bless God for his
Ordinances, for I have received some comfort by them; O that I had a full
Assurance! O that I could see more of Christ! O that I were perfect in Christ!
O that I could love him as the Saints do that are in Glory! If you could, then
you need not come any more to Ordinances. You see in a Cloud a bright side and
a dark side, in Ordinances you have Peace and Joy: Ay, and you have Temptation,
that you may long for another Ordinance, that you may have Peace and Comfort;
so you are led from Ordinance to Ordinance, you are led from Duty to Duty, till
you are brought to Glory. So when you have received some Revelations of Christ,
you long for Ordinances again, that you may receive more: I say, a sincere
Believer that waits upon the Lord Jesus Christ, that waits for a shower from
Heaven, he may see, that in every Complaint he has cause to rejoice; he must
needs see something; though he has a dark Cloud, he cannot but say, Truly he
hopes to see a bright Cloud also: He cannot but own that he has some
Glimmerings of Hope that were never found before. Conversion, that was never
found in a carnal Heart; as sometimes the Lord is pleased in an Ordinance to
give unto the Soul at one time one Promise, and at another time another. If a
Man had a Field of Corn, and should thresh and grind it at once, could he eat
it all at once? No, but a little and a little at a time: So the Field of the
Promises is a large Field, when you come to Glory, all the Field will be bound
up, and all the Promises will be accomplished, and you will have your Souls in
that glorious Paradise of perfect Blessedness. But now the Lord is pleased to
drop in one Promise at one time, and another at another. The poor Woman of
Canaan desired to be under Christ's Table to be fed with Crumbs. They that wait
on Christ for Crumbs, shall not miss of having their fill at last. A poor Soul
in Christ gets at one time one Promise, and at another time another, and so is
carried on till the Harvest is white; when you are ripe for Glory, there will
be a perfect accomplishment of all the Promises; but in the mean time we must
wait for those great and precious Promises, 2 Pet. 1, 4. Hereby are given to us
exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you might be partakers of
the Divine Nature: exceeding great and precious Promises, but these Promises
drop down as you have need; hereby are given to us exceeding great and precious
promises, great incomparable Grace, Love and Mercy are wrapped up in them, at one
time one, and another time another is dropped into the Soul. The Sons and
Daughters of Sion that wait on God in a way of Duty, O the sweet and precious
Promises that they have given them! As Ruth followed Boaz's Reapers, and
gleaned after them all day, and then lay down at Boaz's Feet at night. To
spiritualize this, Who was Ruth but a poor Gentile? she was a Moabitish Woman.
O how good it is to be waiting! It is the Believers Duty to be waiting on the
Word, and all the means of Grace, and what should he do at night? Lie down at
Christ's feet, leave him not till you are married to him, nor then, till you
are brought home to Glory, while you enjoy him fully: So I say, wait on him
gleaning in his Field, and you shall have sweet Divine Comfort and Consolation
from him at last.

Secondly, As for Promise, so for quickening your Hearts by his Spirit, when
you cry with David, Psalm. 119.25. Quicken me for my Soul cleaves to the Dust.
The Lord is pleased sometimes to come in with quickening Grace to your Souls,
that you find your Heart quickened and revived like a dry Tree or Plant after
Rain: So the Soul complains, I am like a barren Wilderness, I do not find my
Heart ascend up to God, my Heart is even cleaving to the Dust, but he desires
Quickenings; Quicken thou me according to thy word; thou have promised
quickening Grace, therefore I wait for Quickenings: So a Soul says, O that I
had Christ! Could but my Soul taste him! Could my Soul experience his
Revivings! And in waiting have you not found his Quickenings, when you have
confessed your Soul was free among the Dead?

Again, Have you not found new strength to believe in Christ? You have gone
home sometimes, and said in your Hearts, I will never doubt more, I will never
give way to Unbelief more, I will never to my dying hour misbelieve the
Promises of God, for his promises are sure, and his mercies never fail. I could
sing with the Psalmist, Praise the Lord, for his Mercies endure for ever;
praise the Lord, for his goodness never fails: And can witness what the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 138.2, 3. I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and
praise thy Name, for thy loving kindness and for thy truth; for thou have
magnified thy word above all thy Name; in the day when I cried thou answeredst
me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my Soul. In the day that I cried,
that I waited upon thee, immediately I had new strength from thee: When my
Heart was faint, when my Soul was in a languishing condition, I cried unto
thee, and thou strengthenedst me with strength in my Soul; I had strength to
believe, I had strength to wait, I had strength to hope, and I had strength to
live upon Christ for all. Have you not experienced this, that you have come
weak to an Ordinance, yet have found strength, as one that has drank new Wine?
Therefore the Lord is pleased to give you strength, that you may go from Duty
to Duty, from Mercy to Mercy, from Peace to Peace. O you that wait on Christ in
a way of dependence for new Revivings, and new Manifestations to your Souls,
what Comfort will it be to you, tho you have but little strength, to go from
strength to strength? The Lord has promised it, Psalm. 84. They shall go from
strength to strength till they appear before God in Sion. This was spoken of
the willing Israelites; many tarried at home to worship Jeroboam's Gods, they
would not come to Jerusalem, the Journey was too far, and the cost and pains
too much; they would rather serve the Calves that Jeroboam had set up: But the
Godly Israelites went to Jerusalem; and what did the Lord do for them? See
verse. 5. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are the
ways of them; whose Heart is found believing and waiting for Christ, whose
Heart is united to Christ, and found waiting in his appointments: What then?
They go from strength to strength, every one of them in Sion appears before
God; not one shall faint by the way; every one shall appear before God in Sion
if they have never so far to go, as sure as if they had but a Mile to go: So it
is in this day of our Gospel Worship, in our waiting on Christ in the means;
the Soul says, I have many Duties on my Hand to perform, and I do not know how
to do them; but if your Soul desires to believe in Christ, to live in Christ,
to roll upon Christ, to wait on him in his Ordinances, you shall go from
strength to strength; you shall every one come to Glory, though you go through
the Valley of Bacha; tho you have dark places, and barren places, you shall have
Wells of Salvation, and they shall refresh your Souls. Christ will be dropping
his Comforts and Grace, that you shall be filled with Comfort; you shall go
from strength to strength, till you appear before God.

Again, As for your Strength so for your Victory and Conquest over Corruption:
Have not you found in your waiting, that the Life of Christ has been manifest
in the Death of your Corruptions, in your Conquest, that when you have cried
out, O wretched Man or Woman! O how unfit to wait on Christ! O how dark and
dead am I! Yet have not you through the Grace of Christ, found the Life of
Christ made manifest, that you have gone away conquering and Victorious? Though
you do desire to live upon Christ, yet you are not brim full of him at once,
but do receive your Joy and Comfort from him drop by drop, that you may live on
Christ in the way of his Appointments.

Thirdly, The third Reason is, that your Souls shall not be filled as you
desire, but drop by drop, because we are not able to bear much of God's Glory
at once, we shall be over-set with the Feast if it be too much, we are not able
to drink much of this new Wine, it is a Joy unspeakable and full of Glory;
therefore the Saints are called to enter into the Joy of their Lord, because
this Glory is unspeakable, and cannot enter into them, as good Mr. Whelch, when
he was in Prayer and Communion with God, Hold Lord, says he, it is enough. So
the Spouse complains of being sick of Love, not for an absent Christ, but for
the great Enjoyment, Cant. 2.4. He brought me into his banqueting House, and
his Banner over me was Love. What then? Stay me mith Flagons, comfort me with
Apples, for I am sick of Love. But in the 5th Chapter she was sick of Love for
an absent Christ, for a withdrawn Christ; not absent in Union, then she could
not be sick of Love, nor for Communion, but over-set with manifestations, not
in that manner as she enjoyed when she sat under his Shadow in the third
Chapter, that she tasted his Fruit to be sweet, for then she had it by degrees,
but here in more abundant manner, verse. 3. As the Apple Tree among the Trees of
the Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons. I sat under his shadow with great
delight, and his Fruit was sweet to my taste. While the Fruit drops from the
Tree, the Spouse could eat it, taste it, relish it, and that with delight, and
was not over-set with it; but she wants more Communion. He brought me into his
Banqueting House to the Love-Feast, there his Banner over me was Love.

First, You see a Believer in a state of Grace cannot move one Foot till Christ
move him; how much less can a Soul that is in a state of Sin move after Christ?
Christ brings a Soul on from lesser to greater enjoyments, from lesser to
greater manifestations; he brought me into his banqueting house, where it was
sweet to sit, where I had an Apple, a drop of his Love, a taste of his Grace:
But he brought me, I could not get thither of my self; he brought me to his
banqueting house; what Sauce to the Feast? His Banner over me was Love: What
would have been the Banquet without the Banner of Love? His Banner over me was
Love. What then? I was made so much of, filled with such joy, such comfort;
filled with such assurance, filled with such delight, that she was fain to cry
out, Stay me with Flagons, comfort me with Apples; my narrow Vessel will not
hold it, I must have new strength. Stay me with Flagons, new Wine, that is, the
thing containing for the thing contained in it. By Flagons is meant the Wine
contained in the Flagons, as we speak in the Lord's Supper: We say this Cup is
the New Testament in his Blood, that is, the Wine in the Cup. So here, the
Spouse, Stay me with Flagons, I have such a Love Feast, I want Flagons of Wine
to strengthen me; yea, and let me have some of the Apples too, that before
dropped from the Tree, I am sick of Love. Do you not wish sometimes, O that I
were filled with Christ! O that I could praise him, love him, behold his Face,
and enjoy him as they do above! Could our poor weak Vessels bear this? No. When
the Lord passed by, Moses was to lie in the Clefts of the Rock; and John fell
down before him; therefore he gives drop by drop, that we might not have our
Hearts over-set, but with an Appetite long for more of him: But for the full
manifestation of him, that is reserved for you in Glory, where you will have
strength for Vision, and where you will have support for Fruition; there you
will have your fill of him, when he brings you to the Throne of his Glory.

Fourthly, The Lord Jesus Christ is pleased not to come down with those full
Streams, and pour in as your Souls, may be, would desire, because your Souls
may have a real Impression of his Divine Grace and Love to your Souls. When the
Soul has longed and waited for manifestations of his Favor, what deep
Impression does it make? Then O bless the Lord my Soul, and all that is within
me bless his holy Name, Psalm. 103. How was the Psalmist taken with the loving
kindness of God? Whet deep impressions does it make on the Heart, when the Soul
has been in the miry Clay, and there has been dead and cold, and the Lord
has quickened it?

Fifthly, The Lord Jesus Christ is pleased to give down to your Souls not such
full flowings as you may desire (but yet you are not barren) that nothing may
be lost of his Divine Grace and Love; there is Milk for Babes. What, would you
have all strong Men? What then should we do with the Milk? there is Milk for
Babes, and Meat for strong Men? The Apostle writes to Children, to young Men,
and to Fathers; there are Children that can scarce go must be carried in Arms,
there is the Breast for them; and then there is young Men, that is the
Christian, that can weather Temptation better than some others. Alas! should we
preach to weak Believers as we do to strong Believers, they would be
discouraged, and think they had no Grace: There are some that are able to
weather Temptation, and to conquer Corruption, and to overcome the Enemies of
their Souls, and bear the hidings of God's Face better than others; but then
there are old Men, Fathers in Christ, and they have more experience in Trials,
more experience in Comforts: David had experience, Hide not thy face from me,
thou have been my help hitherto, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
Salvation. Consider there are three sorts; if every one should be a Father,
every one young Men and strong, then there would be no Children: You that cry
you are barren, have you no Grace, because not so much as others, and as you
desire? And though you have not such Divine Manifestation as others, therefore
is not Christ yours? Have you not your longing Desires many times filled up
abundantly? There are small Vessels and larger Vessels, the Lord Jesus would
have nothing lost of his Divine Grace and Love; and Believers that serve him
faithfully and sincerely, yet have not such manifestations, such full showers
as you desire: Would you have all Love, all assurance, all comfort? and so pass
along: But are not you conscious that many of the Children of God are not so?
But they are longing, depending on Christ for Manifestations; and would not you
have some drops of Comfort for them? Yes, says the Believer, then that would
go beside you at that time; for while you have assurance, you need not those
comforts and supports as poor doubting Souls want; but you are rather for
praising and blessing God: But yet we are in diverse Frames, and the Soul is
still thirsting or wanting, and sees its want of Grace; that frame of Grace
seldom meets with disappointment in the Word, but something falls to their
share. If you had your Hearts full of Joy, and had full assurance, you would
rather be seeking a place to be praising God, than to be under such Ordinances,
where we are disponsing and giving comfort to doubting Souls. As a Child at the
Table, give it a bit and a bit, and the Child will be looking up in your Face;
but if its Belly were filled at once, it would be ready to be gone; so if you
were filled with Comfort and Joy, and so were not living upon the Lord Jesus
Christ for the manifestations of his Grace, you might not have one Sentence in
some Sermons belonging to you. But the longing Soul is still longing and
waiting, because they are sensible they want more Grace, more of Christ, more
of the pouring out of the Spirit. When we have a plenty of Rain we have not so
many Vessels empty; but when the Hills are dry, and the Valleys want Rain, then
the Vessels are set forth, if but a little Rain falls: So when you have those
full streams of Mercy you desire, there will not be such running to set out
your Vessels; as when you feel your Wants, and are more sensible of your
Emptiness. O with what earnestness do you thirst after Christ, and the means of
Grace, when you are under the sense of your own Poverty! Then the poor Believer
cries, O let my Vessel have some fillings! O that my Heart may not miss any o
that comfort, that joy that drops in the Word!

Sixthly, The Lord is pleased to give us by drops, and not in such full measure
as is desired, that they may be the more endeared to Jesus Christ: It is the
whole Work of a Believer, though he use means, yet to live on Christ; Adam's
Nature is too much in us, we think we have Stock enough, like the Prodigal,
Give me my Portion and I will be gone; so we think we have enough of our own:
And if we have enlarged Hearts, enlarged Desires, we are apt to rest on
Ordinances more than Christ: But when the Soul sees nothing, neither Ordinances
nor Duties can help it, then it rests on Christ, then it lives above all upon
Christ; though they use all means they may to enjoy Christ, they would leave no
stone unturned (as the Spouse) that they may meet with Christ, Cant. 3.2. I
will rise now, and go about the City in the Streets, and in the broad ways will
I seek him whom my Soul loves: I sought him but I found him not. The Spouse
used all means, secret Duty, public Duty, all ways to meet with Christ, but
she could not prevail till Christ revealed himself to her.

Seventhly, The Lord is pleased thus to give to us, that we may be more
thankful for every shower of Grace.

So much for the second particular; the Soul must needs live a growing Life
that lives on Christ, because Christ comes down as Rain on the Soul; and
although the Soul does not find those manifestations that it desires, yet the
Lord intends nothing but good toward them.

Thirdly, They that live this Life of Faith, that desire Christ in all, and
live on him in all, Jesus Christ will through his Grace make them live a
fruitful Life, because Christ is to them the glorious Sun of Righteousness: As
he is Rain from Heaven, so he is the Sun of Righteousness, that the Believer
lives under the warming Divine Beams of this Glorious Sun. For me to live is
Christ; to live under his Divine Beams of Grace, to have my Eye fixed on this
glorious Sun of Righteousness, to have my Aims and Ends, and my Eye singly fixed
upon him; therefore the Believer that by Faith lives on him must needs live a
fruitful Life, Mal. 4.2. But unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun of
righteousness arise with healing under his wings; and you shall go forth and
grow up as Calves of the Stall. Unto you that fear my Name.

First, You have the Persons that enjoy this great Privilege, those that fear
the Lord, to wit, Believers, distinguished from all others.

Secondly, The Author of this Glory, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, The Mercy they shall receive from him.

He shall arise with healing under his Wings upon such as fear his Name. This
general Mercy has three glorious Manifestations:

First, He rises with healing under his Wings: Christ makes healthful Souls,
the Believer has an healthful Soul.

Secondly, Here is Liberty to the Soul, they shall go forth; one that knows not
Christ is in Bondage; but they shall go forth.

Thirdly, Here is their growth, they shall grow up as Calves of the Stall; them
that fear the Lord the Sun of Righteousness shall rise with healing under his
Wings. Though the Believer sometimes may have his doubting Fits, his
Dispondency many times, yet the Sun of Righteousness will not let him perish
for want of Healing; he will rise with healing under his Wings.

First, The Lord Jesus Christ heals the Souls of Believers with his Spirit,
when he pours out his Spirit into their Souls; comfort ye, comfort ye my
People, I will send the Comforter to you. To a poor doubting, drooping,
desponding Believer the Lord Jesus Christ rises with healing under his Wings,
he sends him a Divine Cordial from Heaven, he sends a drop from his own Heart;
the Spirit of God comes and heals the Soul. When the Disciples were under
Trouble, the Holy Ghost is promised, I will send you the Comforter: Though it
is a dark Day, though you think you shall never bear your Burden, yet I will
send the Holy Ghost that shall be a Comforter, that shall lead you in all
Truth, that shall be better than my Presence: So when the poor Spouse her very
Bowels were turned within, her very Heart was broken: I opened to my Beloved
and he was gone; my Soul fainted, my Heart melted: What then? Did he leave any
thing behind him? Yes: He left Myrrh upon the handle of the Lock; he did not
only leave a Lock and Key, he did not leave an Heart without Faith, nor an
Heart without some Peace, nor an Heart without Joy, nor an Heart without
Comfort. A Soul that is under the Law, when he has done a Duty, is dead and
hard still; but the Lord Jesus Christ leaves Myrrh upon the handle of the Lock;
though he was gone and left her wounded, he left her Balsam to heal her.
Whenever the Lord Jesus Christ leaves his People, he leaves Myrrh behind him,
Cant. 5.4. My Beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels
were moved for him.

First, Christ heals with his Spirit.

Secondly, Christ heals with his Merits.

When a Believer is under Trouble and Fear, then this precious Blood of Christ
comes fresh to them, and is applied to them; they overcame by the blood of the
Lamb. When a poor oul goes mourning, wishing, longing, O that I knew that
Christ were mine! Then Christ comes with his glorious Merit, with his precious
Blood he comes and heals the Soul, comes and applies that Blood, in whom we
have redemption through his blood, the remission of sin, Ephesians. 1.7.

Thirdly, The Lord Jesus Christ heals the Soul with his Righteousness.

When a Soul finds it self in a naked condition, (as it were) it cannot draw
nigh to God, it cannot look up to God, it cannot speak cheerfully of God, nor
thank God for the riches of Redemption, fearing Christ is none of theirs; then
the Lord Jesus Christ reveals his Grace and Redemption; and then the Soul
says, The Lord my righteousness; the Lord Jesus Christ heals all the Faculties
of the Soul.

First, He heals the Understanding: Though the Believer has true knowledge of
Christ, yet he may be in the dark; when he stands behind the Wall, the Believer
cannot see him. The Lord Jesus Christ is pleased by his holy Spirit to
enlighten the Understanding, to see how glorious and beautiful this Sun of
Righteousness is: The Sun is the Glory of the World, so Christ is the Glory of
the Soul. As the Sun is Speculum Mundi, so Christ is Speculum Animae; all the
Spiritual Light that the Soul enjoys comes in and through Christ. Psalm. 36.9.
For with thee is the fountain of light, in thy light we shall see light; so
that I say this glorious Sun of Righteousness heals the Understanding; he opens
the blind Eyes, and leads the blind in a way they know not. The glorious Gospel
is the Chariot that the Sun of Righteousness rides in, that brings immortal
Life to light through the Gospel: But what would be the Gospel without the Sun
of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 1.10. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our
Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished Death, and has brought life and
immortality to light by the Gospel. What would a Gospel be without a Christ? It
would be as a Box without a Pearl; it would be as a Glass without Quicksilver.
Nay, a poor Soul would have no Eyes to see this Glass, were it not that Christ
shines into the Soul: Before Christ comes every Soul is shut up as in a dark
Dungeon, and can see nothing: But when this glorious Sun does shine with his
glorious Beams on the Soul, how does the Soul see his Beauty and excellency!
Then it may be said that the Light of the Lord is risen upon them, Isa. 60.1.
Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is revealed.
When a poor doubting Believer has the revelation of this Sun of Righteousness,
when he shines on the Soul with the Divine Beams of his Grace, with the Divine
Beams of his Love, with the Divine Beams of Comfort, with Divine Beams of
Peace, this Sun of Righteousness is united unto a Believer: We cant have a dark
World while we have the Sun; our Horizon cannot be dark while we have the
glorious Sun in it: so Christ is in the Believer the hope of Glory, and they
live in Christ, and Christ lives in them: But does he always shine alike in
them? No: The Sun does not always shine alike; though it is the same one day as
another, yet sometimes the Clouds keep it from us, but yet they are enlightened
with it. Take notice of this, you can never be thriving Souls, while you are
ignorant Souls: But a Believer, though he complains of Ignorance, has such
Knowledge, that he can say, I desire none but Christ, none in comparison of
Christ: The Soul can say, I desire nothing but Christ; and if you ask me, what
I I would have, I would tell you Christ Above all. If you ask me, How came you
to know this glorious Lord? He shined on my Understanding in the glorious Glass
of the Gospel, changing my Soul into the same Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all
with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into
the same image from glory to glory. When a Soul comes to see in the Glass of
the Gospel this glorious Lord, how glorious Christ is, then the Soul cries out,
O let me live in Christ! Let me glorify Christ! Surely now you are thriving
Souls in the knowledge of Jesus Christ; I mean, saving knowledge, sanctified
knowledge, such as the Sun of Righteousness reveals when he rises with healing
under his Wings. There are some places that have not the Sun for many Months,
and O how dark and uncomfortable are they then! How dark are Souls till Christ
comes into them! Whatever knowledge you have, though you could discourse whole
Bodies of Divinity, yet you are dark and ignorant till Christ comes to
enlighten and teach you. The weakest Believer is brought to this Frame to
thirst after Jesus Christ, and to desire him with his whole Soul; most do not
believe the Report Ministers give of him, Isa. 53.1. Who has believed our
report, and to whom has the Arm of the Lord been revealed? for he shall grow
up as a tender plant, and as a root out of the dry ground, he has no form nor
comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire
him; many see something in good Duties; they would be doing something for their
Salvation, and think to patch up a Righteousness thereby; but for to know Jesus
Christ so as to live on him, they see no desirableness in him. How much did the
Pharisees do? Yet Jesus Christ was rejected by them. We shall see his Glory as
the Glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of Grace and Truth. O what a
Christ full of Grace, and full of Truth, and full of Love, and full of Clory,
did these Jews reject? The Sun of Righteousness, though he was come, he had not
risen with his Glory upon them. Ah glorious Lord, that any should be so blind,
as not to see some Beauty in this glorious Christ! And yet so blind is the most
of the World, and many Professors, that though they have the glorious Light of
his Word, yet how dark are their Souls? We may say as the Prophet, When they
see him there is no beauty that they see in him that they should desire him.
Tell a carnal Heart of Christ, and Grace, and Heaven, they go away, and have no
desire to him; but when Christ comes in his Word, and shines into the Soul, and
rises with healing under his Wings; O then, says the Soul, let me have a
Christ, let me live to Christ! Before they saw no Beauty in him that they
should desire him; no Beauty, and yet altogether beautiful. What is the most
glorious Object when a Man is blind? What is the glorious Sun to a Man that
cannot see? So what is this glorious Christ, this lovely Christ, this precious
Christ, to a poor blind Sinner? But for the Believer that has Christ his Life,
he cries out for more Knowledge, more Grace, more Communication with Christ:
Christ does daily shine more and more in a Believers Understanding, removing
Ignorance and Darkness. The poorest Believer in Knowledge cannot but give God
praise for healing his Understanding; though I know we are rather crying out
for what we want, than giving thanks for what we have received. The Lord Jesus
heals the gross Ignorance of your Understanding, and heals it more and more:
Though God is pleased to give to every one according to their place and
station, yet every one shall have a saving Knowledge. There is Milk for Babes,
and Meat for strong Men.

Secondly, You shall prosper and thrive, because the Sun of Righteousness, when
he arises on your Souls, heals your Affections. Before the Heart was as dead
and as cold as a stone, no love for Christ; whatever you loved, no love for
this Lord of Glory: But now when this Sun of Righteousness is risen with
healing under his Wings, he heals the Affections of the Soul; that now the Soul
is let out in affection to Jesus Christ; now the Soul cries out, How lovely is
thy dewlling place, as David did; and why is it so lovely, David? Because there
I enjoy God. So says a Believer, How lovely are the Ordinances of Christ! Why
Christian, what makes them so lovely? Oh, says the Christian, I meet with a
lovely Christ there. Says the Spouse, Tell thou me, O thou whom my Soul
loves, where thou feedest where thou make thy Flock to rest at noon! Why,
would you be there? I would be where the Flock is, because Christ is there,
Cant. 1.7. When the Soul feels the warm Divine Beams of the Sun of
Righteousness, then the Soul comes to see a Loveliness in Christ. Before you
can love Christ, you must see that Christ loved you first, he first darts his
Divine Love into your Souls. When Elijah cast his Mantle over Elisha, says
Elisha, Let me, I pray thee, kiss my Father and Mother, and then I will follow
thee. Why, what have I done to thee? What have thou done! Enough to draw me
after thee. It was not any virtue in the Mantle, but a Divine Power from Heaven
that did draw his Heart after the Prophet. Away he runs after him, and when he
was taken from him, he cries out, My Father, my Father, the Chariots of Israel,
and the Horsemen thereof.

When the Divine Beams of the Love of Christ are cast into the Soul, then the
Soul cries out, For me to live is Christ. O that I may live to the Lord! O that
I may die in the Lord! O that I may have upholdings, that I may have strength
in every Trial! Then I care not what I go through, that I may enjoy the Lord.
Sometimes a Believer comes with an Heart very cold, dead and narrow, and does
not Jesus Christ send him away as a burning Lamp? When he rises with healing
under his Wings, what Divine Love does he draw forth in your Souls after him?
The Spouse was so cold, she could not so much as open to Christ; but when
Christ had left his Myrrh upon the handle of the Lock, she runs after him,
crying out, She was sick of Love. So sometimes a Believer is in a very dead
frame, a very cold frame, a very narrow frame; but the Lord Christ comes in the
Ordinance with his Divine Beams, and the Soul is warmed, and transformed into
the very Image of the God of Love: As for Example, the Disciples were walking
in a freezing condition, Christ was among them but a little while, and their
Hearts were burning hot within them; Was it Christ's bodily Presence only? No,
no, that many Thousands enjoyed; but he came to them with the healing Beams of
his Divine Love to their Souls; he darted Divine Beams of his Grace into their
Hearts: O then they talk after another manner. With what fervency and delight
did they discourse of the Kingdom of Heaven, to what they did before? Sometimes
when Believers meet together, how dead, and cold, and narrow are they? But when
Christ arises with new healing Beams of Divine Grace in their Hearts, how
thriving is their Discourse? How profitable? How warmly do they discourse of
the Kingdom of God? How longing after it? Luke 24.32. And they said one to
another, Did not our Hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the way,
and while he opened to us the Scriptures? He might have talked of the
Scriptures long enough, and opened the meaning of them, and no warmth come to
their Heart, till he shined into their Souls. You that are united to this Sun
of Righteousness, you that live on him by Faith, you are under these thriving
Beams, though you have not always the same manifestation: But when these
glorious Beams dart into your Souls, how lively are you in your walking, and in
your talking? Though you may have some frosty Nights, some cold Fits, yet while
you are united to this Sun of Righteousness you shall have some warm Beams that
shall make you thrive and grow. All means of Grace are like the Prophet's
Staff, which will not bring the dead Child to Life until the Prophet comes.
When the Prophet came and lay on the Child, the Child was warm, and it breathed
and stirred, and rose up and walked. Poor doubting Soul, is there Breath in
thee? Do thou breath after Christ? Do thou desire no means, mercies nor
blessings but what thou may enjoy Christ in them? I say, Christ has already
breathed on you, and his Divine Beams of Grace will cause you to rise up and
walk, I mean, to grow stronger and stronger; so that the Sun of Righteousness
heals the Affections of many. A poor Soul cries, I cannot love Christ, it is
impossible I should ever love him! But if you desire to love Christ with your
whole Heart you love him already. The Soul that has a spark of Faith, that
works by Love, shall be sure to increase in Love: When Christ comes down, when
he puts in his Finger by the hole of the Door, says the Soul, Draw me, I will
run after thee; his Love is better than Wine. Christ sometimes gives you drops
of Wine, sometimes Flagons of Wine; sometimes but a Sip, and sometimes full
Draughts. Draw me and I will run after thee; as if she had said, Draw me, and I
will commend thee to others: As Melancthon said when he was converted, He
thought that he could have converted all that he conversed with; but he found
the old Serpent was too hard for young Melancthon. When the Soul comes to know
this glorious Christ by Faith, and to live upon him, the Soul thinks he could
so commend him, that he could make all about him to love Christ. Draw me, I
will run after thee: Why, what is the matter? Thy Love is better than Wine,
verse. 3. Because of the savor of thy good Ointments, thy Name is as Ointments
poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee, verse. 4. Draw me, we will run
after thee. When the Lord Jesus Christ witnesses to the Believer, by the
Spirit, that he is united to him, when he sends forth Divine Beams from this
Glorious Light, and Life, and Warmth, the Soul has his Love drawn out
abundantly. When Peter was freezing by the Fire in the High Priest's Hall, one
look from Christ melts his Heart. Ah, my Friends, you may have the Fire of
Ordinances kindled, yet have an Heart as cold as a stone; but when Christ looks
on you, then does he melt your Souls into the very Image of Love, then he draws
the Heart after him in Divine Acts of Love, that what the Soul has often
thought of, now it comes more and more to the Soul, that Love is stronger than
Death. When the Divine Beams of Divine Love are darted into the Soul, and the
Soul comes to consider,

First, What unconceivable Love the Love of Christ is: O, says the Soul,
Christ has loved me with an unconceivable, unspeakable Love: So Paul says,
who loved me, and gave himself for me, Not I live, but Christ lives in me; the
Soul is acquainted, this is an unspeakable Love, John 1.3. Behold what manner
of Love is this that we should be called the Children of God! O what
unspeakable Love is this, says the Soul, that I should be called a Child of
God! How comes it about? O the Wonders of this Love! O that I should be called
a Child of God? What me, to be made like Christ? For God to be my Father in
Christ? What manner of Love is this? How unspeakable, how wonderful is this
love?

Secondly, When Christ comes to shine on the Soul, it comes to see what
distinguishing Love this is: Why me, O Lord? Who gave himself for me? Says the
Apostle, There is an application of this Love. Why me, Lord? Why not many
thousands chosen, and I left out? Why I chosen, and many thousands left? O that
Christ should love me, redeem me, die for me! O my Soul, love thou the Lord,
live to this Lord, let him be all in all, who loved me before the World was:
That I am not among the Damned in Hell is a wonderful mercy: But that I should
be one of the Lords redeemed ones, that I should be chosen out of the Kindred,
and Tongues, and Nations of the Earth: O what Love is this! The Expressions and
Impressions of Divine Love! A Believer would live with it all his days, and die
with it, and go to Glory with it. Why me, Lord? Why have thou pardoned me,
sanctified me? O that God should give Christ for me! That Christ should go
through his Sorrows for me! Through his bloody Sweat for me! That I should have
a part in Christ's precious Merits! What though Christ loved sinners, if I am
not the sinner that Christ loves? But when the Beams of Divine Love are darted
into the Soul, it cries, O that Christ has loved me more than his own Life!
more than his own Glory! and love me above others in the World! O what
distinguishing Love is this! Then the Soul must needs have an endeared Love to
Christ. O that for me to live may be Christ! O that I may enjoy him in all my
enjoyments!

Thirdly, The Soul sees the Love of Christ is undeserved Love. O wretch that I
am, that ever Christ should love me! It is an heightning our Love when the
Divine Beams of his Love shines on our Souls, to reveal how unworthy we are of
Christ's Love. This is that the Apostle speaks of, and nothing more heightens
our Love, than that Christ loved us, when we were unworthy of his Love, 1 Timothy
1.12, 13. And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has enabled me, for that he
counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry, who was before a Blasphemer,
and a Persecutor, and injurious, but I obtained mercy. It is a glorious Beam of
Divinity shines on the Soul, when the Soul comes to see its own Unworthiness:
Why me, Lord, so wretched and miserable a sinner? What, Christ come from his
Glorious Throne, from Heaven to Earth, to heal my Heart! To come here to die
for me a wretched Soul! O when the Sun of Righteousness rises on the Soul to
draw out its Love to Christ, then the Soul sees its own unworthiness; then a
Soul loves Christ really, when he sees Christ loved him unworthy. How unworthy
is my Soul of his Love! This was Paul's Cry, and so it is every Believers; and
the more Christ shines on your Soul, the more do you see your unworthiness of
his Love and Grace; and the Soul cries out, Lord, have thou passed by all my
unworthiness, crowned me with Love, enriched me with Love, and shall I have my
fill of Love? O what Love is this!

Fourthly, The Soul finds it a Love that passes, Ephesians. 3.14. And to know the
love of Christ which passes knowledge. Truly, says the Soul, I cannot tell
you wherefore Christ loved me, nor I cannot tell you the Depths of his Love;
but this I can tell, I shall ever shine in the Ocean of his Love to all
Eternity. The more they meditate, the more they consider; the more they think
of it, the more they wonder; what was from Eternity in the Breast of God, that
was manifested in time in giving Christ. If you ask me to tell you from whence
it comes, it was from Eternity.

Secondly, The Sun of Righteousness with his glorious Beams heals the
affection, in giving the Soul an humble and contrite Heart. Many think when
they are not shooting up they are not growing; but there may be a taking Root,
though not a shooting up; the golden Mines are not seen above the Earth, they
lie low: By the Influence of the Sun the Seed takes root in the Earth, and
springs up. Thus it is with the Sun of Righteousness, the Lord Jesus Christ, in
changing the Heart of a Believer; when he is increasing in the inner Man, not
shooting forth, not growing in the apppearance, yet he takes Root, is growing
in Humility. When once the Lord Jesus Christ comes with his Grace, and shines
into the Soul, it humbles the Soul, and makes it low in its own Eyes, and then
the Soul sees its self wanting in Grace, wanting in Love, wanting in
Enlargements and Delights, but it grows humble. When Christ appears the Soul
sees its own Deformity, the Soul thinks it is decaying in Grace, when it is not
acting those Graces, as we may say, above ground. The Fruit Trees do not bear
Fruit all the Year, yet are alive all the Year. So I say to the Believer, it is
the surest way of Growth when they grow in Humility. When a Soul comes to see
Christ, the more he shines with the Divine Luster of his Grace and
Righteousness, the more the Soul is contrite. Says Paul, When the Law came,
sin revived and I died. Paul, was it the Law in the Letter that showed you your
sin? (then why does it not teach those poor Creatures that read it, and have it
read to them?) No, but it was the Power of Christ in the Law, the Spirit of the
Law of Life in Christ that shined into his Heart, and brought home the Law to
him, to be a condemning Judge on the Bench, to give the Sentence of Death, that
Christ might be there to be the Object of Life and Salvation to his Soul. Says
he, Sin revived and I died. Persons will strain what they can to keep an even
reckoning with the Law, by doing some outward Duties. Such as the Lord Jesus
has not risen upon, they are yet in Darkness, Children of the Night; they walk
at uncertainty, they know not whether they go. Alas! many a poor Soul thinks
he is as sure to go to Heaven as he is to die, when he is in the very Road to
Hell; only some go in the broad trodden Path, open, profane, impudent sinners;
some steal thither behind the Hedge, they are going to Hell, but in a closer
walk, hidden from others, and from many that are said to be Children of the
Kingdom, Mr. Murcot on Mal. 4.2.
that are Strangers in Heart to an inward Revelation of Jesus Christ. But when
Christ comes to the Soul, he comes to the inward part; then the Soul is
unhorsed of it self, and laid low before the Lord. It was the Saying of an Holy
Divine, We may sooner call twenty from Profaneness, than one from his own
Righteousness: For says he, sin is a feverish Distemper to the Soul; and when
the Man has sinned, he knows he is out of order: But for a Man's own
Righteousness, it is so born and bred with him, that he makes it his grand
Idol; till Christ appears to the Soul with Divine Beams of his Righteousness
and Grace; this lays a Soul low and humble before the Lord, and makes a poor
Soul behold its own Ignorance. Says the Soul, I am foolish, but Christ is my
Wisdom; I cannot manage my Salvation, nor I cannot choose aright, but Christ is
my Wisdom to choose for me.

Thus a Soul is humbled under its own Ignorance; he beholds Christ that
glorious Sun that gives Light to see his Fathers Face, and to have all the
glorious Will of God revealed to the Soul in him. The Sun is the Glory of the
Heavens, but one Star differs from another Star in Glory, but there is none
like the Glory of the Sun. O the Lord has put the Excellence of Glory on the
Lord Jesus! He is the (...), the shining forth of his Fathers Glory. He speaks
here of Christ as Incarnate: As the Glory of God did shine in the Face of
Moses, so that the People could not behold; so now the Glory of the Lord
shines in the Face of Jesus Christ, as the Apostle has it, so that we cannot
behold it; it dazles our Eyes steadfastly to hold his Glory, as it does to
behold the Sun in its Glory. Here is the Glory of his Grace, the Glory of his
Wisdom, of his Mercy, of his Power, and all in Christ; he is the Glory, as it
were, of Divine Attributes, they all shine forth in him, each with his peculiar
Glory. The Temple, the Glory of the Lord filled it, so that they could not
stand to Minister before him sometimes. So Brethren, now the Lord has placed
us in Jesus Christ, he has filled him with his Glory. Therefore says the
Prophet, The Glory of the Lord is risen on thee, Isa. 60.3. Mr. Murcot.
that is, Christ manifested to thee.

Secondly, The Soul sees its self unrighteous, therefore it is humbled under
its sinfulness, till Christ is made its Righteousneses.

Thirdly, The Soul sees its self clothed with Rags; like a Man that works
hard, yet cannot cloth himself with any thing but Rags. Says a Soul,
notwithstanding all that I have done, I have not a Righteousness to cloth me
to stand with before God: But Christ is my Robe of Righteousness; therefore
when the Soul is humbled, when he does not grow in enlargements, yet he grows
numble under the sense of his own Unworthiness, and of Christ's Excellency.
Many Trees are planted in shady places, that grow up tall, tho they bear no
Fruit. When a Soul knows not Christ, there may be some external Duties
performed, yet the Soul does not grow. When Trees are short they bear thick.
When a Soul grows in Humility, they bring forth much Fruit, though they hang
down their Heads. When the Bunches of Grapes are heavy, then does the Vine hang
down its Head: So when a Soul grows out of Love with its self, and in love with
Christ, then does the Soul lie low before the Lord. When a Believer thinks
there is a decaying, it is not so; though it may be some Graces are not so much
in Exercise at one time as at another. But I do not understand how Grace can
decay whilst Christ lives. The Trees are not green all the year, yet you do not
say they are dead, the Root is in the Earth and keeps alive. So a Believer
groaning under a sense of his unworthiness, he is then best prepared to bring
forth Fruit to God. The more we find our own unworthiness, and the less we find
the Promises to belong unto us, the more we must desire them, being assured
that this desire does greatly please God, who desires and wills his Grace
should be earnestly desired. Therefore when the glorious Sun of Righteousness
casts forth its Divine Beams, the Soul grows humble and lowly: There may be
some deadness as to the exercise of Faith, some deadness as to the exercise of
Love, some backwardness in heart unto Duty. Is the Soul now decaying? No, it is
a Winter Season; and tho you do not find Grace in present Exercise, yet your
Root is alive and will spring forth. Will Christ let it die? No, it is more to
glorify his Grace. Lazarus shall lie four days in the Grave, and then the
Power of God will be more glorified in raising him up; and this we find most
excellent in Peter: Did not Peter know Christ? Yes; but yet he must take a
little better root; he must see that not only his Righteousness is in Christ,
but his Life also. Peter was a brave Man before he fell, I will not forsake
thee, though all men do, I will stand by thee; if all Men forsake thee, I will
stand alone. Many times when we are carried on smoothly and largely on Duty, we
are apt to think our Mountain shall never be moved, as David did; but, says
he, Thou hidst thy Face, and I was troubled. When the Sun is lowest and
furthest from us, then our Shadows are longest; but when it is shining over our
Heads, and nearest us, then our Shadows are shortest; then the Sun is to us
most glorious: So it is, the less our knowledge of Christ is, the more do Men
dote on their own Righteousness: The Shadow of their own Righteousness is
longest when Christ and they are most Strangers; but when Christ comes to dart
into them his glorious Beams, then they see themselves nothing. The Soul that
has a glorious Revelation of Jesus Christ comes to see himself all in Christ,
and nothing in himself. Says the Apostle, Sin died and I revived. Christ is
truly Omnipotent, and truly then reigns in our Souls, when we find our selves
so weak that we can scarce give a Groan. Many, because they have not outward
Marks or Signs in acting of Sanctification, they will conclude they are not
alive in Christ; but Faith, when Christ arises with Glory on the Soul, beholds
Christ what he is, in the Promises, and what he has done for poor sinners, and
so wraps it self in Christ alone, in whom all the Promises are Yea and Amen for
ever. Christ is that glorious Sun from whence a Believer has all his Light,
and that precious Stock that a Believer receives sap and nourishment from, to
bring forth Fruit. A Believer may have a Winters season, that he may not
exercise his Grace; but I cannot understand that a Believer can be said to
decay in Grace, being engrafted in Christ.

Do you think Peter is in a worse condition than before, or that he decays? No,
it is only Grace stopped in its exercise. Do you think Faith was in a decaying
Frame? (I know many conclude it was, but I cannot think it) Faith was only
stopped in its exercise, his Faith was in the hands of Christ safe. Sin is sin,
and will cost the Saint dear; but though sin is evil in its self, God brings it
about for good; and though there is a stop in the Exercise of Grace, the Root
shall not wither, nor the Branch neither, but the Sun of Righteousness will
shine on the Soul and revive it. What does poor Peter do? O how does he break
forth into sorrow? Luke 22.61. The Lord turned and looked upon Peter, and Peter
remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said, Before the Cock crow thou
shall deny me thrice; and Peter went out and wept bitterly. Was Peter in a
decaying Frame? The exercise of his Faith was stopped for a time, the Current of
that Faith that works by Love, that should have been stronger than Death, that
many Waters cannot quench; that Love that should have been in a Flame, it was
for a while under the Ashes, and the Floods did as it were overflow it. But did
Peter decay? No, Peter's root was in the Ground, there came a glorious Beam
from the Lord Jesus that did revive Peter. Peter, the Devil will sift thee, and
thy Comforts will have a failing time; thy own experience will fail thee of thy
love to Christ, and confidence of thy Courage and Boldness. There is no
building on experience, we may take them for comfort, but it is Faith in Christ
we must build on, because experiences may fail us. Peter comes to a sad
experience of his own wretched Heart, his Love was as it were under Water; but,
says Christ, Peter, I have prayed that thy Faith be not lost; thy experience
will fail for a time: When a Tree does not bear Fruit in the Summer, we say it
fails; but in the Winter you cannot say it fails, because you cannot expect
Fruit: So Christ told Peter, his Faith should not fail; therefore it did not
decay, but there was a stop in its exercise; but his Faith being kept by
Christ, prayed for by Christ, it did not fail. Indeed poor Judas's decayed,
Demas and Alexander's decayed, because theirs was but seeming, not real Grace.
But is Peter's decayed? No: He like the Flowers in Spring time, appeared.
Christ looked upon Peter: The Sun of Righteousness, this glorious Lord, the
Believers Life, when he sees the Believer wants a Season to bring forth Fruit,
then he turns about the Divine Beams of his Grace toward the Soul; Peter had
taken Root, and now he shall bring forth Fruit. Peter remembered the Words of
Jesus, he remembered what Christ had said, Lord, thou have told me what a
deceitful heart I have. And what, does he boast? No, he falls a weeping, he
grows in Humility; now he has a look from Christ. O how many sweet Looks go
forth in those Divine Beams on Peter's Soul! Christ takes care of his own; we
have great Complaints from a Believer, but Christ always when the Soul wants
Fruit, comes with a Divine Beam, darting into the Soul. Christ does cast many
sweet Looks on a sinner, when he breaks his Heart for sin.

First, A Look of Love. Have thou dealt so with the Lord that loved thee? Ah
Peter! tho thou have denied me, I will not forsake thee. Oh Peter, though thou
have swore and cursed, I know not the Man, yet I know thee, and will take notice
of thee, and will make known my self to thee. O consider what Love this was!
Christ looked with a first Love on Peter; we love him because he first loved
us. Ah Peter! thou have made the Breach, but I will come to make it up; thou
have turned from me, but I will follow thee with my Love, I will begin with
thee: As Christ began our Life of Grace, so he begins all our Revivings. Take a
Saint under an hard Heart, under Guilt, he may sit under means, and it is his
Duty so to do, but no stirring till Christ comes. When Peter was in his sin and
rebellion, Christ looked on him with a first Love.

Secondly, Christ looks with a free Love. Peter, I will not wait till thou
come to me with Legal Repentance, I will look on thee before thou confessest
me. Christ begins first, he comes freely with his Love; Peter had smote on his
Heart, he had no preparation to come to Christ; Christ loves freely, Hosea 14.
when he heals Backsliders he loves freely, Verse 4. I will heal their back
sliding, I will love them freely, for my anger is turned away from them. Every
Act of Christ's Love to us is free Love; there is not any moment of our time
that we can bring any thing that is our own to Christ to love us.

Thirdly, Christ's Love was a very strong Love, sinners shall never break the
Cords of it. Therefore have I drawn them with the cords of a man, with the
bands of Love, Hos. 11.4. O how strong was Christ's Love to Peter! When a Soul
laments that it cannot love Christ, then the ^oul is growing in the Grace of
Love, Love then is stronger than Death, and so is Christ's Love to every one
that he redeems, and so it was to Peter: The strong love of Christ broke in
upon him, and now he falls a weeping. Ah Peter! have I loved thee, and yet thou
have forsaken me; yet here I am with a new look of Love, Love stronger than
Death, that overcomes all our deadness and coldness; then the Heart breaks and
melts; when Christ comes with his look of Grace, he will break the hardest
Heart there.

Fourthly, Christ's Love was a very seasonable Love; Then was the time of love,
when thou were weltering in thy Blood, Ezekiel. 16. How seasonably does the Sun
shine on the Flowers and Plants to revive and comfort them! When the Soul
complains, Corruption is strong, Grace is weak; my Heart is cold, Love dies, I
find my Soul fainting, I fear I decay; Christ comes in seasonably with a new
Manifestation of his love to the Soul, and this breaks the very Heart. That
which is spoke of the Sun in the Firmament, may be spoken of this glorious Sun
of Righteousness; the Sun comes like a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, so does
the Lord Jesus Christ appear to his Bride: The Sun rejoices to run its Race as
a strong Man, and as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber does it appear: So does
Christ comes as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, and as a strong Man delights
to run his Race; so does the Lord Jesus Christ break forth into the Soul with
his glorious Beams of Divine Grace.

Fifthly, Christ's love is a great love. How great is that love that can pardon
such sins, pardon such sinners, visit the Saints under such Frames of Heart!
This was the love of Christ to Peter, he looked on Peter (to break his Heart)
with a look of love.

Secondly, He looked with a look of Mercy. O Peter, I will pardon thee. Return
to me, says the Lord, I am married unto thee, Jer. 3. Ah Peter! I am thine; he
looked upon Peter, it was Mercy broke Peter's Heart. The Terrors of the Law may
make Men run distracted, but their Hearts are hardened against God. But when
pardoning Grace comes, that breaks the Heart, melts the Heart. Peter went out
and wept bitterly; what, shall I find mercy? shall I find favor? shall such
rich mercy be showed in pardoning me! O give thanks unto the Lord, for his
mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 107. and Psalm. 136.

Thirdly, The Lord Jesus Christ breaks in with a Divine Shine of
Sanctification. If Christ is your Life, you shall never want Grace; it is our
Duty to be waiting for Grace, praying for Grace, but a Believer shall never
want Grace; he gives Grace to him in a time of need; if ever it was a time of
need, this was a time of need with Peter. It is good you should see your want,
it is good you should seek the Lord; he gives the Grace of Repentance, the
Grace of Humility; he gives the Grace of Godly Sorrow. How seasonably is Grace
given to a Soul that longs for it! When there is no Water in their own
Cisterns, the Lord Jesus comes with new Springs of Grace to such a Soul. A
Believer never walks more comfortably than when he walks humbly, then the Soul
mourns before the Lord. Such Divine Beams of Love from Christ work in the Soul
true Contrition and Humiliation. Ah, says the Soul, have I had so many
wooings, so many offers of Grace, yet have kept Grace out of my Heart? Could I
shut out the remembrance of him one moment? Has his love been so soon
forgotten? He that wept for me, and bled for me, and died for me, have I kept
him out of my Heart? The Spouse tasted of this, but it was a growing time, but
her Soul was in great bitterness; Oh, says she, it was the voice of my
Beloved, I knew him, yet I did not open to him, Cant. 5.2. I sleep but my heart
waketh, saying, open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled, for my
Hand is filled with Dew, and my Locks with the drops of the night. Verse 3. I
have put off my Coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I
defile them? Verse 4. My Beloved put in his Hand by the hole of the door, and
my Bowels were moved for him. When I opened my Bowels, my Bowels were moved to
think that I knew it was my Beloved, yet would not open to him. When a Soul
comes to know Christ, it cries, O the many Offers I have had! O the many sweet
Wooings I have had! O that ever I should slight, and neglect, and resist as I
have done! O that I should love so little, when he loves so much! O how slight
have I thought of him! How unkindly have I carried it, and how untenderly! O
now let Christ be all in all! Now the Soul has a weeping Eye; I looking cannot
but love, and loving cannot but mourn. O now I wonder how I could shut him out
of my Admiration, of my Adoration, out of my Praises and Delights one Moment!

Thus the loving kindness of Christ melts the Heart, when Christ is made our
Life, and Christ sends forth new glorious Beams of his Grace into the Soul, the
Saint would not walk with a slighting Thought of Christ, but would be always
admiring and glorifying Divine Love. When a Soul comes to have a look from
Christ, then there is the weeping Eye. Wh^t do weep for, Soul? O, I weep for
joy, yet mourn for sorrow. O that I should be so unkind, so ungrateful, as to
slight and disregard him! O that ever Christ should knock and knock again, love
and love again! O Christ is my Life; had he not been my Life I had been dead
and undone unto all Eternity. The Soul that before thought it self something,
now sends forth sad Complaints, complaints of an unbelieving Heart, that Christ
has been entertained no more, believed no more, relied on no more; now the
Soul complains and cries out, O wretched Creature that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death and sin?

This is not a pining Unbelief; but Faith being raised up in an higher pitch,
the Soul grows in Humility, that it has been so misbelieving. If ever a Soul
comes to have the blessed revelation of the excellency of Christ, the thing
which they lay to Heart, is unbelief: Many think if they can but keep touch
with Duty, it is well enough; but when Christ comes, the Soul mourns that it
has not believed; the Soul comes to see how worthless its self is, and how
precious Christ is. O, says the Soul, methinks all of Christ is precious! His
Offers are precious, his Promises are precious, his Precepts are precious. O
how unworthy am I of such Grace!

Thirdly, When this Glorious Sun of Righteousness shines into the Heart of a
poor sinner, the Will is subdued, they shall be a willing People in the day of
my Power: Man has a Will to set up something of his own, but now the Will is
conquered. When the Soul is brought to this, Mr. Perkins in his Grain of
Mustardseed.
to have a constant and earnest desire to be reconciled to God; to believe and
to repent, if it be in a touched heart, is in acceptance with God, as
Reconciliation, Faith, and Repentance it self. Says the Soul, Let me have
nothing but Christ, whatever I have without Christ it will do me no good; let
me live to Christ, let me glorify Christ; blessed and glorious is such a Life;
I would be swallowed up in that Life, and so then the Will is brought down.
Lord, let me be any thing, so that I may glorify Christ; then the Soul will
trifle no longer. Says the Soul, I am resolved to have a Christ; he is
offered, why may I not have him? God has given him freely. Why not to me that
am a sinner? the poor Soul presently lays hold on him, presently stretches out
his hand of Faith to lay hold on him.

Thus the Soul is growing, though not with those Affections as it would; yet
the Affections are healed in growing in Contrition by the Sun of Righteousness
shining on it.

Secondly, A Soul is healed of the Wounds and Guilt that is on him. When a
Sinner comes to have the Sun of Righteousness shine on his Soul, his Guilt is
healed, Isa. 53. The Prophet says, by his Stripes we are healed: The Stripes
of Christ are our healing. Verse 4, and 5. Surely he has born our Griefs, and
carried our Sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and
afflicted. But he was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our
Iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed. There is no thriving in Grace till the Wounds of the Soul are
healed; all our Wounds are inward Wounds; it is not an outward Prayer will heal
your Wounds, nor outward Fasting, nor outward Confession; no, it must be the
streams of the Blood of Christ running through the Veins of the Heart by Faith.
The Soul never comes to have his Wounds healed, till Christ rises with healing
under his Wings: There is an inward Wound within the Soul, there is Guilt
within that will sit as a Judge condemning the Soul. Now by his stripes we are
healed, there must be an Union with Christ, the Sufferings of Christ to be made
over to the Soul; Christ's Righteousness to be made as surely the Soul's own,
as if it had a perfect Righteousness of its own: Take away all iniquity, says
the Prophet, so will we render the Calves of our Lips; Take away all iniquity,
while there is any Guilt on you, you are altogether guilty. Psalm. 143 2. Enter
not into Judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man be justified.
If you are called to answer for one Transgression, you are undone; if you are
called to account for one, you lie under the condemnation of all; but when
Christ is become your Life, then all your Guilt is removed; no Justification
but by Christ alone. The Diseases and Distempers of our Souls are our sins, the
guilt of sin is a wound that is cut deep in the Soul: Now when a Soul is
brought under the healing Wings of the Sun of Righteousness, he heals this
Wound, Psalm 103.3. Who forgiveth all thy iniquities, and heals all thy
diseases: Sin cut off a Creature from God, and so makes a Wound, which now is
healed and made up: When they are pardoned, forgiveness and healing is all one
with them in the Prophet Hosea 14.4. I will heal their backslidings, I will
love them freely; the Justification freely by his Grace, as the Apostle calls
it. Poor sinner, thou that ever knew what sin was, what a Wound it was to
thy Soul, knew that thy pardon was a healing in thee; so then this arising
is by his Spirit, in his Word he conveyeth the Blood of Jesus Christ, the merit
there of makes it over to the poor Soul that believes, to the doing away of
all the Guilt that lay on the Soul; it also takes away that Anguish and
Trouble that did lie upon the Soul: When a Wound is healed, the Anguish and
smart is taken away, tho it may be, while searched and tented, there will be
smart and sore, yet afterward it is taken away. Broken Bones are nothing to a
broken Heart, nor the broken Flesh any thing to a broken Bone, The Lord heals
the broken Heart, he binds up their Wounds, Psalm. 141.3. I have seen his
ways, and I will heal him, says the Lord. He speaks to the conditions of a
poor disconsolate Soul under the sense of God's Wrath, Isa. 57.8, 9. He was
wrath and smote him, yea, he did hide, and was wrath. Oh how this troubles a
poor Soul! he cannot but have his Heart full of Darkness, Terror and Trouble,
that has the face of God hidden from him. Well, says the Lord, tho he did
walk frowardly before me, gave me not my ends in smiting him, yet I will heal
him; and wherein does this healing consist? Alas! in restoring Joy and Comfort
to him. The poor Soul was overwhelmed with Sorrow, his Heart was ready to sink
and fail within him; and lest it should do so, he will heal him: Here is a
healing indeed, the healing of broken Bones and broken Hearts; the Lord Jesus
was anointed by the Father, for this very purpose, with the Oil of Joy and
Gladness, above his Fellows, that he might speak in due season, that he might
bind up the broken Spirits. The Lord Jesus delights to do this Will and Work
of his Father. O he loves to be doing with broken Hearts! And O that we had
Work for the Lord Jesus! This day he is among us now, to see if there be any
Heart in this condition, that he may heal us, it is his delight to do it. O how
does many a poor Soul come under an Ordinance with an heartless Mind, cold and
dead, and his Heart does burn within him, while the Lord by his Spirit has
Communion with him in those Ordinances. What refreshing does arise to a poor
weary Soul, when the Lord that creates the Fruits of the Lips, speaks Peace
to such troubled and weary Souls! He reviveth the Spirits which languish, and
are ready to go out. As the poor Birds that in the Winter are hard put to it;
some lie, you hardly know where, as if they were dead or dying; when the Sun
returns, how does it revive their little Spirits that were dead before! The
Night brings a heaviness and burden along with it to the Body, but in the
morning when the Sun arises, how does it enliven and enlighten! Oh so it is in
this case, many poor Souls can say by experience, when darkness has been long
on them, they have no light, no comfort, no refreshment, no breathing of the
Spirit to their Apprehensions in Ordinances on their Heart. O how have their
Hands hanged down, and their Knees feeble and knock one against another for
feebleness! And that which was within them in their own Apprehension ready to
die! But no sooner has the Lord Jesus, the Sun of Righteousness, looked on
them, Mr. Murcer.
but they have had their Ankle-bones stretched, The Joy of the Lord is their
strength, Neh. 8.10. The Saint indeed sometimes may have some Graces that may
not be in exercise; but there are other Graces set on work, so that a Soul
still lives a fruitful Life. While you are ignorant of Christ, there is no
going forward whatever; whatever Duties we do, it is all but an heap of
Ignorance; Legal Repentance is such Sorrow as is in Hell; but they that know
Christ, go forth of themselves to Christ for all.

First, The Soul goes forth from his own Righteousness, all becomes as filthy
Rags, he goes forth from himself; you will never thrive while under the old
Adam; no believing in Christ, no living on Christ, until the Soul goes out of
himself; before ever you can see Christ glorious, you must go out of your
selves, Cant. 3.11. Go forth, O ye Daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon
with the Crown wherewith his Mother crowned him in the day of his Espousals,
and in the day of the gladness of his Heart. It is a glorious crowning when we
are crowned with Christ's Crown; but a withered Crown, when we are crowned with
our own Doings and Duties. The Pharisees never thrived under any thing they
did, because they did not come forth of themselves. Go forth from your sins,
from your selves, out of your selves to Christ for your Life. A poor Man has
nothing at home, and he goes forth every day for something to live on: So a
poor Believer cries, Lord, I have nothing in my self, I will live upon Christ
for all; it is not enough that I have made a Profession, or can hear a Sermon,
or have got good Books; but, says the Soul that knows Christ, I will live
every day on Christ for new experience, for new supplies every day for the
manifestation of his Grace, of his Love, of his Peace: The Natural Man is bound
up in himself, and is fond of his Prison. As the Prodigal, he was resolved as
long as he could get Husks, he would live on them, rather than go to his
Fathers House for Bread. Many poor Creatures, while they can but speak to God
in Duty, (though they have many fears) they will live on that, rather than go
to Christ to be their Life. The Woman of Canaan was highly to be commended; for
when Christ told her, she was a Dog, she desired a Crumb. Why Woman, sure you
may fare better than to live on Crumbs? What, have you nothing at home? No, she
must live upon Christ, for she had not a Crumb of her own that would feed her
Soul, Mat. 15.25, 26, 27. She came and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me:
But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the Childrens Bread and to
cast it to Dogs: And she said, Truth Lord, yet the Dogs eat of the crumbs which
fall from their Master's Table. I shall never thrive till I am under Christ's
Table: A Crumb from Christ will satisfy me more than all my own Loaves: I am
sure not a word drops from him, but it is Life; not any Look from him, but it
is Life; not any Communication from him, but it is Life. So a Soul that lives
on Christ, he goes forth of himself. O pray how do you that have been so long
without the knowledge of Christ, that live upon your own Duties? A Believer
will tell you he lives better, and fares better now he is Christ's Beggar, and
lies under his Table for a Crumb, than he did when he lived on his own stock.
There is Liberty in this Life, If the Son make you free, ye are free indeed:
You are but Bondslaves by Nature; a Slave to the Devil, a Slave to the World,
a Slave to your selves, in Bondage to the Law; and I believe many Professors in
this day understand not these words, If the Son make you free, then are you
free indeed. Many will be ready to say, Make me free, I will pray my way to
Heaven, I will hear my way to Heaven: Ay, but do what you will, while you are
out of Christ you are in Bonds, it is only Christ can make you free, John 8.36.
If the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed. The Servant abides not in
the house for ever, but the Son abides ever, the Servant shall be cast forth.
When you have done all, you shall be shut out of Heaven, if you are not a Son.
The Servant abides not in the House for ever, but the Son abides for ever. If
you bring the best of your Performances at the Great Day before the Lord, and
hope to be accepted for your so doing; if you should say, Lord, receive me into
thy Kingdom of Glory, for I have prayed and fasted, and gave Alms, lived in
offensively to all, done hurt to none; as sure as you live now, the next word
would be, I know you not, depart from me: We must be sanctified by the
Righteousness of Faith, which is of God in Christ. O what a blessed thing is it
to be found in him! That was Paul's care and desire, Phil. 3.9. And be found in
him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith, and be
found in him: These words have an Emphasis in them, And be found in him. O take
heed every one of you that hear me this day, that you be found in Christ, not
having mine own righteousness, says the Apostle. What Paul? none of your
Sufferings, none of your Prayers, none of your Duties? no, none of them; these
are good in their places, but I would have none of them in point of
Justification, but be found in Christ; I desire the Righteousness which is of
God by Faith.

I tell you Friends, you can never grow, till you come to live this Life, till
the Sun of Righteousness rises on your Souls, and you go forth of your selves,
and live on Christ, and then you grow; why? Because then you are grafted into
another Stock, John 1.1, 2. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the
Husbandman; every Branch in me that bears not Fruit he takes away; and every
Branch that bears Fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more Fruit.
You must be united and grafted into another Stock before you can bring forth
Fruit. It may be some will say, What, have I lived so long, and have not taken
one step to Heaven? I tell you, until you know Christ, you have not taken one
step Heavenwards; many Duties performed, and yet the Man be where he was. Can a
blind Man see his way until his Eyes be opened? Can a dead Man walk till he is
raised from the Grave? Can a Man serve God, and please God, that is dead in
sin, under sin? Dead Godwards, Heavenwards? Dead to the Life of Grace? Blessed
be God for every moral Man, and I wish we had more of them in the World. But
this is Salvation-work we are about, there is nothing below the saving Knowledge
of Christ will give you entrance into Glory. Be under Ordinances as long as you
will, not one step do you take Heavenward till Christ comes to be your Life,
then the Soul prospers, then it has liberty. Take a Soul that does not know
this Life of Christ, the Soul is under burdens: I will appeal to your
Consciences, until you came to know Christ, was there not a burden on your
Soul? If you should have prayed all your Life, you could not get the Burden
removed: And can a Man thrive under a Burden, under Weights, under Pressures?
There is a Burden on the Conscience; the poor Papist, the poor Legalist, the
poor Formalist, when they have done all they can, come to speak with them, the
weight is still left behind. What if a Man lives twenty or thirty years in
Turkey, he is still in Captivity, notwithstanding all his toil and pains, if he
be not redeemed by paying a Ransom for him. There is great plenty of Means
among Professors, but still there is a complaining, I pray, and I hear, and I
have no comfort; but when Christ comes to rise with healing under his Wings,
when a Soul beholds his Iniquities laid on Christ, never to be charged on him
more, then he serves the Lord cheerfully, walks cheerfully with God in all the
Duties of his Heavenly Calling. While a Man bears his own Iniquity, he can
never walk cheerfully never serve God comfortably. Whatever a person does while
he lives on, any thing below Christ, he lives but discontentedly. What gives
the Soul rest and satisfaction must be as durable as the Soul is; Mr. Flavel's
Treatise of the Soul, p. 121.
for if we can possibly find in this World a condition and state of things most
agreeable in all other respects to our desires and wishes, yet if the Soul be
conscious to it self that it shall and must over-live and leave them all behind
it, it can never reach true contentment in the greatest afflulence and
confluence of them. Man being an immortal, is therefore a prospecting Creature,
and can never be satisfied with this, that its well with him at present, except
he can be satisfied that it shall be so for ever. Do what you will, there is a
discontentedness, if you have not Christ to take away the sin of your Duties.
When the Messengers of Job came one after another, what, will you never have
done? He might have said, No, not while all is gone; neither will the Law have
done cursing you, nor Conscience accusing you, while you are under the Guilt of
sin, there comes one Messenger after another bringing the bad News. Whatever
you do while you are Strangers to Christ, you have nothing but ill News: The
Justice of God meets you, the Law condemns you, the Devil takes all advantages
against you, because you have not Christ to be your Righteousness: But whatever
a Christian meets with of Crosses, Afflictions, Reproaches, if he say, Come
thou peaceably? the Answer will be, I come peaceably. When Christ is become
your Salvation, and has taken away your Iniquity, there is nothing comes to
you but what comes peaceably. Where is Daniel? In the Lion's Den: What, among
those devouring Creatures? But there is the Angel of the Lord with him to stop
their Mouths. The three Children in the Fiery Furnace; but there is the Lord
Jesus Christ with them. Where is Moses? on Mount Horeb; but there is the Angel
in the burning Bush with him. Where are the Children of Israel in the
Wilderness? In Affliction; but the Angel of his Presence is with them, Isa.
63.9. In all their Afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence
saved them; in his love and in his pity he redeemed him, and he bare them, and
carried them all the days of old. And where art thou, Soul, that Christ is thy
Life in Afflictions? All is for good, all is in love: There is not one
Providence comes, but it is for thy good. How can you love God when you live
discontentedly? How can you delight in God, while you fear God is angry with
you? While you think, tho I have been at Duty, I have not done enough: Here
will be an Opposition against Duty; a carnal Heart cannot hold out long; and
what you do will be but with discontent. What Profit have we, that we have
fasted and prayed, and thou regardest it not? Many Persons look after large
Expressions, and great Enlargements; when they miss of them, they are
discontented; as Jonah was, because his Goord withered. Here is a discontented
Professor, as well as an humble Christian: The humble Christian complains; why?
Because he cannot believe more, nor love God more, nor serve God better: But
the discontented Professor complains for want of Gifts and Enlargements. Shall
we bring thousands of Rams, or ten thousands of Rivers of Oil, or my first born
for my Transgressions; the Fruit of my Body for the sin of my Soul, Micah 6.7.
What a proud absurd Question is this? A carnal Heart will do any thing, rather
than come to Christ, and yet have no Contentment in what they do. But Soul,
when Christ becomes thy Life, and the glorious Divine Beams of his Grace shine
on your Soul, you will live a contented Life; all comes through Christ's hands;
all your Blessings and Mercies are bought with the Blood of Christ, all your
Duties sanctified by Christ: Surely this Soul must needs thrive. We say
discontentedness make an unthriving Person. Indeed it is impossible the Soul
that is not united to Christ should thrive, for he has altogether
Impossibilities before him: It is impossible for you to reach Heaven with your
Duties, to get your sins done away with all your Tears and Prayers, without you
are washed in the Blood of Christ that cleanses from all Sin, 1 John 17. If
you can fulfill the Law, you shall live by the Works of the Law, but it is an
impossible thing: If you can pray your way to Glory, you shall be saved; it is
impossible: But when a Man comes to Christ, he takes away all the
Impossibilities. To what purpose were a Man commanded to bring in a Sum of Money
of his own to save his Life, if he never had it, nor ever will have it to pay?
Man since the Fall has not, nor never can have a Power of his own to obey
God's Commands. Whatever God commands, Christ has done it for the Believer;
what ever Law commands, or Justice demands, it is all done for you by Christ.
Says the Apostle, As for the Works of the Law, if you can do them, you shall
live in them, Gal. 3.6. For as many as are of the works of the Law, are under
the Curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them. Gal. 3.22. But the
Scripture has concluded all under Sin, that the promise by Faith of Jesus
Christ might be given to them that believe. Verse 23. But before Faith came we
were kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith which should afterward be
revealed. But, says he, we were all concluded under sin, that the promise by
Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. Christ comes and
opens the Prison Doors, lets the Soul out from Unbelief, lets the Soul out from
under the Curse of the Law. How does Christ let the Soul from Prison? Christ
comes to the Heart, causes it to believe; the Soul now believes the Promises,
takes hold of Christ in the Promise; Christ comes to the Unbeliever, to the
Soul under the fear of God's Wrath and Curse, assisting it with a Divine
Promise, working Faith in the Heart. As suppose a Soul is under the burden of
his Sins, and should say, I am so great a Sinner, I fear I shall never obtain
Mercy; Christ comes with this Promise, It is a faithful Saying, and worthy of
all Acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners, of whom
I am chief. The believing Sinner lays hold on Christ in the Promises, and
finds Relief. The Soul lies burdened with the sense of God's Wrath for sin,
Christ comes in with that Promise, Come to me all ye that are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest. Says the Soul, Is it so indeed? What, rest in Christ for
me? What, will Christ give me rest? The Soul closes with the Promise, makes
Christ his Life and Rest to live upon. As supposing a Man should be in a Crowd
among Pikes, and Guns, and Halberts, among mischievous Men; he is afraid one
will wound him, another kill him; but comes a Friend of his, and a strong Man,
and carries him through all. So does Christ, when a poor Soul is under fear in
himself, he is afraid of every Frown, of every Trouble; Christ comes and
carries him through all, from the Curses of the Law, from the Wrath of God,
from sinking Fears, by applying himself a suitable Remedy, who died for their
sins, and rose again for their Justification. Now the Soul goes out and is at
Liberty. Until you know this Life, you are but poor Prisoners, Slaves and
Servants, and you do Duty but in Servitude, till you come to know Christ. The
Soul that knows Christ shall grow; many do not grow, and they think it is for
want of such a Grace, or for want of Gifts and Enlargements. But here is the
fault, It is in not living upon Christ, and making him your Life: As you know
the Flowers and Roots that are in the Earth peep up their Heads in Spring, as
if they were rejoicing to see a Jubilee. So does a Soul that has been tugging
under the Law, that has not known Christ. When Christ comes to shine on the
Soul, the Soul comes to look up and to breath in a new Air. Now Christ appears
to his Soul, he as it were hears a new Voice, Come away my Beloved, the Winter
is past, the singing of Birds is come, Cant. 2.10. My beloved spoke, and said
unto me, rise up my Love, my fair one, and come away. Verse. 11. For lo the
Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone, Verse. 12. The Flowers appear, that
is, when the glorious Spring comes the Sun shines warm and gloriously; and what
then? The Spring is come, the Flowers appear on the Earth, the time of the
singing of Birds is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land, the
Fig Tree puts forth her green Figs. When the Soul comes to live by Faith in
Christ, and grow up in Christ, it puts forth green Leaves. They are all
withered Duties that are performed out of Christ. Persons may make a great
Discourse of Religion, and be divided into Parties, and they will all pretend
to own Christ; whereas if they are examined, they deny Christ. But the Souls
that do live on Christ, they do bring forth Fruit. What is the Law but the
Winter to the Soul? Arise, says Christ, my Love, my fair one, and come away,
for lo the Winter is past, the Rain is over. A Man you know cannot travel in
Rain, because of the Floods. The Floods of God's Wrath are dried up when you
come to know Christ. The Rain is sweet and pleasant when it comes down
moderately; but when it comes down hastily and in abundant manner, it causes
Floods. Whatever a Soul does, until it knows God in Christ, there are Floods of
Wrath between God and them. But when a Soul comes to know Christ, all God's
Dealings are like moderate Rain. Rise up my Love and come away, for lo the
Winter is past, the Rain is over; no Rain to hinder you from God, no Rain to
keep you from the enjoyment of him: Mild all your Mercies are as Rain; ay, and
all your Afflictions too: Then you may go through all Trials cheerfully to
Heaven; you my meet God smiling on you in every Trouble and Affliction. After a
great Rain, how doubtingly does a Man go on his Journey? there are great Floods
of Water; I cannot go on with comfort, I fear deep Gulfs in the way; but when
the Floods are dried up he goes forward comfortably. So does a Soul when he
comes to live on Christ, he goes forward with Joy. We may say to a Christian,
you have great Afflictions, and great Temptations; but it is all sweet; there
is no fear of God's Anger, Christ has taken all that away. The more I pray,
says the Believer, the more I am encouraged to pray, the more I do act Faith,
the stronger I find my Faith; but till you come to believe in this Christ, to
make him your Life, you go on very feebly, very doubtingly; and the Soul many
times cries out, I faint, I fear I shall not come to Glory when I have done
all: And many under Convictions go back again, and cast off Religion. What is
the matter? Truly, I fear I shall not hold out, I shall not reach Heaven at
last. But when you come to know Christ, says the Soul, I know whatever I meet
with I shall be brought home safe to Glory. O then what miserable Doctrine is
that of falling from Grace! As if Christ would bring Believers half way to
Heaven, and then leave them. Has this glorious Redeemer undertaken this for
the Believer, and at last will he leave him? No, no; if you have made Christ
your Life, you shall certainly be brought home safe to Glory.

Seconldy, if it be so that a Believer's Life is wrapped up in Christ's Life,
then a Believer lives a happy Life.

I shall branch these forth into several particulars, to show wherein this
Happiness consists.

First, He that lives on Christ lives an happy Life, because it is a suitable
Life to an immortal Soul; while persons live upon any thing below Christ, it is
nothing but a little Dust, a little Earth. What is Gold, or Silver, or Honor,
or Life, or Liberty without Christ? Such is the nature of the Soul, that it is
not fitted to live upon gross, material and perishing things, as the Body does.
The Food of every Creature is agreeable to its Nature. One cannot subsist upon
that which another does, as we see among several sorts of Animals. What is food
to one, is none to another. In the same place there is found a Root which is
fit for Swine, a Stalk which is Food for Sheep, a Flower which feeds the Be,
and a Seed on which the Birds Live. The Sheep cannot live on the Root as the
Swine does, nor the Bird on the Flower as the Be does; but every one feeds
upon the Plants, which are agreeable to its nature; so it is here, our Bodies
being of an earthly material nature, can live upon things earthly and material,
as most agreeable to him that can relish and suk sweetness (...) these things:
But the Soul can find nothing therein suitable to its nature and appetite, Mr.
Flavel.
it must have spiritual Food, or perish.

Now to live Christ is the only suitable Life to an immortal Soul. A precious
Soul must have something precious to live upon; there is nothing can purchase
the redemption of the Soul: No one can redeem his Brothers Soul, that is too
precious, Psalm. 49.7, 8. None of them can by any means redeem his Brother, nor
give to God a ransom for him; for the redemption of the Soul is precious, and
it cease for ever. Every thing is below this immortal Soul; none can redeem
his Brothers Soul; no, not by his Riches, nor by his Prayers or Duties, without
Christ become his Life. The redemption of the Soul is too precious to be bought
by any Duties that can be done; Prayers, or Tears, or Fasting cannot buy a
Soul; therefore it must be a precious Christ that must be the Life of the Soul;
for he is suitable to an immortal Soul, as we speak concerning our natural
Constitutions. When Health is wanted, we say the person must have that which is
suitable; if they give him Food, we tell him he wants Physic; if he have
Physic, we tell him he wants Air; if he have this, we tell him he wants
Contentment; and so if they do not hit of that which is suitable, the Man is
lost: A Man may be killed with Food as well as for want of it; and likewise
with Physic as well as for want of it: So if we do not hit of that which is
suitable, it is the destruction of the Body. So if we do not hit of that which
is suitable to the Soul, it is the Death of the Soul. Suppose a great many
persons endeavored to make a Cure, but they miss of that which is suitable,
then there can be no Cure wrought. The poor Papists think to save their Souls
by trusting to their own Merits, and their feigned Purgatory; but alas! they
miss the mark. So some carnal Protestants, they will do many things, and think
to gain eternal Life. When they are convinced of sin, they will run to Duty;
they do well; but if they make that their Savior, there they miss the suitable
Good. Some they go to Reformation, they do well; but that will not do, if
rested on; or to trust to their own endeavors, or own purposes, they settle on
a false bottom, all miss the Mark of this glorious high Calling in Christ
Jesus. It were therefore too brutish and unreasonable, of a man that
understood the nature of his own Soul, Mr. Flavel's Treatise of the Soul, p. 59.
to cheer it up with the stores of earthly Provisions made for it, as he did,
Luke 12.20. I will say to my Soul, Soul, thou have laid up Goods for many
years, eat, drink, and be merry. Alas! the Soul can no more eat, drink, and be
merry with carnal things, than the Body with spiritual and immaterial things;
it cannot feed upon the Bread that perishes, it can relish no more in the best
and daintiest fare of an earthly growth, than in the White of an Egg; but bring
it to a reconciled God in Christ, to the Covenant of Grace, and the sweet
promises of the Gospel; set before it the Joys, Comforts and Earnests of the
Spirit; and if it be a sanctified, renewed Soul, it can make a rich Feast upon
these. These make a Feast of fat things full of marrow, as is expressed, Isa.
25.6. Spiritual things are proper for a spiritual and immaterial Soul. If a
Physician gives a thousand Medicines, and miss of the right, the Man dies.
Every Man walks in the Name of his God, but how many are ignorant of Christ,
who is the Life of the Soul? Now notwithstanding all Duties and Performances,
they want a precious Christ for a precious Soul. At first Man lived on his own
Works, but when he sinnned, the Soul had an immortal stroke, that can never be
healed by all his Works: It must be Christ that must redeem his immortal Soul.
When Adam had sinned, God said, Thou shall die, that is, in dying thou shall
die a double Death; while he lived, he lived a dying Life. To live Christ, it
is a suitable Life; a precious Christ for a precious Soul is suitable. For

First, The Redemption of the Soul is precious; they are not redeemed with
corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the precious Blood of Christ,
1 Pet. 1.18, 19. and Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his Blood,
the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his Grace. Now this
Redemption becomes not the Soul, till a Soul lives on Christ; but this
Redemption is suitable to a Soul under the wrath of God, under sin, and under
Guilt.

Secondly, Pardoning Grace is very precious: And it is in Christ alone that the
Soul can be pardoned. Pardon is a precious Jewel to an immortal Soul. It is
only living by Christ, laying hold on Christ, that this pardoning Grace is
conveyed to the Soul. Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven him,
whose iniquity is covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute
sin, Romans 8.32. Psalm. 1.2. An immortal Soul is precious in its being; yet for
want of a pardon is miserable to all Eternity, because of its precious
Excellency and Nature, that wants the highest perfection to live upon him
alone; and not having him to be their Life, their Death is more miserable than
any Creature; because other Creatures, when they die, there is an end of their
Misery. If a Man be condemned to die, that is a Malefactor, if under the sense
of his miserable end, looks upon himself better never to have been born, better
never to have lived on Earth, than to make such an end. A Soul out of Christ is
the most miserable Creature that can be; for the excellency of the immortal
Soul is cast down to the greatest misery, because it wants that, which alone is
the Soul's cure and happiness.

Thirdly, Christ is suitable to the Soul, in that there is a righteousness
suitable to cover the Soul. All the Gold and Silver, and Jewels in the World,
will not be of any account to an immortal Soul, when it stands naked before
God. But Christ's Righteousness is a precious Garment, that clothes the Soul
that is naked in sin. Buy of me white raiment, thou art poor miserable and
naked; but I counsel you to buy of me Gold tried in the Fire, that thou may
be rich; and white Raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of
thy nakedness may not appear. Here is a clothing for the Soul, or else it will
remain naked for ever, and have nothing to keep off the Wrath of God. When a
Soul is convinced and awakened, and affected with the Love of Christ, when the
Beams of his Divine Love and Grace break into the Soul embracing Christ, what a
quick sight and sense has a Soul of Divine Comforts and Blessings? And on the
other hand, what a quick sight and sense has a Soul of the Wrath of God, that
is awakened under the sense of its Guilt and Misery. Many have stifled their
Conviction, being swallowed up in Sensuality, and are apt to forget the
awakenings of Conscience by reason of the hardness of their Hearts, and
blindness of their Minds; but when God comes to awaken them thoroughly, that ye
shall not sleep again, then the Soul has a deep sense of the Wrath of God. If
we could have spoken with Judas before he hanged himself, he would have told
you, he had Hell begun here. If you could have spoke with Cain, he would tell
you, he found the Terrors of Hell while here on Earth. Were we to speak to
despairing Souls yet out of Hell, they will tell you their Souls are naked to
Divine Vengeance; apply to them what Comforts you will, there is nothing will
do them good, without an Application of Christ to their Souls; and as they are
awakened here, so they will feel another Day what they now fear, Psalm, 90.11.
What is suitable to the Soul but Christ? Have not many gone with all their
Gifts, and Parts, and Duties to Hell? What will serve this Immortal Soul but
the Robes of Christ's Righteousness? That alone will save from the Wrath of
God, and will alone bring the Soul in the favor and love of God: Therefore to
know and behold Christ, is the only suitable good for an Immortal Soul. We say,
when we see a Man raised from sickness or Death, by the use of means, How happy
it was he was directed to that means or Physician. Ah! but thrice happy, yea, a
thousand times happy, yea, everlastingly happy art thou, if thou art directed
to know Christ, for his is the only Righteousness that can cloth you to stand
in God's Presence, and be saved from the Wrath to come. Then further, as there
is in Christ's precious Pardon and precious Righteousness to cover the Soul: So
there is precious Peace suitable. When a Man has not Peace with God, he is a
miserable wretched Man. For a Man to be followed up and down wherever he goes
with the Wrath of a sin-revenging God, that he cannot come to God; But
wherever he goes he is afraid Divine Vengeance will seize him. What a dreadful
state is it!

Fifthly, To have Christ our Life is suitable, because Christ lives for ever,
and your Soul lives for ever, and you must have something to uphold them for
ever. All the Saints in Heaven, though they live for ever; and all the Angels,
though they live for ever, they cannot help you, if you have not Christ for
yours. If Christ, who is at God's right Hand, is not your Life, where will your
immortal Souls sink! How happy is it to be provided for an Immortal Life! Thy
Throne, O God, is for ever and ever: The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right
Scepter, Psalm. 45.6. The Soul lives for ever, and therefore a short good, Mr.
Murcot on the Parable of the ten Virgins.
tho never so full, is not commensurate to it. There must be certitudo aeternae
fruitionis. There must be a never-dying Life, and that must be a Life wrapped up
in Christ. Your Life is hid with Christ in God; e're long you will all go out
of this World, and must appear before God; and if you have not Christ for your
Life, what will you do? What a Folly is it to make any thing your Hope below
Christ; be it Riches, or Honors, or Duties? alas! these will all fail you.
Says John the Baptist, I live a decreasing Life. He must increase, but I must
decrease, John 3.20. but he is yesterday and to day the same for ever; but all
other things will wither and die. Therefore how good is it to live in Christ!
Take a Soul naked out of the Body, and show it all the Riches, and Honors, and
Blessings of the World; Alas! they can do it no good. Says the Man, my Soul
that lives for ever, that never dies. It is immortal Life that my Soul must be
bound up in; so that I say, to live Christ is a suitable Life, in that it is
suitable to a Soul that lives for ever. We see Persons are careful that they
may lay up something to help them when they cannot work, and are careful to lay
up something for their Children; and alas! will you provide for a mortal Life,
for a poor dying Body, and will you not provide for your immortal, ever-living,
neverdying Souls? O lay hold on Christ now, that you may live for ever! E're
long you must be gone from hence, and then no more praying, nor hearing. And
you that rest on Duties, e're long you can rest no more on them; and you that
are careless and formal in Duties, or negligent of them, e're long you will
have no more Opportunities: And you that are careless of getting Christ, e're
long you will have no more Offers of Christ. There are two sorts of Fools I
have minded, mentioned in the Holy Scriptures. First, The Fool that laid up
much on Earth, but did not live to spend it. And the next, The Fool that laid
up so little, and lived beyond it. In Luke 12.29. we have an account of the
Fool that laid up a great deal on Earth; he thought he had a long time to live;
says he, Soul, take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years. This
was a Fool indeed, for he had not provided for, nor thought what would become
of his Immortal Soul. Thou Fool, have thou not thought of thy immortal Soul? Of
thy eternal state? Thou have laid up for thy Body for a long time, but this
night shall thy Soul be required of thee, thou shall live no longer here. What,
take thought for Barns, for Riches, and no thought for an immortal Soul! No
thoughts of a Christ to save thee to all Eternity? Many will take great thought
about the things of this World, but no thought for a Christ, for their immortal
Souls. You have enough laid up for many years as you think, but it may be not
for many moments. If you have not a Christ you are not safe for one moment. And
what will you do if the Lord say to thee, this night shall thy Soul be required
of thee? O Fool, have thou not something laid up for time to come, when thou
have not an hour to live? Have thou had thoughts for the things of this Life,
when thou have not spent one thought for the things of another Life? This mad
Fool, he laid up Goods for longer than he had time to enjoy them. Considered
for a great while to come, and yet laid not up any thing for his Immortal Soul,
that was to live for ever, this night shall thy Soul be required of thee; thou
shall have no more time in this World, and have thou not laid up for Eternity?
O Man or Woman, what a Fool art thou, that do not look after Christ! That
do not seek in good earnest for thy immortal Soul to be happy to all
Eternity! The second Fools that are mentioned, are, They that outlived their
Estate, they had not enough to keep them. I warrant, you will say, they wanted
care in this World; and you shall hear many worldly Men say, That will not I
do, I will take care to lay up something for a spending time; but it is not
worldly Riches we are concerned about, but higher matters, it is Spiritual
things. The Foolish Virgins outlived their Estates, they survived them, they
had not enough to maintain them; my meaning is, they wanted saving Grace, they
took much pains in outward Truths, yet wanted Grace to carry them safe to
Glory. You may live on Duties and Performances, and the outside of Religion;
and I tell you your Immortal Souls will outlive your Duties, and be undone for
not having a Christ. Your Souls will not outlive all external Duties and
Ordinances, and if you have not lived on Christ, you are undone. The foolish
Virgins thought they had done very well, and had got enough to keep them to all
Eternity; they set out with the wise, and kept along with them; but here was
the difference, the one had Christ in them, and the other was without him; the
one had Christ in their Hearts, and the other had only the Notions of Christ in
their Heads; the one lived on Christ in their Duties, and the other lived on
their Duties without Christ; the wise Virgins Lamps kept burning, because they
had Oil of Grace, and Christ was in them, the hope of Glory; but the foolish
Virgins they wanted Oil in their Lamps; yet what confidence had they that their
Condition was good, which did appear by their Coufidence to the very last. Mat.
25.10. Afterward came also the other Virgins, and said, Lord, Lord, open to us;
sure we have some part in thee, sure we have some Treasure here: No, says
Christ, you have none at all, I know you not. They bgged Oil of the wise, Giv
us of your Oil, for our Lamps are gone out: They outlived all their Duties and
Gifts, and were miserably poor for want of Grace. My Friends, be you never so
outwardly religious, if you have not Christ in you, you will out ^^e all your
Duties and Righteousness, Pr^yers and Tears, and all Duties will (...) over;
and if you have not Christ to (...) your Righteousness, you will be very poor
at last: None so poor as those who lie down in the Grave without a Christ. Give
us of your Oil, for our Lamps are gone out: We have no Oil. What have you been
doing all this while? What, so long a praying People? So long Hearers? So long
Professors, and have you not a Christ for your Souls? They thought they had Oil
enough in their Lamps, but were miserably mistaken. Many think certainly if
they pray and hear, they shall go to Heaven; if they come to the Lord's Supper,
and are baptized, and have other Ordinances, they shall go to Heaven. Why
Friends, the foolish Virgins were all this, yea, and more than this; for many
Persons may have scandalous Lives outwardly, but these were called Virgins;
they walked so uprightly, none could charge them with Hypocrisy; none could
say, black was their Eye, till at last they slept when the others slumbred. The
foolish set their faces Heavenward, as well as the wise; only the Hypocrites
they have their Faces one way, and row another, as Watermen do. But what was
the difference? The wise Virgins made Christ their Life, and the foolish lived
upon their own Duties without Christ. Many think themselves very well, because
they do perform Duties, and attend on Ordinances, and can discourse of Christ?
But do you know what it is to have Christ your Life? When the foolish Virgins
found Christ was come, they cried, Alas! we are undone; we have lived on our
own stock, and we want a Life beyond all that we have lived: And the foolish
said to the wise, give us of your Oil: Have you no Oil to spare us? No, none:
All the Angels in Heaven, nor Saints in Heaven cannot help a poor sinner, that
has not made Christ his Life. He that has most of Christ cannot part with any
of Christ; he that has most Grace cannot part with any when he comes to die.
O, says the graceless Soul when he comes to die, give me of your Oil, have not
you some to spare? The ungodly Husband will wish himself in the condition of
the Godly Wife, the Ungodly Parent of their Godly Child, the Ungodly Children
in the condition of the godly Parent. If the ungodly Child should cry to the
Godly Parent, Oh for some of your Grace! Oh spare me some of your Grace! The
Answer will be, No, no, we have little enough for our selves; would we had more
Grace, pray go and buy for your selves: But alas! it is too late, we trifled
with Christ and with Grace: I could go home after I heard a Sermon and be
content, and thought it was well enough, though I never minded it any more: I
was told, if I had not Christ I was undone: It was preached to me, if I had not
Christ's Righteousness, I should be found naked; but I did not mind it, nor
regard it; but now it is too late. I indeed performed some Duties, because I
was afraid of Hell, and because Conscience would not let me alone. I kept to
hearing and praying, but to make Christ my Life, that I was ignorant of.
Whatever was preached to me of him, to make him my Life; whatever was preached
to me of him to make sure of him for my own, I thought I could spare him well
enough, I thought I could live on my own Duties. Alas! you may be full of
Duties, and yet have an Heart empty of Christ: You may keep a Sabbath
outwardly, and yet have no enjoyment of God inwardly; you may perform Duty, but
if you have not Christ your Life, you will survive all you have, you will live
to spend all.

An Hypocrite may go very far, his Profession may carry him very far, and yet
fall short at last. God does not pluck away the Vizard at first, but lets
them proceed. The foolish Virgins took their Lamps, and went boldly out to meet
Christ along with the Wise. More then will be persuaded too, that will hardly
now stir a Foot for Christ; they continued so, until the Bridegroom tarried so
long beyond their expectation, that they fell asleep.

What a dreadful thing is it for Professors to have nothing but what they may
live to spend, and be undone when they come to die? Your Immortal Souls will
survive all your Prayers, and all your Sabbaths; and if Christ is not your
Life, you are undone for ever. This was the case of those fooolish Virgins: The
Fool in the Gospel provides for many years to come, and lives but a short time.
And the other, they pretended to get something for their Souls, and lived to
spend all. You may be undone for living on your Profession, as well as those
who are Enemies to it. Many will say, they have not time to look after the
things of another World; no time to mind Christ, nor seriously to think of
their latter end. Alas! it is not being on your Knees in a morning, and
remember the Lord no more all the Day; then to go hurrying on in the World,
never minding Christ nor your precious Souls. On the other hand, there are
foolish Professors, that make their own Duties their Righteousness, and so
think they have no need of Christ. The one lays up more for himself than he
lives to spend. The other is so foolish, he lays up so little, (not having
Christ) that he spends all, and so is miserable; but let us have a care we are
not those Fools. You that are Professors, have a care you do not die poor, that
you do not live upon your Duties, and not get Christ for your Souls to live
upon. The foolish said to the wise, Give us of your Oil: But the wise answered
and said, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you; but go rather to
them that sell, and buy for your selves. Ah! how fain would every one of you
have a Christ when you come to die! How fain would every one of you have Grace
when you come to die! You will go home, it may be, this day, and a few days
more, and set quietly at your Tables without Christ; but when you come to die,
you will cry out, O that I had a Christ! It is hard venturing your Immortal
Souls on this Line of time, thinking it will reach out longer; and you do not
know how soon this thread of your Life may be cut asunder; and when you come to
die, and are without Christ, you will wish, O that I had closed with Christ
when I was persuaded to do it. You are always ready that know Christ, but never
ready, whatever you do, without Christ; if you have performed ten thousand
Duties, and keep a thousand Fasts, without Christ, you are undone. And when
they came, the door was shut; the Door of the Kingdom, the Door of Grace, the
Door of Mercy, the Door of Happiness, of Comfort. What, the Door shut? What,
the Door of Heaven shut against me! O where shall I go? Those persons that will
not in time come to Christ for Grace, they will knock when it is too late for
entrance into glory.
What shall I do? I am shut out; without the Kingdom, without God, without
Christ, in everlasting Burnings. Afterward came also the other Virgins,
saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. Thus ready will they be to call Christ Lord,
that never took him to be their Husband. Lord, Lord, open to us, we are come,
we are come, we knock now. O how earnestly do they knock now! You that coldly
desire Christ now, that indifferently seek after Christ now, you will at last
knock and call earnestly when it is too late.

There are three dreadful Outcries in this World, but there will be three
dreadfuller Cries which a Person that dies without Christ will send forth in
the other World.

The first dreadful Cry in this World is, a Malefactor that is sensible of his
Misery when he is condemned. What an Outcry, when it is said, Thou must die? O
how does he cry out for mercy!

The second dreadful Outcry is, When a Ship suffers Shipwreck, and the Mariners
or Passengers are sinking into the Sea, then what a dreadful Outcry is there
with them, that before were cursing and swearing!

The third dreadful Outcry is, When Soldiers or Rebels besiege a City, and put
Men, Women and Children to the Sword; but a Person that lives and dies without
Christ, there are three dreadfuller Cries.

First, A Soul that is awakened departing this Life, takes a view of his
miserable state in the other World, when Conscience drags him before God's
Tribunal, and there is condemned by the Law of God; the Soul cries out, Lord,
must I be shut up under thy eternal Wrath for ever? There he sees the Judge
condemning him, the Law condemning him, Conscience condemning him; he can look
no way but he is amazed; above him a sin-revenging God, below him everlasting
Flames, O what a dreadful Outcry will a condemned Soul make! You may know by
these foolish Virgins, Lord, Lord, open to us, what a dreadful Outcry will
there be for a condemned sinner to appear before a sin-revenging God. You are
all condemned in Adam, and if you have not a Christ you will be condemned to
all Eternity; when the last Moment comes, what an Outcry will there be, Lord,
Lord, must I to Hell for ever! Must I be damned for ever! Yea, Soul, for thou
have no part nor portion in Christ.

Secondly, As Seamen or Mariners when they suffer Shipwreck, and are sinking,
make a dreadful Cry; so a Soul that is out of the Body, that has not Christ;
all your Duties, and Profession, and Comforts, all your Righteousness, and your
Souls sinking together. O what a dreadful Cry will there be! my hope is
perished, my Righteousness is perished, my Duties abhorred. Woe is me, I am
undone for ever!

Thirdly, What a dreadful Outcry is there, when a City is besieged and
plundered, and all the Men, Women and Children put to Fire and Sword! So when
Christless Persons must appear before God's Tribunal, the Sword of Divine
Justice meets the Soul. The Angel that stood at the Gate of Paradise had a
flaming Sword in his Hand; the Justice of God, that flaming Sword, will meet
you at Heaven Gate: Soul, no entrance here, you must for ever lie in the Prison
of Hell, till your Debts are paid; you have no Surety, you have no Christ, you
have no Grace; then you must for ever depart into everlasting Burnings, now too
late, when Justice has took hold of them; Legions of Devils halling them down
to the bottomless Pit: They cry, Lord, Lord, open to us, when their Lamps are
gone out. Now Lord we see our Sparks dying before they reach Heaven. O pardon
this our Hypocrisy! And O give of thy Oil! Thou art the Olive Tree, pour out
thy Oil into our Vessels. Had they with the wise Virgins Oil in their Lamps,
saving Grace in their Hearts, they had been ready, and entered with Christ: No,
but they would not come to Christ; and see now the Gate was shut upon them; now
they cry, Lord open to us; they would not come to him for a Wedding Garment,
but they would be beholden to him to let them enter into the Feast without one;
Mr. Murcot.
tho Heaven would have held them but a little while, if they had entered in that
condition.

Next, This Life is a suitable Life, because it is a glorious Life. Alas! you
live a miserable Life till you know Christ: A Professor without Christ is a
poor empty Person. You read of a new Heaven and a new Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness.

What was the Earth? A dark Chaos before the glorious Sun, that glorious Light,
came. What is a poor Soul in this poor House of Clay, till you come to know
Jesus Christ, till you come to live Christ? We have a dark Chaos, but when you
come to live Christ, this is a new Heaven in the Soul, and a new Earth; every
part of the Soul, every Member of the Body is put into a new Frame. O says the
Soul, let me not act but for Christ, let me not walk but with Christ, let me
not be employed but for Christ, let me not live but to Christ; it may be you
will give us the hearing of a Sermon on the Lords Day, but what Mould are you
cast in all the Week? Alas! what Folly and Madness is it for to be seeking,
looking, waiting and watching for what is not, for what will not do you good?
Our Eye is fixed, our Thoughts are fixed, our Hands are employed, but is it for
Christ? Can you say you desire nothing in comparison of Christ? Or are your
Thoughts swallowed up in the World? Where you have had one for Christ, it may
be you have had many thousands for the World. To be a Professor, and not live
on Christ, it is as if a dead Man should be dressed with the Clothes of a
living Man, and should have Meat dish'd out and set before him to eat, who yet
remains Dead, and the Meat untasted.

Persons may make external Profession, and have Ordinances administered to them,
but if you do not know Christ, and live Christ, what Profit will you have in
all? What is the Chaff to the Wheat? Most of the Sermons you hear you may have
the Notions of Religion; but if Christ is not made manifest to your Souls, you
have but the Shell without the Kernel, the Chaff without the Wheat. He that
knows Christ, he that lives Christ, is above that Soul, let him live never so
noble a Life, that knows not Christ. Therefore the Prophet says, That a wise
Child is better than an old and foolish King, Eccles. 4.13.

A wise Christian (though he is never so little in Grace and Knowledge) that
knows Christ, is better than the greatest Person in knowledge that does not know
Christ: Better is the poorest, lowest Christian, than the greatest Noble in the
Land that does not know Christ.

Now I shall show in some particulars the Glory of this Life. To live Christ
first. If you come to live Christ, it is a glorious Life, for there is the
beginning of Glory: Whatever you do, you never come to have Glory begun, till
you come to live on Christ by Faith, Phil. 1.6. He that has begun the good
Work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ; he that justifies,
he glorifies. We are called to eternal Glory by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 5.10. If
we have not Christ ours; eternal Life will never be ours, Col. 1.27. Christ in
you the hope of Glory. All the Pearls of a Christians Crown of Glory are the
purchase of Christ's Blood. As soon as a Soul begins to know Christ, he begins
an Heaven on Earth. Let Earth and Hell do what they will, Glory is begun; the
World, and Devil, and Temptations may toss you, but they are come too late to
destroy you, there is immortal Life and Glory begun The immortal Seed is sowed
in the Soul; Grace in the Soul is Glory in the Believer: Christ dwelling in the
Soul, is the beginning of Glory; you never come to know the Life of Glory, till
you know Christ; and when you come to live on Christ, you are in the way to
Glory, and shall as sure come there, as the Saints and Angels now in Glory.
This is the comfort and stay of a Believer, when he comes to know Christ, he is
certainly linked to eternal Glory.

Secondly, To live Christ is a glorious Life; for you are changed from Glory to
Glory into the same Image; for there is a glorious Union between Christ and a
Believer; there is the natural Faculties, there is the same rational Soul: But
the Soul has new Qualities, being changed by Christ dwelling in the Soul; they
are changed in their Understandings, their Affections, their Wills. It may be
compared to Iron put into the Fire; while Iron remains red hot, and the Fire is
in it, if you beat the Iron to pieces, you cannot separate it from the Fire;
knock but the least piece of Iron, Fire is in every piece, yet the Iron is not
the Fire, nor the Fire the Iron; yet the Iron is in the likeness of Fire: So
the Soul is not so changed into the Image of Christ, as not to retain its own
natural Faculties, but by reason of Christ dwelling in it, is changed in its
Qualities from Evil to good So there is the Glory of Christ appearing in all
the Actions of a Christian, though they have many Infirmities, yet all that they
principally design, is the Glory of God. When Fire is in the Iron, you cannot
separate it; you cannot say, that Iron is without Fire, nor Fire without Iron:
So in this Life you may see a Saint has many Imperfections, but yet Christ is
in him, swaying his Heart and Life with the Scepter of his Righteousness:
Though there are the same Faculties, yet the Qualities are all made new: So
though there is corruption in Prayer, and weakness in Faith, and weakness in
Love; yet there is true Love, and true Faith and Repentance, there is something
seen of Christ in all his Infirmities, 2 Cor. 6.18. We are changed from Glory
to Glory, (...), by the Lord, the Spirit, or the Spirit of the Lord. Dr. Owen
on the Spirit.
in every Faculty of the Soul. What a glorious change to be changed into the
Image of Christ! The Beams of the Sun have several effects, some things it
withers, some things it revives. The Gospel of Christ and the goodness of God,
that melt the Heart of a Saint, hardens the Heart of an impenitent Sinner; but
the Soul that has Union with Christ, that Christ is his Life, the Love of
Christ conforms the Soul to Christ. There is the meekness of Christ, though not
in Perfection; there is the Love of Christ, the Humility of Christ, though not
in perfection, the self-denial of Christ; there is the Patience of Christ,
though not in perfection, but through Christ you are pardoned. The Soul that is
changed into the Glory of Christ, has natural corruption, natural
backwardness; but Christ being their perfect Head and spotless Righteousness,
they are pure and lovely in God's Eye. Jesus Christ, God Man, has all the
glorious Idea's of God's Image and Grace shining in him, as in a Glass, he
reflects the same in and by the Glass of the Gospel in the Hearts of Believers,
who by Faith contemplating, are by the efficacious working of the Spirit of
Grace transformed into the same glorious Image, even from Glory to Glory, from
one degree of glorious Grace unto another. Thus the believing Soul by Faith
contemplating the Wisdom, Meekness, Patience, Kindness, Justice, etc. of God
shining in Christ, is by the effectual concurrence of the Spirit of Christ
transformed into a wise, meek, patient, kind and just Spirit. Faith, by
contemplating the Glory of God in Christ brings into the Soul Spiritual Ideas
of the same glorious Image, a Divine Light and Life bearing some resemblance to
the Life of God, or Divine Nature; so that Christ the essential Glass of God,
has not only a manifestative, Mr. Gale's Treatise of the Saints Amity with
Christ.
but also transformative, changing Glory shining in them.

Beloved, have you not all immortal Souls? What would you have your Souls be
like when you come to die? Would you have them like the Devil? Would you have
the Pride and Envy of Hell, the Covetousness of Hell? Or would you have the
Image of Christ stamped on you, that you may live Christ, and lead an humble
Life, a meek Life, a self-denying Life, an holy Godly Life? What likeness would
you have your Souls appear in out of your Body? Whose Image and Stamp would you
have them bear? Most Men live to themselves, and make provision for the Flesh,
to fulfill the Lusts thereof: And some live to be revenged of others to get the
World of their side. The Lusts Persons seek to fulfill are innumerable to speak;
but how would you have your Souls appear? What condition would you have them
in? Would you have them in Christ? O then beg Christ may be your Life! Beg you
may be changed from Glory to Glory, into his Image; every day of a Believers
Life he is going from Glory to Glory.

Poor, wretched, ignorant Professors! What do you think will become of you e're
long, if Christ is not your Life? Eternal Death will be your Portion. You see
many Imperfections in a Believer, yet he is perfect in Christ, being changed
into the Image and Glory of Christ. A Believer, all his works are works of
Grace, all his walking, walks of Grace; all his Actions, Actions of Grace; and
in all that he does, there is a Glory on it, through Christ his glorious Lord.
They that live on external Duties, they will give you the hearing of a Sermon,
and away; they seek not to know Christ, but they will be found as dreadfully
miserable as the Turk or Heathen that never heard of Christ; for
notwithstanding their Profession, they are swallowed up in the World. Take a
covetous Man, his Heart is on this World. Take a gluttonous Man, his Heart is
set to make his Belly his God. Take a Man that lives on Christ, his Heart is
knit there, he cleaves to the Lord with full purpose of Heart.

Thirdly, It is a glorious Life, because you have the hope of Glory: You never
will have the hope of Glory, till you have Christ living in you, Christ in you
the hope of Glory, 1 Timothy 1.1. If a person be without Christ, he is without all
true hope of Salvation; there is neither hope of the Glory of God, nor
rejoicing in the Hope, while a person is without Christ. What, have you hope of
Glory? But have you a good Hope? If you come to live Christ, then you have a
good hope; if you have Christ in you, then as sure as Christ is in you, you
shall come to Glory. Who is in you? Who lives in you? We know our next
Neighbor, we know our familiar Friend or Acquaintance. Who do you converse
with? Who is your near Neighbor? Christ or the World, Christ or vain Thoughts,
Christ or Carnality? Is Christ in you? If Christ is in you, then he reigns in
you, and you converse most with him. What is your daily Food, your Livelihood?
Mistake me not, I would not have you neglect your daily Calling, I hope you
understand me better: But what do you make the chief of your Aims and Ends?
What takes up your Heart most? Does the Love of Christ, the Mercy of Christ,
the Peace of Christ affect you most? If so, I tell you, you live a glorious
Life. I warrant you think that they that conversed with Christ on Earth were
happy; I tell you, there were thousands saw Christ's Face on Earth, that shall
never see his Face in Glory. It may be you think if you come and hear a Sermon,
you have conversed enough with Christ for all the Week, though you never had
one precious thought of Christ; but to have Christ your Life, you have a
Glorious Life. Soul, is thy Heart wrapped up in Christ? What would you desire, if
you were to have your Wishes granted? Is it Christ? More of Christ? To live
more to Christ? To enjoy more of Christ? If it is so, you live a glorious Life;
there is more Glory in one Believer, than in all Creatures on Earth beside.
When Chrysostom was put to silence, said some, Better the whole World were left
in darkness, than such a glorious Light should be put out. Now if the preaching
of Christ be so glorious, what is the Life of Christ in the Believer?

Fourthly, To live Christ is a glorious Life, for there comes a glorious Train
with Christ, all the Graces of the Spirit

Believers are God's Habitations, Ephesians. 2.22. You are the Terrestrial wherein
the King of Glory keeps his Abode, till you be removed to abide with him in
Heaven. If we did but consider, and our Eyes were opened to see what a Train of
Hellish Lusts dwell in us before Christ is in us, we should be amazed; the
Apostle tells you of many of them: While you are fleshly, and not know Christ,
I tell you, whatever you are in Profession, you are what the Apostle speaks,
Gal. 5.9. Now the works of the Blesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witcheraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Heresies, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like; as if he should say, I will not foul my
mouth with what dwells in a carnal Heart. May be you may say, Many that have no
Grace abhor many of these things. I answer, It may be the Devil may not lead
Persons into all at once; but the Works of the Flesh are manifest in
unconverted Persons. What Man is there that knows not Christ, but loves
something below Christ, and that is Idolatry, though you do not worship a
strange God. Do you love a strange God? Is God first and last? Highest and
best? Most prized and loved? Is all well when Christ is enjoyed? Do you not
complain more for other things than for Christ? Hatred is a very reigning sin;
Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, many sins dwell in the Heart, all sin is
rooted in corrupt Nature; but what is meet for Sale he brings forth, like a
Shopkeeper, he brings forth Goods that are fit for Sale, he has all sorts,
but he does not sell all sorts at once. So the sinner has all sin in him to be
brought forth; Satan tempts him sometimes to one sin, sometimes to another.
When the Devil comes to buy, the Sinner is furnished with all sorts of sins for
him, and sells what the Devil pleases to buy. But when Christ comes, what Train
does he bring with him? He brings a glorious Train, Verse 22. But the fruit of
the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Longsuffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance; against such there is no Law; the Law has nothing to say
against them, for Christ is formed upon their Heart. O what a glorious Train
does Christ bring! When Christ is your Life, you come to Christ, and walk with
Christ, what a glorious Train of Graces possess the Soul! Now the angry Man,
the wrathful Person is a meek, an humble Person; the worldly Man is come to
love Christ, and God, and the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Saints, and Holiness;
he is come to have the Fruit of the Spirit. O what a glorious Life is it to
live Christ! It sets Christ on the Throne, and unthrones Ungodliness, and at
the last Day Christ will set you on his Throne, and crown you with Glory.
Christ and the Believer are all one, he dwells in you, and you live on him.
Alas! to be a Professor, and walk at random, to walk in the Suburbs of Hell,
while we Profess to be Citizens of Heaven. I profess it is a shame some
Professors should profess Religion: Blessed be God that many are waiting on
God; but till you know Christ, there is a black Train in the Soul. The Hearts
of many swell, if they know but a little of the Letter, if they can but speak
or discourse; but when Christ comes, there is a new frame of Heart; not new in
Faculties, but in Qualities. O what a glorious Life it is to live Christ I This
Life is not to be paralleled. If I had the Tongue of an Angel, I could not set
forth the Life of a Soul that lives on lives Christ; it is so far beyond the
Life of the carnal Professor, that makes me repeat it over and over: There is
so much difference between this Life and the Life of carnal Professors, that
they do not deserve to be once named in the day the Believer that lives on
Christ is spoke of. What, for Christ to have Union with the Believer? For the
Believer to have Union with Christ? It is such a Mystery, that the Angels
desire to look into the Mystery of it. Those that live not this Life, tho they
make a Profession, they are cold Professors, ignorant Professors, and indeed
nothing but Professors.

Fifthly, It is a glorious Life, because it is the richest Life you can live:
You never live richly till you live holy; and you never live holy, till you
come to live on Christ. Of his fullness have we all received Grace for Grace.
There is not only in Christ a fullness of Abundance, but also fullness of
Redundance; there is an everflowing fullness in Christ, as a Fountain overflows,
and yet remains full, Grace for Grace, or Grace upon Grace, abundance of Grace,
and the increases of Grace one by another; there is all good in Christ that
poor Sinners want. Omne bonum in summo bono, Mr. Brook's Unsearchable Riches of
Christ.
all good is in the chiefest good.

You may see Corn that is scattered on a thatched House spring up, but it soon
withers; it is not like Corn sown in its natural Soil. You may see some new
Professors under some Convictioons, how hot and zealous they are, but it soon
withers, there being no root: But when a Soul is planted in Christ, it is got
in good ground, it is not thorny ground, or stony ground. Many Persons are very
unhappy; they are very diligent to do something to attain Happiness, yet miss
of Happiness at last. Many Professors are very unhappy, they make a great noise
of Religion, yet never come to know Christ, so never thrive in Religion. You
never thrive, nor lead a rich Life, till you know Christ; all Treasures of
Wisdom dwell in him that is the true Wisdom; and the Lord humble this
Generation, because they exalt Christ no more, live Christ no more: It may be
you pray, and hear, and perform Duty; but alas! all this is nothing till we
come to know Christ. The Lord humble us, I say, you, and me, and all of us, for
we are all Fools till we know Christ. I do not condemn Arts and Sciences, but
yet I say it is all nothing to the knowledge of Christ, in whom are hid all the
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2.3. Soul, would you know God? It must
be in Christ: Would you be wise? It must be in Christ: Would you have true
Learning? It must be in Jesus Christ: Would you know the Glorious, the Mystery
of the Gospel, it must be in Christ: What is all Learning, all Knowledge, all
Understanding? (though all this is good in its place.) If you can tell the Name
of God in all Tongues, what does this signify? If you do not know God in
Christ, you are but a poor Creature, the treasure of all Wisdom is in Christ,
and Christ will lead you to the Father the Fountain of all Wisdom; this is a
rich Life to live Christ.

First, You are enriched with the Presence of God. When you know Christ, then
you dwell in the Presence of God; the Devils dwell in his wrathful Presence;
all of us this day dwell in God's general Presence, the Saints only dwell in
God's gracious Presence. When you come to know Christ, you dwell in the special
Presence of God. Psalm. 140. ult. ver. The upright shall dwell in thy Presence.
Shall sit before thy face, or dwell with thy face, that is, in thy presence.
Ainsworth.
None upright but in Christ; none perfect but through Christ. Surely the
righteous shall give thanks to thy Name, the upright shall dwell in thy
presence. There is no Man upon Earth that has Righteousness in himself; no,
not one: There is no Man upright but in Christ. When Christ is become yours,
then God takes up his Dwelling with you: When Christ dwells in you, then the
great God takes up his Abode with you; then you have the gracious Presence of
God go where you will.

Secondly, When you come to live Christ, you are enriched with the glorious
Benefits of Christ; all that Christ died for is yours, Redemption,
Justification, Sanctification, the Riches of Grace, and Riches of Glory is all
yours. What, a Soul in Christ, and poor? It was never found, and can never be
found: A Soul in Christ cannot be poor, all the Riches of Heaven, the Riches of
the Mercies, Blessings and Comforts of this Life, and that to come.

Thirdly, All the Promises are yours: There is no condition you can be in, but
there is a Promise to supply you: Truly that is a rich Man that has a promise
of Supplies whatever state he is in. Though you have a great many Afflictions,
you have abundance of Promises; you have a great many Trials, and you have
great Promises, free Promises, glorious Promises, you are rich; for go with the
Key of Faith, and you may open the Promises. And whatever you take out, there
is never the less left behind: That Promise that supplied you some years ago,
it is as full now as it was then. If a Man takes out of his Bags or Coffers,
the more he takes out, the less he leaves behind; but the Promises are always
full; go to a promise in Temptation, go to a promise in Desertion, go to a
promise in Affliction, yet they are still full; indeed sometimes Faith not
being lively to suck out the Comfort, we think the promise is dry; but the
promise is full. We are like a poor weak Child to a full Breast, that cannot
draw out the Milk. When Faith is weak, we leave the comfort of the promise
behind, and cannot draw it forth. Now how come you to be enriched with these
promises? Do they not flow in and through Christ? all the Curses belong to them
that are out of Christ; but in Christ all the promises are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor.
1.20. For all the promises of God in him are Yea, and in him Amen, unto the
Glory of God by us in Christ. All the promises are Yea, that is, certainly
true, and in him Amen; to the Glory of God, Amen. I know it is the desire of
most to be rich, then beg of God that you may know Christ, beg of God that you
may live Christ: In him all the Promises are Yea and Amen. What, art thou not
in Christ? O wretched, poor, miserable Man or Woman! In Christ only are
Promises, and true Riches, Yea and Amen for ever. Whatever you do, go to
Christ, for in him they are Yea, and in him they are Amen; see that by Faith
you go to Christ, he is the way. What rich and precious Promises are in him! To
take a promise, and not take Christ to be your way to the promise, is to go a
wrong way to receive comfort from the promises. If ever you have a promise, it
must come in by Christ: if you make Christ your Life, wrap up your Life in
Christ, as has been discoursed and all the Promises are yours.

There is not a Soul of you so full of comfort, but you have need of a promise;
not one of you so well in the World, but you have need of a promise, Isa. 38.6.
By these men live. Go to the promises, and then living or dying, you are rich
Men. Ah, Sirs! if the promises in Christ are not yours, I would not give a
Farthing for your Profession; and when you come to die, you will wish you never
had made a Profession. But the Soul that lives on Christ is happy. Blessed
Souls, are you tempted? Are you afflicted? Are you troubled? The promises in
Christ, will yield you sweet Relief.

Fourthly, If you have Christ, you have all the Blessings of Ordinances: I tell
you, though you may not enjoy that comfort as you desire, yet there is not a
Sermon you hear but you are enriched by it; for if thy Soul break and mourn,
and long after Christ, thou art enriched; for a broken Heart is worth ten
thousand Worlds. A Broken Heart, through Christ, is accepted of God. Psalm. 3.8.
Salvation belongs unto the Lord. The means of Salvation, the preaching of the
Gospel, and all other Ordinances; Salvation belongs to the Lord, compared with
Ephesians. 1.3. where it is said, We are blessed with all Spiritual Blessings in
Christ Jesus in Heavenly places: (pray mind it) Blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus; what then, who has blessed us? how? With all spiritual
Blessings; all the means of Grace are made Blessings. What abundance of rich
Seed of Grace is sown upon stony ground, where Christ is not known? But the
Blessing is upon the people of God: Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in Christ Jesus,
who has blessed us with the Blessings of Faith, with the Blessings of Hope,
Blessings of Love, Blessings of Patience, Blessings of the Sacrament, and all
the means of Grace we enjoy.

You that live Christ, though you go mourning from a Sermon, this may encourage
you to wait for the Blessing of the means of Grace. It may be a Soul may object
and say, I am a poor sorrowful Soul; am I blessed? Soul, thou art blessed.
Blessed are they that mourn. The contrite Heart is an acceptable Sacrifice to
God. Blessed are they that mourn. This is your case, sometimes you mourn, at
other times you rejoice in God, and joy in the God of your Salvation. You are
rich in Blessings; all Sermons that you hear do your Souls good, and all
Ordinances do your Souls good; you are blessed when you are humbled, when you
mourn, when you thirst, as well as when you rejoice. These are Spiritual
Blessings in Christ. O Christless Soul, till you know Christ, there is not one
of these belongs to you. O Sinners, you have innumerable Curses hang over your
Heads, that are out of Christ, you have a Book (...) of Woe and Lamentation
written without and within, Ezekiel. 9.10. Many sorrows are to the wicked, but he
that trusts to the Lord, mercy compasses him about, Psalm. 32, 10.
Innumerable are the Blessings that Believers are compassed about with. When you
come to an Ordinance, and think you do not meet with God, you complain, and go
away mourning, you are blessed; if you go away in the dark you are blessed: How
so? I blessed, that cannot see Christ! Yes; blessed are they that trust in him,
and stay themselves upon him, though they walk in Darkness, and see no Light. O
what a rich Soul art thou that live this Life of Faith! You are blessed in
all Ordinances, all Opportunities: I tell you, whatever comes, God will bless
his people; God's Providence is to all the World, he takes care of the whole
Creation, he is wonderful in Goodness and Mercy; yet as a rich Man that gives
to many, yet in an especial manner, says he, I must remember my Children at
home, my dying Child, my weak Child, this Child, that Child, every Child. So
God gives liberally to all, but gives his special Blessings to his Children,
his choice Blessings are reserved for his redeemed ones. O what a rich Life it
is to live Christ! The Saint is rich in Faith, rich in Love, rich in Peace,
rich in all Blessings. Then the Soul admires, What, am I blessed in every
condition? What, with all spiritual Blessings? O Lord, not long ago I was
crying out, Sure God has forsaken me! But this was your infirmity and sin. But
is not Christ more precious to you than ever? Do not you long for Christ,
thirst for Christ? Then you are blessed. Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled. Under Darkness, under
Temptation, under every Affliction you are blessed, and every Sermon, and every
Sacrament, and every Ordinance you have, you are blessed; though you cannot
rejoice in God in all, yet you are blessed in all; though you go away hanging
down your Head. O I have not met with God! I tell you, you are blessed: For it
is said, Blessed are they that mourn, and Blessed are the poor in Spirit.

Fourthly, You are enriched with the Love of God. I do not know what you can
have more to enrich you: If the love of God does not make you rich, I am sure
nothing can; and you can never be rich if you have not the love of God, and be
sure God loves you; if you know Christ, he looks on you in Christ, loves you in
Christ, delights in you in Christ, John 16.27. For the Father himself loves
you, because you have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God:
God's favor makes rich those whom God favors; he has grace that heals his
Soul, which is that that makes his Happiness, and is that which is the inward
fashioning of every Man's apprehension that makes him happy, that brings
comfort to him. Pray mind, the Lord Jesus speaks with an Emphasis, for the
Father himself loves you: You have my Father's love, a choice Love indeed: And
how comes this Love about? because you have loved me, and have believed that I
came out from God: because you have believed in me, and made me your life: God
loves you: What, God love me! I confess it would make a Christian go
comfortably through all the Trials in the World, the very ardency and
application of that: the Heart of God is the Ocean, the first rise of all Love
to the Creature: Christ is the Spring that first receives from him, Dr. Crisp.
and then through him all Love is diffused to the Creature: God loves me, for
the Father himself loves you: What, God love me! I pray how comes it about?
because you have loved me, and believed that I came out from God: You have made
me your Life; you have Faith in me; and now God loves you: God never loved you,
whatever you did without Christ: God abhors all out of Christ; God elected you
all in Christ, chooses you all in Christ, pardons you all in Christ: and then,
Oh what Immense Love is this! God loves you in Christ: O unspeakable Love! O
infinite Love! this Love is Love that passes Knowledge; Love that passes
Bounds; O highth and depth of Love; you that live in Christ, and believe in
Christ, are rich Souls: We use to say, when we see Men thrive and prosper in
the World, This will be a rich Man: And what may you say of the Saints? O they
will be rich indeed, they will have a rich portion, because they believe that
Christ came out from God. O Soul! have thou with thy Heart chose Christ, with
thy Heart lived to Christ, with thy Heart wrapped up thy self in Christ? is it
the outcry of thy Soul, none but Christ, none but Christ? thou art a rich
Soul; for thou art already possessed of the presence of God, and it will be thy
portion to live in the House of God for ever: For Brethren to dwell together in
love and unity, how sweet is it! O the harmony of it! but what a divine Harmony
is there in that Soul where the Love of God dwells? Turn about your Thoughts,
turn about your Ears: Hear, I beseech you, for Christ's sake; accept of Christ,
that you may have God's love: God indeed loved the Elect with Everlasting Love
in Christ; but God's Love is not manifested to you, until you believe in
Christ; then all the things of this life are yours; there are many things which
we cannot reach here, the price is too great: Is not that rare which costs
dear? there is not a bit of Bread you have (you that are Saints) but it cost
the Blood of Christ; all your Mercies are in a way of redemption; all is yours:
Paul and Apollos, and Cephas, and life, and death, and things present, and
things to come; for ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. May it not be said of
them that know not Christ, Nothing is theirs? Is not the Minister yours, as
well as others? Is not your Bread yours, and your Meat yours, and your Drink
yours, and Clothes yours? No, Soul, they are borrowed Mercies, stolen Mercies,
and you will be damned for them without Christ has paid for them for you: but
the Soul that loves Christ, his Mercies are all bought: the Ministers of
Christ, those Ambassadors of Peace, are all yours in Christ: Paul is yours,
Apollos is yours, and Life and Death is yours. You that art out of Christ, it
makes my Heart tremble to consider that your Mercies are all to be paid for,
to be reckoned for; and you that are in Christ, you may leap and rejoice at a
drop of cold water and a bit of bread: O! it is a rich Mercy, it is bought with
the Blood of Christ; and then at last you will be enriched, you will sit like
Kings in Glory with your Lord and Redeemer for ever and ever.

Fifthly, It is a happy life, because it is a Soul-satisfying life, the Soul
cannot be satisfied with any thing below Christ; whatever a person does enjoy,
whatever a person does in a way of duty, he cannot be satisfied if he has not
Christ: Take who you will, whether they be Formalists, or Legalists; whether
Moral men, or Profane men; whether Rich men, or Poor men; or Professors, that
have not made Christ their Life, they will tell you they want satisfaction;
there is a complaint of this thing, or that thing wanting to give contentment;
if they have Golden duties, if they do not bring the Water of life, they cannot
satisfy their Souls: but this life of living upon Christ does satisfy the
Soul, I shall show in these following Particulars.

The Lord will satisfy her Poor with Bread: the poorest Man that lives upon
Christ, lives more plentifully than the richest Man that knows not Christ,
Psalm 132.5. I will abundantly bless her provision; I will satisfy her Poor
with Bread: Who is the Poor? the Poor is a longing person, a craving person:
the poor desire something they stand in need of, says the Lord: I will bless
Sion's provision: it is a great Mercy to have our provision blessed: we may be
fed high, and yet not have healthy bodies: Many may fare high in means of
Grace, but not having a Blessing with it, they do not prosper: Many have been
long under the means of Grace, and yet do not thrive nor grow in Grace: says
God, I will satisfy her poor with bread: The Poor are craving, and desiring,
and longing; so the longing Soul in Christ shall be satisfied; they shall not
want: the Prophet Isaiah speaks of spending their Money for that which is not
bread; which will not satisfy: but the Lord Jesus satisfies the Soul, fills up
the Desires, whatsoever they be: Take one which is under the Law, and has the
greatest Gifts and Parts, but is a stranger to Christ, and one that is the
poorest in gifts and parts yet in Christ; he has more satisfaction than the
other with all his great Gifts and Parts: the poorest and meanest in Grace that
is in Christ, lives a higher life than the richest in Gifts and Parts, or in
worldly things, that does not know Christ; so that it is a satisfying life to
live Christ: Here is enough for this present life, enough for hereafter: there
is enough in Christ to fill up all the Faculties of the Soul, John 6.35. I am
the bread of life; he that comes to me shall never hunger; he that believes
on me shall never thirst: Coming and Believing is the same; he that comes or
believes in me shall never hunger: What, does not a Soul in Christ hunger? does
he not long for Christ? yes, but as he hungers and thirsts for Christ, he shall
be filled, his wants shall be supplied: we say in our outward things, Money
answers all things: but Money will not satisfy the Soul: But, says Christ, he
that comes to me, I will satisfy all his desires: he shall have Contentment,
Supplies, Satisfaction; he shall want nothing: I am the bread of life, I will
satisfy his hunger: I am the water of life; he that comes to me, shall never
thirst: they shall never cry I perish for hunger, or I perish for thirst. The
Prodigal, when he came to his Fathers house, he did hunger, but he had bread to
satisfy his hunger: A Soul believing in Christ, making Christ his life, there
is enough in Christ, to ^^ll up all the desires of the Soul, and to heal all
the Wounds of the contrite Heart. Whatever the Soul desires, in Christ are
Eternal Springs to fill up the Soul; every thing that is below Christ, is too
empty to satisfy an Immortal Soul: they are not Springs, they are but
Cisterns; take Ordinances, take away Christ, what can the Ordinances do? will
not the Soul wither immediately? Ordinances are but Cisterns, and not Springs:
the Psalmist says, All my Springs are in thee, Psalm. 87.7. Does a Soul desire
to love God? has the Soul a desire to be satisfied with Love, with Beauty,
with the Glory of Christ? there are divine Springs from Christ, who is an
overflowing and ever-flowing Fountain to the Souls of Believers to satisfy all
their desires. So that a Believer, let him desire as much as he will, he shall
have his desires satisfied, Psalm. 17.15. As for me, I will behold thy face in
righteousness: I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness. The longing
Soul shall not miss of being filled with Wisdom in Christ, with Redemption in
Christ, with Sanctification, with Salvation: Let the Soul crave for Holiness,
there is enough in Christ to fill it: let it crave for Love, there is enough in
Christ: let it crave for Peace and Joy, there is enough in Christ to fill it:
Christ being such an inexhaustible Fountain, is still flowing into the Soul to
give it daily satisfaction: the Soul may weary it self in other things, and not
be the better. Believers, that can but experience the least true Longings after
Jesus Christ, tho with a weak Faith, need not doubt but that they have true
Faith, and shall not miss of a true and full satisfaction.

A weak Faith shows it self by this Grace of God, namely, an unfeigned Desire,
not only of Salvation, for that the Wicked and Graceless Man may have; but of
Reconciliation with God in Christ: This is a sure sign of Faith in every
touched and humbled heart, and it is peculiar to the Elect. Perkins on the
Creed.
What a Mercy and Blessing it is to have the least true Desires after Jesus
Christ, since such Souls are assured in Gods Word, that their longing Souls
shall be satisfied. Says Holy Bernard, He that Thirsts, let him Thirst more,
and he that Desires, let him Desire more abundantly; because so much as he can
Desire, so much he shall Receive.

Persons will be weary of their Pleasures, weary of their Treasures, and weary
of their Duties: that Soul which has made Christ his rest has the truest
satisfaction; when a Soul comes to know Christ, it may say with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 116. Return unto thy rest, O my Soul; for the Lord has dealt bountifully
with thee. What Rest has the Soul? There is a great many restless Enemies;
there is Satan pursuing, the Law condemning, Guilt pursuing, the poor Soul has
no safe Refuge to flee unto but the Lord Jesus. The Soul that has Christ his
Life, can say the Lord Jesus Christ has purchased eternal Salvation for me; he
became a Curse for me, and Redeemed me from the Curse of the Law; and let Satan
and Conscience say what they will, Jesus Christ has paid my Debts, satisfied
Justice, given me rest to my Soul. Take up thou thy quiet Rest in him O my
Soul, for what ever the Law says, it speaks to them that are under the Law:
But I am Redeemed by Christ, he is become my Rock, and my Salvation; my Soul
return thou to thy Rest. Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the works of the Law,
are under the Curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them. Be sure you
do all, or you do nothing; there was never a Man since the fall of Adam, that
could do all things, nor the least thing as he ought. But Christ fulfilled the
Law, and has delivered us from the Curse of the Law; for the Just shall live
by Faith in Christ. Till a Soul comes to center in Christ, the Soul can never
have rest and quiet: Indeed you may forget the day of your Death; if you are
wrapped up in Carnal securities, that is not Rest; the Soul will be molested
again, when Conscience is awakened, to consider what the state of the Soul is.
But if the Law and Sin accuses, the Soul that can truly experience the Lord
Jesus Christ is his Life, has Redeemed him from the Curse of the Law, has
Died, and Risen for him, and is at Gods right hand interceding with Divine
Justice, and has paid the whole Price and Ransom; the Law condemns them that
are under the Law, but Christ has delivered a Believer from all its
Accusations; who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? What Christ
has done, is a Believers own; he is Righteousness to every one that truly
applies him. My Friends, till you know there is satisfaction made to the
Justice of God, you can never take up your rest; do as much as you can, until
you come to center in this Glorious Redemption, that Christ has purchased; to
see him Sanctification and Redemption; that he has satisfied for you, that you
live on him for all; then the Soul can take up his quiet Rest. But till it is
thus, do as much as you will, there is something wanting still: Not a word of
Peace to be had from God, but in and through Christ. Do as much as you will in
a way of Duty, without Christ, you cannot have Rest and Quiet. If you have been
a Praying Person this Ten, Twenty or Thirty Years, this will all be swallowed
up in this one thing, God is not satisfied, the Guilt of Sin follows me, my
Conscience accuses Says Luther, I am not able to endure my Conscience, neither
am I quieted by my own Works, or by the Righteousness of Gods Laws; much less
have I any comfort by my sanctity, which out of my own Devotion and good
Opinion I make choice of; yea, the Devil through my Sin, so hunteth me in such
sort, that I think the World is too narrow for me; only the acknowledgment of
Christ lifts me up, and sets my Conscience in Peace.

Therefore I look not what I am in my self, but what Christ has done; he has
bore the Curse, therefore I shall never bear it. God has laid on him the
Iniquity of us all, therefore my Soul return thou to thy rest. All the Debt is
discharged, now my Soul can live a quiet Life in Christ. O what a
Soul-satisfying life it is, to live Christ! and till then there will be a
complaining; when you have done all that you can do, when you have done the
best you can, you want a Righteousness to stand before God. The Soul in Christ
is clothed with a Garment sufficient for to cover its Nakedness. Here is a
Righteousness is as broad and long as the Wounds and Nakedness of the Soul; and
that your own Duties can never be. If a Man could stand bemoaning his Sins from
Morning till Night, there would be something in that that he would need a
Pardon for; but now Christ was made Sin for us, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Made Sin, not only said to be so, but
made so; Sin imputed to him: And while our Sins lay on him, he was an imputed
Sinner, baring our Sins. The Wrath of God was poured on him, he bore the fault,
and God laid our Sins on him, that we might be the Righteousness of God in him.
His Righteousness is made our Personal Righteousness, as if we had performed
all things our selves; we are made the Righteousness of God; not thought to be
so, or seem to be so, but really made so: here is a covering to cover all our
Nakedness. Isaiah says, our Righteousness is a Bed too short for us to stretch
our selves upon, and a Covering too narrow for us to wrap our selves in: if a
Man has a Garment of Silk or Silver, and if it be not long enough to cover
him, there is cause of shame; so if you have the bravest Duties and
Expressions, Carriage and outward Behavior in Religion, without you are wrapped
up in this Righteousness, there is still something wanting, that will cause
shame and Confusion to all Eternity; he was made sin for us that knew no sin,
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. A Believing Soul ought
to talk with our Savior in this manner, I am thy Sins, thou art my
Righteousness, therefore I am joyful, and boldly do triumph for my Sins, not
over ballancing thy Righteousness, neither let thy Righteousness suffer me to
be or remain a Sinner: Luther.
Blessed for evermore, and praised be thy Name sweet Jesus. It is a glorious
Expression, a high Expression, a comfortable Expression, and truly a great
Mystery; that the innocent Lamb of God, that knew no Sin should be made Sin for
us, and we made the Righteousness of God in him, Col. 2. We are complete in
him, complete in Christ, though not complete in Sanctification yet complete in
the sight of God in Justification; he does present you without Spot or Wrinkel
before God. In the best of Men the best Performances leaves a sense of Guilt
upon their Souls; there is something wanting; but in Christ there is complete
Righteousness, complete Wisdom, complete Redemption, complete Beauty, complete
Glory, every thing complete that the Soul is complete in him.

Fifthly, To live Christ is a happy Life because it is a safe Life; you are
never safe till you are in Christ, and there is no safety any where else; you
that are in Christ O look back first, what not long since you were; Secondly,
what now you are; Thirdly, what you shall be, and you will see cause of
Admiration. When you were out of Christ, what a dangerous state were you in,
under the Wrath of God, the Curse of the Law! Consider, where was I when I knew
not Christ? Where was I going? I was going to Destruction and did not know it:
Was I so near the Brink of the Pit and did not mind? Was I so near sinking and
did not cry out? O how can I but admire and adore this God that has done this
for me! He has brought me nigh by the Blood of the Covenant; he has brought
me to a safe Condition; you were a far off, but now are brought nigh by the
Blood of the Covenant; ye were without Christ, without the Covenant, Ephesians.
2.13.

Thirdly, Consider what ere long you shall be; you that are in Christ shall ere
long be with Christ, you shall be safely arrived in Glory: O the danger that a
Soul out of Christ is in! You are under the Sword of Divine Justice, and how
soon it may drop down on your Head, drop down on your Heart, you do not know;
therefore you are never safe till you are in Christ, that is a safe Life; Prove.
1.33. But whosoever hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely and shall be quiet from
fear of evil. Whosoever hearkens so as to believe, accept and lay hold on, and
close with Christ, they shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of
Evil, the Fear of Evil shall not hurt you: Prove. 3.18. speaking of Wisdom, she
is a Tree of Life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that
retains her. There is in Christ safety, there is first the Life of
Justification, secondly of Sanctificaon, and thirdly of Glorification.

First, a Life of Justification, a Tree of Life to free from Condemnation:
There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ, Romans 1.8. You are safe
from the Condemnation of the Law; you are safe from the Condemnation of
Justice, you are safe from the Condemnation of Conscience, you are safe from
the Condemnation of the Devil, you are safe from the Condemnation of the World:
Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect? there is Life laid up in
Christ, Life for poor dead Sinners, Life for poor condemned Sinners that lay
hold on this Tree of Life; there is no Condemnation to them more; there shall
be no following them, as it was with Joab to the Altar to slay him there. Lay
hold on the Tree of Life and you are safe for ever: You may say of the
Thunderings of the Law, I am safe from them all, the Tree of Life stands ready
to give you the Life of Righteousness and Justification that you may be free
from Condemnation; there is no Condemnation: What a safe case is a Soul in,
that is in Christ? let a Soul be condemned never so much, nothing shall hurt
him, God has justified him in, through, and for Christ's sake; though the
Devil come and accuse, and says this man is clothed with filthy Garments; this
Tree of Life stands ready, Zechar. 3.1, 2. Satan comes and accuses Joshua, he
was clothed with filthy Garments. Thou art a holy God, a God of purer Eyes than
to behold Iniquity with approbation: But here is one come with filthy Garments,
here is a sinful Man come; he comes to offer up Sacrifice for the People, but
he is sinful; the Devil comes and accuses him and condemns him. Now while there
is any thing to condemn a Man he is not safe; the Devil comes and lays to his
Charge that he is clothed in filthy Garments, but he comes not in Love to
Holiness, but in Envy to Joshua, in Envy to the Saints, and in Envy to God, and
in Envy to his Free Grace; but the Lord Jesus Christ said to Satan, the Lord
rebuke thee Satan, the Lord rebuke thee, Is not this a Brand plucked out of the
Fire? I have chosen him, he is an Elect Vessel, I have redeemed him, I have
clothed him with Change of Raiment, I have put a fair Mitre on his Head; Satan
do thy worst and speak thy worst, thou can not hurt Jashua. So this Tree of
Life frees from Condemnation; lay hold on Christ you are quit, let what Bills
there will come in against you; if a Man should be tried for his Life, and
there comes in many Bills of Indictment against him, but he shows his Pardon
for all, then in vain do they come in; or if there be never so many Items all
is forgiven; so let the Devil come in with never so many Items, and the Law
come in with never so many Items, the Lord Jesus forgives them all to them that
lay hold on him by Faith.

Secondly, Then it is a Life of Sanctification: Where sin reigned before, sin
shall not have Dominion over you; you are not under the Law, but under Grace:
Then you may see that the Law will not kill sin: The Law will tell you, you are
a sinner, but it will not kill your sin, Romans 6.14. For sin shall have Dominion
over you; for you are not under the Law, but under Grace. Tho sin may trouble
you, it shall not have Dominion over you; tho it may grieve you, it shall not
undo you. The Serpent's Seed is sentenced, The Seed of the Woman shall break
the Serpent's Head. Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh, God sending his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. When a Soul lays not hold on Christ,
sin is in his Nature, his Lusts dogging of him, his Lusts reigning and ruling
over him; but through Christ he overcomes.

Thirdly, A Life of Glory. The Apostle reckons the Justified ones among the
glorified ones. Whom he called, them he justified; and whom he justified, them
he glorifies. He speaks in the Present Tense, as if it were already done, that
they that lay hold of this Tree of Life, are as sure of eternal Life, as if
they were already in Glory: So that it is a very safe Life to live Christ, and
to lay hold on her: But mark it still, this Tree of Life is too high for carnal
Reason to reach. This Tree of Life must drop Fruit into your Souls before you
can reach up to that. We see fruitful Trees are bending Trees: Trees that are
loaded with Fruit bow down, so that even a Child may lie on the Ground and eat
the Fruit: So Jesus Christ taking our Nature, humbled himself to the Death of
the Cross; he condescended so low, to have Union with us poor sinners, that a
poor Soul cannot go to Christ till Christ first comes to him. Christ first
comes to the Soul, he bends down to the carnal Heart, and possesses the Soul of
the Life of Faith, and then the Soul can reach up to him. Come to me all ye
that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. But how? Shall I
come, Lord? may a poor sinner say. Says Christ, No man can come to me except
the Father draw him. I must first come by my spirit to the sinner, before he
can come to me by Faith. But says a poor Soul, I cannot lay hold of Christ, I
cannot believe, nor I cannot make Christ my Life, I am a poor undone sinner;
but if Christ comes to you, and takes you by the Arm, as he did Ephraim, Hos.
11.3. cannot you go along with him? If he comes and gives you an hand of Faith,
and takes hold of you, can you not follow him? This fruitful Tree of Life bends
down with his Fruit, that sinners may lay hold on him. If the Husbandman
expects to have Corn, he must sow it; if a Man would have a fine Garden, he
must plant it, for the ground naturally brings forth nothing but Briers and
Thorns. The Ground was cursed when Adam had sinned, and every Heart is cursed,
and all the sinner can bring forth by Nature is cursed Fruit; there may be
something like Grace, something like Faith, but no true saving Faith; as there
may be Field-herbs like Gardenherbs, and many other things alike, that are not
the same natural Gifts, may show like Grace: But by natural Reason there is
never a Man nor Woman, (do the most they can) that can lay hold of Christ, till
Christ comes and lays hold of them. There is nothing in our Hearts but Briers
and Thorns, we cannot believe; but when Christ comes, and works Faith in our
Hearts, then we lay hold on Christ, then we are safe for ever. When you are got
into Christ, all Storms whatsoever cannot hurt you, you are safe. So the Lord
Jesus speaks, Prove. 8.35. For whosoever finds me finds Life. Whoever is a
stranger to Christ, is under the power of Death, the sentence of Death and
Condemnation; but whoever finds me finds Life. What then? They shall obtain
Favor of the Lord. In the Favor of a King or great Man they say is safety;
but that is not true always, nor very often; but they are certainly for ever
safe that enjoy the favor of God. You must find Christ before you know the
favor of God; God's favor is manifest in Christ; when he shows kindness it is
in Christ; whosoever finds Christ shall have God's favor, Psalm. 68.18. He has
received gifts for men, yea for the rebellious also, that God may dwell among
them. If you would have the favor of God, seek after Christ; in this Temple
the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, and when you come to live in Christ,
God lives in you, he comes and takes up his abode with you; Thou have ascended
up on high, thou have led captivity captive, thou have received gifts for men.
What Men? The Rebellious. What encouragement is here for rebellious sinners to
come to Christ? O sinner, come; Christ has received Gifts for you: To what
end? That God may dwell among you. Christ has received enough to make you
lovely in the sight of the Father for ever. How should Saints also be
encouraged by this, under all their Infirmities and Troubles? If you had all
the comforts of a present Life, and had not the favor of God, you would be
undone for ever. He that finds Christ, finds Life, and shall obtain favor of
the Lord; God will dwell among such. As Christ by Death made way for the Soul
to come to God, so by the Revelation of his Grace a Soul comes to taste of the
Love of God. When a Soul comes to know Christ, then the favor of God shines on
him; and is not this a safe Life? O Christless Soul, that lives, but not in
Christ; that knows many things but not Christ; that performs Duties, but not by
Faith in Christ; you are never safe, you do not know how soon your
slaughter-day will come, and it will be eternal. You that have not Christ for
your Sacrifice, you must be the Sacrifice for ever. The Lamb of God was offered
up once for all; but if he be not your Sacrifice, your Souls must be a
Sacrifice in Hell for ever: But you that live Christ live an happy Life, for it
is a safe Life. As Abigail spoke to David when she met him, the greatest
comfort that she brought to him, was, That his Life should be bound up in the
Life of his Lord, 1 Samuel 25.28, 29. I pray thee forgive the trespass of thine
handmaid, for the Lord will certainly make my Lord a sure House: because my
Lord fights the Battles of the Lord, and evil has not been found in thee all
thy days, Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy Soul. Says she,
Here is a mighty Man risen to pursue thy Life, but though he is risen up
against thee, thou shall be sure to be safe. Why? What is the reason? The Soul
of my Lord shall be bound in the bundle of Life with the Lord thy God. Whatever
pursues a Soul in Christ shall never hurt him. All Temptations, and Troubles,
and Accusations that pursue the Soul shall not hurt it. Says she, A Man is
risen to pursue thy Life, but however the Soul of my Lord is bound up in the
bundle of Life with the Lord thy God. Friends, you are never safe, till your
Souls are bound up in the bundle of Life with Christ, till you come to take
Christ, lay hold on him as your own, you are never safe, you have Pursuers. A
man is risen up to pursue the life of my Lord: But one poor Christian is
pursued with Temptation, another with strong Corruption, another with strong
Fears and Terrors, another with great Desertion; but Christians, never fear,
your Life is bound up in the bundle of Life; the Life of Righteousness, the
Life of Grace, the Life of Comfort, the Life of Glory. The Soul that believes
in Christ is so bound up in him, that the Devil cannot reach him, Temptation
cannot harm him, sin cannot undo him, Trouble cannot overcome him. O what a
Life is a Believers Life! I am not speaking of a Professors Life only; not one
that performs Duty, but one that lives on Christ. For me to live is Christ. O
it is the safest of Lives! Whatever you have done you will never be safe;
whatever you have professed, you will never be safe till you are bound up with
Christ. There is nothing you can do in outward Duty, but the Devil will have
more to say against you, than you have to say for your selves. There is no
fear, O Saint, whatever comes against thee, if thou art in Christ. Therefore
consider it, every one of you, as you would appear at the Great Day, and your
Faces not be ashamed, pray see that Christ be yours, pray see that you can
produce the Seals and Witness of the Spirit of God that you are Believers, or
all your Profession will leave you miserable. To live Christ is a safe Life,
John 14.19. says Christ, Because of him you shall live also. He lives, and you
shall live; he is in Glory, and you shall be in Glory; he is on the Throne, and
you shall be on the Throne; he is beloved of the Father, and you are beloved of
the Father. Believing in Christ is a safe way; no way safe but by believing in
Christ. There is a poor Christian in Troubles and Trials, but he is happy, his
Life is bound up in his Lords Life, which is the Life of Lives. When Jacob was
in his Journey to Padan Aram, when he came to lie down at night, he had but an
hard Pillow. Indeed many times it is hardest with the outward Man, when it is
best with the inward Man: He had a stone for his Pillow, but a cordial for his
Soul. A Ladder that reached from Heaven to Earth.

This Ladder has six glorious Rounds, that make a Believer to ascend up to the
enjoyment of God, his Birth, his Life and Doctrine, his Death and Resurrection,
his Ascension and Intercession. Christ is that Ladder that reaches from Heaven
to Earth; the Saints Salvation is begun, carried on, and finished in and
through and by him; he is the Author and Finisher of our Faith, we are elected
in him, Ephesians. 1.1. Christ is Principium and Caput Electionis, he is the first
Elect, in whom, and for whom all other are elected. God elected Christ to be
Head of the Body, all the Members chosen in him, he is made All to the
believing Soul, from first to last he is made of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

It was a Figurative Discovery of the Lord Jesus Christ, whose Deity and
Humanity was set forth by this Ladder.

This Ladder may be considered, either 1. Literally, and so it is represented
to Jacob, the Providence of God, who tho he dwells in Heaven, extends his Care
and Government to the Earth, and particularly makes use of the Angels, as
ministering Spirits for the good of his people; and these Angels do not appear
idle or standing still, but always in motion, either ascending to God, to
receive his Commands; or descending to Earth for the execution of them; which
was a most seasonable Vision for Jacob in his sad and sorrowful condition, that
though he was forsaken and persecuted by Men, and forced to fly away secretly
for fear of his Life, yet he neither was nor should be neglected or forsaken of
God in his whole Journey. Or, Mystically, and so it represents Jesus Chist, by
whom Heaven and Earth are united, who is called the way to Heaven, which this
Ladder was, who as the Head of Angels, Mr. Pool's Annotations
is perpetually sending them forth either to God, or from God, to minister to
the Heirs of Salvation.

And he dreamed a Dream, and behold, a Ladder set upon the Earth, and the top
of it reached up to Heaven, and behold the Angels of God ascending and
descending. Genesis 28.11. And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there
all night. It is best tarrying, though night, when Christ is present, because
the Sun was set. When outward Comforts go down, and Christ arises, it is a
blessed change. And he took of the stones of the place, and put them for his
Pillows. It is a blessed Lodging where Christ is. And lay down in that place to
sleep. Well may a Soul sleep quiet, when Christ is present with him. And he
dreamed a Dream, and behold, a Ladder set upon the Earth, and the top of it
reached to Heaven. This must be Jesus Christ figuratively.

For First, His Protection was ready, though this was but a Dream: God did
visit his People in Dreams of old, before Christ was manifest in the Flesh.
Jesus Christ, whose Humanity was set forth, who humbled himself to the Death of
the Cross, he came from Heaven to Earth, he was truly God, truly Man. And
behold the Angels of God ascending and descending on it. Still there are always
ministering Spirits about the Heirs of Salvation, still they keep the Rounds of
the Ladder; they are ready to serve God, if they are sent a thousand Miles,
yea, Millions of Miles, to minister to the Saints, showing still only, that a
Soul in Christ has protection, and Guardian Angels to attend upon him, he has
the Chariots of God to accompany him, Psalm. 68.17. O Believer, what are you
Christ's? And have you so many Angels waiting on you daily? Where is your
thankfulness? Where is your Heart-love to God? Psalm. 34. The Angel of the Lord
encamps round about those that fear him. Have you Angels waiting and attending
on you? Angels ascending and descending for your Good? you are in a safe
condition. Believing Souls, have you not found this Ladder many times when you
have been in Trouble and under Desertion; have you not found your Hearts hard,
your Comforts dead, your Souls cast down; have not you found Jesus Christ the
Ladder, by which you have ascended up to the Father? Has he not brought you
out of that Wilderness condition?

Whosoever thou art that fear the Lord, be of good courage, take thou no
care, neither be faint-hearted, nor make any doubt of the Angels waking,
watching and Protection, for most certainly they are about, and by thee, and do
carry thee upon their hands. But how, or in what manner? Take thou no care. God
says it, Luther.
therefore it must be sure and certain.

Although now adays they appear not visibly, nor afford such outward help, yet
are these Heavenly Messengers employed for the safeguard and benefit of the
Saints. As Embroidered Cherubims environed the Tabernacle, Ainsworth.
so do those Heavenly Soldiers guard God's true Tabernacle, the Church.

Cant. 3.6. Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness? Who is this? From
whence does she come? From the Wilderness; a Wilderness of Trials, Temptations
and Desertions; she turns her Back on them, and her Face on Christ. And how
does she come? She ascends like Pillars of smoke. What Incense has she? She
has perfumed Incense, Myrrh and Frankincense, with all Powders of the
Merchant, with the sweet savor of Christ, with the Righteousness of Christ: It
ascends, being drawn up by the Spirit of God; it is perfumed, having Christ's
Righteousness. No Powder of the Merchant can be sweeter than the Prayers of a
Saint to God in Christ; but they would not ascend, if it were not for the
Spirit of God. While Persons employ their Gifts and Parts out of Christ, they
descend; though they do perform Duty in the exactest manner, yet there is Evil
enough in them for God to abhor it; they are as smoke in the Nostrils of a pure
God: But when they are perfumed by Jesus Christ, they are a sweet savor.
Therefore be not afraid of those weak Prayers, smoky Prayers, they are perfumed
with Christ's Righteousness. It may be the poor Soul complains, I have been at
Prayer, but I have prayed with such wanderings, and such deadness, and such
coldness, that I fear God will abhor me: But Soul, have thou breathed after
Christ in them? Then Soul, they are perfumed, they will be accepted in Christ:
Therefore by Faith in Christ your Prayers are safe. O blessed be God for Jesus
Christ, blessed be God for the Persume, and blessed be God for this ascending;
for you never would have ascended, if it were not for the Spirit of God; nor
have your Prayers perfumed, were it not for the sweet Odor of Christ's
Righteousness. There are two things a carnal Heart is ready to do; if they do a
Duty to their mind, then they are apt to be proud of it, and rest on it; and if
they do not do it to their Mind, then they are cast down and complain, I cannot
pray, I cannot profit by hearing, God has forgotten me.

The humble Godly believing Soul, that has made Christ his Life, he can truly
say, Though I am poor in my self, yet I am rich in Christ; I am indifferent and
cold in Prayer, but Christ is my Offering and Altar, and therefore in him I put
up all to God. Therefore you see how safe a Soul is that is in Christ.

First, Your Souls are safe, none can rob you of them; go where you will, your
Souls are safe in the hands of Christ; you that live Christ, know Christ,
believe in Christ, lay hold on Christ, your Souls are safe indeed, he will keep
you: Says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.12. What I have committed to him, he will
keep; my All I have left with him; he that has bought me, that has paid the
price, I have committed all to him: As you know, if a Man has purchased a rich
Jewel, and leaves it in the hand of a trusty Friend; says he, I have left it
with one that is an able Man; but is he faithful? Yes, he is a very honest Man.
O how much more may we speak of Christ? Have thou committed thy Soul to Christ?
Why? Because he is able to pay whatever Justice can demand: He has paid it
all: Whatever Troubles or Trials I go through, Christ can bare me up. But is
Christ faithful? He is a faithful High Priest, says Paul, I have committed my
All to him. You do not know what you lose by not committing your selves to
Christ: We commit our selves to our selves, and that is our great loss. If you
believe Christ to be faithful, commit your Souls to him, it is safe to leave
your All with Christ.

Sometimes a Man will not leave the worth of six pence in another Man's hand;
why? Because he is in debt, and so he thinks it is not safe. Christ is not in
debt, he has paid all that God has demanded, therefore do you commit your
Souls to him; the Apostle had committed his All to him; and truly Paul had
learned very much of the knowledge of Christ: For the which cause I also suffer
these things; nevertheless I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed.
Many times a person says, I am ashamed, I was such a Fool to believe such a
Person. Many times you trust to your own Heart; ay, the more Fool you. Many
times you say, I trust to my own Duties; ay, the more Fool you: But I have
committed my All to Christ: Why? Because I know him, I have left all with him,
and I am persuaded when I meet the great God, I shall not be a Farthing in
debt, for Christ has paid all. I am persuaded my Comforts will be safe; I am
persuaded my Hopes, my Faith, my Soul, my Body, my Treasure, are all safe; when
the poor Hypocrite will be ashamed, when the carnal Professor will be ashamed.
Whatever Denomination Believers go under by a reproaching World, let them do
all they can, you that have committed your Souls to Christ shall not be
ashamed. Nevertheless I am not ashamed, says the Apostle, for I know whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that day. Look to that day, that great day of
accounts is coming, that day that you must meet God at the Judgment Seat. If
Christ does not then present his satisfaction for you to God, you must lie by
it to all Eternity: But if you are in Christ, your Souls are safe. Paul was as
sure of Glory, as if he were in Heaven; he was as certain of a Crown of
Righteousness, as if possessed of it, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith; henceforward there is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto them also that love his
appearing. Friends, look to your Crown, look to your Souls, look to your Glory,
ay, and that you may secure them; look that you lay hold on Christ. Methinks to
consider how many Millions of Souls will stand at the great Day strangers to
Christ, that have made a great Profession of Religion, but have rested upon
their own Duties for Salvation, should awaken us to throw our selves upon
Christ alone in all we do for acceptance before God. Do as many Duties as can
be performed, if Christ be not yours at that day, you will be confounded; but
if Christ is yours, your Souls are safe.

But Christians, are your Souls in the hands of Christ? Bought with the Blood
of Christ? Have you committed your Souls to Christ? Do you live on him? Psalm.
37.5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall hring it to
pass; he will never fail them that commit themselves unto him, Heb. 13.8.
Yesterday and to day the same for ever. If the World be turned upside down, he
is the same for ever.

Secondly, The Soul that lives Christ, his Soul is safe, none can rob him of
his Comforts.

First, Afflictions shall not rob you of your Comforts. Truly I tell you,
Friends, there are many, we hope they are Believers, but for want of a real
demonstration of Faith in Christ, and living on Christ, they are afraid in
every Trouble, that God is coming to destroy them. But if Christ is your Life,
who can destroy you? Mat. 10.28. And fear not them which kill the Body, but are
not able to kill the Soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both
Body and Soul in Hell. What hurt can all Affliction do, when God is your God?
There is not one Affliction comes but it is in Love. You may write Love upon
all your bitter Portions, they are all safe, you have them from a kind and
tender Physician that understands his Practice, and loves his Patients. If it
is a bitter Portion, yet Love and Care may be writ upon all. Many are apt to
cry, God is against me, he is destroying me, he has found me out; but when
Christ is become your Life, it is all in Love from God. If a Child be running
in a pleasant way, to the Rivers side, where many Children have been drowned,
and one pulls this Child away, it cries out, O let me go this pleasant way; but
the Person or Parent that pulls it away, knows the Danger that the Child does
not, therefore he plucks it away, tho against the Child's Will. So many times,
when a Saint cries out, God is dealing with me in Anger, when God is dealing
with him in Love; and tho it is a green and pleasant way, the Lord prevents you
by Afflictions from the Evil that otherwise you would fall into. My Son,
despise not thou the chastning of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked
of him. It may be you will say, Do any despise the Lord? Yes, when you murmur.
Truly God might have prevented this Affliction, I cannot bear it, I should have
done well enough, had not these Troubles come upon me. But God is not wrath
with a Believer, the Flame of his Justice has taken hold of Christ. The
Physician does not intend any hurt in a bitter Portion. Christ has paid dear
for your Afflictions, that they might be sanctified, Heb. 11.6. Whom the Lord
loves he chastneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives. If ye endure
chastening, God deals with you as with Sons; for what Son is he whom the
Father chasteneth not? But while a Soul is out of Christ, every Pressure is a
Lash of Divine Justice: But a Soul in Christ may say, by his stripes am I
healed, my Iniquities are laid upon him, God has nothing against me, Christ
has paid all for me.

When God calls his Children aside, and corrects them, they may say, I will go
to my Father, and hear what he speaks; for Christ has paid all, bought all,
and whatever the Cup is, though bitter, I will drink it up; though a Cup of
Affliction, it is a blessed Cup. But Souls out of Christ, every thing robs them
of their comfort; while they can do any thing, and prosper in the World they go
on bravely; but let God touch them, and they are filled with Amazement. But
take Saints, that God is their God, Christ their Life, they can go on
comfortably. Lord, whatever bitter Portion I have, it is in Love. That God in
anger chastises his Saints, is impossible, for Christ has born the Wrath of
God, and has satisfied Divine Justice, that God has not one drop to pour out
upon you that are Christ's. Your Afflictions are to keep you from sin, to subdue
sin, to sanctify your course of Life, that you may be weaned from the World,
and live to God. Many Persons bring a false Charge against the Saints of God in
their Afflictions, as Job's Friends did against him: You will say to the Godly,
when they are afflicted, The Hand of God is against you, the Curse of God is
upon you, the Devil and our corrupt Hearts are very apt to make bad
constructions of God's Dealings, and to close in with such conjectures. If
Christ has not paid all, there is something for you to pay; but if you are
Christ's, Christ has paid all; therefore Affliction cannot rob you of your
comfort.

Secondly, Justice cannot rob you. The Justice of God is satisfied, you may
look Divine Justice in the Face boldly. There are two Men that walk very
fearfully, the Man that borrows what he has, and the other that steals that he
has. The one is afraid of an Arrest, the other of hanging. So it is with poor
Sinners; The ungodly Man that calls not upon God at all, steals all, for he
never asks Gods leave; he steals the Mercies of God without asking God's leave
whether he shall have them or no. There is another, that is the Professor that
knows not Christ; he indeed will ask God for Mercies and does perform Duties;
he will pray, he will give thanks, and he will fast, and, in his own conceit,
do whatever God requires, but he rests here; but notwithstanding all this,
Justice is not satisfied. It is your Duty to give thanks for Mercies, and your
Duty to pray, and your Duty to fast. But do you think your Duties are Payments
to God for what you receive? And do you think, because you perform Duty, you
satisfy God? No, there will come a day of Reckoning, and you must lie in
Prison till you have paid the last Mite, if your Mercies are not bought with
Christ's Blood; but if Jesus Christ is become your Life, then all is paid; for
you have all your Mercies in a way of Redemption. So the Psalmist, Psalm. 107.1.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever.
Will giving Thanks entitle to these mercies? No, let the redeemed of the Lord
say so: You that are Christ's, all God's Mercies are yours, made over to you,
every Mercy is bought and paid for. But an Unbeliever, every comfort he has he
must pay dear for, his Mercies and Talents are but borrowed; but all the
Mercies you have that are in Christ, are bought with the Blood of Christ. What
you have is your own in Christ Jesus, therefore none can take it from you.

Thirdly, Satan cannot rob you of your comfort, if you are in Christ; he may
cast Floods after you, but he cannot rob you; he may wash you, but shall not
drown you. Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it. You are not built on this Rock, that have not Christ to
be yours, do what you will; but taking hold on Christ, you are built on a Rock,
Mat. 16. And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will
I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her. Christ
is not only a Rock to uphold you, but he is Life to keep you, that all the
Floods that the Devil casts after you shall not drown you; Satan's Temptations
may come, and may try you; the Saint may see a great Cloud arising, but it
shall not drown him. David complains, That Deep calls unto Deep, and that the
Waves and Billows were gone over him. Though there may be great Waves, great
Trials, great Temptations, they shall not overcome you. I tell you, the Devil
shall never drown you that are in Christ; the Ship may be tossed, the poor
Saints may cry out, Lord, save, or we perish; but if Christ is in the Ship, no
fear, if Christ is yours; if you are tossed with Temptations, and perplexed
with great Troubles, all the Devil can do against you shall but stir you up to
awaken Christ, though he intends the undoing of your Souls. Have you
Temptations or Wand^^ngs in Prayer? Does it not make you to cry to Christ more
vehemently, to run to Christ more constantly, to rely on Christ more heartily?
The Devil's Temptations do but wash away your Filth, you are kept still upon
the Rock, you shall not be drowned: The lovingkindnesses of the Lord are still
the same to you, the Devil robs most of the World, he robs them of their Time,
and their Souls and Comforts, and they will certainly be undone: But now though
Satan does trouble you with Temptations and Corruptions, you that are
Believers, he shall not rob you of your comfort, because you live on Christ.

Fourthly, Death shall not rob you of your comfort. If Christ is yours, Death
in and through Christ is conquered. If a Lion or Bear did lie dead in the
street, every little Boy would be ready to stand on them, and make nothing of
them; but if they were alive, they would be afraid of them, and not dare to
come near them: So Death being conquered by Christ, the Sting being taken away,
the weakest Believer in Christ may insult over Death. Death comes peaceably to
tell you, God would have you come home to your Mansions of Glory. But a carnal
Man out of Christ, Death undoes him; he may cry out, I am undone, lost and
damned for ever; I shall never breath on Earth more, I shall never hear a
Sermon, I shall never have an Offer of Christ more, I am going to everlasting
Destruction: But to a Believer the Sting is taken out. Sin was the Instrument
that brought Death into the World, and the Death of Christ is the Death of sin.
A Believer, when he dies, may say, I shall change my Life for a better, it does
not rob him of his Joy; Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. When Christ, who
is your Life, shall appear, you shall also appear with him; I am going to live
a better Life, I am going to live with him that I live to. Death is conquered
to a Believer, it cannot rob you.

First, It cannot rob you of your Joy, for you are going to a better Life. A
Believer may say, I am going where I shall never grieve God more, where I shall
never cry more. Why hidest thou thy Face? I am going to that Christ I live to;
my very Heart longs for him, whose Presence I shall e're long enjoy: You are
but going out of the lower Room into the upper; you are but going from the
Church Militant below, to the Church Triumphant above; you are going up to him
that came down to you: That Life is safest that Death cannot rob us of. O what
a lamentable Outcry will there be with many at their Death! There would be more
Outcries with Sinners than there are when Death comes, but that the Devil
stupifies them, that they do not cry out till they are in Hell: But if Men were
set on the brink of Hell, and could see the misery they are going to, Christ
not being theirs, O what a dreadful Outcry would there be! But now a Soul in
Christ may challenge Death, O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy
Victory? O Death, what have thou against me? Christ has took away thy Sting. O
you that have Christ your Life, how sweet should every Sermon be? How sweet
should every Sabbath be? How sweet should every Word be? Methinks your Souls
should be bound up in Love, Grace, Glory, and the Comforts and Blessings of the
Covenant of Grace; and when Death approaches, you should think of Christ's sweet
Words to you, Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. O what a joyful Day will the
day of Death be to a Believer!

Secondly, Death cannot take away the comfort of a Believers Company. We are
sorry to leave our Relations and Friends and Company that we delight in here;
but never was your Heart so taken up with Delight in the Saints, in the best
Frame that ever you were in, to the thousandth part, to what you will be in
Glory: But the Wicked will be robbed of the comfort of their Company; they will
then curse the Day that ever they saw each others Face; but the Saints will
meet all the glorious Saints, Patriarchs and Prophets: God is yours, Christ is
yours, and you will come to a glorious Assembly; the Company that you delighted
in on Earth you will come to after Death, Heb. 12.22, 23. But ye are come unto
Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem; and to
an innumerable company of Angels, to the General Assembly and Church of the
first born, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and the
Spirits of Just Men made perfect. What a glorious company are these! O how many
glorious Suns will you see in one day? The very first moment you enter into
Glory what a glorious sight will you see! O how will you admire that blessed
Face that was spit on for you! O how will you admire those blessed Wounds in
his Arms, Legs, Side and Heart, that was made for your healing! Satan cannot
rob you of your company; you loved the People of God on Earth, and you are
going to them. So the Apostle comforts the Thessalonians, that at the Death of
their Relations they should not complain, 1 These. 4.13, 14. But I would not
have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that they
sorrow not even as others that have no hope; for if we believe that Jesus died,
and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with
him. Do not you fear, Death shall not rob you of your company, Christ will
bring them with him. For this we say unto you, by the word of the Lord, that we
are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord. Death cannot rob you of your
glorious Company, the glorious Saints that are gone to Heaven before, and they
that remain behind. You shall never lose one Friend by Death.

Thirdly, Death cannot rob the Believer of his Life, for his Life is hid with
Christ; when Death comes they do but sleep; that Immortal Soul that God
breathed into the Body that is now living, that goes immediately into Immortal
Glory. Death does but enlarge it, and set it in that place where it will never
be confined to a sinful Body: The Saints will never cry out with David, Ps.
102.2. Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble: But the time
will then come that all his Fetters will be knocked off, and he will then indeed
come to know that Life that he has long wished for: So that Death cannot rob
them of their Life; they do but fetch a Nap in the Grave till Christ comes and
calls for them. If we would live for ever, let us live Christ now; if we would
not have Death kill us, let us kill sin now, Romans 6.23. For the wages of sin is
Death, but the gift of God is eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord. So
that there is eternal Life laid up in Christ. Dying, it is but a going out of
your dark Chambers here below, to that Glory above, where you will have no need
of a Candle, or the Sun; for God and the Lamb are the Light of that place;
there the Saints shall never cry out, O my Heart, or, O my Head, but shall be
taken up in the Arms of the Lord of Glory. When Christ appears, who is our
Life, What then? we shall appear with him in Glory, Col. 3.3, 4. For ye are
dead, and your Life is hid with Christ in God: When Christ who is our life
shall appear, then shall they also appear with him in Glory. The Saints, if
they consider, need not be so afraid at the approaching of Death, for it will
be the real happiness of their Souls; for then you shall enjoy that perfect
Communion and Blessedness that you long for here on this side the Grave. We are
willing to have rest, but are loath to go to bed; we are willing to be released
of our sins and troubles, but we are unwilling to die, and we shall never be
wholly freed from them till then. How lingering are we, as if our Desires were,
that Christ's Chariotwheels should stay a little longer! But sure were the Joy
of this glorious Life more cleared up to us, we should long to put off our
Mortality, and to put on Immortality, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. You that have Christ
for your Life are very safe, Death shall rob you of nothing; for the Apostle
says, For him to live is Christ, and to die is gain. Death does but take away
that clod that we carry about us, that we may see the Sun of Righteousness more
glorious, and enjoy him more perfectly in immortal Life and Glory. Death robs
most, but shall not rob the Believer; you shall but make an exchange of Heaven
for Earth, Glory for your Shame, Joy for Sorrow; for your crying and weeping
here, praise and Hallelujahs above.

Fourthly, Death shall not rob you of your Treasure. Indeed the Damned live,
but it is a miserable Life, living Death in everlasting chains. When Death
comes, the Treasure of the Saint is perfectly enjoyed: What they had an earnest
of before, now they have in possession; now they shall put on the glorious
Robe, and the Royal Crown on their Head; they shall put on the Crown of Glory
and of Righteousness; Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness. O
what a laying up is here! When the Apostle was ready to be offered up, says
he, I am ready to be offered up, but I shall lose nothing by it, for I cannot
have my Crown till I die, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought the good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown
of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at that
day; and not to me only, but unto all that love his appearing. I am ready to
go, I do not repent my going, I know very well the time of my departure is at
hand: But what then? Though it be, I have fought the good fight, I have kept
the Faith, I have lived Christ, I have made him the hope of my Life, and now I
shall receive my Crown: I have been in Troubles and Trials, and in my Lords
Battles, but now I am going to receive a Crown of Righteousness: Why so? Had
Paul deserved it by his Works? No, but as God is a righteous God, and had
promised, Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; I shall have it, when I am
offered up, when I am put to Death, and then shall I wear a Crown, an Immortal
Crown on my Head for ever; and this is not only for me, but for all that love
his appearing; they must needs love his appearing that have him for their Life.
O the glorious Crowns that the Saints shall be crowned with at that day! a
Crown of Life that never withers. Here our Comforts wither while we hold them
in our Hand; they wither like a Beautiful Flower, in the Morning it holds up
its Head, but by Evening it is withered. A Crown of Glory that never fades
away. O what treasures will the Saints have when Death comes, that have made
Christ their Life! The Worldling will lose his Treasure, the Hypocrite will
lose his hope, he will never hope more, Job. 27.8. For what is the hopes of the
Hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his Soul? Tho he has
gained applause of Men, he shall lose it, Dan. 12.3. And they that be wise
shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever. What is the Hope of a Hypocrite,
of a Christless Soul, when he has breathed his Last, when his Soul sits
quivering on his Lips? Alas! I have made a Profession of Religion, I thought I
had something laid up, but all is lost for ever. O that I should hope in vain,
and now the end of my hope is come, and not the Salvation but Damnation of my
Soul! Though I have done many things, and made a clutter in the World, and eat
and drunk in Christ's Presence, it is all in vain that I have hoped, my
strength and my hope is perished for ever; and then all his Peace is lost; No
Peace, says my God, to the wicked. Then the Storm of Divine Vengeance will
come and awaken the false hope of the Hypocrite; then the Worldling will lose
all his Riches. The Young Man was sorrowful to leave all and follow Christ.
Persons are afraid to do any thing for Religion, for fear of wanting. But
whether the Young Man will part with all to follow Christ or no, he must leave
all at Death, Death does spoil them of all their Treasure: But it is not so
with the Saint. The poor Christless Soul may say, when he considers his state,
Whatever I have, e're long it will be taken from me; if I have treasured up the
Worlds Goods, and have not made Christ my Life, I am like for ever to be
undone; to use this World to God's Glory, will be our Mercy; but to over-love
it, it will be our undoing; but Death to the Saint will be the year of Jubilee,
they shall have double for all their Trials, Troubles and Sorrows; when Death
comes they shall have all restored to them; whatever they have lost for Christ,
it will be gain then; they have laid up for themselves a good Foundation for
time to come, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Charge them that are
rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain
riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy; that
they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
times to come, that they may lay hold on eternal Life. A good Foundation
against the time to come; the Saints have their Treasure in store when they go
hence, Mat. 6.20. Lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven, where neither
moth nor rust does corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through nor steal.
In Heaven there his Heart was, there his Hope was, there his Desire was, there
his Longing was, and now he comes to die his Treasure is safe for him; then a
Saint, while he lives, he need not fear Death, he lives a certain Life.

Secondly, He may live comfortably.

First, He may live certainly on comforts. I am Christ's, and I know nothing
shall pluck me from Christ. I am persuaded: What are you persuaded of, Paul? I
am persuaded that neither Life nor Death, nor Angels nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other Creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. May not some Temptation, some Corruption over-set you?
No, says he, they shall not, I shall be a Conqueror through Christ, nothing
shall separate me from him, I am persuaded Death shall not; if I live I live
Christ, if I die I shall live with Christ. Nor Angels; Good Angels will not, if
they would they should not; nor bad Angels shall not, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present; Buffitings, Reproaches, Scornings, Imprisonment,
Sufferings; what if you go through all this, and are not separate from Christ?
Yet is there not something to come? Do you not fear Death and Judgment that
will be a Terror to most of the Sons and Daughters of Men. Whatever comes I
still am Christ's, neither height nor depth shall separate me from Christ. Let
mine Iniquities reach up as high as Heaven, the righteousness of Christ is
still higher. Nor Depths: It shall not swallow a Believer up, he is held safe
in the everlasting Arms of infallible Grace and Mercy. What a certain Life does
a Saint live, that is sure never to be separated from Christ? things present
cannot do it, nor things to come shall not. What a blessed Life, an happy Life,
a safe Life is this! O poor Christless Soul, how uncertain do thou live! You
are not sure of abiding here one moment. The World is like an handful of Sand
running through your Fingers, like the Air that you breath in, that you cannot
hold a moment in your Fist. But the Believer has a certainty, he can assure
himself he shall never be poor and miserable, nor deprived of true Happiness,
but shall be safe for ever in the Hands of Christ: As for this World, it is
uncertain; how long we shall enjoy Life, Liberty, or any Mercy we know not. But
the best Counsel I can give you, is to get Christ, and then you will be safe:
Things may have a good Aspect one day, and another day as bad, but yet in
Christ you are safe for ever, in Life, in Death, and to all Eternity. Here you
are certain of nothing, Favor of Men, or high or low, rich or poor, is
unconstant; the Wheel turns in a moment. But if you have Christ you have a
certain Life. O how comfortably may a Saint live in all troubles and changes
whatsoever, that has Christ for his Life. We use to say, It is an ill Wind
blows no body good. But I say, let the Wind blow as ill as it will, it blows
the Saint always good; that the Soul may say, Let what will come I live well.
We may compare a Saint that is troubled for outward things, to a Man that has
an Orchard full of Trees laden with Fruit, but because the Wind has blown off
the Leaves, sits down and weeps. If one should ask, What do you weep for? Why,
my Apple Tree Leaves are gone. Why, you have your Apples, have you not? Yes;
then what a foolish Man are you to weep for a few Leaves, that might hinder
both sight and ripening of your Fruit? The comforts of this World are but
Leaves: Why do you weep for the Leaves, while you have the Fruit? Glorious
Promises, Glorious Peace, Glorious Pardon, Riches of Grace, Hope of Glory, and
set down to weep or be cast down for the Loss of a few worldly comforts. And
the truth of it is, so narrow are our Spirits, so unbelieving are our Hearts,
that we many times weep for Losses here, as if we had no better Portion. What,
weeping while the Boughs hang full of Fruit? What, weep while your Souls have
the glorious Promises, and glorious Peace, and glorious Pardon, and a glorious
Christ, and hopes of Life Eternal through him? Will you weep for a few outward
Losses and Crosses, while your Souls are filled with Fruit? While your Souls
are as Trees bringing forth Twins? This is much to be lamented, that the Saints
do thus mourn for outward comforts; let the Wind blow which way it will, it
cannot take away your Life: You may eat of the Fruit of the Tree of Life in the
midst of Paradise, that you may leave your Drops below, and come to the full
Fountains above. If a Man has enough, he may afford to lose a little. Says
the Psalmist, I have a goodly Heritage, the Lord is my Portion, Psalm. 16.5, 6.
The Lord is the portion of mine Inheritance and of my cup; thou maintainest my
lot; the lines are fallen to me in a pleasant place, yea, I have a goodly
Heritage. While Christ is my Life, my Glory, my Portion, I have a goodly
Portion: May be the Winds may arise, Storms of Affliction, Storms of Trouble,
the Lord knows what may be; but make sure of Christ; let the Wind blow what way
it will, it can but blow off the Leaves, it cannot take away the Fruit. The
Church says in Lam. 3.24. The Lord was her portion, she would hope in him. Is
it so, that a Believers Life is bound up in Christ? There is a great deal of
difference between a Believer and another Man at Death: What are the thoughts
of a carnal Man at Death? What if they were known to the Standers-by! My Life
is done, and my Misery is come, O that I were to live in the World, and never
die. But what is a Believers thought? O, says he, that my Heart may be settled
on Christ, that I may know Christ to be my Life, and God mine, I would bless
his Name for ever. There is a difference between a moral Man and a Believer:
How is it? I have lived honestly, I have done no body any harm, God deal with
me as I have done with others. Now a Believer will discourse of things in
another manner, I have nothing in my self, I am sin and sinful, but Christ is
my Life, therefore I desire not to stand in one of my good Works in Judgment,
but wrap up my self wholly in Christ's Righteousness. Come to a Legal Man, one
under the Law, O I would pray more, fast more, if I were to live longer. Thus
he would do a great deal of Work in a little time, not considering if he lives
longer he carries the same Heart about him. But a Believer says, If I am to
live it shall be by Faith. I would believe more, know Christ more, I would live
upon Christ more, and when I die I would die in him, and be found in him at the
great day.

3 Infer. Is it so that a Believer's Life is bound up in Christ? What boundless
Love was this in God to poor Sinners, that he unbosoms himself to them, that he
should give Christ to be their Life! When they were carnal, wicked and sinful,
that then Jesus Christ should be revealed unto them; that the Lord should
bestow on dead Sinners such a precious Life, who were by Nature poor, dead,
heavy Lumps of Hell? What infinite surpassing Love is this, that should give
such a Life to raise up Lumps of Hell to Heavenly Glory! Christ clothed
himself with Human Flesh and Blood, that so he might become an Infinite Mass and
boundless Sea of visible speaking, breathing, weeping, bleeding, living, dying
Grace: All the glorified Saints and Angels are but living Monuments, and
ever-living Tenants of this Free Grace; this Grace of Christ perfumeth Heaven
and Earth: All the Grace which God does, or can put forth for the Salvation of
Sinners, is laid up and exhibited by Christ; he has broad and strong Shoulders,
which can bear to Heaven the most heavy Lumps of Hell. There is more Force and
Omnipotence in Christ's Infirmity and Sufferings, than in all the strength and
efficacy of Men and Angels. There is more Life in Christ's Death, more Riches in
his Poverty, more Victory in his hanging on the Cross, than in all the World
besides; yea, Christ's very Sighs, Tears, Sweat, Stripes, Reproaches and
Faintings have a Sovereign Efficacy in them for the procuring and conferring
Grace on his redeemed ones. Thence we receive of Christ's Fullness Grace for
Grace. Look as the Child receives from his Parent Limb for Limb, Member for
Member; as the Sons of Adam receive all of his Fullness, Sin for Sin, Lust for
Lust, so Christ's regenerated ones receive of his Fullness, Grace for Grace;
there is not any Grace in the Heart of Christ, but his Members have an
Impartment and Resemblance thereof. Now this infinite Plenitude of Grace in
Christ, which renders him so glorious, proceeds originally from the Election of
God the Father; for all the Treasures of Grace are originally lodged in the
Sovereign good pleasure or Heart of God the Father, who has ordained Christ as
Mediator, through whom all are to be conveyed to the Elect. This ought
greatly to be remarked or heeded by the Friends of Christ, that albeit the
Divine Essence and Sovereign Will of God be the Original Fountain of all Grace,
yet he has determined that not one drop of this Grace shall be derived unto
Sinners, but through Christ a Mediator. This is the great Mystery of the Gospel,
the great Wonder of Heaven and Earth, that the blessed God, who is the Fountain
of all Grace, Mr. Gale of the Saints Amity with God in Christ.
should so far condescend to Sinners, as to assume Human Nature, and to make it
a Receptacle and Vehicle to convey all Grace unto them.

4 Infer. Is Christ a Believers Life, and such a Life as has been discoursed:
How should Believers be endeared to Jesus Christ? What a thriving, happy,
blessed, glorious, surpassing Life do Believers live! It is natural to Persons
to love their Lives more than all Enjoyments. What Cost and Pains will Persons
be at to preserve their natural Lives? but what are all the Lives that have
been since Adam to the end of the World, if compared with Christ, who is a
Believers Life? all their present and future Blessings are bound up in this
Life: What cause has every every Believer to mourn, that they love Christ so
little, that has loved them so much! His Love to them passes Knowledge, the
Depths of it can never be fathomed. With what purpose of Heart should every
Believer cleave to Christ! Christ loved with his whole Heart, as it does appear
by what he has suffered for his redeemed ones. Methinks I should hear a
Believer say with Peter, Lord, thou know I love thee. It is much to be
lamented, Christ has many professed Friends, but few real Lovers; as a Learned
Author says, Multi osculantur Christum, pauci vero amant, Many kiss Christ,
but few love him.

Many do as Orpha did to her Mother Naomi, Kiss and take their leave. And many
with Judas, Kiss and betray: But Oh with what an hearty and fervent Love should
every Believer love Christ!

5 Infer. Is Christ a Believers Life? Then what Life should there be in a
Believers Love toward each other! They that are bound up in the same bundle of
Life, should be bound up in a bundle of Love. How can our Love be hid from
them, in whom we see the Love of Christ appear? How can those pretend to be
made partakers of the Life of Christ, that are Strangers to the Love of Christ?
Rivers of Waters ran down David's Eyes, because Men kept not God's Law. Have we
not cause in our days to shed a Flood of Tears, that Christians break Christ's
new Commandment, who has commanded his Disciples to love one another. There
are many that pretend to be passed from Death to Life, but few there are that
love the Brethren. Are not many so bound up in their own Opinion, as if their
whole Salvation lay therein, laying such weight and stress thereon, as if none
could be saved, but them that jump in with them in their Opinion, while it may
be all the while they are grossly mistaken? But if their Form and way of Worship
be right, they mistake the Mark, that rest there for Salvation. How do such
despise Persons holier and sounder in the Principles of Religion than
themselves? and while they profess themselves to be Christians of the highest
Rank, they deny an Article of our Christian Faith, that all that own themselves
Christians profess to believe, viz. the Communion of Saints, denying Fellowship
with them that have Fellowship with the Father, and his Son Christ Jesus; such
as are bound up in (...) things, as Tith of Mint, Annis and Cummin, neglect the
weightier matters, Judgment, Mercy and Faith; not but that it is good to be
zealous for every Truth of Christ; but not to let our Zeal run out more in the
Form than the Power of Godliness, as the Pharisees of old did. Where Love is
wanting, the life and power of Godliness is absent from such Persons. If Love
to the Brethren is a mark of Grace, I believe many that account themselves very
good Christians fail of that mark, except none are their Brethren but those of
their own Opinion; then Papists, and Quakers, and all such Persons that hold
together in a cursed Unity to uphold damnable Heresies, may be said to love the
Brethren, as well as such; for they love not for Christ's sake, nor as they
bare the Image of God, but for Opinions sake. They that love the Brethren, that
love such as have the Lord Jesus formed upon their Hearts, will love every
person that is sound in the Faith, and holy in Life, though he differ in
Judgment in some outward Forms. Persons being great in their own Eyes, makes
them look so loftily upon their Brethren, as Luther says of himself, Tantus
eram sanctus ut purissimus fuerim omnes si potuissem occidere, I was so great a
Saint in my own esteem, that I was ready to slay all if I could; and this he
did out of a blind Zeal. The Pride of Men's Hearts, together with their blind
Zeal, cause persons to exalt themselves, and strive to make the Doctrine and
Life of others odious to the People, although they are such as God has given his
Vrim and Thummim to. While Persons are contending about Words, and distracting
their Hearers with things that concern not their Salvation, and endeavoring to
beget a Prejudice in their Hearts against Godly Ministers, they in the mean
time neglect to preach down Heresies and false Doctrins, that strike at the
Principles of Faith, and welfare of immortal Souls. Surely all those that are
begotten from the Dead unto a lively hope by Christ Jesus, will love all those
that are made partakers of the same Life, and will not cease daily to mourn for
their Deficiency therein.

6 Infer. Is Christ a Believers Life, and such a Life as you have heard? then
what a miserable state is a Christless Soul in! A state of Darkness while they
live, a state of misery, when they die; the Cup of Wrath without mixture,
eternal misery will be the portion of the wicked. Oh what a state of blindness
and darkness do they live on Earth? And what a state of misery will they be in
in the other World? But you may say, How shall I know that Christ is mine? I
shall lay down a few Characters; but I shall

First, Show who they are that have not Christ for their Life.

Secondly, Who they are that have Christ for their Life. I shall begin with the
Negative.

First, That Soul that was never sick unto Death for Christ, never yet had
Christ for its Life; that Soul that never saw himself undone without Christ,
that Soul never made Christ his Life: They that never groan under the body of
Sin and Death, that never cried out, Woe is me, I am undone, what shall I do to
be saved? they are dead in Trespasses and Sins: They that never saw the
Sentence of Death in themselves, never made Christ their Life, 2 Cor. 1.9. But
we had the Sentence of Death in our selves, but in God which raises the dead.

When a Soul comes to say, Alas, I have gone as far as I can, but I cannot get
peace nor comfort by all I do, therefore I must lie down and perish if I have
not Christ to be mine; I have nothing of my own to cover me, I shall be naked;
if I have not his Blood to wash me, I shall die in my sins. If you believe not
in me, says Christ, you shall die in your sins. Better die on a Dunghill,
better die in a Prison, better die in a Fiery Furnace in Christ, than in a
Palace out of him. But what remedy shall there be to save us from our sins?
Why, Christ does not set them to work for Life, but to believe in him, who is
the believing Sinners Life. Let a Legalist or Formalist, they that never were
pained at the Heart with a sense of their undon state; they that have not
Christ for their life; what a deal of difference is between a Believer and
them, as much as thereis between a person that is sick, and another that is
dead: He that is dead, if he be laid on the ground, there is all quiet, and lay
a Weight on him he is quiet; but go and lay your Ear at the sick Man's Bed, and
there is groaning and crying, O my Head, O my Heart! What is it you want? I
want Breath, I want a Physician, I want Life. We preach Christ to you poor
sinners, What is the reason? You do not groan for this Christ: Why? You are
dead in your sins: You go away, and it may be some particular things we tell
you of, you can repeat them when you go home. Some particular Duties you
perform, but are your Souls awakened? Do you groan for Christ? Do you go home
pained at the Heart? Was Christ ever your Life? Do you cry out, I am dead and
undon without Christ be my Life? If you were sick at Heart, and were pained for
Christ, we should hear of you: It may be you go to hear as your fancy leads
you, but not with a sense of your wants. You fancy sometimes this Man, sometimes
that Man, but were your Souls ever sick for Christ? Did your Hearts ever break
within you: Did your Souls ever mourn in secret, Lord give me a Christ? I am
afraid of this little number, many that are dead, that Christ was never your
Life. When persons are in a Swound, put Spirits or any thing into their Nose
they do not mind it; but when they come to themselves, they cry out, I am sick,
O give me something. Says our blessed Lord Jesus, John 5.25. Verily, Verily I
say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live. When Christ comes with
an effectual Call by his Spirit to the Heart in his Word, it raises up the dead
Man. If there be a whole Family dead, there is not one Groan heard; but if one
that is alive be sick or in pain, he fills the place with Groans. Talk of any
thing rather than Christ; any preaching is for some Men rather than Christ,
that is foolishness to some: Ay but Soul, whether thou will have Christ or no,
we must preach Christ, and then we can give up our account with Joy. It is the
whole Work of a Minister to preach Christ; whatever Duties are Spiritual, they
all flow from Christ; but where Christ is not dwelling in the Soul, all they
perform is dead and formal. Silent Professor, quiet Professor, quiet with
outward Duties, with a Form of Religion, and so rest until you are undone. If
once God calls you, and awakens you by the effectual working of his Spirit,
then your Souls will cry out, O give me a Christ! If I have not the Blood of
Christ I am undone! If I have not the Righteousness of Christ I am undone: If I
have not the Spirit of Christ I am none of his: And whose are you then? The
Devils, Romans 8.9. Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of
his. There is no middle state, you are the Devils that are not Christ's; you are
dead in sin under Bondage, if you have not the Spirit of Christ: Be what you
will, a Professor, a Person in Communion, or out of Communion, be rich or poor,
a person of Gifts, a person that can hear, read and pray, if you have not the
Spirit of Christ, you are none of his. When the dead persons were raised up by
Christ, something was called for them to eat. O, says the Soul, when he is
awakened by Grace, give me a Christ or I perish. O that I had a Cordial of his
Blood! I want his Blood, I want his Righteousness, his Promises; they shall
hear the Voice of the Son of God and live.

It is called a Vivification. We are by Nature dead in Trespasses and Sins, in
our deliverance from them we are said to be quickened, Ephesians. 5.5. Though dead,
we hear the voice of the Son of God and live, being made alive unto God through
Jesus Christ, Romans 6.11. Now no such Works can he wrought in us, but by an
effectual Communication of a Principle of Spiritual Life, and nothing will
deliver us. Some think to evade the power of this Argument, by saying, that all
these Expressions are metaphorical, and arguing from them are but fulsom
Metaphors; and it is well if the whole Gospel be not a Metaphor to them: But if
there be not an Impotency in us by Nature unto all Acts of Spiritual Life, like
that which is in a dead Man unto the Act of Life natural, if there be not a
like power of God required unto our Deliverance from their condition, and they
work in us a Principle of Spiritual Obedience, as it is required unto the
raising of him that is dead. They may as well say, that the Scripture speaks
not truly, as that it speaks metaphorically, and that the almighty Power, the
exceeding Greatness of God's Power that is put forth, are exercised herein,
Ephesians. 1.18. Col. 2.12, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. 2 Pet. 1.3. And what do these Men
intend by this quickening, this raising from the Dead by the power of God? A
persuasion of our minds by rational motives taken from the Word, and the things
contained in it. But was there ever heard of such a monstrous Expression? If
there be nothing else in it, what could the Holy Writers intend, by calling
such a Work as this, a quickening of them who were dead in trespasses and sins
through the mighty power of God, unless it were by a noise and insignificant
Words to draw us off from a right understanding of what is intended, Dr. Owen
on the Spirit, p. 279. Sect. 49.
and it is well if some are not of that mind.

Do you hear the Voice of Christ continually in the Word preached? but you must
hear another Voice, or you are undone for ever. If the Voice of the
Ministration of the Word, without the Power of the Spirit, would awaken Men,
there would be fewer in Hell, and more in Heaven than there are. This is the
external means; but yet there must be the pouring out of the Spirit, or else
this will do no good.

And here I shall show how the Spirit of God works on the Heart.

First, The Spirit of God works effectually, that is, the Voice of the Son of
God. How long may we preach the Resurrection of the Dead to a dead Man before
he rises? but that Resurrection that is preached when Christ comes with the
Sound of the Trumpet, and says, Ye dead arise; presently the Dead arise. We
may come and sound the Trumpet in the Ears of Sinners, but they will not
hearken, till Christ come by the effectual working of his Holy Spirit; then it
works indeed, Acts 16.14. speaking of Lydia, whose Heart the Lord opened, and
then she attended to the things of the Kingdom of God, And a certain Woman
named Lydia, a Seller of Purple of the City Thyatira, which worshipped God,
heard us, whose Heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things that
were spoken of Paul. She attended as one whose Heart was opened, and was sick
for Christ, and rejoiced to hear Christ preached.

Secondly, The Spirit of God comes and persuades the Heart to close with
Christ. Says a sick person, I am persuaded if I could but have such a
Physician I should be cured, healed of my sickness: So poor Souls lie
complaining, but not in Despair; they are sick unto Death, but yet shall not
die; they see themselves lost without Christ, yet shall not die for want of
Christ: The Spirit persuades them to embrace Christ, John 6.45. It is written,
they shall be taught of God; every man therefore that has heard and learned of
the Father comes unto me. It is written in the Prophet, they shall be all
taught of God: Is this to leave off all teaching? No, they shall be all taught
of God: How? Why God shall teach them by the Power of his Spirit in the Word:
And how then? Every Man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father
comes to me: God teaches them by the World, and the Spirit persuades them
there is Life in Christ: The Soul is persuaded to close with Christ; for the
Soul that is sick for Christ shall never die. Says Christ, He that believes
on me shall never die. But the sick Sinner is persuaded that Christ can heal
him, and will heal him; he groans, but not in Despair; he sighs, but not as a
Person that is out of hopes, but does believe that Jesus Christ will be his
Salvation, and is his Life; he shall hear the Voice of the Son of God: The
preaching of the Word is the means, but it must be the Spirit of God that must
work and make it effectual; and then the Soul makes no delay, no consideration
of this or that, but closes with Jesus Christ, as a dying person closes with a
Medicine that may cure him.

Thirdly, The Voice of Christ is a Voice that engrafts it self with power in
the Heart. The Apostle says, Jam. 1.21. Receive with meekness the engraffed
word, which is able to save your Souls. They are peswaded that Jesus Christ is
their Life, the Promises of Christ are become theirs; though they are sick of
Love to Christ, they shall not die for want of Christ. Ask Believers what it is
they want; they will tell you, they want more strength from Christ, more
knowledge of Christ, more Communion with Christ: Now they that have not had
these Symptoms of Life, lie yet in the Grave of sin, and the Worm of Conscience
feeds on them, and they feel it not: Millions feel not the Worm of Conscience
till they come to Hell. Says Christ, I came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance. The whole need no Physician, but they that are sick. The
Second Character of such that never made Christ their Lise, are those that
never see themselves poor and undone without Christ. Thou say thou art high,
and increased in Goods, and have need of nothing, and know not that thou art
wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3.17. What,
without Christ, and not cry out, thou art poor, miserable and undone! They that
never see themselves poor, miserable and undone, are yet without Christ. What,
without Christ, and well enough! What has enriched you? Need of nothing! What,
are you well enough without Christ? Thou say, I am increased: What, can you
patch up with any Duties, with any Hopes, with any thing below Christ? But,
says Christ, thou art poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked.
3ly. They never made Christ their Life, that never prized that glorious Gospel
that brings them Tidings of this Life. If a Man be sick unto Death, as he
thinks, bring him tidings of Life, it is the best News he can hear of; bring
him Tidings that his Will is made, his Estate is settled, very well; but how is
it with you? I am a dead Man: O Sir, but I have brought one with me, that
says, he can certainly cure you: This is the best News, says he, that you
have brought me: So is Jesus Christ come to save poor Sinners, of whom I am the
chief, says a poor Soul. This is a Saying worthy of all Acceptance. They that
do not prize the Gospel, and find it the sweetest thing in the World, yet have
not Christ for their Life: There is that in Nature that persons must be doing
something, that they may obtain Blessedness. The Israelites stripped themselves
for to make them a God: So do formal Professers, they will be at much Cost and
Charge for an outward Profession, and then fall down and adore their own Doing;
but to prize this Gospel, that brings them News of a Redeemer, it is very rare
to find one among many. But now the Soul that longs for Christ, is sick for
Christ, rejoices to hear these glad Tidings. Says Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the
World to save sinners, of whom I am chief. It is the best News that ever I
heard: If the Gospel is not joyful News to you, if it does not affect you, you
never had Christ. When a Soul comes to close with Christ, he says, And is
there hope for me, and did Christ die for me? And did Christ come to be Life
for me? O welcome News, the best that ever I heard in my Life! 2 Timothy 1.10. But
now is made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has
abolished Death, and brought Life and Immortality to Light through the Gospel.
Life is brought through the Gospel: What Life? Immortal Life, Immortal Grace,
Immortal Salvation, to a poor undone Sinner. If this Gospel is not prized, but
as a thing indifferent, as many make their calling and business their main end;
but the Gospel is a thing they can best spare. Such never made Christ their
Life. In ver. 9. the Apostle says, Christ has called us with an holy calling,
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and Grace, which
was given us in Christ before the World began, who has abolished Death. The
Death of immortal Souls under the Curse of the Law and Wrath of God. Christ
takes Death away: And what has he brought? Life and Immortality to light
through the Gospel: Were you but sensible of the Worth of this Life, how would
you love the Wells of Salvation, from whence is drawn the Waters of Life? Love
the Pot that holds the Manna that preserves this Life? Love the Messenger that
brings you Tidings, You shall live and not die? How would a condemned
Malefactor love that Person that should bring him a ^ardon; yea, the Messenger
that should bring him News of it? So it is with the condemned Sinner, the
Sentence is passed, He that believes not, is Damned. O what Joy is it to hear
of Salvation by Christ, when the Sinner has a sense of his misery! This
immortal Life comes through the Gospel; When a Sermon of Christ is preached,
News from Heaven is brought to Sinners; and what News is it? O, that there is
mercy and pardon for poor Sinners! Says the believing Soul, shall my Soul
live, is Christ become my Salvation? O what blessed Gospel is this! What
precious News is this! Now Soul, do you look on the Gospel glad Tidings, and
the Feet of them that bring it beautiful? if not, be sure Christ is not your
Life.

Fourthly, They never had Christ for their Life that live in themselves, that
center in themselves, on themselves, and not above themselves: As thus, Take a
dead Man, and wrap him up in Silk and Silver, with the best Perfumes you can,
it centres all in Putrefaction, Rottenness and Death; all the sweet Smells and
Perfumes will not keep him from corruption. But take a living Man, he lives on
something to preserve Life: It would be improper to say a Man lives on nothing;
a living Man must have something to subsist with. A dead sinner centres in
himself, what Duty he performs he takes to be his Life. But a Soul in Christ
lives on Christ, and not on his Performances, tho he performs Duty. So much for
the Negative, now follows the Affirmative. What are the Characters of them that
have Christ their Life.

First, If Christ is your Life, you will love the Word of God, and look upon it
to be very precious, that has been the means of begetting and nourishing this
Life in you; As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that you
may go thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. If you have tasted that the Lord is gracious, you
will love the Food that the Lord gives you. The Prodigal, when he returned home
to his Fathers House, then he thought his Food precious. The Word of Christ is
that which is very precious to the Soul; if you do not taste that the Lord is
gracious, you can never fall in love with Christ: There may be some Convictions
under the Word, but they will wear off again; there may be something that may
delight, but Souls that Christ is their Life, they come to relish the inward
sweetness and power of the Word of Christ, if you have tasted that the Lord is
gracious.

First, They will long for it.

Secondly, They will make it their Meat and Drink.

First, They will long for it. If a Child be crying for the Breast, if you give
it a Rattle, or any other thing, it will not please it, or still it without the
Breast: It is not any thing of this World, nor the Glory of it, will still a
Believer without Christ, Psalm. 84. See how the Psalmist praises the Courts of
God, how lovely it is, One day in thy Courts is better than a thousand: I had
rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of God, than to dwell in the Tents of
wickedness. Why, would you be a Doorkeeper in the House of God? Truly there
Beggars fare well: Hungry Souls would be first in, and last out, they would be
served more than once. Says a longing Soul, I would not have a Word drop
before I come, that I may lose nothing; I would be one of the first in and last
out; I would not have a Word drop, nor a Crum fall, I would hear all that is
spoken of Christ: How sweet is every Word of Christ! The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the Soul. More are they to be desired than (...) than much
fine Gold; sweeter than the (...) the Honeycomb, Ps. 19. And (...) prize thy
Word more than my (...) Food. Soul, thou that longest for the Word of Christ,
certainly thou art alive in Christ. Surely thou that longest for the Food of
Christ, live on Christ. I believe there are many poor doubting Souls among
you. If you were asked, when you are an hungry, if you were invited to a great
Feast, would you not leave that to go and hear Christ preached, would you not
leave your Meal to hear Christ's preous Word? Says Job, Chap. 23.12. I have
esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary Food. Then if thy Soul
longs for the Word of Grace, it is a sign that your Souls are made alive by
Christ. Whoever can say of the Word of Christ, My Soul longs for it, I long for
the Courts of God, I long for the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, I long for
the Pot of Manna, that I may taste of the Golden Manna; I long for the day when
Manna comes down from Heaven; if it is so, I say, from God's Word, though you
may have many castings down, your Souls are made alive by Christ, and he is
become your Salvation. A Saint makes Religion his Meat and Drink. It is one
thing (...) be waiting on God (...), and another thing to (...) Meat and Drink.
An (...) perform many things, and be large in Duty, and yet not make it his
Meat and Drink. John 4.31, 32. His Disciples prayed him, saying, Master, eat:
But he said unto them, I have meat to eat that you know not of. Alas, his Meat
was to do his Fathers Will: The Word of Christ his Ordinances and Duties are
Meat and Drink to the Believer; I live a Life that you do not know of, I have
Meat and Drink that you do not know of, I live in doing my Fathers Will. Says
a Believer, I live on Christ and his Word, and of all Mercies I enjoy nothing
so sweet to me as Christ and his Word, who is better to me than all outward
Mercies: If it be so with you, you may take comfort in this, that Christ is
become your Life; where the Word of Grace and means of Grace is become as Meat
and Drink to your Souls.

Secondly, A Soul that lives Christ, and has made Christ his Life, he lives
above the World: He may have some Fears and Doubts: But it is the Desire of a
Saint to live above the things of the World, If ye then be risen with Christ,
Says a Reverend Author, Amor meus pondus meum, Every Man goes where his Love
carries him.
seek those things that are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of
God; set your affections on things above, and not on things on the Earth, Col.
3.1, 2. When I was in my natural state, says a Believer, when the World went
well with me, I was mightily content; but now I am risen with Christ, made
alive with Christ, now my Heart is set on seeking things above; had I but
Communion with Christ, could I but walk with Christ, live upon Christ, let the
World go which way it will, tho I have many Fears and Discouragements, when I
have Communion with Christ, my Heart is above them all. O my Soul, what a good
Day it is when thou can enjoy Communion with Christ? The Believer lives
above: Though many times a Soul has his gloomy days in the World, when Fears
surround his Faith; but he gets above it again.

When they look above, where their Glory and Comfort is: Set your affections on
things above, and not on things below. There is an Exhortation and Dehortation.
Set your affections on things above, there is the Exhortation: And not on
things below, there is the Dehortation. Christians are often forbid, That they
should not love the World, and commanded positively, that they should set their
Hearts on things above. Tho a Believer is many times complaining, that his
Heart is too much on this present World; but, says a Believer, I desire my
Heart may be above. O that it might never be below again! O were it my Duty, I
would wish to be always in the House of God. Therefore when your Heart is
carried up above the World, you have an Interest in a better Life than this is
below.

Thirdly, To perform Duty, and to live on Christ above all Duties, is another
Character of one that makes Christ his Life. They are carried up above Duty;
they pray, and yet live on Christ by Faith; they hear, yet live on Christ for
Righteousness. Paul was a Man prizing Duty, and loving Duty as much as any
Saint; preaching all night, praying night and day, preaching in season and out
of Season; he was much in praying and fasting, yet, says he, I count all my
own righteousness but dung and dross without Christ. It is rare Wisdom to be a
Student in the Knowledge of Christ. An exact walking Christian, and yet to live
above Duty upon Christ. For one to neglect Duty, and yet profess Christ, that
is a Delusion: To profess Christ, and live upon any thing below Christ, is
Confusion; but to walk circumspectly in our Duty, and yet to live above all
upon Christ, is a Character of a true Believer.

Fourthly. If Christ is become your Life, you will be diligent under all means
of Grace, under those means where Life is begotten and preserved. The Impotent
Folks lay at the Pool of Bethesda, waiting for the moving of the Waters; if
ever they had healing it must be there. A Soul must be diligent about Christ's
Table, where Crumbs fall to feed their (...) And Simon answering, ^^d unto him,
Master, we have (...) the night and have taken nothing, nevertheless at thy
word I will let down the Net. A diligent waiting at Wisdom's Gate, a diligent
harkening when Christ will speak peace. We will hear what the Lord will speak,
are the Words of gracious Soul.

Fifthly, They that have Christ their Life, Christ is very precious unto them.
O how precious is a Man's Life! The Devil could tell God, Behold, skin for skin,
and all that a man has will he give for his Life. A Man would give any thing
for his Life: So a Believer would give any thing for a (...). The Devil appears
before God, What, is Job alive? Tho be is (...) of all, thou have spared his
(...) Man will give all that (...) his ^^fe. Says Paul, I count (...) but dung
and dross that I may win Christ, convin^^ (...) will do any thing for a Christ,
part with any thing, that they might but know Christ to be theirs. When a Man
is set on by Thieves, says he, Take all, so you save my Life, Job 2.4. And
Satan answered the Lord and said, skin for skin, all that a man has will he
give for his Life. If Job had a thousand Treasures, all that he had should go
for his Life. How willingly does the Mariner unlade his Ship, and cast all his
rich Wares overboard, that he may preserve that precious Jewel his Life? A Man
will give Skin upon Skin, Gold upon Gold, Treasure upon Treasure, that he may
save his own Life. Let Life be at stake, and a Man will give all the things he
has in the World for it, and think he has a good bargain. Life is the most
precious, the most excellent thing in Nature. Hester's Speech to the King in
her Petition, imports, that all other Losses might have been born, but the loss
of Life: Mr. Caril on Job.
She thought Liberty not worth the asking for, compared with Life.

A Christian values Christ above all things, Phil. 3.7. What was gain to me I
count loss, that I may have Christ; I count all but dung and dross for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ: For Christ is precious, his Love is
precious, his Offices precious, his Person precious, his Promises are precious.
I would give all, so I might have Christ to be mine: Where Christ is your Life,
you will prize him above all. O let me have Christ, know Christ, that is the
Sum of my Life. The Spouse told the Daughters, He was the chief among ten
thousand. Did you ever see Christ precious? Is his Blood precious? Do you long
for his Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.7. To them that believe he is precious.

Fifthly, If Christ is your Life, you will study Christ more and more. Many we
say, are their own Physicians, they will study Physic, that they may be their
own Doctors, and know how to apply Medicines to themselves. Those Souls that
know Christ to be their Life, they will study to know Christ more, that they
may have a Remedy for every Disease of their Souls ready at hand, and not be
strangers to that Grace and Mercy that helps in time of need.

I shall now come to wind up with a Word of Exhortation. Is it so, that the
Life of a Believer is such a glorious Life? O then you Christless Souls, cry
day and night till Christ is become your Life; it is a Life above all Lives; if
once you come to live Christ, you will say with David, One day in thy Court is
better than a thousand; and I had rather be a doorkeeper in the House of God,
than to dwell in the Tents of wickedness. I would rather enjoy one moments time
with Christ, than all the Pleasures of the World: It is a Life above all Lives.
The Happiness of this World is mixed with Sorrow: You have your dead Flies in
your sweet Ointment: The best of your outward Mercies are mingled with Trials
and Troubles and Fears; and when you have Gain you are afraid of losing it:
When you have great Mercies, you have great Care comes in with it: But to live
Christ, it is a pure Life. It is said of Wisdom, All her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are paths of Peace. Now the Soul that lives on
Christ, what a sweet Life, what a pure Life, what a glorious Life does he live!
But, says the Sinner, What shall I do? Ah Sinner, Christ has done all, that
thou may have all given freely; for in thy doing thou may be undone. But
what may you do to make Christ your Life? Nothing that we do can move God to
give Christ: If we think we deserve any thing at God's hand for our doings, it
is the way to be undone: But though we cannot work for Life, we are taught to
beg for Mercy; God will be enquired of for those things he freely gives.

First, Go to God, and beg of him to convince thee of the necessity of Christ:
Go and tell the Lord what an undone and miserable Wretch thou art; thou art
poor and can not see it: Cry, Lord, I am poor, but I am blind, and miserable:
O Lord, convince me what need I have of Christ Jesus! Beg of God to open thy
eyes to see the worth and want of Christ.

Secondly, Beg the Lord to awaken thy Soul to see how suitable Christ is to thy
Soul: If the Lord would speak from Heaven this day, and say to an awakened
Sinner, What will thou have Sinner? Riches and Honors? Will thou have long
Life? The Sinner awakened would answer, No Lord, that is not suitable, give me
thy self, or I am undone; Oh how suitable is Christ to an undone Soul!

Thirdly, Beg God to persuade thy Heart how ready and willing Christ is to
entertain thee; when all is done, you still sink under your Burden, if you do
not believe the willingness and reaidness of Christ to receive you. Ah poor
Sinner, thou can not long more for Life and Salvation, than Christ longs to
save thee. All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him that comes
to me I will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37.

Fourthly, What can you do, Sinner? Nothing to work in any way to purchase the
Favor of God; but this you may do, Wait upon the means of Grace, wait at
Wisdoms Gate: You do not know, Sinner, how soon it may be your Call, how soon
Christ may come, and you may hear the Voice of the Son of God. Though a carnal
natural Man can do nothing in matter of his Salvation, he may wait on God in
the way of his Divine Appointments. Though Zaccheus was a carna^ ^ublican, he
could get up into the ^^camore-Tree to see Christ. A po^^ ^^^^al Heart may
come, wait and hea^ (...) be at Wisdoms Gate: Come, get into the Sycamore Tree,
and it may please the Lord to speak a Word to thee this day, or next day,
Salvation may come to thy House, to thy Soul. May not we liken many persons
that come to hear the Gospel, to Zaccheus's getting up the Tree to get a sight
of Christ? they come to see and be seen, and think not what they shall meet
with; they never see their need of Christ, but Christ comes and calls the Soul,
awakens it. Sinner, where art thou? Where art thou going, undon sinner? I will
become thy Salvation. Luke 19.3. Zaccheus had only a mind to see Christ as
other persons had; And he sought to see Jesus who he was, but could not, for he
was low of Stature; and he ran before, and climbed up into a Sycamore Tree to
see Christ. And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up and saw him. Christ
must look upon us first; he saw a poor ignorant People running to see his
Person, but not to believe in him for Salvation. Christ said unto him,
Zaccheus, make haste and come down, for to day I must abide at thy House. Come
to the Ordinances of God, attend there: Then, poor Sinner, thou art in the way,
though thou have no Interest in Christ, nor never heardst this Salvation
sounding in thy Soul, so as to give thee comfort, though thou art looking and
beholding there, seeing and hearing out of custom. Jesus said unto him, Make
haste and come down, for to day I must abide at thy House. Make haste, if
Christ would give thy poor dark Soul a call this day, what haste would you make
to close with Christ? there would be no deliberation. Zaccheus delays not, but
comes down presently; and the Lord may speak in a Word of Grace, sinner, This
day I will take up my Abode in thy Heart for ever. O how good it is to be under
the means of Grace! Tho many come but to take a Nap, as Bishop Latimer says,
God may catch thee napping. The Lord may speak to thy Soul, This day I will be
thy Salvation: O what joyful News would it be to a poor dead carnal sinner! If
the Lord should this day speak to thee, and say, Sinner, I am thy Salvation.
And he came down and received him joyfully; he was the best Guest that ever he
entertained. If you had asked Zaccheus a little before, when he sat at the
Receipt of Custom, whether he would have parted with any thing for Christ, he
would not have hearkened to you; now all shall go for a Christ; now, says he,
Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, I will take Vengeance on my
Iniquity; and if I have taken any thing from any Man by false Accusation, I
restore him fourfold. He came down and received him joyfully; Thou art welcome
to me; if I had a thousand Worlds I could part with them all for Christ. Be
sure wait at Wisdoms Gate, you may hear Christ's Voice, saying, I am become thy
Salvation.

Fifthly, When you are waiting, O send up Cries, as the poor blind Men did when
they heard that Christ was coming: You have heard Christ preached this day, can
you be still, and not send up one Prayer and Cry to Christ, Lord, come into my
Soul: Will you go home with your cold Prayers, and cold Hearts, and cold
Affections; and shall Christ stand aloof off, and you stand afar from Christ,
Mat. 20.30. And behold two blind setting by the way side, when they heard that
Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord thou Son of David,
and the multitude rebuked them. So a Soul may say, I have a multitude within me
bids me hold my Peace; I have a multitude of unbelieving Thoughts tell me it is
too late for me to come to Christ; now I have a multitude of Thoughts, Christ
will not have mercy on me; I have a multitude of Temptations never to pray
more, I have a multitude rebuking my Soul; but the more the multitude rebuke
me, the more I will cry to Christ; the more my unbelieving Heart cries, Christ
will not save thee, the more I will cry to Christ to save me; the more my
Temptations bid me I should not pray, I will pray the more; when the Devil
tells me, it is in vain to seek for Mercy, I will seek the more earnestly. And
they cried, Have mercy on us; it was mercy they wanted. Says the Soul,
Unbelief tells me Christ will not look on such a Sinner as I am; and my Heart
tells me, I am so vile there is no hope for me, but I will cry the more, Have
mercy Lord, help me; I will tell the Lord, I have need of a Christ; I must have
him, or I am undone. The more Temptations beset me, the more Unbelief besets
me, the more I will cry to Christ to remove it; the more I am tempted, the more
I will pray, the more I will cry, the faster I will cleave to Christ. Sinners,
send up Cries to Heaven for Christ and Grace, that your Souls may live and not
die. How would the Devil Baffle poor ignorant Souls out of all! He would baffle
them out of Duties, and Ordinances, and Sabbaths: But a Believer will not be
baffled by him; and though the Devil, and the World, and his own Heart oppose
him, he says, I will make my Prayer to the God of my Life, let them say what
they will, I will cry to Christ for Life. And O you that are Strangers to
Christ, and are convinced of your undone condition, beg of them that have an
Interest in Christ to cry for you. O you that have Christ, consider what a
safe, a blessed, a comfortable Life you live. You that are yet Strangers, what
will you do when you come to die, if Christ is not your Life?

Therefore let me beg of you to set your resolution to cry to the Lord, and
resolve that you will not be put off without Jesus Christ, that you may not die
in your sins, and so perish for ever; for the Wages of Sin is eternal Death,
but the Gift of God is eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Blessed be God for Jesus Christ.
ERRATA.
Christian Reader,
Notwithstanding the Care that has been taken to prevent Errors, yet upon a
farther perusal of this Tract, I have found many have escaped the Press: I hope
what I have marked you will mind, and what I have overlooked, if you find them,
you will heartily pass thenn over, minding the Sense, and not charge the Author
with the Printer's Faults.

PAge 13. line 24. for is he, read would he be. p. 29. l. 4. for his Jewels r.
her Jewels. p. 25. l. 10. for enjoys r. desires to enjoy. p. 96. l. 5 and 6.
for a Child in Christ r. Children of God. for his r. their. p. 249. l. 4, for
to be r. is it to be. p. 251. l. 14 for speak r. speak of. p. 258. l. 9, for
lives on r. lives Christ. p. 260. l. 22. for the glorious the Mystery r. the
glorious Mystery. p. 262. l. 28. for a Soul r. Saints. p. 263. l. 9. for Soul
r. Souls. p. 175. l. 17. for in thee r. in

FINIS.
Books Sold by William Marshal at the Bible in Newgate Street.
Dr. Owen 's Books.
THE True Nature of a Gospel Church, and its Government, wherein these
following Particulars are distinctly handled:

I. The Subject Matter of the Church.

II. The formal Cause of a particular Church.

III. Of the Polity, Rule or Discipline of the Church in general.

IV. The Overseers of the Church.

V. The Duty of Pastors of Churches.

VI. The Office of Teachers in the Church.

VII. Of the Rule of the Church, or Ruling Elders.

VIII. The Nature of Church-Polity or Rule, with the Duty of Elders.

IX. Of Deacons.

X. Of Excommunication.

XI. Of the Communion of Churches.

Printed in large 4o. Price Bound 3 s.

Another Book of the same Authors lately Printed, left in Manuscript,
Entitled, A Treatise of the Dominion of Sin and Grace, wherein Sins Reign is
discovered, in whom it is, and in whom it is not; how the Law supports it, and
how Grace is delivered from it, by seating its Dominion in the Heart. Price
Bound 1 s.

Another Book of the Doctors lately published, Entitled, A brief and impartial
Account (...)


