A most Excellent and, and (...) ORATION, or DECLAMATION OF GREGORY NAZIANZEN'S
Stigmatizing, and condemning the Emperor JULIAN FOR HIS Apostatising from the
TRUTH, AND ^ontaining, by way of History, the Persecution of the Christians
during his reign, the Confutation of Pagan abominations, and the obscenity, as
well as absurdity, both of the substance, and Ceremonies of their pretended
Religion, with respect unto it is Doctrine, and the more, or less,
consequential Ceremonies, approved of among the Primitive Christians.

London, Printed by W. Godbid, (...) at the Blew-Anchor, at the lower walk of
the New-Exchange, M. DC. LXII.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN THE DIVINE.
His upbraiding the Emperor JULIAN for his Apostasy.
HEAR this, all ye people, give ear unto me, every inhabitant of the earth; for
with a strong loud Trum^et, and as mounted on a high ^ower, looking on all
sides, every way, I call, to assemble you together: Hearken, Countries,
Na^^ons, and Languages, all sorts of Men and Ages, every one that ^ow is, or
hereafter shall be: Yea, (to make my Summons the more universal) listen, I say,
all ye Powers of Heaven, and Angels altogether, by whose irresistible means a
great Tyrant was destroyed; a great one, and not such a one as Sihon King of
the Amorites, or Ogge the King of Bashan, petty Potentates, and destructive to
the Israelites only, a small portion of the Universe, but the Apostate Dragon,
the great Wit, the All-daring Assyrian, and common Enemy of the whole world;
who not only threatened ruin and destruction to all the Earth, but also hatched
despiteful imaginations, and belched out most abominable blasphemies against
the Almighty. Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, Esa. 1. 2.
O Earth, (for the times require I should use the loftiest terms of the most
Seraphical Prophet, who spoke the highest of all the rest) neither is it to
small purpose, he calling and invoking them for witnesses against a cast-down
People of Israel that had sinned against God, if I appeal unto the self-^ame
creatures, against a Dragon, a Tyrant, who had as highly trans^ressed against
the same God, to ^is own irrecoverable downfall, and, as a just reward for that
his ^^tragious wickedness.

Hear also, if thou have any sense, In Orations and Speeches, the Ancients
heretofore made to set forth, sometimes the goodness of famous men by way of
^postrophe, they spoke unto them as if they had ^^en present, and had sense and
apprehension of ^^at they spoke (whereof they were yet doubtful, ^appeareth
here by our Author Gregory Nazian^^n) and not contented thus to commune with
^^em, they entreated them, That if they had any (...) (as here) or knowledge of
things in this ^^rld to do so and so. This was a kind of doubtful ^mpellation
and soliciting of them, if their state (...) such as that they could take
notice of these (...), that then they would, etc. and no otherwise (...) Dr.
Fie^d of the Church. lib. 3. cap. 20.
^ou Soul of that great Constance, (...) the Cristian Souls of Empe^ours that
were before him: Thou ^^ul, more especially, of Constance, ^ho having attained
the inheritance (...) Jesus Christ, have advanced his ^orship upon earth, and
so well ^^ablished his Authority with the ^^esent Age, that, of all the
Emperors that ever were, made thy self the most venerable, and commendable
for the same.

But, O dire misfortune! the like whereof was never heard, that thou could
not foresee an unlucky mishap, unworthy altogether, and incompatible with the
merits of thine other illustrious Acts, namely, Thy making way for that Man's
rise unto Empire and Rule amongst Christians, who, of all other, became the
greatest Enemy and Persecutour of the Christians. In which one Act, to ill
purpose, thou mis-imployed'st thy clemency and courtesy, by unfortunately
preserving him to life, who was the death of so many, that far excelled him in
all manner of virtue and piety, while they lived.

Nevertheless, that the soul of thou, the aforesaid Constance, now receivest
great solace, I verily assure my self, as well in perceiving that his
wickedness long since extinguished, and Christianity reduced to its pristine
integrity, as in this my discourse, which, at present, I offer to God, as a
more acceptable sacrifice, purer, and better, I suppose, than those of beasts,
or other vain and detestable immolations of meats and drinks, the magnificence
and greatness of which sacrifices declared more ^learly unto all the world
their im^iousness, and (as I may so term (...)) foolish wisdom in so doing.
^or the custom and practice of ^^esh and blood, siding with dark^ess,
abandoned the light of truth, which, while but glimmering upon ^^rrupt natures,
the fruit thereof (...) came dry, and in an instant withe^^d, together with the
abomina^^e stock, that, for a time, sustain^^ them. The rooting out of which
unfortunate wretches, be^^g men, sometimes of greater ^^rldly wealth than other
worthi^^ss, has rendered them equally (...) famous, as well for their
pre^^pitate downfall, as profane (...) worthiness, to all succeeding (...).

As for my self, who offer unto God a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and pay my
vows to the most Ps. 50. 14.
High, who is he that can set up a Theater of Thankfulness, equal in any sort
to the least grace we have received? Or, what Voice thunder out thanksgiving in
that manner as is most fit, for such ineffable benefits, as I would have it?
What Auditors, with me, will entertain the words I am now a framing? The
retribution I am, at present, about to render unto the Divine Word through
discourse in words, though not so agreeable perhaps to the efficacy of that
gracious appellation In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God, Joh. 1. 1.
the Word, wherewith h^ is so pleased (among many other Titles assumed by him)
to accep^ of? Again, the sting of infamy b^ reproach in words, as a deserve^
and due punishment to him, wh^ made it a crime unto Christians i^ the Greek
Tongue to make use o^ words? In which regard, out of (...) pernicious envy, and
hatred toward us, he forbad all Christian^ the use and exercise of speaking
that, which ought to be common to all men. In which his so doing, ^s if to him
alone the propriety ^herein wholly belonged, thinking thereby to have more
reason then ^ll other, he showed himself thereby the most foolish and
unreasona^ of all men, and that for two rea^ons; First, Because thereby he
^eclared himself to be of opinion, that the Greek tongue was to be ^ade use of
only for the service ^f Religious matters, and not like^ise as indifferently
for all other ^urposes, according to the usual ^anner of uttering whatsoever
no^^ons of the mind in that self-same ^ialect: Just as if under the name and
notion of Trading, he should ^orbid, at the same time, the use of ^ll manner of
Trades practiced among that Nation. Secondly, Because he thought we were so
dull, ^s not to perceive the things he ^id, to be done on set purpose, ^hereby
greatly to deprive us of so ^onsequential a benefit: we making some account of
the excellency of that language, and he fearing thereby his impiety, might the
more easily be convinced. As if arguments had their force in the elegancy
only, and appropriating of Greek words to the same purpose, and not in the
knowledge rather of simple and sincere truth. Besides, having a tongue, it is
less possible to hinder us from setting forth the truth therewith, than from
otherwise adorning the same with eloquence in that language. So that, being
inhibited by Julian's Ordinance to learn Greek, he might hinder us only to
speak as the Athenians did, that is to say, more elegantly, perhaps, and
properly: but never the more, for all that, retain, or stop the current of
truth it self. Whereby he made his weakness appear sufficiently, and yet never
the more withheld himself from being reproved, and confuted, having over and
above acknowledged, that in that he had nothing to do to meddle, or to trouble
his head with such matters.

The truth is, It was not for a man who had no great assurance, either in the
truth of his own Re^igion, or in his own ability of ^eaking well, to go about
to hin^er us from speaking; no more ^han if he should think himself the
^aliantest Champion in the world, and thereupon forbid all gallant ^hen, either
to fight, or to enter ^^to the lists with him. No, so to ^o would be thought
rather a sign ^f a fearful Coward, than valiant Captain, seeing the prise is
won of those that fight, and not of them ^^at sit still; of those that have
^^eir full strength allowed them, and not of the maimed, or that are ^^ated in
any part of their vigor (...) try mastery with. If therefor thou be in
fault, for hin^ering on thy part the means of ^ombating, and wilt not suffer
(...) to fight, therein thou shew^^t thy self overcome, and thence ^all I carry
the victory against ^ee without contending, because thou permittest me not to
fight.

See then the fine doings of this wise Emperor, and Lawgiver, who, that there
might be nothing free, whatsoever, from his Tyranny, has published his own
folly, by being, in the beginning of his Reign, desirous, and undertaking after
to exercise that his Tyranny on words, and on the Art of eloquent speaking.

It will be a most fitting thing for me notwithstanding, to render all possible
thanks to Almighty God, with the words of my mouth, for recovering so to do
through his providence to offer up unto him all kind of honorable sacrifice,
not sparing any thing therein, either of goods, or other inheritance possessed
by me; who, having run the hazard both of the times, and of his Tyranny, have
been preserved however, by the only providence of God, for that purpose, whom,
before all things, we are bound nevertheless, both with our words and deeds, to
glorify after that man^er.

As out of an abundant Harvest, therefore, common to all partakers ^ith me of
such his grace, I Will fi^^sh the intended discourse I have (...) say of Words,
fearing, if I stretch (...) speech farther, I be longer ^han is requisite, and
somewhat ex^^avagant beyond the due bounds ^^ that subject, for which I came
^ther to dilate of.

And now, methinks, I perceive ^y discourse well-nigh approach^h, and
advances it self, in a ge^^ral congratulation, to all that I ^^hold at
present. And therefore, ^call unto a spiritual Dance, and ^efreshment all you,
who in fast^^g, weeping, and praying, pass ^^ys and nights to obtain
deli^erance from oppressing evils, ^^ounding a most assured remedy ^^ereof on
Hope, that never fail^h. I call, in like manner, those, ^ho have suffered
infinite pains, ^avels, and vexations, through ^^eat and d^verse torments of
the times, been made a spectacle to Men and Angels, (as the Apostle speaks)
their bodies abased, but 1 Cor. 4. 9.
their souls remaining invincible, doing all things through Christ that
strengthens, and comfort them. And you, after the same sort, who,
undervaluing (the object of mortals malice) wordly honors, have taken in good
part the spoiling of your temporary goods, have, for a time, been injuriously
separated from your Husbands, Wives, Fathers, Mothers, Children, or any other,
in whatever degree of blood, affinity or friendship, allied unto you, were
willing to participate with your Savior, in the fruit of his bloodshedding,
and otherwise suffering for his Namesake, being now able to say and sing with
the Prophet unto God, Thou have Ps. 66. 12.
caused men to ride over our heads, we went through fire and water, but thou
broughtest us out into a place of safety. I call, on the other side also, to
this famous Banquet, all those, who, acknowledging God above all things, have
hitherto re^^ined an assured faith, notwith^^anding the mysteries of
Provi^^nce, which, oftentimes out (...) contrary accidents, draw un^oked for
events, and by virtue ^^ereof, win us as evincingly to ^epentance, our reason
being for^erly carried away with perverse ^^petuosity, which should have ^^en
held out, or renewed it self, (...) not being so envious at the fool^sh, Ps.
73. 3.
(as the Psalmist has it) when (...) saw the prosperity of the wick^^; but
rather conforming our ^^lves to the will of God, and con^^uing constant to the
end, by put^ng little repose in what we saw ^resent before our eyes; which
^eing brought to pass nevertheless (...) we would have it, should con^^rm and
further fortify us in the ^^uth. I call, also, you, who have ^our minds wholly
fixed on the ^ca^fold, and great Theater of this ^orld. In doing whereof, I
will (...) the words of Esdras, saying, ^ome hither, women, who come to see the
plays, and stop the eyes of your minds, keeping them from errors and deceits,
know, it is the same God that is exalted among the Nations, exalted in all the
earth: In all times, and things, he has wonderfully and extraordinarily made
himself known, but never so manifestly never so evidently, as at this time.

Moreover, would to God there were even in this good company, in this numerous
Troop, which heretofore chanted with us, not a feigned and unsavory Song, and
whereunto we gave honorable way, have opinion they will one day render themselves
worthy of reproof. But I wonder wherefore they are so retired apart from us,
and marvel how, in so solemn a Rejoicing, they are not present with us, and
that contrarily they have made a particular Dance, which falls not at all in
any good cadence. They Will pardon me though I speak after this manner, and that
zeal encites me to declare and manifest things as they are. Notwithstanding I
will ^^eviate the stinging of my tongue, (...) the honor of the hope and
pre^^rvation of my brethren, having ^^w more respect to the ancient ^^^endship,
then to the neglect I (...). But yet because hereafter I ^^all be more patient,
I will be ^ore vehement at present in chid^^g and reproving. I exclude then
(...) of this Assembly with grief and ^^me trouble, a sort of men, la^enting at
that they understand (...), grieving at that they feel for there lies the pity
of their ^il) however I reject it. These (...) they who have not sowed on (...)
and firm ground, but their (...) fell upon stony places, where ^^ey had not
much earth; The ^^me are they that hear the word, and for a while with joy
receive it, (...) have they not root in themselves, and therefore dure but for
a time; ^^r when tribulation or persecution ^riseth because of the Word, by and
(...) they are offended.

I will banish from this company yet further off those that are worse who
departing from him that ha^ purchased, and conducted them t^ a place of greater
safety, and magnificence, have given no manner o^ resistance to the times, or
to thos^ that cousen'd them into a miserabl^ and slavish captivity: but rather
with obstinate alacrity, show themselves perverse, and of no reputation, being
scandalized at the good word of God, and suffere^ themselves to be carried awa^
without any affliction, or tentatio^ at all assaulting them. Nay rather, (like
inconsiderate wretches (...) they are) either to gain some little temporary
estate, or retain other evil gotten goods, have sold their eternal salvation in
exchange forsuch transitory trash, such riches (falsely so called) of short
continuance.

And now, seeing we have cut off from this noble Assembly, that which is
superfluous, let us take courage, and purifying our bodies and souls as much as
is possible for us, all agreeing in one spirit, with one voice, sing the
triumphant and ^^torious Ditty that Israel rejoy^^^ in, at the time when the
(...) were swallowed up in the (...), (Meriam leading and be^^ning the Tune, as
follows) I (...) sing unto the Lord, for he has Ex. 15. 1.
(...) gloriously, the Horse (...) his Rider has he thrown into (...) Sea. (I
change that of the (...)) But where it has pleased (...), and as he thought
fit and just, (...) that does, and disposes all (...), even He that turns
the Amos 5. 8, 9.
(...) into the morning (as the ^^^phet Amos has it) and makes (...) day dark
with night: -- (...) strengthens the spoiled a^^^nst the strong: -- He rules
(...) governs, as in a circle, all this ^^rld, that which agitated and
t^^ubled, and which is not: all our (...) that are subject to variation (...)
change, and that are carried ^^^etimes on this manner, and ^^^etimes on that,
for our sakes, (...) are immovable, fixed, and (...) firm in the Divine
Providence, however they seem to go ^^ proceed contrarily. That whi^^ is known
to the world, (viz. ^^ Divine Wisdom of his Father) (...) us is covered and
hid: He hat^ put down the mighty from th^^ Luke 1. 52.
seats, and exalted them of low degree. Also, (which I have take from another
Text of Scripture* The Arms of the wicked shall (...) broken, but the Lord
upholdeth (...) righteous. In like manner from another place, as my memo^^
serves me, (having abundance (...) Texts wherewith to compose th^^ Song, and
which offer themselves to this Thanksgiving) It Is he (...) raisethg up the
wicked above the (...), Ps. 37. 17.
then puts him down again that he appears no more: If we tak^ heed to turn
away readily, and (...) the evil pass.

Who is he among them th^^ treats of Divine matters, that (...) sufficiently
sing, and make relation of these things? Who, that ca^ worthily represent the
power o^ God, and make all his praises understood? What voice or power of
^^^quence equal this miracle? Who (...) that divided the sea by his (...), that
brake the head of the (...) in the waters, that brake (...) head of the
Leviathan in pieces, (...) gave him to be meat to the (...) inhabiting the
Wilderness? (...) Who has shut up the sea with (...), when it brake forth, as
if it (...) issued out of the womb? When (...) the cloud the garment (...) and
thick darkness a (...) for it, and brake up for it my (...) place, and set bars
and (...), and said, Hitherto shall thou (...), and no further, and here shall
(...) proud waves be stayed? Truly (...) has appeased them, they not (...)
been long time furious and (...) up. Who is it that has (...) us the favor to
go upon the (...) of Serpents and Scorpions, (...) laying not our selves in
wait to (...) their heels, that, at the same (...), assailed us publicly, and
(...) up their heads against us, (...) also he ordained we should tread under
our feet? Who is that has done justice and judg^ment when it was not looked
for Who, that has not for ever reac^ed out the rod of sinners upon (...)
righteous? (I say, upon the right^ous, if righteous any may be said be, while
remaining upon eart^ and no otherwise) or (to spe^^ more humbly) upon those
(...) knew God? For the truth is, (...) have not been afflicted as righteous
for, as none simply are so, so, for being so none are afflicted but for their
good, and to the end (lik^ brave Champions) they should pu^ shame and confusion
upon their afflicters. But, as sinners rather, w^ had the punishment of sin
through afflictions imposed upon us; after which, the Lord, in mercy, has been
pleased to show his fatherly care and affection toward us, by his so having
chastned us, that we might become wise, and (as far as he thought needful) to
make us the more advised in our after return unto him. For, He has not rebuked
us in his anger, nor chastned (...) in his heavy displeasure; but (...) showed
his mercy in the one, (...) in the other, viz. in his chastise^^nt and pardon.
Who is it that (...) done vengeance among the ^^^tions? chid and rebuked his
(...)? The Lord strong and (...), the Lord mighty in battle. (...) a Voice, a
Verse, that has (...) to the great graces we now (...), which Isaiah uttered
to (...) ages, and is very agreeable (...) this season, and suitable to the
(...) of benefits, at present, (...) by us: Sing, O heavens, Isa. 49. 13.
be joyful, O earth, and break (...) into singing, O mountains: God has
comforted his people, will have mercy upon his afflict^^^* For all creatures,
all (...) have knowledge, as I (...), of these things. For the Romans 8. 20,21,22.
(...) was made subject to (...) not willingly, but by reason of (...) who has
subjected the same (...). Because the creature it (...) also shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children (...)
God. For we know, that the wh^ creation groaneth and travelleth (...) pain
together until now. The Apostle also enters further into the sam^ celebration,
and rejoicing, to (...) God's children have the enjoyin^ of this contentment
and delight Now then, Sing, O barren, (for Isa. 54. 1.
cannot pass by the alleging (...) Scripture) thou that did not bear^ break
forth into singing, and (...) alond, thou that did not travel wit^ child, for
more are the children (...) the desolate, than the children of the married wife.

Rejoice also all you, who have been wrapped up in this unpleasan^ and irksome
winter of adversity For God has had pity of his people, and has not forsaken
his inheritance: He has done wonderful things, his ancient determination and
purpose is true, which (...) to satisfy those that fear him, tha^ hope in his
mercy. For he hat^ broken the gates of brass, and (...) the bars of Iron in
sunder.

^t's true, because of our (...) he has humbled us; but (...) ^ave been
comforted, and the (...) being broke, we have been (...) by the grace of God,
which (...) called us, and which comforts (...) that are lowly of heart. See
(...) I compose this Hymn with (...) Words, and Divine (...)* And truly, I know
not how to (...) merry, and recreate my soul (...) any other, being transported
(...) my self (as it were) with ^^^lowing content. So that I (...) no esteem of
low and (...) things, fitting and alleging (...) many matters, which are (...)
unto me by the holy (...).

^ell then, there have been (...) (in the first place) the (...) of God's
providence in (...) Translation of Enoch, and (...) of Elias; in Noah that
(...), and, with him, a (...) of all things, in a little (...) of wood,
containing the whole world, from the Deluge the Universe, to the intent (...)
the Earth after might be f^nished with more righteous In^^bitants. Again, in
old Abraham that was called, and gratified in latter days with an offspring,
make Faith of an other seed, (...) promised posterity: who willing presenting,
according to Go^ command, his only son, that (...) freeborn, in sacrifice, in
stead him found a Ram in a Bush, God's appointment, to offer (...) unto the
Lord. The ruin (...) of the wicked Sodomites, (...) were swallowed up with
fire (...) brimstone, was wonderful, wh^ at the same time, righteous (...) and
his family were only save^ And, which is yet more wonder^ the Pillar of Salt
into which (...) wife, for looking back, was tu^ed, remaining after, to
represe^ unto all faithless people, what fearful thing it is, when on called of
God, to return (...) unto the acting of what ever thi^ expressly forbidden by
him. We ^ead likewise of Joseph, who was ^old into Egypt, and being filled with
the wisdom of God, was after made Governor next under Pha^aoh of that whole
Land, to make ^he better provision in a time of ^earth and scarcity, for his
father ^acob, and all his household. Moses ^ad the honor to see God, received,
and gave the Law to the Israe^^tes, Of the 10. Commandments.
and, being appointed by God (...) to do, was their Conductor out ^f Egypt to
the Land of Promise. The ten Plagues of the Egyptians, and the deliverance of
the Israe^ites, at the same time inhabiting in ^he midst of them, was very
won^erful. So was the Sea its turning ^ack with a Rod, and going together again
upon a word spoken by Moses, at what time the Israe^^tes had passage through
the same, (...) on dry ground, and the Egypti^ns were drowned, and utterly
^ver-whelmed with the waters ^hereof to their final destruction. What can be
spoken enough of those two Canopies (as I may (...) speak) carried over the
heads (...) the Israelites by God himself, in their passage unto the Land of
Canaan through the wilderness the Pillar of the Clowd which l^^ them by day,
and the Pillar of Fire which gave them light by night? Of Manna, rained among^
them in their Camps, as they went, from the Lord out of heaven, and Quails sent
them from the same hand of Providence enough to glut six hundred thousand
persons in the Wilderness* Of the just quantity of that heavenly Manna measured
out (...) them by God, whereof they ha^ never the more to store up, th^^
gathered more at a time then wa^ commanded them, nor they (...) less, to
suffice nature, that gathered not so much? Of Waters some drawn out of a stony
Rock others, of bitter made sweet? Of Amaleck's being fought against b^
Prayers, in a mystical and hidden manner? The Sun its standi^^ still, and the
Moon staying her ^ourse? Jordan divided, and the Walls of Jericho falling upon
the ^ound of Trumpets made of Rams ^orns, after compassed about seven ^ays? The
Earth, and the Fleece (...) Wool, interchangeably wet and dry? Strength in
Samson's long ^air, equal in power to a whole ^rmy? A little company that ^ap'd
water carrying away the ^ictory, and with as small a num^er vanquishing, beyond
their ^nemies expectation, many thou^^nds of their adversaries? I need ^ot, I
persuade my self, recite so ^any wonders as followed upon ^he Incamation, and
happy coming of Jesus Christ into the ^orld by birth, or that which the ^oly
Apostles after did in his ^ame. Many Books and Histo^^es there are, that
plentifully bear ^itness of those matters. But of (...) which is come to pass
in these ^^mes, I shall again further make (...) manifest unto you.

Hearken then, and I will relate the same to all you that fear God, to the
intent that the generation that is next to come, and the succession of
generations after that, may know the wonderful power of God. In which regard,
because its not so easy a matter to declare these things, without representing
the greatness and quality of the peril wherein we were formerly plunged, and
that cannot be done without discoursing of the evil complexion of his nature,
and of what principles and seed of malice he came, who was the Author thereof,
to such outrages (having by little and little increased his impiety, even as
poison that comes from cruel Beasts, and venomous Serpents) referring the
larger and more ample discourse of those acts, to those that have a purpose to
compose Tragical Books and Histories, (for having not the leisure to dilate
much of things too far from our present subject) I shall, in reciting part
among many others, leave something printed and engraven on your memory, as on a
pillar, to be communicated to them that shall come after us, and betake me to
his more principal and apparent actions. He then (viz. Julian) having been
first preserved by great Constance, succeeding in the Empire of his father,
when the Troops were armed against their Chiefs, making some stirs, and ^he
Imperial House governed by ^ew Captains: Then, I say, ^eing saved with his
brother by ^ncredible and extraordinary means, ^e gave not thanks either to God
^or his preservation, or to the Emperor, by whose means he was preserved; but
persisting ungrateful both to the one and to the ^ther, showed himself an
Apo^tate to God, and rebellious to Constance his Foster-father.

Now you must know, there was ^ Palace wherein these two bro^hers, who alone
remained of the blood of the Emperors, were, by ^he commandment of that most
gracious Prince, brought up, and there served according to the fashion of
Emperors. That he (viz. Constance) did, to justify himself in part, that the
disasters, happening in the beginning of his Reign, came not from him. Then* to
show the freedom and magnanimity of his courage, in calling them to the
Association with him in the Empire. Finally, for the better, and more firmly
establishing of his estate. In which, notwithstanding, there fell out more
goodness than prudence, with respect unto himself.

They then, being at rest and tranquillity from all business, because they had
not yet the Imperial dignity, but by destination, and i^ hope, their age not
permitting tha^ they should be employed i^ places of command; received by the
care of the Emperor, who wa^ their Uncle, perfect instruction i^ all sorts of
Sciences.

Certainly they gave themselves the more to Philosophy, not only that which
treats of Reasons and ^iscourses, but also Moral, and which concerns Piety,
frequent^^g and conversing with persons ^ccomplish'd, and who made their
^ertues appear in their honest and ^^olish'd actions: so that they made
themselves to be enrolled in the ^rder of Churchmen, so far, that they read
the Gospel to the people, not thinking it any de^aing, or disparaging
themselves ^n point of honor, so to do: but ^n the contrary, supposing there
could not be in a Prince or Potentate a more excellent ornament, than to be
actively employed in their own persons about Offices touching Religion. So that
^n them a great affection to Moral Philosophy, and Christian Doctrine,
appeared, building for the Saints and Martyrs magnificent Tombs, giving great
gifts to Churches, and being conversant about such like Acts, which were
evident tokens, and shined in both of them, for a time, as lively Characters of
Christian Philosophy, and the fear of God.

One of them indeed was trul^ and virtuously inclined to piety for, though of a
stirring and troublesome nature, yet, for matte^ of Faith, he was constant and
firm* But the other dissembling, an^ gaining time, hid under the appearance or
show of simplicity* an evil intention of mind, (a^ one may guess at the
matter.) To which purpose I cannot conceal (...) Miracle that then happened, a
goo^ one, and such as may serve for instruction to many, that are not so
sincere as they should be in the truth of Religion, of which openly they seem
to make much profession. These two brothers being employed in beautifying the
Monuments of Martyrs, and a jealousy between them who should bestow most
magnificence and liberality in building a Chapel they set up with great costs
and charges; as they did not proceed with the like design, so the Masons wo^k
thereabout did not go on with the (...) success of dispatch to the one ^^rty,
as to the other: for where^^ what the eldest set workmen out, proceeded on to
some tol^^able perfection, God being ^^eas'd to accept the same, as ^^metimes
he did the sacrifice of (...), that, as an offering of the ^^rst-born, with a
pure and sincere ^art, was presented unto him. ^he other's work, viz. of the
^^ungest, (see, alack, the Lord's ^^ghting of the wicked in things ^^nder'd by
them unto his ser^^ce, who by small discovers ^^eater matters) his work, I
say, (...) the sacrifice of Cain, was ab^^minated by the Martyrs. The ^artyrs
indeed he made to smile at that he did, but the ground, ne^^rtheless, sunk
under that part (...) the Fabric which was built by (...). Which, so soon as
perceived (...) him, made him bestir himself (...) taking pains to erect the
same ^^ain out of hand; but, after all (...) labor and pains-taking, it
disdained, for all that, to receiv^ foundation from a person so d^famed, so
blasted in his reput^tion; as if thereby proclaiming (...) the world the
after-ruine which necessarily should befall it for (...) own unworthiness; or,
as if in (...) happening, it would honor the Ma^tyrs, by the neglect and litt^^
esteem it seemed to make of (...) detestable a person. Which ce^tainly was an
undoubted presa^^ of his folly and arrogance, as (...) of the contempt he
should (...) afterward toward holy Ma^tyrs, together with many other outrages
purposed by him to (...) put in practice against the Church^ of the Christians,
and other the like places destinated by the^unto sacred uses. With respe^^
whereunto the Almighty, aft^^ this sort, (though for the prese^^ it was not
known apparently (...) any, yet) at a distance seemed (...) persecute, as it
were, the Persec^tor, and well nigh declared the reward and recompense of those
(...) impious doings.

O the subtle nature of corrupt ^ypocrisie to do evil! which, not^ithstanding,
could not avoid the ^ain that was set to catch him, and into which he fell
afterward! O how admirable is the Lord, in manifesting what was to happen, ^y
cutting down wickedness, and ^aking further declaration of his ^^acious
providence; a Miracle ^uly Paradoxal, yet true. O the ^^eat foresight and
heroic mind ^f the Martyrs! that for the pre^^nt, would not receive honor^
from him, who, for the future, should disparage them, that re^used Monuments
and Gifts from ^im, who should make many a ^rave Champions faith, against ^is
will, illustrious, and envy them, at the same time, in their ^ombats and
victories, for so fight^ng! To say truth, they would not, ^y any means, permit
themselves ^lone should receive scandal, and ^e injuriously dealt withal; viz.
That their Monuments should be ^uilt by so wicked hands, and other Churches
served with more holy, neither give occasion after to the Author thereof
thereby to boast in such his profaneness, (...) setting up with the one hand
(...) some, and pulling down with the other to the rest, certain Chapels
dedicated to holy Martyrs, some of them reproached, and other in outward show
reverenced and respected by him; vailing, under a counterfeit appearance, ever,
the true neglect and contempt he usually made of all things. Wherein,
nevertheless, (...) found no great matter to glory of, though never so well
advised in deceiving men, God Almighty, at the same time, being undeceived, who
understands all things, and confounds, in their ow^ subtlety, the most
crafty, though never so cunningly masking themselves under the color of what
ever appearances otherwise. For, although the Lord withheld not, for a se^son,
this indignity done to the Martyrs, neither the forecast and hidden malice
wherewith the (...) was put in practice, nor stop^^d the current of such wicked
in^^ence from falling upon them, (...) causes ever just, and best ^^own unto
himself, according to his inscrutable wisdom, (...) secret disposal of all
things, even as 'twas his will to have (...) iniquity of the Amorites come ^its
full, before their destruction) ^et requisite it was nevertheless the story,
that this malignant ^^ture should be detested of all (...), and the honor done
by him the Martyrs, as unworthy of (...), be utterly rejected. A thing, heeded,
which may serve well (...) the edification of many, there^^ to discern the
equity and justice God in his all-wise acceptance all things, in what manner so
(...) offered, and presented unto (...). For it is he that says to Israel ^hen
they had sinned: Bring no ^ore vain oblations, Incense is an Isa. 1. 13.
^bomination unto me, the New Moons, and the Sabbaths, the calling of
Assemblies I cannot (...) with; it is iniquity, even the s^lemn meeting.
Neither does (...) that is sincere and downright toward God, need any thing
depe^ding upon men to take delight i^ that is unworthily presented unt^ him, the
Lord no less abhorri^^ him that kills an Ox, then th^^ slays a Man; that
sacrifices (...) Lamb, then that cutteth off a Dog neck: casting out of his
Temp^^ the hire of a whore, receiving (...) holding suitable to his acceptan^^
the sacrifice that is presented un^^ him with pure and innocent hands with a
mind lifted up to heaven and clean from taking pleasure (...) whatsoever sin
committed by hi^ No marvail then, if he refused the honor that Julian after
offered (...) to him, seeing wickedly, and from (...) malignant heart, he
presented the same unto God; who regards (...) as man, neither casts he his
(...) upon the outward appearance, b^ penetrateth even into the bottom of the
heart and thoughts, whenc^ virtue and vice fetch their appro^^l, and receive
either recom^ence of reward, or punishment ^ccordingly, from the Almighty. ^hus
fared it with Julian in this ^atter. If any difficulty of be^^ef therein
remains, so that the ^^uth thereof may be called into ^^estion, there are
witnesses yet ^^ving to be produced that saw the ^^me, who related, and
represented (...) miracle unto us, and who have (...) purpose also to
communicate a ^ore ample and full description ^^ereof unto posterity.

Well then, after become men, ^^ey should have entered into the ^recepts of
Philosophy (would to God such their entrance had never ^een, or that they had
attained unto the perfection thereof; which, (...) them that are well born,
serves as (...) weapon of true virtue, to defend them from the impostery of all
^anner of contrary inconveni^^nces, though, to the perverse and ^^ase minded,
it becomes sometimes (...) spur, to set them forward in their untowardness, (as
in Julian, wh^ to give the Devil his due, was we^^ versed in the study of
whatev^^ profane literature.) It Is true, (...) was a great Philosopher, and ye^
for all that, 'twas not possible (...) him to conceal his disease, to kee^
close in his mind the deceit of impiety that therein lurked. For, (...) fire in
wood, though the flame appears not, is known by the smo^^ and sparkles that
ascend from (...) or, as water that runs in hollo^ places, in time of great
wind^ having no way to expatiate it sel^ nor issue free, but is oftener
troubled, and mingled with earth, an^ other filth, renders a sad noise from
within, being pressed with the violence of the wind, and kept bad by the force of
other accident^ meeting together with it: So thi^ man, though he concealed much
o^ his profound wickedness by reason of the time, and instruction of the
Emperor, it not being for a while either lawful, or safe to make known his
irreligion openly, ye^ discovered he nevertheless, some^^^^g then of the
inwards of his ^^ghts to men of more under^^^^ding and subtle in Paganism,
(...) in the true Religion, and Do^^^^ of Jesus Christ: Also, in the (...)
which he had with his Bro^^^^, wherein he maintained the ^^^eks (that is, the
Gentiles) ^^^ing then befitted him, under Pre^^^e of disputing to uphold the
^^^ker side: but it was, indeed, a ^^ourse, or exercise merely a^^^^st the true
Religion, and which (...) much contented them who (...) the character of a more
impi^^^ Religion imprinted in their ^^^ts.

^ut so soon as the Emperor had ^^ared his Brother Gallus King (...) ^he
Romans, giving him, with (...) Government, a great part of (...) Land; and that
to Julian also, (...) permitted full power, and (...), to keep company with the
^ctors and freely to hear the dis^^^rse of the Gentiles: And also, (...) Asia
was as a School to him of the false Religion, whose In^^bitants, the most part
of them, (...) conversant and much verst in Ast^^logy, and Prognostication;
that (...) can foretell things to come, (...) likewise in Sorcery, and in
Incha^^ments, (a Science ordinarily f^^lowing the other) there remain no thing
but one, viz. that (...) and authority were joined to i^piety. Now, it was long
before that the great iniquity of some ^^quired this for him to our (...): as
who say, the health, ^ good constitution of the Christi^^ body being arrived to
the (...) of its perfection; power, hono^^ and plenty of all things brough^
change. For, the truth is, it^ harder matter to keep, then to ^^tain unto what
is desired, an eas^^ thing by care, and pains-taking, call back, and cause lost
felicity return again, then to conserve after gotten: Seeing, when in p^session
of this world's goods (...) any great abundance, we are (...) to wax proud,
and A man's (...) (...) the Wise man tells us) shall Pro. 29. 23.
(...) him low: but honor shall (...) the humble in spirit. (...), being
humbled after afflicted (...) our pride, (for after pride, hu^^lity often
follows, as after hu^^lity, honor; God resisting the (...), and giving grace
unto the (...),) we are thereby the more ^^nestly enforced to seek after (...)
lost condition till we obtain (...) same: which, after found, we (...) not so
heedful in preserving till (...) made more wise by having the (...) in the
whole, or, at least in (...) taken away from us. In this (...) (as it should
seem) it befell (...) Christians at that time, God, (...) weighs all things
equally, ^^asureth all things justly, being ^^eas'd to oppose, after this
man^^r, one contrary to, or with an (...). Which, that holy man after ^od's own
heart, David having (...) much experience of in his life^^me, puts usually in
the number of (...) gracious mercies the Lord (...) done for him by abasing
him, and then restoring him, not bei^^ unmindful, upon any occasion, (...)
thankulness to acknowledge (...) good he thereby received fr^^ him. To which
purpose, what (...) he? Before I was afflicted, I (...) Psalm. 119. 67.
astray: but now have *I kept (...) word: Putting by this method ^^mility
between Sin and Repentance, as if it were engendered (...) the one, and likewise
did engen^^^^ the other. Which, if ye mar^^ is most true; Sin, for the (...)
part, being the Mother of Hu^^lity, and Humility of Repentan^^ So we, after
humble, have (...) lifted up, and whereas heretof^^^ being by little and
little, thro^^^ the good conduct of God brou^^^ to such an estate, and measure
(...) happiness, as we are now in (...) (as I may so say) at such his m^^cies,
it seemed good unto God (...) cast us down.

Among many other sad thin^ that then befell us Christians, 'tw^^ none of the
least, that the Kin^dome, and Life of Caesar (viz. (...) Gallus) came to an
end. How (...) fell out, or by what means, I (...) forbear to tell you, as
being ^illing to offend either the (...) thereof, or him that suffered it, that
respect I owe unto the Pie^^ of them both. Nevertheless, (...) approving of
them in their ^^^knesses, but considering them ^hey were men, they could (...)
of them be exempted from (...) faulty, and in that regard both enough to be
reprehended, were not possible that the reasons (...) we shall use to accuse
the (...), might be the justification of (...) other.

This man then (Julian I mean) (...) the appointment of Constance, (...)
presently heir, not of the (...) but of the Kingdom of his ^ther Gallus, and
soon after was (...) also with him, who gave him (...) estate, being forced to
pay the ^^mmon tributeof all men, as over^^me, and carried away by death, (...)
the loss, and destruction of all (...) survived him.

And now, what shall we touching this most divine, this (...) Christian
Emperor? I care (...) for addressing my complaint (...) any but to thee, O
thou (...) Soul, as if thou saw, and he^est me, while, at present, dire^^ing
my speech unto thee! (...) know, that it can offend thee in (...) thing, who
art now resident (...) God, who inheritests his (...) who art gone from us here
(...) to exchange thy earthless (...) for a better, and more durabl^^ heaven.
Tell me, neverthele^^ who was it that suggested (...) counsel unto thee of
leaving (...) thy successor? who gave to (...) that advice, which comes so
(...) short of that sublime subtlety; (...) great judgment, wherewith (...)
wa'st endued; not only above (...) the Princes of thine own (...) but above
them all, in like (...) that ever were before thee? Th^^ who have purged our
Horizon (...) barbarism, and subdued Do^^stick Tyrants, the one by reas^^
(...) other by force, but with such ^^^terity both, that the one did no (...),
was no let, or hinderance (...) other: and whose Trophies ^^^eived by arms and
battles, (...) fair, and great; but those (...) without effusion of blood,
(...) yet more excellent, and ap^^^red more glorious to all the (...). Thou, to
whom from all (...) of the Universe^ Embassa^^^, and Deputies were sent: (...),
to whom all Nations yield^^^ obedience, or, at least, were (...) the point of
obeying, so that (...), who were not yet (...), carried themselves in that
(...), as if already they had been ^^^rcome: Thou that wa'st led by (...) hand
of God in all thy delibe^^^ons and actions: Thou whose ^^^gment seemed to
surmount all (...) force; and thy Force, on ^^other side, to surmount all
^^^gement: but the glory, or fame (...) Piety, bore the bell away, (...) from
the one, and the other. (...) then, in this only act of thine shewedst thou
thy self (...), and have been surprised? (...) what purpose, I beseech thee,
(...) that easy propension of this (...) inhumane goodness? Which of (...)
infernal Spirits was it that (...) the same into thy mind? (...) was it
possible that thou should deliver, in an instant, to a (...) villain, to a
common murdere^* (...) fair an inheritance, so (...) an ornament? (I mean the
C^^^stians under thy dominion, in (...) life time.) The Flock (...) through the
out-spreading (...) of that bright Morning Star, good Shepherd Jesus Christ
shining upon them, is so (...) in all the world? The royal Pr^^^^hood of God
multiplied, (...) spread abroad with so much (...) and travail here on earth.

It may be (my Brethren) I (...) seem unto you to have showed (...) self
partial and malicious in (...) discourse, in that, among the (...) sons of my
accusation, I do (...) readily add what is true. But, if observe what I have
declared, ^^u'l find by the same arguments (...) my complaint, I have
suffici^^tly justified what I said, and ^^^ewise that the absolution is fix^^
to the accusation. For, when I ^^oke, and used this term good^^ss, I thereby
declared his inno^^nce.

And now, who is he, among ^^em who have known him but ^^eanly, who knows not
that be^^use of his zeal to Religion, and ^^fection to usward, wishing all
^^od, and prosperity to the Chri^^^ans, he made so great account (...) Julian?
as also, that he made (...) so much reckoning of the ho^^ur of his race, or of
the increase (...) the Empire, as of us? But, on (...) contrary, would have
given all ^^ings, the Empire, life, and all ^hereof any thing is dear, and
^^ecious, for our assurance, and ^^eservation? there having been ever man
living, that desired a ^^ing more to heart, then he the ^^gmentation of
Christianity, and to see it attain to the height of glory, and power in his
days.

For certainly, neither the su^duing of Nations, nor the goo^ Policy of his
Empire, nor (...) abundance of his Wealth, nor (...) hieght of his Honor, nor
the Co^templation that, in name, and e^fect, he was King of Kings, (...) any
other things, in which (...) ground their felicity in this wor^^ ever brought
him so much conte^^ as that we by his means, and he (...), prospered both with
Go^^ and Men, and thereby (as in a mi^rour) saw the authority of (...) Church
established indissolubly (...) ever: raising thereon his consid^rations higher,
and more royal^ then many others, in clearly di^cerning that the Roman Estate
^^thered its greatness, and increas^ with that of the Christians. An^ in
consideration (it seems) the until the coming of Christ in (...) flesh, They
attained not unto (...) highest point of rising into an ^^solute Empire of
Monarchy, (...) Perfection of Government, which (...), and not before, could
ever ^rought to pass, or accomplish^^: He remembered our cause, (as (...) reason
he had to do so) with (...) much zeal, good will, and all ^^rty affection. So
that, if it ^^pened at any time, that it was (...) somewhat harsh to us, it
(...) not that he the less esteemed (...) or would do us a dispeasure, or
^^^tifie others to our prejudice: (...) his seeming severity tended (...) to
reduce us to one and the ^Wor^ belief, and not otherwise to ^^ide, and separate
us by Schisms. (...) for all this, he was but little ^^tchful (as we have
formerly (...)) on his own guard through his ^^^plicity, as also, in his
clemency (...) appeared a kind of weakness: (...) he that is without malice
thinks (...) of malice, and therefore he (...) not of that which was to (...),
by his not knowing what it (...) to dissemble.

By such means as these impiety (...) in by little and little, two contrary
affections meeting togethe^ the one in a good people, the ^ther in the
wickedest and (...) Atheistical man of the who^^ world: who fretting without
ca^^ against the Christians, had nothi^^ to say against our doctrine: (...)
having no considerable precepts (...) the Gentiles School, that could (...)
maintained by reason, without e^ample, sought by his impiety (...) render
himself renowned and ^^mous, beginning, in a new manner, a war with him, who
ma^^ him Emperor. But when (...) knew he could not carry it (...) virtue, and
lawful means, he (...) do it by the contrary, namely (...) the same affection,
that he broug^^ about his other mischief and wic^edness.

Behold then the Apolo^^ made to Christians in the (...) half of Constance:
which (...) not but seem just and equitable (...) men of judgment. Howev^^
there are some who finding themselves satisfied in this matter, (...) not yet
be satisfied therewith, but ^^cuse him of simplicity, and small ^^resight in
imparting the Empire, (...) thereby putting the Authori^^, and Forces into his
hands, who ^as his enemy, and whose Brother (...) had formerly put to death.

Hereupon, it is necessary for us little to discourse upon this, though (...)
be but to show that this act of (...) was not wholly against reason, (...)
humanity both, no, nor yet un^ecoming altogether the grave ^^ovidence, and good
judgment (...) the Emperor. For, it would (...) a shame to us, having
received (...) much honor from him, and ^^owing him to be so accomplish^^d,
and excellent in piety, not to ^^eak further in his just defense: (...)
especially, seeing he is dead, (...) has now left us. In which ^^gard we
cannot justly be re^^oached for using flattery, having (...) liberty to speak
freely, without any suspicion, in proposing law^^l only, and true grounded
argu^ents on his behalf.

To which purpose, who wou^^ not have thought the honors co^ferr'd upon him
should have re^dred him more mild, and peac^able? as also, the confiden^^
wherewith too assured of hi^ more ingenious, and just? Lik^wise, in that the
two Brothers ha^ by a royal judgment, and sentence, the one received
punishment, the other advancemen^ there was no possibility of believing, that
he, who had adorned J^lian's youth with dignities and honors greater then
could ever b^ hoped for by him, would ever punish the eldest without a just and
lawful cause. So that, for resolution of the thing in question so f^^ it may be
answered, the one (...) Constance his acts ought to be attributed to the
temerity of Gal^^ who was punished, and the oth^^ to the good nature of
himself, wh^ gave those honors unto Julian Or, to say truth, Constance had no^
so much assurance in Julian's fait^ and oath, as in the power that wa^ then
remaining in his own hand.

Some think, under the same ^elief Alexander the great gave ^orus, not his
life only (who ^ravely on the other side, fought ^or the Crown) but also the
King^ome of the Indies. Neither ^ould he make his magnanimity ^etter appear,
then by such an act ^f his, who being Alexander, ^hought there went more of him
(...) overcoming, then by arms; ^eeing 'twas in his own power (as (...)
conceived) if the other, viz. ^orus, had showed himself un^rateful, and
rebellious thereupon, ^o have overcome and utterly vanquished him afresh. So
his great ^ssurance, great Constance his confidence, I mean, in his own
strength, was the cause of his so liberally ^estowing those great honors, that
^ut of a magnanimous mind, and heroic spirit, he so profusely conferred upon
Julian.

But what need I debate so much of this, seeing its easy for me, although I
let go this reason, to gain my cause? For if he that truste^ another man, does
ill, how much more he that is trusted, if he fa^^ in such his trust? and if it
b^ blameable, not possibly to fore*see an evil inclination; in wh^^ degree of
blame and baseness sha^^ we put that perverse nature, tha^ so foully deceived
him, who so fairly, and ingeniously trusted thereunto?

But certainly it is a thing, whereof we cannot soon beware, unles^ we be as
malicious in our selves. Besides, let us do what we can, it is a hard matter to
make a wicke^ man good. For reason would, that this man should have showed
himself faithful to Constance: an^ if there had been any spark of ill will
toward him, to have utterly extinguished the same. But, on the contrary, in
recompense of so many benefits, he conceived against him an evil affection,
became ^ Malefactor toward him his Benefactor, making it his design to do evil
unto that gracious Emperor, who had no other design, then to do ^ood unto him.

Behold, good people, the do^trine that the Platonists, the ^hrysipsians and
the famous Peripa^^ticks, the Stoics, and other, who ^orme their pallats to
speak so ^rettily, have taught him! Take ^otice of the Geometrical Pro^ortion,
the discourse of Justice, and of those Patient Philosophers, that maintain,
It Is better to take, ^hen to do wrong. See also what ^rave Preceptors, what
great Coun^ellors of State, what grave Lawmakers he took to him in the
quar^ours, and drew out of taverns; and of whom he was wont to say that [he
approoved not their manner of living, but rather admired their eloquence:] nor
it neither, but, possibly, rather their impiety. These alone were the men, whom
he thought good to advise with, and to ask counsel of, in whatever to be done,
or, otherwise, left undone by him.

And, are we not well advised (think ye,) to admire this kind (...) people, who
form Idea's of Co^mon-wealths in their discourse, th^^ can never be reduced
into Act who sooth up cruel Tyrants (...) their Oppression, with fair speechs
and present to the gods a half pen^^ with a grave look of the forehead? Of this
sort, some believ^ there is no God at all; Others n^ Providence, but that all
things come to us by hap-hazzard, ^^ chance: Some, that we are governed by the
Stars, and Figures ^^ fatal necessity; (I know not where they have it, nor from
whom) Others, that all things tend to Voluptuousness, and therein the
quintessence of humane life consists; but, as for Virtue, they give it a fine
name only, and extend its relation no further then the limits of this life,
positively putting it down for granted, that [the faults we commit in this life
dies with us, and no further account to be made for them after death.] The
ablest of all their Wise men are endued (it seems) with no bette^ ^nowledge,
but being wrapped up in ^he muddy and obscure darkness of ^rrour, and ignorance,
never lifted ^p the understanding to discern ^ver so little the beams of saving
truth, but rather troubling themselves with things here below, and that fall
under the cognizance of the senses, never comprehended any thing about the
nature of Devils (as most reasonable it is that God, the Creator of them,
should be) If there were any one among them, that had dived never so little
further into the abstruse secrets of nature, being destitute, at the same time,
of the grace of God, he rested upon that which to him seemed easier to
understand, and brought the vulgar multitude to conform themselves thereunto.

Is it then any great wonder, that he, who was endued with such Precepts, and
taught by such Masters, should prove a Traitor to him that trusted him? a
Felon, and rebel to him that raised him up? If there be yet any other question
of defending, by accusing him, He could not (I should think) be much troubled
in mind for the death of his Brother, who was his Brother's enemy by reason of
his Religion, and so much displeased to see Christianity flourish. No, but
being transported with rage rather against true piety, he the sooner troubled
the State, to establish and give liberty to his false, and foolish opinions: it
being requisite, according to their reasons, to annexe the Empire to
Philosophy, and (as it fell out after) rather to complete, then to cause the
evils of the Commonwealth to cease.

Now the first Act of his rebellion, and temerity was, to make himself be
crowned, and to procure, or rather assume to himself the sublime title of
Emperor; which, in times past, was wont to be obtained, not as a rape, or prey
of fortune but by succession, or by the will of the Emperor, or else (as
anciently practiced) by Order from the Senate. But he would (...) acknowledge,
as author of his ^^nour, him, who was the true ^^rd of the Monarchy. Then
^^ving forged in his mind a foolish ^^cessity of taking up arms, which (...)
was so rash, and un-advisedly ^^ld to undertake, (See but what (...) contrived,
and to what point he ^^duced his oversight and folly, O (...) extreme fury of
this man!) (...) went armed with great forces against his Prince, and part of
the ^est, under the color and covert (...) excusing himself for taking upon
him the Crown. I say under (...) color, etc. because, as yet he ^^ssembled,
and endeavored to ^ver his disloyalty, and madness (...) a time, when indeed,
his whole ^ope, and full intention was to ^^tablish himself in the Empire, and
by his ingratitude render him^^lf notable to all the world. Wherein his hope
(as it fell out after) did not deceive him, was ^ot in vain. With respect
where^nto, I would not that they should be ravished with admiration, (...) mind
not the incomprehensib^^ height of God's Providence governing all things, and
ascribe litt^^ or nothing to him in the all-wise di^posing, and regulating of
State^ who, whatever they imagine to the contrary, as sweetly, as secretly
ordains whatever he will have brought to pass, in its due season and the same
for the better alway^ though silly men sometimes mislike thereof, and are not,
perhaps, satisfied in their understanding wherefore he does so. No^ this Divine
Providence (you mu^^ know) induced not this man (...) do evil: For, God is not
the Author of evil, but of all goo^ things, sin proceeding never from him, but
from the party alone tha^ makes choice thereof.

As for this wicked Impe of Satan, (I mean Julian) he stayed no^ his restless
motion, but readil^ running to those Companies thi^ were of his government, and
unto a part of the Marches of the Barbarians, whereof, rather by craft, ^hen by
open war, he became Ma^ter, approached the Imperial Court (as instructed so to
do, say ^ome of his Party, by Prognosti^ation, and the advertisement of Devils,
who promised him an hap^y adventure, and a change of them that then governed
the af^airs:) or, according to the saying ^f those who know truth, he the
^ooner advanced, thereby to arrive, ^t a day prefixed, to effect horrible and
secret wickedness, as hasting to ^e at the murder, whereof himself was the
author, covering the con^piracy then by means of one of ^is Domestics. So
that, it was ^ot divining, but knowing certain^y, and the act it self a work of
wickedness, and not a benefit the Devils had granted him: who by that which
fell out in Persia, have ^ade the power they had well ap^ear of luckily
conducting his af^airs. Let them be quiet then, who attribute to Devils his
celeri^y, or quick dispatchin that matter, however, we cannot deny but th^^ the
foul act of his consulting with d^vils was damnable. Nevertheles^ had not the
disease of the Emperor prevented the incursion of th^^ Tyrant, and the secret
war bee^ stronger then the disclosed army the Villain had soon felt, that (...)
hasted to his ruin, and that, before he was chastised by the astonishment he
was put into by (...) Persians, he had carried the punishment of his deserts to
the R^man Territory, where he, before that, had contrived his wicked
conspiracy, which was likely enough because as then he discovered no^ himself,
although enclosed with the army of the most valiant Emperor, that he might have
no way of escaping: as it was easy to judge by that which happened afterward,
there being but little expectation of cutting off the means of retreat to him
that had already the Empire in his hand. But, as the Emperor marched
virtuously against perfidiousness and impiety (Good God what a mischief do I
(...) make mention of!) he dyed (...) the midst of the way, repen^^^g himself
to God, and Men, (...) he had been so kind unto Julian, (...), as much as it
was then (...) for him to do, showed the af^^^tion he bore to the true Religion.

Years, at present, mixed with joy (...) down my cheeks, and, as the (...) and
Floods, strive together, (...), in their meeting, mingle, and ^^^uble one an
other, while I am ^^^covering what happened after. (...) the end and issue was
pleasant (...) agreeable to us, as the begin^^ng had been sad and heavy, not
^^ely in regard of the Christians, (...) their afflictions, which pro^^eded,
either by the instinct of (...) evil Spirit through the will of ^od, who knows
the cause there^^; or (it may be) from our ar^^gance, which had need of being
^^strained, and purged: but also (...) the regret of that wicked soul, (...) of
those, carried together with (...)* to perdition. There are some, who bewail
only the last plagu^ and torments they endure here below, as having no respect
at al^ but to this present life, and, (...) their mind, regard not the futur^
nor believe any chastisement sh^^^ be imposed upon, or recompe^^^ done them for
the things commi^ted by them in this world, leadi^^ the lives of beasts, and
mindi^^ nothing but the present time only placing their sovereign good in
h^mane tranquillity, and, contrarily attributing misfortune, and infelicity to
adversity, and to thing that happen cross to their desires* But, as for my
self, I deplore mo^^ the torments they shall receive i^ the other world, and
the which (...) surely, though secretly prepare^ for the wicked (to say nothing
(...) that which is more grievous, viz. to be deprived, to be banished from the
presence of God for evermore. Alas what sore punishmen^ will that be!)

But how can I refrain bewailing of this miserable man? how otherwise choose but
more lament ^^ose, who, of their own accord, (...) self-motion have retired
them^^lves to his false worship, then ^^ose that compelled thereunto by
^^rsecution? And how can I hinder (...) lamenting yet more him, that ^^rried
others, then those who vo^^ntarily rendered themselves, and (...) part, or sided
with the wicked (...) their profaneness?

Contrarily, it is a thing neither ^rievous, nor irksome to Christians (...)
suffer for the Name of Christ, ^ut a happy contentment, not one^y in
consideration of the heavenly ^^fe, but also of the constancy and ^lory he has
made way for them to ^ttain unto here below among pe^ils.

Whereas to the followers of Ju^ian, the evil that is already befallen them is
beginning of future torments that are threatened, and destined for them
hereafter. So that, it had been much better, they had been longer punished
here, then to be reserved to that high seat of justice in heaven. But I will
not in^^ hereon further, that I may (...) the Law, that forbids rejoicing (...)
the fall of an enemy, when he (...) cast down; and that rather, bei^^ our
selves in better condition, (...) should show our compassion toward him in his
greatest nece^sity.

I will resume therefore the chi^^ scope of my discourse, and spea^ of him from
whom proceeded (...) unlimited a desire after vice, (...) immense a zeal to all
manner (...) wickedness. How came it to pa^^ that he ran so fast to mischief^
from whence was that his enmity to Jesus Christ? He entre^ and entitled
himself his Disciple he had the knowledge, by conference, touching many subtle
discourses of truth, proposed by himself, and heard, from others, fin^ precepts
of saving health, or eternal salvation. And behold, no sooner came he to be
Emperor, but he made open profession of Paganism, as if he had been ashamed
of being formerly a Chri^^^an, and for that reason would ^ischief the
Christians, because ^^mself had been a Christian in the ^^ginning. But here was
the ori^^nal of his audaciousness, (as they (...), who boast of their being of
his (...) Counsel) having washed (...) ground with filthy and dete^^^able
blood, (see, into what foul ^^rms I am constrained to fall!) (...) had a
purpose to have establish^d abominable ceremonies in op^osition unto ours,
being himself ^according to the Proverb) as the ^ow that wallows in the mire.
He ^rofaned his hands thinking to wash and purge them with that, that ^^uched
the sacrifice, which is done without effusion of blood, by means ^hereof we
participate with God ^n his Passion, and in his Divine Nature. The Royal Palace
was ^mployed in dissections and sacrifices, serving himself in his wicked reign
with wicked Coun^ellers.

And now, while making mention on of dissections, and of the foolis^ or rather
damnable affection he bore to them, I know not, whethe^ I should put in
writing, a common and trivial miracle, or give credi^ unto what is said of it.
For, the truth is, my mind hangs, as in (...) balance, not knowing which way
to incline, there being some things worthy to be believed, others not*
Nevertheless, it being no new thing, but oftentimes happening that upon the
change of great estates, by means of such vai^ dissections of beasts, etc. some
prodigious things have been presignified (though, in this manner to fall out
after, is that which seem^ worthy of admiration, both to me, and to all them,
who are willing, and have a desire that holy things should be declared, and
handled holily) I shall take the boldness to make further relation of what is
reported.

Behold then what happened. One day as he sacrificed, the standers by saw in
the entrails of the beast [a cross crowned in a circle] which ^^ought
astonishment, and troubled ^^me of his own Party, as if there^^ had been
signified that we ^ould carry away the victory: ^t the Prince of impiety being
^ore courageous, replied that it ^^pressed rather we should be shut (...), and
enclosed. Behold then (...) miracle that I spoke of! If it (...) false, the
wind will blow it ^^ay, if true, it is Balaam Prophe^^ng; and Samuel coming
again, ^^d appearing unto the Witch of ^^ndor, and Saul; the Devils con^^^sing
Christ, whether they will (...) no, and the Truth, to procure ^^lief, proved by
its enemies. It ^ay further be that this was done, (...) ordained, to reduce
this man ^^om his impiety. For God, who (...) prone to mercy, can, and does
^^ten use many extraordinary ways (...) lead men unto salvation, through (...)
knowledge of the truth.

See an other thing (reported of (...) any, and credible) one day, ^^ing into a
hideous, and almost inaccessible cave (would to (...) from thence he had fallen
i^ Hell, rather then gone on furth^^ to such mischiefs) and having man in his
company worthy of (...) Hells, who took himself to be great Master in this
Science, (...) rather Sophistry (for among th^^ they have a fashion to devine
(...) conferring of future things (...) Devils in obscure places, wheth^^ it be
they love darkness, beca^^^ they are darkness it self, and exc^lent Workmen
in the darkn^^^ of sin, or, be it they avoid meeti^^ with good people on the
face of (...) earth, least such, after seen them, might take any power from
them in their devining) he (...) struck into a great fear. Now, astonishment
had seized on (...) villainous man at his first entra^^^ into the Cave, before
spoken (...) and increased more and more aft^^ (For it is said such dealers with
(...) Devil have strange and inward b^ings, and representments) and (...) there
appeared unto him Ph^tasmes of fire, with (I know not that) other follies, and
raving ^^ymeras; Being surprised there^ith (for he was a Novice in this
^^ctrine) he had recourse to the ^^rosse of Christ, and called to his Admit we
grant this History to be true, and that Satan's flight at the sign of the Cross
made by Julian, was enforced, might not God, for the confusion of the Apostate
and for the glory of the cross, which Julian, out of spite, (...) hate of
Christ despised, put that terror into Satan, (...) the sign of the Cross,
that he was affrighted there^ith; I think the^es no Orthodox Christian, who
will (...), but that God might do it for such an end: and so, (...) suppose, G.
Nazianzen here, with respect to this mira^^e of the Cross, may be understood.
(...) him against whom he then re^^^ted. (That which follows is ^^ore
notable.) The Cross of christ had the better of it: for the ^evils were
overcome thereupon, (...) the frights vanished; But what (...) out afterward?
Mischief took ^^eath again, he again grew hardy, (...) begins, as formerly to
play his ^^anks afresh; whereupon the ^^me frights, in an instant, repre^^nt
themselves. What then? He ^as fain to address himself, once ^ore to the Cross
of Christ; im^ediately after the Devils are qui^^ed: whereat, the Novice being
in a great perplexity, the Master (...) the Sacrifice, that was near (...)
perceiving the matter, pervert^^ both the truth, and him, told (...) the Devils
were not afraid of (...) Cross of Christ, but had both (...) and Christ in
abomination. (...) evil speech of that lewd man c^^ried him away quite: for as
he sai^ so he immediately persuaded hi^ and thereby drew this untowa^^ Disciple
of his into the gulf (...) utter destruction. Wherein th^^ was nothing
strange, for a vicio^^ nature will sooner follow the co^^sell of a wicked man,
then retire (...) the advice of a good. What he (...) and what he said more in
the Cave and what illusions he was cheat^^ with before he came up, they (...)
learned the same, and since instr^cted others therein, know very we^^ He came
up I am sure, much tro^bled in mind, making the sa^^ appear more evidently in
his ou^ward gestures, and in the gastlyn^^ of his looks, as also by those mean^
further manifested, who they we^^ whom he adored, continuing on (...) that time
more especially (...) he was always full of (...)) to commit all manner of
^^^kednesse. I say, from that time, ^^^ause then he showed, and made (...) be
more seen. Insomuch (as I ^^^eive) he gave it out to be taken (...) of, that he
had not lost his (...) in descending, and having fel^^wship with Devils,
calling the ^^aviour, in that his being inspired, ^^ball, and appropriating
there^^th to himself fair, and honorable (...).

These were his beginnings. But (...) that which he hatched was ^^^closed, and
the mind that he had (...) persecute us appeared, he thought (...) an other
device worthy of a man ^^rowly flush't, and perfect in ^^ckednesse, or else,
that had (...) the same of those, who had (...) exercised in such doctrine. For
(...) it was a thing too bold, and gross, (...) declare War openly, and
consti^^te himself Captain of Paganism, which had brought some difficulty to
that whereat he aimed: so w^ had made our selves more courageous, if they had
not taken us b^ force, and had opposed to Tyrann^ the great affection which we
ha^ to the true Religion: it being the disposition of generous courages t^ be
bent against those, who would carry things by force: Even (...) the Flame,
that's excited by the wind increases so much the more as the wind is more
vehement grounding his judgment therein, no^ only by the reasons he had to^
comprehend it, but also by precedent persecutions of the Christians which had
brought to Christianity more glory, then diminution, in tha^ Christians had
settled their minds i^ piety, and, as hot Iron in water, hardened them against
perils. Bu^ he thought that making War wit^ subtlety, and adding force with
persuasion, also mingling a mild manner of dealing with his Tyrannical power
(which was nothing else, but to cover the fire with abait,) he thought (I say)
that this manner of proceeding was ground^d on reason, and would carry the
^atter. For, above all things, he ^^vyed them, who were Champi^ns of
Martyrdom, and therefore ^rove, with all his might, to force, and constrain
people to return to ^aganisme, and proceeded so sub^ely in it, that none
perceived it: and contrarily we endured punish^ents without having the honor
^f Martyrdom. But, it was ^reat-simplicity in him, for all that, (...) to do.
First, because he per^waded himself, we knew not the ^ause why we were in
trouble, and that by this Sophistry, and Ca^illation, he thought to cover the
truth, not seeing that the more he ^aboured to take away these honors, ^o much
the more he made us ap^ear greater, and fairer. Secondly, ^or that he persuaded
himself, that what we did, was for the desire of ^ain-glory, and not for the
zeal of truth. As on their part, for the ^ame cause, they were wont to make use
of Empedocleans, of Aristeans, of Empedotineans of T^^phonians, and a troop of
such li^^ wicked juglers. One of whi^^ casting himself into the Gulphs (...)
Sicily, to make men believe (...) should become a God, and be ^^ken from them,
to change this (...) for a better, was discovered (...) his chamlet Cloak,
which the flam^ cast out, to be dead, and cons^quently no God, but a lover on^^
of vain glory, and an ignorant, (...) silly Ass.

Others, secretly retiring in pl^ces under ground, sick of the sam^ disease of
vainglory, and love (...) themselves, being discovered after got not so much
renown by the^^ secret retreats, as reproach for suc^ their impostures.

But, as for Christians, its their only joy, to suffer for Gods cause for the
true Religion of Christ: i^ comparison whereof, we ma^^ little account of
pleasing men have no other aim, but to be accepted of the Almighty.

Besides which consideration, they ^^at are truly wise, and lovers of ^eavenly,
and divine matters, (...) to be joined with Christ alone, (...) Christ's sake,
without any other ^^ward: they that do good works ^ith intention of receiving
recom^ence for the same, being in the ^econd degree of virtuous people: and
they that abstain from evil do^ng for fear of punishment, in the ^hird. Thus is
it with us, that are ^rue beleiving Christians, and the proof that we are so
minded indeed, ^s easy for them to find, that will undertake it.

But, Julian desirous to deprive us that are Christians of the chief honors,
(for many judge by their own affections, the affections of others) above all,
set upon our Fame and reputation. Wherein he proceeded not openly, as former
persecutors, but Tyrannically invented always something against us, that it
might be to him a chief crime, to force the people of the habitable earth and
to tyrannize over the most perfect, and accomplished doctrine that ever was.

But certainly, he made war wit^ us, and persecuted piety in the cowardliest,
and basest manner tha^ might be, in regard, among the persecutions wherewith he
astlicte^ us, he caused frauds, and decei^ to interveene in troubling us.

For, whereas power branche^^ it self into two considerations, the one
consisting in persuasion, the the other in Force, and Violence* He made use of
that part of his power which was the hardest and most inhumane, namely force;
(reflecting for the most part unto Tyranny, through the unrulinesse of the
Common People both in City and Country, whose audaciousnesse is otherwise
intolerable, being carried inconsiderately unto all attempts sometimes,
without either wit, or discretion) This force he put in practice against the
Christi^ns without any express Edict, or Ordinance, for what he would have
them do, but only that he would establish an unwritten law, by which he forbad
any one of them ^ould be sought after for his good ^ill, and affection to
Religion. The ^^ntlier part of his Power, which ^as persuasion, he reserved to
him^^lf, although he kept not the same ^^violately. For, as nature cannot
^ermit, that the Leopard should ^uit his spots, or, the Moore his ^lacknesse,
or Fire its heat, or ^he Devil the hatred he bears to ^han (who from the
beginning was (...) murderer) so it could not suffer that this man should
abandon his ^ruelty, wherewith he was fully ^ncensed against us. But (as they
(...)) the Cameleon changes her self ^iversly, and can take all colors, ^ut
while I leave there this fabu^ous Sophister, Proteus the Egyptian Julian did
the same to the Christians, bearing toward them all affections of the soul,
except mildness, his very mercies to them being cruel, and his persuasion
mixed with much violence; covering, under the outside of equal dealing, all
manner of injustice, and oppre^sion. Which the more easily (...) be guessed at,
by those subtle me^^ usually put in practice by him, (...) draw us to his lure:
His persuasion to this purpose being always bri^^ but his violence, which
follow^^ after, if not yielded unto in wh^^ he would have, lasting long. In
(...) word, his accustomed manner (...) dealing with us, was after the fashion
of Hunters seeking to catch their game, viz. either with snares (...) of fair
words to take us, (...) with other weapons of violence (...) make after us,
until reduced under him as his prey.

Having resolved in his mind, and made good this division of hi^ power into
seeming mildness, an^ force, he betook himself to another stratagem (which
only was resolved upon, though otherwise very inconstant, and extremely
variable in all his proposals) and it was this, to begin the execution of his
wickedness upon those of his own House, and Guard (a way practiced by all
Persecutours) there being no hope ^f invading those that are further ^ff, if
those nearer hand be not ^^rst looked after. Even as an Ar^y cannot fight its
enemies, if, at ^he same time, it be revolted against it is chief. For this
reason, ^e changed all the Officers of the ^mperial house, putting some away,
others to death, neither, for that wanting in their several respects
^articularly to this great Emperor, ^ut because they then showed it most of
all, and at the highest. For which two considerations they ^ecame (it should
seem) unprofita^le and might not be suffered to serve him.

He gained the Soldiery afterward, partly by himself, partly by means of
their Commanders: and esteeming it easier to persuade, he won some by Offices
and Dignities, others, (who knew no other Law but the Will of their Prince) by
their simplicity: and (to say more) he drew to him a great part of the Army,
viz. as many as he found weak, and inclinable, and who then, and before, were
servants of the times. Having gained some, and in hope to gain others, he was
not nevertheles^ Master of all, neither could he th^^ persecuted us, procure to
himself such a multitude by his ministry, but that yet there remained more then
seven thousand, who bowed not 1 Kin. 19. 18.
the knee to the Baal of his power, who worshiped not the Image of his gold,
and who, though bitten perhaps D^n. 3. 18.
with his Serpentine words, by looking after on the Brazen one, or on one that
was a type of Christ Number. 21. 8.
on the Cross, received no hurt by him. Of which number there were not a few,
that had honors and dignities, whom, a man would have judged in appearance,
might have suffered themselves to be wrought upon, either by fear, or hope.
There were also very many of low condition, of no great esteem, but for their
number, unto whom having given the assault, he was by them repulsed: even as a
great, and thick wall by a thin and ^^eak Engine.

Moreover, he angered not him^^lf any more, because those that ^ot from him had
courage, and ^onquered: for he was so much out ^f his senses, that those, whom
he ^oped to overcome, seemed to him ^s all won already. Yea, he had ^he
boldness to undertake against ^he great Standard, which being ^oftily
displayed, with the Cro^s woven therein, conducted, and magnificently guided
the Army, that had the Virtue (as the Latin word bears the name) of
comforting, and lessening labors and trawails, and which (as a man may say) is
the King of Standards, as well of them adorned, and enobled with the Pictures
of Emperors, enrich't with devises by Embroderies of diverse colors, as of
those carried at the end of a Lance, and flying in the air, with faces of
horrible Dragons, and jaws gaping, casting flaming lights, and embroidered with
ranks of Shells represented to the life in cloth of Gold, and thereby affording
both applause, and pleasures to the beholders. After then that with content he
had ordered his House, and thought he was on the top of all his business and
out of whatever fear and danger, he attempted that which follows. What was
that? to suppress the truth of God, by laboring, Tooth and Nayl, (as we say
in the Proverb) utterly to subvert, and root out, not only the Christians, but
also Christianity it self, from off the earth. O foolish, wicked, and ill
taught man in things out of thy reach, and of highest concernment! dared'st
thou thus obstinately to undertake so silly, and unlikely an enterprise against
that fair portion of Gods inheritance, and Manna of the habitable earth, which
had penetrated throughout all extremities by means of the profit, and facility
of preaching of the Gospel, (that thou childishly calledst folly, and yet had
subdued the wise, withstood Devils, and resisted time) as being old, and new
together, accordingly, as those of thy party, the Heathens have composed one of
thy Gods? The first, viz. the Janu^
truth of the Old Testament, declared but to a few, the last, viz. that of the
New to very many: the former, as the draught or description of a shadow, the
latter as the accomplishment of the same mystery folded up, and reserved for a
certain time only, and to be revealed after. Again, who, and from whence art
thou, that thou daredst to set upon so rich an inheritance of Christ? so rich,
and great, I say, both, and which shall never perish, although there were never
so many more furious, and more out-ragious then thou wast: but shall advance
itself, and grow more and more famous for ever? In regard I believe the
Prophesies of old, and those things in like manner which are manifest at
present before our eyes, things that as God he has created, and as man
inherited, which the Law has set forth, but grace accomplished, the Prophets
foretold, the Apostles confirmed, and the Evangelists consummated, or made
good and perfect from the beginning unto all ages.

Have thou been so bold as to approach near the holy Sacrifice of Jesus Christ
with thy abominations? and to come with the blood of thy beasts in opposition
to his divine blood, that has washed and purged all the world? Did thou
dare to make War against peace? to lift up thy loose hand against him that was
fastened both for thee, and by thee upon the tree? have thou set, or composed
thy taste against Gall? would thou set up a Trophee in defiance of the Cross
of Christ? erect against his Death a Destruction? against his Resurrection a
Rebellion? against the truest Martyr that ever was (if a Martyr we may call
him) those that were no Martyrs?

Persecutor as Herod, Traitor (...) Judas, but that thou never shew^d'st thy
repentance in an halter as ^e did! Thou who have crucified jesus Christ in like
manner as Pi^ate! enemy of God's as the Jews! who, to thine own inevitable,
though future destruction, wast ^eserved, for a time, to be Author ^f so much
mischief! do thou nothing respect those that have ^een sacrificed for the
name of Je^us Christ? Have thou no regard to that great St. John Baptist? to
St. Pe^er, St. Paul, St. James, St. Steven, and a world of other valiant
Cham^ions, that both before, and since their time, have miraculously main^ained
Gods truth in peril of their ^ives and goods? manfully fought against fire and
sword? powerfully ^ubdued beasts and Tyrants by pre^ent torments, and denounced
condemnations, as if they had only borrowed their bodies, or, indeed, had no
bodies sensible at all of what they suffered for Gods cause?

Now wherefore all this? That with their mouth, at last, they should renounce
the true Religion? So belike or, otherwise, thou would never have caused
honour^ to be ordained for them, together with praises, and feasts. But so far
off was this Devil Julian from bringing this to pass, that the Christians in
his reign, for the most part, not only still perfisted in their former
profession, and defense of Gods truth, but also by them Devils were cast out,
Diseases cured, Apparitions and Prophesies followed, their humane bodies upon
touching, or repairing unto, had virtue and power given them a^ well as their
sanctified souls, to work miraculous effects: yea further, drops only of their
blood, or, the like little remains of their Martyrdom, had the same efficacy
and power, etc. What say thou* will thou still slight, and not yet have a
reverent esteem of such like persons? Thou, who admirest the burning of
Hercules, caused upon a disaster of having offended women? and the dismembring
of Pelops, either for the love of strangers, or Gods? with respect whereunto
the Pelopides rendered themselves noble and remarkable both by the shoulders,
and by the Ivory: who admirest the gelding of the Phrygian Priests, that
receive their shame with the sweetness of musical Instruments, wherewith
appeased after? the torments and cruelties used in the mysteries of Mythra, The
Persians worshipped the Sun under the name of Mythra, by offering up men as a
sacrifice unto it.
and his burnings, as well just, as mystical? That murdering of Strangers killed
by Bull's The Sacrifice of that Kings Daughter, because of the City of Troy?
and the blood of Meniceus which was shed for the Thebans? then that of the
Daughters of Scedasus at Euctres? thou that make so great account of those
young Laconicks, who whipped one another till the blood followed, and besprinkled
the Altar for the delight of that chaste Goddess, and Virgin? who make so
great esteem of the Hemlocke of Socrates? of the Thigh of Epictetes? of the
Belly of Anaxarchus? whose patience was more by necessity then of good will:
who commendest also the precipices of Cleombrotus, moved to cast himself from
thence by the reading of the discourse of the Soul? the dispute of Pythagoras
touching his Beans? the content of death by Theanes? or of I know not what
other of his School, and Sect?

Nevertheless, thou most wise and generous, if thou will not admire the things
I have said came to pass heretofore because of our Religion: at least
contemplate on that which is present, and consider the patience of our
Scipioes, and Epam^nonda's: seeing thou marchest with thy Army, and causest thy
self be served with meats common, and not delicate to eat: that approvest very
much of those Emperors, who make War, and conduct their Armies themselves: that
savourest of I know what generosity, and discretion in honoring the virtue of
thine enemies, and make more esteem of the valor ^f thine Adversaries, then
of the ^owardlinesse, and idleness of whosoever of thine own party: ^eest thou
not many among us, ^aving in their possession neither ^ouses nor goods, stripped
likewise ^f their flesh and blood, and yet through such their sufferings
approaching near unto God? who ^ye on the bare earth, their feet ^as Homer
speaks of a certain Devil that desired to honor him) all ^irty! who are
humble, and yet ^levated above all here below? who are on earth here with men,
and yet, at the same time, in heaven above with God? who are bound, and yet
free? forced, and yet invincible? who possess nothing in the world, and yet
enjoy all things that are in the world? who consist of two sorts of lives, the
one which they make no reckoning of, the other, whereof they esteem very much?
who dye to live? who through the dissolution of body and soul, are reunited
unto God? who live exempt from all inordinate affections, and yet filled with
the holy and true love of God? to whom appertains the fountain of light, whose
beams already penetrate their souls: who are spiritually nourished, as it were,
with angelical singing of Psalms? and kept turns, whole nights, together in
praising God? who have their minds already in heaven, by a divine rapture,
before they dye? to whom appertains cleanness and purity? who know its all one
to depart from this world, and to be with God? to whom belongs rocks, and also
paradise? to be cast down upon the earth and yet to be set upon thrones in
heaven? to be naked in their bodies, and yet clothed with incorruption in
their souls? to be here in deserts, but yet in heaven with good company? who
neglecting and repressing the sensualities of the body, enjoy, for all that, a
perpetual, and un expressible content of the soul? whose tears are the deluge
^f sin, and restoration of the ^orld? whose extended hands put ^ut fire, tame
the raving of wild ^easts, dull the edge of the sword, ^ake whole troops fly
away? and ^now thou also, that, at length, ^hey shall withstand, and triumph
^ver thy impiety, although, for a (...), thou bravest it, and, with thy ^evils,
dancest (as I may so say) (...) the delights of thine own hearts ^^sts, and
heathenish devices.

Nevertheless, O impudent fel^ow as thou art! how can it be that, in the mean
time, thou better ^onsiderest not of these things? ^hou, who art as liable to
death, as any other worldling? How can ^hou find in thine heart to make no
^reater esteem of those before ^poken Saints of God, neither to ^everence them
as thou ought? ^re not the gifts and graces, where^ith those clear Lights of
heaven ^hine so bright, far to be preferred before the unsatiable covetousness
^f Solon that wise man, whom Craesus made trial of with his Lydian gold? or the
Philocaly of S^crates, that is, an affection in doting upon fine things? for I
am ashamed to think of, much less b^ in love with his foul sin (of Sod^my, I
mean) although, with ver^ much artifice, heathen men have strove to cover it,
and are commended for their so doing. O^ the licourishness Plato showed i^
Sicily? which brought him to suc^ a condition, that he was sold without being
redeemed by any of hi^ own disciples, or other of the Greek Nation? Or, the
glutton^ of Xenocrates? the Cinicalne^^ of Diogenes? who made a Tun hi^ house,
wherein he more accounte^ of Beggars, then of Princes; o^ Barly-loaves, then of
fine Manche^^ (as the Tragedy has it.) Or, the Philosophy of Epicurus? who
kne^ no other sovereign good, then the pleasure he took to please hi^ senses.

You, make great account o^ Crates. Certes, 'twas an exploi^ worthy a brave
Philosopher, vo^untarily to quit himself of his ^reat revenues: and, that they
not ^inder him in his study of Philo^ophy, to cast away much riches ^ormerly
possessed by him in great ^ontempt, but the manner of his ^penly making known
the same, ^y boastingly publishing the know^edge thereof to posterity, is a
^^gn he was ambitious of popular ^pplause: a mark whereby we dis^ern him to be
affected as well with ^he tumor of Vainglory, as with ^he humor of being a
Philosopher. ^ou admire him, who being at ^ea, and commanding all his goods,
(...) a tempest, to be cast over^oard, thanked fortune that she had ^educed him
to a Sultan, or to a ^hilosophers cloak. Also Anthiste^es, who, as a
quarreller, having all ^is face broken, made no more ac^ount of it, then the
writing on his ^prehead, as on a table the name ^f him that had beaten him; to
^he end, peradventure, he might make his complaint more heinous against him,
when time should serve. Thou highly prizest (...) other, that lived not long
since who making his Oraisons to the Sun, stood upon his feet as long a^ the
day lasted, observing, it man be, to begin then when it came nea^ the Earth,
that such his prayer^ might be the breifer, and finishing them when the Sun
set. Thou als^ make great account of him, who in winter, being on the guard,
too his charge so to heart, that he passe^ the whole night, which froze hard in
contemplation, and had hi^ mind so intent thereon, that he fel^ not the cold at
all. Thou praises^ also the curiosity of Homer's desir^ to know the Riddle of
Arcadia^ and Aristotle, who stayed sometim^ on the bank of Euripus, to
understand the cause of its Ebbing an^ Flowing; neither of which being
perfectly understood by either o^ them, was the cause of the one an^ of the
others death. Thou esteemest also of the Wells of Cleander of the Girdle of
Anaxagoras, an^ of the Weeping of Heraclitus. Now tell me, how many have thou
of these? and how long have they ^asted?

And wonderest thou not at so ^any thousand of ours, that have ^ollowed the
like Philosophy, and ^ar more admirable, all their lives? ^eest thou not how,
in all parts of ^he world, as well men, as women ^f our Religion, have striven
one ^ith an other, even unto admira^ion on all sides, who should be ^ost
renowned for virtuous living, ^orgetting even the laws of nature, ^hen
endeavoring to appease God (...) their chaste conversation and pa^ence, not
only the meaner sort ^f people that are wont to live of ^odily labor, but the
great and fa^ous also for their ancestry and ^ignities? Who changed their
for^erly accustomed delicious man^er of living in all plentifulness (...)
variety of delights, for the ^rder discipline of a more severe (...), to follow
Christ: who, though (...) attaining to the grace of eloquent speaking, (true
piety not consisting in Rhetorical strains, and in the fruit of wisdom
proceeding from the lips (according to the opinion of one of your own Poets)
and being of little value,) yet most excellent they were, notwithstanding, in
the sweet disposition of their souls, in the sincere and exact government of
their lives and actions, to the Will of God.

But this man, shutting his eyes to all this, and aiming only to please
Devils, (which already many times, justly overwhelmed him) before he made any
Ordinances for common affairs, rush'^ upon the Christians: and, althoug^ he had
two things which gave hi^ trouble, viz. the Galileans (for (...) he was pleased
injuriously to ca^^ us) and the Persians, who, bearin^ troubles patiently,
continuall^ made war against him: So it was he had a business came so near him
that the Persian war seemed (...) him but as a Play and Fable: where of, though
he made no show, yet he was so transported with fury, that every one took
notice of him: But this so prudent person, so good a common-wealths-man,
considered not, that in the first Persecutions, there happened but a little
confusion and trouble, because our doctrine was not then spread among so many
people, the knowledge of the truth as then made manifest but to few that had
need of more light, but now that the Word of our Savior is so far spread, and
so well established among us, to strive to pull it up, and to shake
Christianity, it is no other thing, then to overthrow the Roman Empire, to
expose to all manner of danger and ^azzard the whole State of the Republic:
which is the worst that our greatest enemies can wish to us, namely to see us
receive these evils from our selves, and by the means of this new and admirable
Philosophy and Policy, by which we become so happy, and return to the first
age, and golden condition of the world that was without trouble, without all
kind of dissension, or Warring one with another.

But they will tell me, the People are gently governed, Taxes remitted,
Magistrates worthily chosen, Thieves punished, and such like things, with
respect unto temporary felicities, and make it good. For it must needs be we
should have our ears tingle with such manner of applauding him in his
Government. But the divisions, nevertheless, and commotions of Towns and
Countries, the destruction of families, the quarrels of private houses, the
separation of married folks, that were likely to follow such a mischief, and,
as the truth is indeed, have followed the same, brought they any augmentation
to his glory, or commodity and benefit otherwise to the Commonwealth?

Who is he, that is such a Partizan of Paganism, so void of common sense as to
avow the same? For, even as in a man's body, when a member or two are out of
order, the other cease not to do their office, and to conserve the welfare of
the rest that are in health, and the greater number, by means whereof, even
those that were ill affected, ^ut of frame often come again to their natural
constitution: but when too many parts are ill affected, there is scarce any
remedy, but that the whole body becomes in danger to be overthrown: So in
^tates and Republiques, particular defects may sometimes be made ^p, when, at
the same time, it fares well with the general: but when ^he greater part is
weak, without doubt the General is in much haz^ard to be destroyed. A case so
obvious and trivial to every common understanding that the grossest enemies we
have cannot possibly ^ut soon foresee the same, especi^lly at this time that
the Christians ^re so increased.

But the malice of this man has ^o blinded his reason, that hand over head he
cease not to molest ^ll manner of Christians, little and great: Yea, so
tainted he is with all kind of wilful hatred against us, not only unworthy of
a judiciou^ Emperor, but also of a far meane^ man in understanding and place
that, as if, with our Name, h^ could take from us the belief which we repose in
Christ, he has commanded our Name should b^ changed, and that we should be no
longer called Christians: yea, (...) make us ashamed, as if thereby w^ were
accused of some great crime^ he made a new edict touching the same, calling us
therein, and o^daining we should be called Galileans, in stead of Christians;
she^ing indeed thereby that the name o^ Christian is a glorious and honorable
Title, otherwise, certainly, (...) would never have taken it from us* and, in
lieu thereof, given us a^ other less famous, and not of the like reputation.
Or, whether fearing some virtue to lie hid under tha^ Name, which might cause
those o^ his Party tremble, so often as spoken in their hearing [in like manner
as those Devils in the Gospel are reported to have trembled at the name of
Christ] took away the occasion of their being so troubled, by forbidding us to
be called after that name.

As for us, we desire not to change those names whereby he is called, knowing
nothing more ridiculous, then those appellations of Phales, Isiphales,
venerable Pan, etc. wherewith he takes a pride to be styled: being Names not
only infamous, and shameless, but such, as upon consideration of the reasons
wherefore at first they were taken up, cannot otherwise then give offense unto
modest ears that take notice thereof, Neither envy we his title of Caball,
whereof he boasts so much in his follies, or that other epethice of Hercules
Kill-cowe, etc. worshipped as a God, because, in his Thirteenth labor, he begot
with Child in one night fifty daughters of Thyestes.

If endeavor to find out new names, wherewith to reproach him for his fouler,
and more villainous actions, we are not ignorant how to fit him with a great
many more to the purpose, then those, whereby to vilify us, he has invented
against the Christians. The History of his unworthy Acts is not so altogether
unknown to us, but that it is an easy task, thereout to furnish our selves with
Names more then a good many, whereunto to entitle him, as due to his deserts,
though much unbeseeming the man he would be taken for, being not content to be
styled by the Title of Emperor of the Romans only, but also would be called
Emperor of the whole world. For so he persuaded himself, he should be before
his death, as being bewitched into such a belief by those Devils, and
Magicians that thereinto infatuated him.

As for our being called Galileans, that are Ch^istians, we are no whit ashamed
thereof, seeing Christ our blessed Redeemer was so called. Yea further, seeing
he that is Lord, Creator, and Governor of the Universe, Son, and Word of God
the Father, sits on the same Throne, with him, Mediator, and High Priest,
and, for the love of us, (that despised, and cast his Image in the dust, as
ignorant, perhaps, a great many of us, of that high mystery of his Deities
conjunction with our flesh) took upon Phil. 2. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
him the form of a Servant, and ^ore our sins in his own body on the ^ree,
that they might dye with him: If he, I say, suffered himself to be called a
Samaritan, and (which is worse) a Devil: (to whom it was an easy matter with
an Host of Angels, yea, a word speaking only to vindicate himself, and repulse
a whole world of wicked men) and was neither offended thereat, nor made
complaint against them that did him that injury, but sent them gently away,
(shedding tears to obtain pardon from God his father for them that crucified
him) shall we, that are vile worms, however christened in his Name, hold it an
unseemly thing, think it much to be defamed, after that sort, or troubled
therewith, when, in the same manner, reproached for his sake? God forbid. Nay
rather, -- being reviled, we bless: being persecuted, we suffer it, esteeming
1 Cor. 4, 12.
more of such injuries, and other scoffings, wherewith reproachfully thou
tauntest us, then to be otherwise made rich by thee, for a time, with the muck
of this worlds goods, then to be advanced by thee to fleeting Honors, and
Offices, and whatever other earthly preferment that is in thy power, and choice
to confer upon us. Yea, moreover, whereas it is thy whole delight, thi^^ hearts
content is solely fixed on such matters, we stick not to make open profession
unto thee, and unto all the world besides, in the words of the Apostle, that we
determine not to know, (much less to be affected, and hunt after) any thing
among you, save Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 2, 2.
and him crucified.

He had one quality more in him, an unworthy and dishonest one both, and that
was, he accustomed himself, when covertly aiming to gain us to his Party, at
the same time to put on the Fox his skin upon that of the Lions, or, (as I
cannot better express the same) to cloth, under the mask of Minos his justice,
his own cruelty, and oppression.

To abridge my discourse, the rest of his abominable actions I Will leave further
to be dilated, unto those hereafter that shall be pleased more largely to pen
the whole History thereof, not doubting, but many will strive to make Posterity
acquainted with things of such consequence, and whether Tragedy, or Comedy,
(call them as you list) deserve not to be concealed. As for my part, I Will
reduce unto those passages before spoken of, one, or two of his most signal
acts, to let them who admire his deeds, and count him praiseworthy for the
same, know, a man cannot invent charges enough, is not able to find faults so
many, or reproaches so great and shameful, as he deserved.

It Is a maxim among Emperors, (I know not whether it be practiced with other
Monarchs, but among the Romans it is exactly observed) viz. that, in honoring
them, they set up for the reigning Emperors, public Statues; for, as for
Crowns, and Diademes, they suffice not (it should seem) no, nor Scarlet, nor
solemn Ordinances, nor Taxes, and Tributes, nor great number of People to
applaud them at their first entrance into Supreme Authority: but it is their
pleasure, over and above, like Gods, to be adored, that thereby they may be
held for more majestical and sublime. They will also have the same adoration
done, in like manner, even to their very Pictures, and Images, that thereby
their eminency may be set forth more absolutely, and completely. Among these
Images, and Representations, each Emperor chooses severally unto himself
certain of them: e. g. Some, setting forth to the life great Cities making
Presents: Others, a famous Victory crowned with triumph: Some, Magistrates on
their knees, with devises expressing their Charges and Offices: Others, cruel
Beasts killed with Arrows, directly shot through again; Others certain
vanquished Barbarians laid prostrate at their feet, or otherwise killed in
diverse manners. For they desire not only the truth of things, whereof they
assume the glory to themseves, but also, to have Representations, and Pictures
thereof. See now how this man plotted, what craft by him was used against the
Christians. As those, who in drinks sometimes mingle poison, so he infused,
upon a time, abomination among his Imperial Ceremonies, confounding together
the adoration of Idols with the Ordinance of the Romans. For which purpose,
among the Effigies of Emperors, and other usual Pictures, he caused to be
interposed the resemblances of Devils, and that done, exposed them to the
People, Cities, and principle Governors of Provinces. These Images, or
Pictures were after that manner contrived, that who so adored the Emperor, the
mischief could not be avoided, but, at the same time, he must, of necessity,
adore therewith Devils, the Effigies, or Pictures of Devils, being so cunningly
interweaved with those of the Emperor. Now who so adored not those
Representations, the Imperial Majesty was offended therewith, and the Party
refusing to give honor thereunto found guilty of High Treason against the
Emperor. There were some wiser, and more advised, who finding out the deceit,
were not taken with this so artificially invented snare; who were afterward
punished for such their prudence, under the pretense, they had not honored the
Emperor: when as the true cause was, for their being faithful rather to the
great Monarch of heaven and earth, and to the true Religion. A great number of
the simpler and poorer sort of people were ensnared herein: who, in my opinion,
deserved to be pardoned for their innocence, being by subtlety thereunto
enforced.

After this sort, matters being thus deceitfully handled, 'twill be sufficient
to make this person infamous, and worthy of just reproof, in regard private
Persons, and Princes, should not govern themselves alike in their affairs,
their actions being of different weight and importance, a private person not so
much to be blamed when he does any thing by subtlety, and after a covert
manner, because otherwise, perhaps, he is not able to compass what he would
have, by force, and therefore is constrained to use art, and dissimulation:
but, as for a Prince, it should be otherwise, because, as it is a shame to be
overcome by force, so, I esteem it yet a greater, to cover his designs with
craft, and faining. There Is beyond this an other matter, which, though it came
from the same forge and conception, is yet worse, because the evil of greater
consequence. I will annex it here unto what I have spoken formerly.

There was a certain day, wherein the Emperor would bestow a Largess, whether
accustomed and ordinary, or more solemn and at a prefixed time, to manifest his
inward malice toward us, it skills not. 'Twas ordained then, all the Army
should assist therein, that every one, according to his degree* and dignity,
might receive his Largess and Pay. (Behold here another mystery of villainy, see
here how iniquity plays its part) under the color of liberallity he would
bring it to pass, by alluring the Soldiers with money, (who for the most
part, are ordinarily covetous enough, if not too unsatiable) The business was
this. Being pompously set in great state, and also very powerful through his
wiles, by reason whereof, (as if he had been an other Melampus, or Pro^heus) he
could change himself into whatsoever forms, at his pleasure, according to the
quality of affairs he had in hand, (the story that I am about to tell, would
move compassion in whosoever of any good nature, or tolerable apprehension,
whether beholding this sad specta^le with their eyes, or otherwise ^earing the
samerelated unto them:) There was before him Gold, there was Incense, and just
against him Fire; close by stood the Master of the Ceremonies, who gave notice
what was to be done: The outward pretense was, the making ^se of certain more
ancient, and honorable Ceremonies in that their reception of the Emperors
Largess, but the issue after was, They were to Sacrifice Incense in the Fire,
and receive from the Emperor the wages of such their perdition (very little
indeed for a thing of so great concernment, for the loss of so many souls, by
their committing therein so heinous and execrable an offense against the
Almighty.) O wretched gain! O miserable recompense! wherewith the Soldiery
were betrayed, and sold by such an invention they who had conquered the whole
universe, by means of a little Fire, a little Gold, and a little incense, were
discomfited and destroyed* (...) (which was more pitiful) thought not upon
their death and ruin. Such as went thither, for the lucre of (...) little
money lost thereby their souls, kissing the Emperors hand, and perceiving not,
that, at the same time, they kissed the hand o^ their Assasinate, and were
nothing the better by so easily suffering themselves to be carried away, a^ by
an inviolable Law, unto such simplicity, and unadvisednesse* How many thousand
Persians should there have been to have made such a defeat? how many archers,
and slingers of stones? how great a number of armed Soldiers? what engines to
beat down walls could have done that, which one only hand, one only journey,
and one wicked counsel brought to pass, and accomplished?

I will insert here one story more lamentable then the former but ^ow recited.
It Is reported that some of the before-said Soldiers having been deceived by
ignorance, after the Act committed, and re^iring to their Houses, as they were
at Table with their Companions, and about to drink water (as accustomed to do)
not thinking of the mischief which they had brought upon themselves, but taking
the cup in their hand, and lifting up their eyes on high, began to call upon
the name of Jesus Christ: Whereat, one of them more sensible of what they had
done, then the rest, said to them, after this manner. [What mean ye to invoke
Jesus Christ, after renouncing him?] with which words being astonished, and
stricken (as it were) half dead, what strange thing (say they) do you affright
us withal? tell us, when was it that we renounced him? unto whom the other
replying, when ye burnt incense before the Emperor, which was a sign of such
your renouncing him; presently these poor souls leapt from the board, as men
bereaved of their wits, and, incensed with despite and choler, ^an to the
Marketplace, crying aloud, [We are Christians, we are Christians, we have not
been Traitors to thee, O Savior Christ! let all the world know it, and
principally our good God, for whose sake we are content to live or dye, as
seems good to him: we have not wilfully abjured the confession of thy holy
Name; if with our hands we have transgressed, our hearts never gave consent
thereunto: we have been deceived with the Emperors Gold; that was it, whereby
we were contaminated: but such our unperceived abomination, when time was, we
have since the knowledge thereof, utterly abandoned, and desire our blood may
be shed in expiation for that great offense formerly committed by us.] After
which Out^ries openly made by them, they an directly to the Emperor, furi^usly
throwing the Gold received from him formerly, before his face, ^n presence of
the standers by, unto ^he earth, exclaiming with a loud ^oice, we have not been
called by ^hee to receive honor, but to be marked with the infamy of
Repro^ates: Do us the honor, who are ^hy Soldiers, to kill and sacrifice ^s
to Christ, who is our King: For ^he Fire of Incense burned by us at ^hy
command, command us to be ^urned with fire; and for the ashes ^hereof, reduce
thou us to ashes: cause our hands to be cut off, which ^nwittingly have been
advanced to other Gods: honor others with thy Gold, who will not repent the
^eceiving of it: as for us, the riches which we look for, is to gain Christ,
which gain we prefer before all other gain, before whatever other riches, or
honor, or things of this life, that thou art able to impart unto us.

This was it they said, and advertised others to take notice of the craft that
was put upon them, t^ purge themselves from the sins o^ this intoxication,
making satisfaction, or leastvvise endeavoring so to do, by their blood, unto
Christ Jesus that dyed for them With which resolution of their the Emperor
being exceedingly irritated, would not, nevertheless command them to be put
to death publicly, for fear of rendering them Martyrs in his so doing: but gav^
order they should be sent forthwith into exile, punishing them that way, the
more reservedly, for the neglect, the little regard the^ seemed to show unto
his person i^ their Speeches, and Actions before him, but now specified. Had
he pu^ them to death, there could nothing be more acceptable unto them and, as
for his Banishing of them, they were so far off from being troubled
therevvith, that they too^ it as a great favor from him, rejoicing with inward
delight in their souls, (I dare say) in that thereby they conceived themselves
the more freed, or at least, they were the more removed out of sight from being
upon every occasion, defiled and deluded further with his enchantments and
deceits.

Having this intention, and employing otherwise his malice diverse ways (for
his mind was nothing settled) and inflamed more with a Diabolical fury, than
with any natural reason, being uncon^tant in his resolutions, he concea^ed
always the secrets of his wick^dnesse. But as it is said of the ^^re of Mount
Aetna, that it is hid^en in the bowels of the earth, ^ourishing and increasing
its self in ^eing retained by force, or some ^ther thing, (viz. the breath of a
Giant in torments) rendering hor^ible murmurings continually from ^he low pits
thereof, casts out a moke on the top, (an inevitable sign of the calamity
aproaching, if the fire become so great that it cannot be stayed) and then with
violence breaking its bounds, ascends upwards, and enlarging its wideness,
makes a strange vomiting, which spoils and corrupts the Land near adjoining:
So was it with this man, who sometimes commanded, and helped himself in our
affairs with the frauds, and impostures of his deceitful, and sophistical
Edicts.

But, since his untamed fury was let loose, he could not by any means conceal
his malice. For from that time, he began to persecute those of our Religion
openly. Where, passing over thos^ Ordinances he made against ou^ Sacred
Churches, (which were generally published) together wit^ robbing us of those
Offerings, an^ Money consecrated to God, proceeding no less from avarice, the
irreligion; the forcibly taking a way of our holy Ornaments, which were pulled
from us by filth^ and profane hands, the Priests and Sextons, for keeping them,
being dragged up and down, and tormented, defiled also and covered over with
blood streaming from their bodies torn with lashes of rods, when their hands at
the same time, were fastened to pillars; the Crosse-bow-men running through
Provinces, and Cities, wickeder and crueller then himself, who gave the command
that we should be utterly routed instead of the Persians and Scythians:
Forbearing (I say) the speaking of these things, who is it that knows not the
Sa^agenesse of them of Alexandria? who, among many other enterprises which
furiously they put in practice against us, making use of the Licenciousnesse of
the times, without any either honesty, or modesty in ^o doing, (being a people
furious and turbulent by nature) so far ^eightned after destruction, their
^hirst, that (as it is reported) they fil^ed our holy Temple with two sorts of
blood, viz. the blood of beasts sacrificed, and of Men. In which barbarousness
of theirs an Officer of the Emperors Army was chief, who, for this only
cruelty, got him a name, and made himself famous amongst them.

Who is he, moreover, that has not heard of the swarms of the Heliopolitans,
and rashness of the Gazeans? who, for their mercylessenesse toward us, in
recompense thereof were honored and applauded by him, and had experience of
his liberality. Who is he that has not been made acquainted with the fury of
the Arethusians? who till then being altogether unknown, were since had by him
in great reputation, it not being virtuous actions always that bring
reputation and credit to persons, but also superlative wickedness sometimes,
and, never the like heard of, brutish invention pu^ in practice to punish
innocen^ Christians. I will only recite tha^ which may seem horrible and crue^
to very Atheists themselves.

Certain chaste Virgins knowing little of worldly affairs, as excluded from the
sight of almost all other save themselves, by these barbarous Arethusians
having been dragged stark-naked into the Marketplace, to the intent they might
be put to the more open shame, were commanded to have the hair of their head
cut off, after which, their flesh cut in pieces, (my God! scarce have I the
patience to repeat it) was immediately thereupon by them savagely devoured with
their Teeth in a Feast suitable to that their execrable fury, filling their
bellies also then with the raw Livers of those Virgins, and after that, common
meat being brought in, some of them took the bowels and guts of the aforesaid
Virgins, yet reaking hot, and mingling them with hog-wash, threw them to the
Swine, before the others faces, that they might see their hungry hogs tear the
same, and, together with barley mingled amongst it, eat it up all. A dish of
meat which till then, never the like was fed upon, and wherewith the Inventer
thereof should have endeavored to glut the Devil only: As, the truth is, the
Devil after made a fine meal of the blood of the wounds which that wicked
Emperor Julian received in his bowels, and whereof he was slain when shot
into his body in the last Wars that he ever fought upon earth, with the
Persians.

Again, who is such a stranger in our affairs, as has not heard of Marcus
Arethusius a famous man among us? who ignorant of the story of him, except I
relate the same at present? who in the reign of Constantine's giving full
liberty to the Christians to exercise their Religion, pulled down one of the
Gentiles Temples, or rather a retreat, or habitation of theirs for Devils, and
converted a great number of them that were Pagans unto the Christian faith, to
the right way thereby unto everlasting life, as well by the excellency of his
manners, as by his eloquence: and for the same cause, was not well liked of by
the Arethusians, or, at least, those among them that were followers of Devils?
But, since the affairs of Christians were troubled, and that those of the
Greeks, and other Gentiles began to rise high, he could not avoid the violence
of the time. For the vulgar, being wont; for a time, to retain their passions.
as fire that is hid in wood, or, as a stream of Water that is stopped, upon any
the least occasion rises, and breaks through all. He then observing the
madness of the people, who were not a little animated against him, and
threatened him, was resolved at first to fly from them, not so much for want of
courage, as to obey the command of Christ, which wills us to retire from one
City to an other, and thereby to give way to our Persecutours. For good
Christians must not only regard their own particular, though never so virtuous
and constant, as beware of their enemies, and that, on their part, they give
not the least occasion to do them an injury, which, without scandal to their
weak brethren, and to the prejudice of true Religion which publicly they make
unfeigned profession of, it is in their choice to put by, or make prevention of.
It so fell out, nevertheless, that perceiving many to be apprehended, and
dragged before Magistrates because of him, and that there were some in danger
of the loss of their souls, by reason of the cruel persecutions wherewith they
were afflicted in their bodies for his sake, he would not altogether neglect
them, who for the making sure of his person, were in hazard to lose their own.
Wherefore, being first holily and well-advised, he returns back from his
retirement, and offering himself to the people, resolved with patience to
undergo whatever calamities of the times: With respect whereunto, what injuries
and oppressions were there, unto which he was not exposed?

What could be more lamentable? every one brought (I know not what) resolution
to adhere to that foul sin of diversely afflicting him, carrying neither any
regard to the constancy of him, nor to the quality of his Persecutours; who
were the more irritated against him through a supposition, that his return to
them proceeded rather from a contempt, or neglect that he made of their
persons, then of any virtue, or constancy in himself to undergo whatever
tribulations to be inflicted upon him by their fury. Whereupon, this holy old
man, this voluntary Soldier of Jesus Christ was led through the City
(venerable for his age, but more for his life to all the world) exposed to
these tyrants, and hang-men, and conducted by people of all manner of
qualities, rich and poor, young and old, men and women, some of one sort, and
some of another, hurried together: yea (and which was more strange to behold)
those who had estates, and were of the wealthiest, strove together, were
emulous among themselves, who should punish him most, all indifferently
esteeming it a commendable thing to inflict whatever torments upon him, and to
triumph over him; Whom all the people of the Town villanously handled, some
halling him through the Streets, other thrusting him into the Kennels: these
plucking him by the hair of his head, those smiting him upon every part-of his
body: using further, shameless reproaches, and not to be spoken of, among so
many other mischiefs; just as those are wont to be done unto, who were
punished in those Paganish mysteries of Mythra. He was also lifted up in the
air as in a svving, too and fro tossed from one side to the other: he had his
precious body received naked upon the points of their Penknives, who acted
their parts in this mournful and sad Tragedy against him: Yea further, they
put his legs in a press, and squeesed them to the bones: they cut off his ears
with a fine slender thread, making him, in the mean time, stand upright in a
basket, and rubbing, or besmeering him all over with honey and salt, they
exposed him to Waspes and Bees about noon, when the sun shined hottest and
clear: which made his flesh seem, as it were, to melt, and gave those animals a
warm throat full of this happy meat. I call the meat, this flesh happy,
because, however tortured, yet suffering patiently for Christ's sake, he rendered
every part of his body happy, as a blessed sacrifice, and most acceptable in
the sight of God.

There Is an other story as well worthy to be remembered, and spoken of him, and
that is this.

This good old man and young both (for the dolours which he underwent in his
old age caused him not to abate of the lively cheerfulness he was endued
within his youth) smiling in the height of his torments, was heard to utter
these famous and most remarkable words unto his tormentours, saying, [I esteem
very much the posture wherein you have put me in thus lifting me up, It Is a
good omen to see my self exalted, and others below me.] He had as much to say
touching the different condition wherein himself was, in comparison of those
that persecuted him: the contemplation whereof seemed to make him feel no more
pain, then as if he had been only an assister at the tormenting of another,
taking those his sufferings for an honor, and not for a punishment, wherewith
they seemed after a sort, but indeed were no way able to afflict him.

Where is there a man never so little gentle and debonaire, that is not
affected with this gallantry, that reverenceth not this holy Martyr for these
brave acts? But the times permitted not to show pity in such cases to the
Christians, neither the irregular passions of the Emperor, whose unrelenting
will it was still, that the people, Cities, and Magistrates should, by all
means, carry themselves cruelly unto us, though many of them, for all that,
were utterly ignorant of the bottom of his wicked heart. Thus went the affairs
with this constant old man. If you ask the reason? 'Twas because he refused to
give five Shillings to his Executioners: which was an argument evident and
plain, that he had the patience to suffer for the cause of God, and his true
Religion only. In regard, whilst they demanded at first a great sum of money,
in lieu of the Temple it is being pulled down by him, and would abate nothing of
that price, but either the whole sum was to be laid down by him, or else he
rebuild it at his own charge, one would have thought this refusal of him came
from want of means, and disability to satisfy what was demanded, rather then
from zeal to the true Religion: but after that by his constancy he had gained
to be abated in part, and continually had something cut off with respect unto
the price formerly required, so that the demand in the end amounted but to a
little in value, yea so little that it was easy for him to pay it, the
difference between them was who should remain master, they in making him give
something, though never so little, or he, on the contrary, (who was not to be
forced,) to pay any thing at all, although very many there were that
voluntarily offered to give for him more then they desired, not only because
of his unparalled piety, but also in consideration of his invincible and
unconquerable constancy. At what time a man might clearly see, he fought not in
this list for money, but for Religion.

Let then those that so much admire this Philosophical Emperor, resolve us,
whether these, and the like actions of his, were signs of mildness and
gentleness, or contrarily, of much pride and cruelty. As for my part, I
believe the Question is soon answered.

I have not as yet declared how this Sufferer was one of them, who had formerly
saved this detestable Prince, when all his Race was in dangers, by secretly
conveyhing him away from those that sought to destroy him. The reason, it may,
be, of his deserving to be so grievously punished, namely, for his imprudent
preserving him then, who became after so great a plague to all the world. In
consideration of which whole business, with respect unto the patient suffering
all manner of cruel torments, and other lamentable reproaches by this Martyr of
ours, A certain Greek, that is to say, a Pagan in Religion, (though in his
behavior otherwise, somewhat above, and beyond all other of his kind that ever
lived either before or since his time, to be admired at) being not able any
longer to behold the tormentours on his own Party, and the constancy of him
that endured thus all manner of punishment on the other, brake forth into these
noteable words unto the Emperor, and in the presence of the whole company that
was then assembled together, and spoke after this sort. [Are not we ashamed,
Sir, to fee our selves so overcome of the Christians, that we have not the
power to be masters over one poor old man, who has gone through all sorts of
torments, and of whom, if we had had the better, it had been no great matter?
is it not a great impeachment of our credit, when all is done, to retire
vanquished by him? Whereupon (as it seemed then) the other Officers blushed,
but those Kings, that is to say, the Pagan Priests mocked at it. Could any
thing in the whole earth be more shameful and wretched, not with relation so
much to him that suffered the same, as, on the other side, especially, who
caused these mischiefs, and other the like abominable outrages to be put in
practice?

In this sort, after a most barbarous, and never the like heard of inhumanity,
dealt they with Arethusius? So that the cruelty of Phalaris, and of Echetus
will seem small, in comparison of theirs; more espcially of his who compelled
them thereunto, and was Author thereof. O that I could meet with the Creature,
that had the gift to infuse into me the Knowledge of Herodotus, the Eloquence
of Thucidides, whereby to paint out the wickedness of this man; to set forth
in livly colors to Posterity, the whole History of those several passages of
profound villainies that were acted by him throughout all his whole life.

I pass to make mention of Orontes, or of them who had their throats cut in the
night, which he hid in favor of the Emperor, being staid because of the body
of him to whose death he seemed to consent, for that would be more proper to be
put in Verse. Neither will I speak of the Caves, and places under ground in the
Imperial Palace; or, of that which was done in Ponds, and in Pits, and in
Ditches filled with the pernicious treasure, and detestable mysteries, not only
Anatomies and dissections of Children and Virgins (made use of to cause Devils
appear by Divinations, and in other abominable and irregular Sacrifices) but
also, of them who were in trouble for the true Religion.

Concerning all which, it is my advice not to tax him openly; and that because
himself was ashamed thereof. And good reason, for it is certain, had he not
endeavored to keep them secret, they had turned to his confusion, after made
known and discovered.

As for the Christians of Caesarea, a magnanimous People, and constant in
Piety, who were so injured, and cast down by him, it is not a matter, it may be,
which deserves reproach; because that being irritated against Fortune, (which
sometimes was contrary to him) in time of prosperity he had (in his opinion
perhaps) just cause of vengeance; as also, we must excuse somewhat the injustce
that then bore sway, and wherewith ^hey were then so much infested.

Who is it that knows not how ^he multitude furiously incensed against the
Christians, killed a great number of them, and threatened ^et worse? And
thereupon the Governor of the Province keeping a middle way betwixt the time
present, and the Edicts then already made, and esteeming it, on the one side,
better to comply with the Season, and on the other, to carry some respect unto
the Laws; after putting a great number of the Christians in prison, chastised
also some Pagans. Whereof, being afterward accused, he was brought before the
Emperor, and thereupon deprived of his Government: Whom (although alleging
the Emperors Ordinances, on which he had grounded his Judgment) it failed but
a little of his being condemned thereupon unto death; thoug^ in the end, he
experimented hi^ clemency, and was banished only* His Reply, nevertheless, to
the Emperor, was gallant and brave For, when extolling unto him the valor of
the Pagans above the Galileans, in that one Paga^ sometimes brought under his
Subjection many Galileans. [Wha^ great matter is it, (quoth the Governor to the
Emperor) if on^ Pagan overcome or subdue a multitude of Galileans? Has not
you^ Highness made an Edict for the Pagans to do thereafter; Are no^ they
backed by your Command, to use all manner of violence against them, when
whosoever will, is not only permitted, with all sor^ of injustice, to molest
them, but also assisted, and may call for what help as he thinks fit, at his
pleasure, to wrong and confound them? When as he that is most cruel, is most
commended; he reputed the best Subject that exercises his wit most to vex
them? When for a Pagan, in the least manner, to be courteous to a Ga^ilean, is
to be criminous in the ^ighest degree? When noneless with^tand, none sooner
yield themselves ^o our fury, than those Galileans? When not only a few, but
many ^undreds of them, though of force to resist, yet in obedience to your
Majesty's pleasure and will, patiently submit themselves to one poor Pagan
Executioner, to be punished? To beat then those that resist not, and after to
boast of their manhood that do so, what is it, but to publish rather their
violence, than to make good their valor to Posterity? Besides, the pleasure of
a Prince, or Emperor, is a Law not written, which, being upheld by force and
authority, has much more power in it, than when written, and not upheld by the
same force to maintain it.

This should not be so (say they) who have set forth unto us a new God, good
and gracious. Contrarily, your Highness publickely has forbidden us to trouble
the Christians, as also commanded that Christians should not be injured at
every man's pleasure; so that thereby the Christians are discharged from our
causing them any more wrongfully to be afflicted.

The Hydra, though you cut of^ one of its heads, is never the less hurtful,
because, in stead of tha^ one cut off, other nine succeed in the place thereof.
And (if we must believe Fables) did we ever see a Patarical Chimaera gentle and
pleasant, because it had three diverse Forms, which should rather cause the
same to be thought hideous? Or, must that infernal Cerberus, or Scilla, the
plague of Seamen, be counted harmless, because the upper parts thereof (as
it is said) are pleasing and beautiful to the sight, as resembling a fair
Creature of humane kind, when the rest of it are full of the figures of
Dogs-heads, and of other wild beasts, that commit all manner of mischief? when
it swalloweth up whole fleets of ships, and is as dangerous as Charybdes, right
over against the same?

But what? Will thou find fault with the arrows and stones, and excuse the
Crosse-bowes, and those that shoot in them? Or, shall we condemn the Hunters
dogs for greedily running after their prey, and worrying of it, and at the same
time, hold them excused and innocent, that make use of them? 'Twill be very far
from reason so to conceive, and needs some sophistical cheat to cover over,
and wrap up the truth by the force of a fair speaking tongue, to defend these
vices.

Their's a means (I confess) to warrant (in some sort) him that would disguise
himself with these subtleties, by taking to him the Helmet of Pluto, the Ring
of Gyges; which, in turning the beril or broad part, makes him that wears it,
become invincible. On the contrary, this great impostor, by how much the more
he striv^^ to walk in the dark, and no body see him, to dance in a net (as we
say in the Proverb) and not be perceived, by so much the sooner (as it
happened) was he descried and laid open by the judgment of truth: at least, by
those that had eyes in their heads to perceive, that he alone was Author of
these mischiefs, of those actions, which himself with all his subtlety, was
never able to make good. So easy a matter it is for wickedness, we see, to be
convinced and made manifest unto all men, when, however daubed over, for a
time, with fair shows, it has recourse still unto its own naughtiness, and
falls foul upon the head always of its first contrivers.

If the acts thus committed by him until this time were very uncouth, and far
strange from magnanimity, or whatever other Imperial virtue, may we say that
what he forethought to put in practice for the time to come would prove
better, and more ingenuous? No such matter: yea, it had been somewhat more
tolerable, if what he purposed to do, had not been far worse, and crueller,
then that which we have already recited. For, even as a Dragon, when he raises
part of his scales, and begins to set up his bristles, the other being sin a
readiness, its not possible for him, but he must also raise, and set them up,
in like manner, although; till then, they were composed, and stirred not: Or,
as in Thunder, when rumbling in the clouds, the lightning thereof we di^cern
with our eyes, before hear with our ears the great Claps that follow after: So,
this fulminating Emperor had already hatched in his mind, and contrived in
design those abominable enterprises which after he intended to bring to pass,
and was fully bent most barbarously to put in practice against us Which were so
strange and unusual till then, that to him alone it appertained both to
invent, and to cause them after to be executed. Its true, before his time, the
Christians had been made sensible of great troubles and vexations that
Dioclesiaen their first Persecutour, an^ Maximinian (who succeeded him being
worse, as also Maximi^ (the cruellest of the three, whos^ Statues beaten down
in publiqu^ places, and yet to be seen, serv^ as a memorial of the hurt done
b^ him, and in which are engrave^ for ever the deformities of his Person)*
brought upon them. But neither of these three, no, nor an^ Tyrant that ever
preceded them at any time thought of, or invente^ the like Stratagems,
wherewith (...) torment us, had he lived to have finished such his diabolical
desig^ and hellish purposes against us.

These then were his drifts, ((...) those of his Privy Council averr^ But he
was prevented by the grac^ous providence of God, and (...) the tears of many a
good Christian that shed them in abundance, applying no other remedy against
the venom of this their Persecutour.

It was in his intention also, to take all manner of liberty from Christians:
and to inhibit them all things: viz. The conference of Public Assemblies, of
Markets, and of all Places also, wherein any Jurisdiction was held: as being
none of them capable of such rights, if first he had not presented Incense
before the Altar, and thereby discharged the Salary of such, and so signal a
mystery.

O Emperors, O Kings, O Lawmakers! Have not ye (even as the Influence of
heaven, the light of the Sun, the benefit of the Air, by a gracious and
universal Decree, are common to every one) established Laws, and Ordinances
for all the world freely and indifferently to make use of? Yet this wicked man,
this Perverter of all things would go about to deprive us Christians thereof.
So that though never so much injured in our Persons, cheated in our Goods, or
receiving what ever other intolerable wrong from them, it should not be
permitted us, by way of Justice, to have any recourse to whatever Laws, or
Ordinances, to right us. In this regard, they began to assume liberty to
themselves to mock and flout us, yea to assault us with blows unto that
excess, that they scarce suffered us to fetch our breath, or enjoy one quiet
hour amongst them. Which nevertheless, was so far from disheartning us for
making ever the less profession of the faith and repose that we put in Christ
Jesus, that it heightened in a great many of us who were so injured, a greater
constancy to Go^s Glory, howbeit to the Authors of our Persecution, greater
sham^ and reproach for so troubling us.

But lets hear the Reason, of all this (I beseech you) of this Assasinate, of
this Apostate-Law-givers thus dealing with us.

You shall have it in his own words, your Law (quoth he) permits you neither
to defend your selves, nor to demand reason of justice, nor to possess any
thing in particular: but rather to make no account of this world, or, of the
things that are in it, as being all of them transitory, and vain. Moreover
that, It Is not for you to render Mar. 5. 39. 40.
evil for evil, but whosover shall smite you on the one Cheek, to turn to him
the other also: again, to 5. 44.
one suing you at the law, to take away your cloak, to let him have your coat
also. It may be, he will add, We must pray for them which despightfully use,
and persecute us. For, how should not he have the exact knowledge of all things
commanded, and permitted us Christians? He, I say, who before attaining to the
Empire, was entered into the Order of a Reader of the holy Scriptures, and who
had the honor to serve at the high Altar, as also, to adorn our Martyrs with
Churches, and Chapels?

Above all, I admire one thing of him, that, seeing he had exactly studied our
Books, he took no notice, (or else, in good earnest, would not see that which
is written elsewhere) viz. Every wicked man Ps. 73. 37.
that goes away from God shall perish: In like manner, He that troubles them,
who remain faithful, and contrives punishments, whereof himself is worthy.
With respect whereunto, If we must needs be such, as he will have us, and
govern our selves according to those aforesaid Precepts of our Savior,
concerning the regulating our Actions thereunto: and, as for himself, in the
mean while it may be lawful for him to live as wickedly as he lists, in all
manner of ungodliness, by using oppression, and whatever other deceit against
Christians, that desire to live more quietly, in all righteousness toward
God, and good conversation toward their Neighbor: If the actions (I say
further) of man's life, being either virtuous or vicious, the Gods, whom those
of his own Party seem to worship and obey, approve of virtuous men, and reject
those that are vicious: If this be a thing confessed by the Testimony of our
very Enemies, and of those that persecute us, we have then gained what we
desire to have granted, we have obtained our cause. If it be said by them
moreover, that on their side also, they have any honesty, or fair deportment,
though but in word only, and not in deed toward us, and are not so impudent
and accomplished in wickedness (thereby supposing to please themselves, though
not their profane Gods) as to maintain, that vice appertains to them as their
proper inheritance: Let them show us how, and what Justice there is in it, that
we should be so constant in our suffering afflictions, and they not to pardon
such as pardon them; considering we have the better at one time, and you at
another; seeing the affairs of this world roll and change, first of one
fashion, then of another. Have the Christians ever used you, as you have used
them? What Libertys have we deprived you of? Against whom is it, we have
incited the Peoples fury? To whom have we sent Captains, that that did more
than was commanded them? What People have we reduced into the danger of
hazarding their lives for us? Who are they we have deprived of their Places and
Honors, appertaining unto them, as to honest men? In a word, what did we ever
commit like unto many things which you have in part executed, and in part,
threatened to practice against us? Truly, you cannot say what: You (I say) who
so reproach us for being defective, for our coming short of that meekness, and
gentleness, that by Christ our Masters counsel is required of us.

Moreover, Thou, who art so wise, and well advised, in shutting us up within
the narrow Precincts of Christ's stricter advises in the Gospel, why markest
thou not, that in those very places, some things are enjoined us, upon promise
of reward, if we do thereafter, which are not imposed for all that, upon
necessity of obeying, under pain of punishment, if we not perform the same?

For, though it be a thing very excellent, and to be wished that all were
perfect, and if possible, attain to the top of well-doing, in whatsoever
commanded, or forbidden us: Yet, seeing there is a great difference between
those that do those duties whereunto enjoined, some obtaining to a great height
of perfection; others unto a mediocrity only: What reason have thou, to make
Ordinances, whereunto all are not bound for observance, and yet punishest such
as perform them not? Every one, not deserving a reward for what he does, being
not liable presently unto punishing for what he does not.

And therefore, in binding our selves unto what we should observe, as much as
may be, through the whole course of our lives, it becomes us, at all times, to
regulate our manners and actions, by the Laws of true Philosophy; which, as it
rewards ever, where rewards become due to our deserts, by doing what it
commands; so it punishes no^ at any time, where punishments are not due for
our not doing that, whereunto, by way of counsel we are only, lovingly and
most tenderly advised.

But, I will again embarque my self in the discourse of what he [Julian] did
touching Sciences, and the use of Tongues; it not being possible to ref^^in
from often making mention of him, and forcing my self to defend him in what
lies in my power to speak truly in his behalf, and yet justly otherwise,
rendering him worthy of neglect, where he deserves the same. In which regard, he
never did, (I may speak it impartially) a more unjust and insufferable action,
than when he would have prohibited us Christians the study thereof. Which
perverse resolution of his, barbarously intended against us, every man, me
thinks, that with delight, addicteth himself to the profession of good
literature, should contemn, even as I do, who cannot hold from revealing my
self to be of that number, and who, by reason, and in comparison, thereof, have
quitted altogether, and wholly abandoned all other things of this life; whether
they be goods, money, jewels, plate, authority, honors, or the like trash,
depending upon those unappeaseable tormentours; the vexatious desires of this
world, that as in a dream, bring fading pleasures, but no true joys to the
beholders thereof with their eyes.

But, as for my self, I have embraced the only study of Tongues, and other
Sciences, having no manner of regret at the pains I have endured, as well by Sea
as Land, to attain thereunto; desiring that I, together with all my Friends and
well-wishers, may be abundantly furnished, and fortified therewith: And which I
have always cherished, and chosen above all things, next unto that Soverain
good, the glory of God, and Salvation of the Elect, depending on him in his
Son, and our Savior Je^us Christ, through the grace and powerful operation of
the Holy Ghost. So that if every one (as Pindarus has it) feels, or is
sensible of his own loss most, it is necessary for me to discourse of this
subject; not any thing that can be imagined being so agreeable therewith, as to
render all possible thanks to the Word or Son of God the Father, by the words
and benefit of the tongue, for that the study of Tongues, and other Liberal
Sciences have hitherto been left free to us.

But, what ayled thee? or from whence proceeded it (O thou light and
unsatisfiable man!) that thou wentest about to forbid the Christians this study
of Sciences and Tongues? which was, not only in the number of those evils,
wherewith we were threatened, but also, well near ordained and published. Why
so? And Wherefore I pray? Whose counsel, reason (I beseech you) has carried
thine Understanding? (called by thee, in thine own term, and fancied phrase,
Mercury.) What wilfully wicked men, what enchanted Devils have suggested the
same unto thee? If thou will, we will tell the truth, why.

It was requisite and meet for thee, after committing so many foul and enormous
things, that thou should be reduced unto such a pass, as to be hurried into
thine own confusion, by, in what thou reputed'st more prudent and wise, therein
unwittingly to make thy self appear to all the world a very fool through thy
much oversight, and indiscretion.

For, say, I pray; To what did this thy Ordinance tend? What reason therein
had thou, for that thy new and strange prohibiting us the leave of attaining
to the knowledge of the Tongues, and other Sciences? If any equal, and
indifferent? produce the same, and we will quietly be satisfied without further
complaining. For, as accustomed we are to overcome with reason, so will we
never (with Gods help) be so destitute of common sense, so void of tolerable
understandi^g, as not to yield, and give place to reason, in like manner.

Yea, but reply you, Sciences and the Greek tongue belong to us; even as
Barbarism, and Ignorance to your Religion; which consists in no other great
matter, then to say only [I believe.] But they among you, nevertheless that
follow the Sect of Pythagoras, will they not laugh you to scorn for so saying?
Seeing [Ips^ dixit, the Master said it.] was enough among them: viz. Their
great Principle, and of more account, than whatever answer else, though never
so prudent, and to more purpose. For after this first, and so much esteemed
maxim of theirs, in making no further answer, (which was enjoined all them
that followed his Philosophy,) he accustomed himself to speak little: It being
certainly observed among them, upon whatever Question asked, or reason demanded
to reply only, [So Pythagoras is of opinion.] and therewith without other
satisfaction, or further resolution given, to rest content. So that, it was in
a manner the same thing, though with some little change of words and syllables;
for them to remain satisfied with Pythagoras their Master's [I have said it.]
as for us, with respect unto what said by Christ our Master, to say [We must
believe.] All this notwithstanding, you forbear not still to mock, and detract
us, for that, by our Religion, we have bound our selves to give credit unto
that, which Persons filled with the Spirit of God, have transmitted unto us.
Whereas, their very authority, were there nothing else, is proof sufficient for
what they have written, being of more power, and force, to convince the
gainsayers, than all the Ipse dixit's of Pythagoras, all the Demonstrations,
and Positions of whatever other Philosophers, and humane Doctors since the
beginning.

But suppose the tying our selves to believe certain Doctrines, delivered unto
us after that sort, be liable in good earnest, to be reproved, and justly
contradicted by you: How can you prove the use of Tongues to be in your power
only? If so, How comes it to pass, that we, against your Laws, and Ordinances,
have a share therein? For, to whom belongs the Greek Tongue? to whom to speak,
and understand it? I say, to speak, and understand it, thereby to distinguish
the force of words, with which you aequiocate, when diverse things are
comprehended under one, and the same expression; some understanding one thing,
and some another? But thou must confess, the Greek tongue depends either on
the Service of thy Religion; or else, on the pleasure of those that first
invented, and established the same. If on thy Religion, tell me where, and by
what Priests, it was first ordained, that the Greek tongue should be spoken
therein; as we see it has been resolved, whereof, and to what Devils, we
should sacrifice? For, according to the Statutes, and Rules of your Doctors and
Priests, it is not lawful unto all, to use all alike; or, to one, to use all
after the same manner. In what Place, (as in the Country of the Lydians) is it
a holy thing, proper and pecu^iar unto them, to render curses unto Hercules?
and to believe, they do this fained God a great honor in singing reproachfully
unto him? Or, (as to the Inhabitants of Taurus) to kill Strangers? And (as in
Lacedemonia) to be whipped till the blood springs forth until it touch the
Altar? To whom is it a holy matter, (as to the Phrygians) to be gelt, as they
were, the Music sweetly sounding, and they losing their genitals in dancing?
Or, (as in other places) to use Sodomy, keep brothel Houses, and make use of
such other the like mysteries?

There was a custom, and ordinance also, to speak Greek unto some of their
Devils. Which, if still it should be used, it could not prove, or thereby be
inferred as a proper, and peculiar thing for the Greeks, or Pagans to apply to
some one of their Gods, or Devils that whereof every one might be served, every
one of them make use of:. Even, as it is ordained to sacrifice very many things
that are vulgar and common: which, if thou say, it is not so, and the Dialect
of this tongue appertains properly to thee, as of thy domain, and in this
right, repellest us: I answer, it cannot be comprehended what reason thou have
for it, or how thou can appropriate it to Devils. For, although the Service,
or Caball of thy Religion be performed in the Greek tongue, it follows not
therefore, that the Greek tongue depends on Religion: neither is it a
sufficient reason to proscribe, and exclude us from making use of so good a
Dialect: the conclusion would not be pertinent. As if two Qualities happen to
be in one Subject, it follows not, those two are one same thing. For,
supposing one same man to have the Art of Drawing Pictures, and Melting Gold,
it should then follow that his Gold-mel^ing, and Picture-drawing should be one
and the same thing: Which but to suppose only were a very vain, and most
absurd conceit.

I demand then of thee, (who art so jealous of the Greek tongue,) what thou
meanest, in not permitting, but rather going about to hinder us from making use
of it? Forbiddest thou us thereby the downright, and trivial manner of
speaking thereof, accordingly as the Common People are accustomed to speak it?
or, that of speaking more elegantly therein, and with choicer terms, that are
not so intelligible of the unlearned, or of those that are not so well ver'st
in the knowledge of Tongues.

A Tongue is not proper, or peculiar to them, who have invented it, or to any
Art, or Profession comprehended in the mind: but to all that can understand it.
For, even as in the Artificial tuning of Musical Instruments, the string
heightened, or loosed, renders diverse sounds, yet all, according to his mind,
that, to make good Harmony therewith, plays; and governs the Instrument: So
uses the divine Word, the great and Sovereign Workman, for matter of
Sciences, and so forth, with us; It being, according to his pleasure, that this
man should invent one Art, that an other, and communicate the same, without
appropriating either, to their first Inventors: and thereby render out lives
more pleasing, more acceptable, or more tunable each to other.

Tell me, then? the Greek tongue, appertains it to thee alone? What? the
Rudiments of Letters, were not they the Invention, first of all, of the
Phoenicians? or (as ^ome say) of the Egyptians? or rather of the Hebrews, a
wi^er People then either of them, who maintain their Law in Tabl^s of Stone,
was first written by the finger of Cod? belongs it to thee alone, to speak
elegan^ly, as those of Athens? and measures (I ought first to have named the
Science of encamping, and making War) to whom belong they? Belongs not that of
Warlike Inventions to the Euboeans, if it be true Palamedes was of that
Nation, and for the same reason, evil spoken of, accursed, envyed, and after
condemned by those that set forward to the Conquest of Troy? Well then, If the
Egyptians, Phoenicians, and Hebrews, of whose Inventions we make use, in our
doctrine: If the Inhabitants of the Isle of Euboea, claim that as theirs
properly, the same reason that thou alleagest: what shall we do? or how
justify our selves to them? w^ being liable, by the same Law, tha^ thou
would make, to be deprived of many excellent Arts, descended unto us from
others, and, consequently, our selves forced to render them back again to their
first Inventors; till, at length afte^ returning what we had from them* It
befall us, as it did the Jaye i^ the Fable, who, when she had restored unto
other Birds the feathers that she borrowed of them her self afterward remained
naked and became deformed.

To give an instance, or two, in certain Particulars. The Art of Poesy, does it
belong to thee only? or may it not rather be ascribed to a poor Old Woman? who
being punch'd on the shoulder (as the tale goes) by a young fellow passing by,
and affronting her, she fell thereupon into such a fury, that unadvisedly, and
upon a sudden she rapt out a Verse: whereat the fellow taking delight, with
more curiosity after skanned the feet thereof upon his fingers: and, by this
means, the admirable Art of Poesy was first occasioned. Again, if thou
braggest, and art so vainglorious because of thine Arms, tell me, brave Sir,
from whom had thou them at the beginning? Were not the Cyclops they that
first invented the Art of Forging? If Scarlet also be so much prised by thee
above all things, who made thee so cunning and knowing a man therein, as not to
ascribe the first finding out thereof to the Tyrians? in whose Country a
Shepherds Dog of theirs browsing upon a Swad of red Beans, and his Chapps
becoming all over, as it were, bloody therewith, gave his Master a hint
thereby, to take notice of the Flower thereof: And from thence sprang the first
attempting to Die, with the juice of it, that cloth which is now in so great
esteem with you, O ye Emperors! and great Persons.

What say thou in thy claim farther unto Husbandry, touching Plowing, and
Tilling the Earth? As also, to the Art of making Ships? when the Athenians deny
thee the right, to be the sole Master, and Proprietor thereof, by ascribing the
first invention therein, to Ceres, Triptolemus Dracon; as also to Celeus,
Icarus, and to the rest of that Fabulous rout. Where took your filthy
Mysteries, (fit only to be celebrated in the night) their first rise? To pass
by these foolish matters, and have a fling again at thy fury, or rather impious
acts: From whence had thou the Invention of taking thy first imitation of
formalityes, and giving the same to thy Paganism, as also other of thy most
abominable Ceremonies in serving thy false Gods, are they not from the
Thracians, (as the Greek word (...) signifies;) and thy manner of Sacrificing
from the Caldeans, and Cypriots? Even as Astronomy from the Babylonians;
Magique, from the Persians; the Art of Divining by Dreams, from the
Telinesians: as that, by Birds, from the Phrygians, who first observed the
motion, and flying of them. To avoid prolixity; From whence has sprouted every
Science put in practice by thee? Has not some one, or other, gathered from
each of them a particular Invention, and through reducing the whole altogether
into one Mass, thereby forged out unto thee a false, and foolish Religion? May
we not then openly avow it to thy face, that when thou shall have rendered up
each Art of thine, to it is own Author and Inventor, there will remain nothing
behind to thee, but thine own Folly, together with thy new Ordinance of denying
us all things, for the further establishing of thy fond and wicked Religion?
Thou being the First of the Christians that have plotted a revolt against Jesus
Christ thy Master; as in former times, the Scythian Slaves rose up in
Rebellion, and revolted against the Scythians that were their Masters. In my
conceit, thou hadd'st done better, to have endeavored the discomposing, the
overthrowing of our Union; who, in relation to thy Laws and Ordinances, seem
wicked, and perverse; that thereby the remainder of thy Empire being at rest
from such like fighting business, a man might see the Roman Republique (as in
it is first splendour) delivered from all civil wars, which are far worse than
foreign: Even as we should rather prevent the destruction of our own bodies and
flesh, than that of Strangers.

Now, (Howbeit all the Actions of this our Impostor toward Christians, in
relation to what before spoken of, fall out to appear frauds, only covered over
with courtesies, and consequently, far unworthy of Imperial Majesty,) I shall
yet produce some finer, and fuller of subtlety, that were acted by him.

To which purpose, He perceiving after all this, that in confideration of the
Precepts, Doctrines, and Divine Testimonies, as well of the Old, as New
Testament, (of the Old, by Prophesies, and evident Inspirations of Gods Spirit:
Likewise of the New, by the Revelations of the Son of God, and of Miracles,
great, and remarkable to confirm us in those things, which, by the Fundamental
Positions of our Religion, we make open profession of,) we began to become most
constant, and confident in the Truth, and Faith of Christ; that we might not be
quitted in these respects without his assaulting, and offending us for the
same, as he did others, upon the like occasion. Behold he contrives and puts in
execution his designs against us! as Rabsheketh (Leiuetenant to Senacherib
King of the Assyrians) sometime did against the Jews, who entered with an Army,
into the Country of Judea, 2 King. 18. 17.
and having with great power, laid Seige before Jerusalem to take it, when he
saw he could not carry it by force, and that the Traitors within could not
deliver him nothing according to his expectation, he endeavored with fine
words, and in the Jews own language, to make himself master thereof; which the
besieged taking notice of, demanded first that, addressing himself to them, he
would speak in the Assyrian tongue, and not in the Hebrew, for fear, least
under the sweetness of their own language, they might cunningly be brought
into servitude: So this man [the Emperor Julian] after the same manner,
desiring to bring us under his subjection, was upon the device of founding
Colleges in all Towns, of erecting Pulpits to Preach in, and Chairs to read
and expound his Pagan instructions, as well, those that concerned manners, as
other pretended holy mysteries: likewise, of publishing a Form of Prayers sung
by them, and answered one toanother: also, touching the Discipline of those who
should happen to be faulty in the Preface of their Caball; and, generally,
imitated all good orders, and establishments that are observed in our Religion.
For he had well-nigh brought to pass an Ordinance for building of Hospitals,
and other Public houses, also Recluses for Virgins, and other that for
Devotion desire to retire themselves from worldly affairs: again, other Places,
where care to be taken in making provision for sick folk, and other sort of
Distributions to poor people: also, as we are wont to use letters of
recommendation from one Country to an other in favor of the Necessitous, as
occasion offered it self, so would he have ordained to be done on his party:
with the like wholesome constitutions borrowed from us, and seemingly much
approved, and liked by him, in like manner.

Behold then, what this new Sophister, and Teacher of strange doctrines had
resolved upon! But, in that, touching these matters, the purpose and intention
of this man was not accomplished and effected, I cannot say whether it was more
advantageous to us, (that were forthwith delivered from him, and his) or to
him, (whose enterprises were vain as dreams:) because, easy it had been
presently to discern the difference betwixt the actions of men, and the
imitations of Apes: Of whom, though it be said, they can counterfeit some
subtleties which men use, and do before them, to deceive them, yet herein they
are to seek, in that not able through their imitation to discover the reason of
our craft in so doing. Whereby it falls out, that neither the Thessalonicall
Mare, nor the Woman of Lacedem^n, nor those who drink of the water of Arethusa,
I mean the Sicilians do better carry away the price among them of their kind,
then the Ceremonies and Customs of Christians: Which, though comely,
significant, and grave, as also of laudable use, are such, not withstanding, as
cannot be attained unto of any other sort of men, that go about to imitate
them: their Original being taken, not so much from the Invention of Men, as
from the assistance of God, in their making, and continuing the same still to
his Church, and People.

But, there is nothing prettyer, then (as on a Theater) to observe, and heed
well the admirable imitation of these men, and excellency wherewith they
endeavor to counterfeit us. What then, I trow, is the manner of their
teaching? What the end of their assembling together? Is it not, that (as Plato
says) we may see this City move and wag? which is but a discourse in words.
Whereas true Philosophy, in the general, consisting of two Parts, viz.
Theoreticall, and Practique: the former more hard and sublime, the latter,
though lower, yet more profitable; both of them, helping each the other, are in
perfection in our Religion. Because, as we make use of the Theory for the
knowledge of heavenly things, so we establish the Practique as the basis
thereof: it not being possible to participate with, or to attain unto true
knowledge in the Theory, without endeavoring to do thereafter in the Practique.

As for their Manners, I know not whether therein they are, either more
ridiculous, or vile, and abject, their Lawmakers destitute of divine
inspiration while compofing them, and the Laws themselves thereupon resembling
roots of trees undermined and carried away with water, floating up and down,
without having any firm foundation whereupon, for any long time, to repose them.

To compare, nevertheless, our our condition with theirs in this regard; As
they give unto themselves the liberty to sport and play in many Passages of
their Fables: so we, in like manner, are not debarred of all mirth, when
commanded, in Scripture, to rejoice with them that tejoyce: neither free, more
then they from sadness, when advised to mourn with them that mourn etc. there
being with us, as well as with them, A time (as Solomon speaks) to weep, and
Ecles. 3. 4, 7, 8.
a time to laugh: a time to dance: -- a time to keep silence, and a time to
speak. A time to love, and a time to hate: a time of war, and a time of peace.

Let their Theater then (I know not what else to call their Temple) be set up,
and they of the better sort in the Commonwealth, o^ that have attained unto
gray hairs, be placed in the highest chairs, o^ whoever else make themselves
taken notice of for the honor of their race, or wisdom in things of this
world, (wherein there is more false and fading pleasure, then true piety;) for
we will agree to them in this point. What then? As for their after rejoicing, let
themselves, in what they have a mind, please themselves, be clothed with
Scarlet, honored with Flags and Garlands: If this be true felicity, and above
that which the common sort can attain unto, let them (a Gods name) enjoy the
same, esteem the estate that is vulgar and low to bring with it neglect and
contempt both: contratily, the other, that is more magnificent and exquisite, to
gain authority, and belief: never will they abase themselves so much, I am
sure, as to esteem it, as we do, a point of honor to be humbled; and, not in
the fashion of clothes, but in the manner of well living to make true
estimation of what represented before our eyes, employing our whole time, not
about trifles, and curiosities, but in that which depends on the inward man,
and consists, not in seeking after popular applause, but in well governing all
manner of unruly passions, and affections incident unto our souls. On which
point, for the present, we will set up our rest.

Now what follows after?

Thou, for thy part, wilt represent unto thine Auditory riddles, or dark, and
hard matters to be interpreted [Divine Oracles] (as thou call them) Thou will read, and expound unto them Books, that treat of the mystery of thy
Religion, and of the World. But, tell us, what are those Books? and who be the
Authors thereof? Will it not be a fine thing (think ye) to sing of the
Generation of the Gods fained by Hesiod, and of their Wars set forth by him? of
the Rebellions of Tyrants and Giants, with their deaths? and of other horrible
accidents and disasters that befell Cottis, Giges, Briareus, Enceladus? of your
Gods, some described, by the same Author, to have Dragons feet, othe^s clothed
with Thunder? of your Isles thrown down upon them, and serving for receptacles,
and graves, to those that they are cast upon? Again, to sing of the sundry foul
Swarms, and diversity of imagined Hydraes, Chimera's, Gorgon's, and the like
monstrous mass, and confused rabble of all manner of other wickedness, and
profannesse? Are not these sweet things to gather out of Hesiod, and to feed
the ears of the People withal? Also, the bewitching story of Orpheus following
thereupon, with his Harp, and Song drawing after him Wild-Beasts, and Birds? To
relate of Jupiter his magnificent Titles, and the many significations thereof?
with his being the most high Sovereign among the Gods, and yet covered with
dung (whether of Sheep, of Horses, or of Mules, I know not) that thereby he
might make the power of his Godhead understood, by his producing from thence a
great number of small insectile creatures, and giving life unto them upon their
productions? After all which, to make mention of that impure Goddess of
theirs, who more immodestly, than became her feminine Deity, showed her self
half naked; to make her worshippers (I think) as well in love with Her, as with
the Religion, wherein she was publickely adored, and represented after that
fashion, by her Images, and other Pictures in her Temples, and elsewhere, to
be looked upon?

Neither does herein the total or whole sum of their foolish fopperies consist
but unto these, (as upon a Stage) are made to appear Phanes, Euricapeu^, and he
that swallowed the other Gods, and vomited them up again, or discharged his
stomach of them afterward, to make himself known the Father of Gods, and Men.
Are not here, in these high Points of their Religion's mystical matters, sound
and subtle Doctrines of Edification for the Common People to gather out, and to
make use of for their Souls health.

Besides these, and a number of the like ridiculous toys, Certain Allegoryes
are invented, by their Doctors imaginations therein, transcending humane
capacity by which they precipitate as weltheir own, as their
auditorsunderstanding unto confusion.

Again, touching Homer, and those many fond stories fabled by him, where will thou affixe the same? For it is he, who of old, composed Comedyes, or rather
Tragedyes concerning your fained Gods. You Will find (I believe) both the one,
and the other in those redoubted Poesies of his, whereof some cannot choose but
move and stir up their laughter, as well as other, tears. The truth is, 'twas
not a matter of small consequence for Oceanus to be reconciled to Thetis: and
therefore, well might she run about, and rave like a mad woman, upon the
thought only, that through the abstinence, for a time, of conjugall duties;
viz. in not commixing dry things with moist; there might eminent danger follow
after, to the prejudice of the whole world. Be it so. But what tolerable reason
may be given? what the least sober interpretation can be made of that meeting
of Jupiter and Juno, the same time, when at mid-noon, not at midnight, Juno so
shamelessely entreated, and entised him also, mostlasciviously to accompany
with her? Your Poets endeavor, indeed to dissemble it in their verses, strewing
for them a bed of fresh herbs, and renewing the same with flowers of Safron,
and Hiacynths. But where? and from whom had they these things? To what end
further? and what reason is there yet among you, that the same Juno, Sister,
and Wise of the aforesaid Jupiter, should sometimes hang in the Air, and in the
clouds counter-ballanced with chains of i^on, together with manacles of gold?
She, I say, who had her arms so white, and her fingers so rosy? Had any of the
other Gods demanded a reason of Jupiter, wherefore that his fair Goddess was
put into such a posture by him, without first asking pardon of him, for that
his presumption, he had cast himself in danger of Jupiter's displeasure, for
that his good Office showed toward Juno.

At another time, the said Juno, nevertheless, sportingly encompassing her
slender waste in the loose girdle of sweet love, put on, together with it, such
blandishments of enticing affections, such winingly bewitching charms of
wanton expressions, that with his own lips thereupon, he could no longer
refrain, from giving sentence on her behalf; protesting she so irresistibly
surprised him, in those her amorous allurements, that, of all his other
Mistrisses, there was none to be compared to her. What means also that divine
mystery of the brown eyebrows, and the shaking of those locks that made all
the heavens tremble? What the wounding of Mars, that dull lover? and of that
indiscreet Adultresse Venus the fair, shut up in a brazen nett, bound, and
manacled by lame Vulcan, who, to his own shame and confusion, assembling the
Gods together, to see this spectacle, for a little money let them depart again?
If able to render a reason of such like toyishness, tell us further, I pray,
what was meant by that fright, and stir among the Gods, touching that unchaste
Helena, that by reason thereof, the Heavens fell on such a thundering, the Earth
on such a cracking, that it wanted little, but both had been removed out of
their places: the Sea likewise turned upside-down; the gates of Hell opened,
and thereupon, what before, so long time lay hid, made known and discovered.

All which, and more, a great many the like strange things, having been as
strangely and diversely delivered unto Posterity; who is he among you, so subtle
and profound, yea, though he had the understanding of Jupiter, that with what
ever discurring imaginations higher than the clouds, can reduce them to common
sense, or in any kind of mediocrity, make them as much as tolerable to be
understood?

Which if true, and they are not ashamed to confess as much; in like manner
acknowledge them to be base and dishonest things; then the proof thereof,
(without having recourse to a Mythologie to serve them for a covering, with
respect unto what they suppose so finely to have found out and invented,) will
be apparent and manifest enough. What shall we say further? Is it not a
handsome thing, think ye, for those men, that hold so firmly and constantly
unto what in the Ceremonial circumstances of their profound Religion, they make
profession of, to abuse and fool themselves after this sort with obstruse and
nonsense Fables? Thus, nevertheless, they are accustomed to do, for the most
part, who thereby would endeavor in what ever, though never so weakly said, or
done by them, to escape from being reprehended. But they will reply, perhaps, the
businesses before spoken of are but mere conceptions, matters, which they so
greatly stand not upon, but invented on set purpose only to take up the
Peoples thoughts, and delight their fancies withal. If so, then let them
produce, and show us other things of their Theology, that are more solid, and
natural, that we may further confer with them about the same, and, in the
interim, tell us, whether it be not great sottishness to boast, and make a
more then ordinary account of matters that are only fabulous, and to be
blushed at? Again, whether it be not a foul shame, to publish to all the world
hidden things, and unknown to many (sor every one is not learned) with
pictures, and figures, and (which is worse) with great loss of money in
Temples, Altars, Statues? also by Sacrifices, which put men to the cost of so
many crowns? When a man may be pious enough in the true Religion without much
cost, is it not a folly to desire rather to follow error, and falsehood with
infinite charges?

But, let them say, they are Fictions and Jeasts, wherewith Poets abound in
their measures, and in Fables, to delight, and tickle their ears therewith that
hear them, mixing, after that sort, hidden and covered senses, that few but
learned and discerning men know how to make use of: I ask the question, how can
others make account of, or have those deites in any great estimation, when
those Poets of theirs, themselves abuse after that gross manner, the Gods they
would have honored, that it is reward enough for them, that they are not
punished for their so doing? For seeing, by their Law, under pain of death,
they are prohibited, in any manner, to use whatever Blasphemy, or reproach
toward the Gods, what punishment, (suppose ye) are they worthy of, that
frequently, and in public mock, and jest at them, in their Poesies, after the
foulest manner, with the filthyest, and most injurious taunts can be thought
on; yea, and leave the same after, as in a Comedy, unto Posterity, for, a long
time, to be laughed at?

Touching their having some things more covered, other more manifest in their
Religious Worshipping of their Gods, I acknowledge that in our Religion it is
so also, but with this difference: In our Books concerning the same, the common
and litteral sense has nothing foul, or dishonest in it: and that which is hid
to the vulgar, to the learned therein it is very admirable and clear: even as if
a body perfect in beauty were in some secret place, covered with a vestment
fit, and correspondent thereunto.

Moreover, Representations and Resemblances of Divine things, ought, methinks,
to have nothing therein dishonest, or, unworthy of what they signify: or, be
such as men would take ill, if the same should be done unto them. Yea rather,
they ought to be things exquisite in beauty, or, at least, not vile and base:
that, either discreet men may justly take exception at, or, the vulgar be
thereby scandalized.

On the contrary, what you practice, there is no credit to be given unto, and
what outwardly represented by you, is as detestable. For, what sense is there,
to make a man's self be led in the streets through the dirt, and drawn to the
Port among rocks and shells? What is the end? And to what purpose are such like
things recorded by you?

As for thine own part, thou will forge us Jests, and Allegories, of thy
Travels and imaginations, but no body will give credit unto, o^ believe the
same. And why? because what already in sight, and above-board, is plain eno^gh,
and intelligible. Whereby, as thou gainest none that will give ear unto thee,
so thou losest lookers on, to behold and see what thou would have taken
notice of: men, as well stopping their ears, as withholding their eyes, the
while, from the apprehension of such unlikely, and impertinent matters. Again,
the reason of your Theory, and Allegories is such, and so far from the purpose
intended by you, that it is easier too bring together things far apart and
separated asunder, than to make agree, and reconcile in one and the same
person, your fictions and figures.

It being thus with them touching their religious Mysteries fought and derived
from Natural Philosophy, what may, or will be said by them with respect unto
their Morality? What Principles and Maxims have they in use therein to form
men unto virtue? What remonstrances to better by degrees and make them more
perfect? They Will reply, perhaps, and say, for example, first, that Concord is a
fine thing, viz. to see Cities united, People, and Families agree well
together, and Every one, for his own particular, to govern himself according to
the right Rules of uncorrupted Nature; which separating, and yet reuniting all
things, has composed, though of Many Parts, yet but One only Frame, or
fabric of the Whole world. And this they will not stick (it may be) to show, and
set forth by diverse examples. But in relating to the Wars of the Gods, their
Seditions and revolts one with another, and an infinite number of mischiefs,
and evils which they suffered, and procured thereby, and whereof the most part
of their Poesies are full: Instead of peaceable, they make their Auditory
mutinous; in stead of wise, vain; rather than thereby render the Proud, Humble;
or the Audacious, Modest, and well mannered by such examples. For if, without
having such (as it were) Pictures before their eyes, it be an hard piece of
business, to bring them from evil to good, from vice, to virtue; who naturally
are inclined, and given over, in a manner, to all filthiness. How may we
imagine it a thing possible, to persuade such unto a more orderly life, unto
more peaceably behaving themselves: when in prosecution of such their other
evilly inclined affections, they seem but only to conform themseves, in so
doing, unto the examples of their false Gods? which profain Deities of theirs,
being diversely set forth unto them by Poets, their only Preachers, (as I may so
say) some as Patterns of one vice, some of another: What are they, the People,
otherwise thereby, then as it were, encouraged unto the same? What their Gods,
but their Guides (I mean the Peoples Conductors) in whatever manner of evil
Concupi^cence? Neither are those foul Feinds Patterns only, but also Pat^rons
of all kind of abomination: and in consideration thereof, are as severally
honored, and served by their several Worshippers and Servants, with several
Altars, and Sacrifices, dedicated, and sacred unto such, and such foul
enormities, etc. With respect whereunto, your Party, having their full swing,
and liberty to wallow in as licenciously as their hearts can wish; would it not
be a heinous matter to punish by Law, things established by Law? For their Gods
to take vengeance on those men, for acting those things, in regard whereof,
themselves are especially acknowledged to be Divine, and more particularly,
adored as the only Patrons of such affairs, and in whose behalf, it is rather an
honorable, than reproachful matter, to be Vicious; (if vicious in such a
case, it be lawful to cal^ any?) Would any man believe this? or, can there be
any such in justice? any supposed wrong o^ offense taken so oppressive, an^ not
to be tolerated among you as this?

Secondly, If we prefer, and extol the honor and respect due to Fathers, and
Mothers, and for that they are the first mediate cause of our entrance by Birth
into the world, give them Honor with the first: Does not Theology, and Reason
both teach that we should do so? To which purpose, does not their God Saturn
do well? has he not left them a fine example? He, who gelt Vranias, that he
should beget no more gods, and then threw his genitals into the Sea, whereof a
God was after engendered? And Jupiter, that, in imitation thereof, rebelled
against Saturn his own Father? Such examples of cruel Paricides among the
Gods, and the like, do they not well to insert in their Books to be imitated of
Children, in honoring their Fathers and Mothers, after the same fashion.

The third point, shall be Neglect of Riches; as who can say, the not procuring
of them at all hands, is no matter how, though never so wickedly. To which end,
in what matter shall their Mercury be represented? What shall we say to that
sharke? what honor? and after what scene, are we to atribute the same to his
budget? to the virtue and gift of grace that this filching God had to steal,
and carry away, with a trick of nimble conveyance, whatsoever he once laid his
prolling fingers upon? What to Phoebus also, who is said to give nothing
without gold? unto whom, nothing is so welcome as ready coin? Behold! are not
these rare encouragements and examples, to put men, though by nature otherwise
never so covetously affected, into an utter detestation of the muck of this
world, money, so perniciously sought after.

Moreover, with what face can Jove's Priests exhort his worshipers unto
Continency, when Jupiter, sometimes, wholly applies himself to the love of
Women? at other, to Phrygian boys? for whose sake (if Poets say true) he turned
himself into an Eagle. etc. Also, wherefore is it, that at a Drinking match,
wherein, meeting with other of your inferior Gods, to the end those profane
Deities might be more voluptuously attended upon, you feign him to cause them
to be served, and waited upon by those boys, he so much delighted withal, in
stead of Butlers, and other Servitours? Let Hercules, (if you please) be there
also, who deflowered fifty of the daughters of Thyestes in one night: And then
I know no reason, wherefore having put an end to this thirteenth labor of his,
he may not be put likewise into the number of those other Gods. Their furious,
as well as fighting God Mars, will he not be a fine fomenter of Peace? A ready
resolver upon all occasions, to cut of ^holler? Bacchus their God of Wine, a
sober Deity to encourage his worshipers unto a due moderation in quaffing and
drinking? And that crafty Companion of theirs Cost^er, to withhold men from
deceit and cozenage?

Again, when others are sad, that move from place to place, upon seeble and
weak legs; will not that limping God of theirs, that halts both on the one
side, and on the other, be a notable bar, and obstacle to keep light and
unseasonable Jesters from scurrill mockery, and unbridled laughter? Jupiter,
who together with a foul company of other devouring Devils, ran so fast to that
pompous, and magnificent Feast of the Aethiopians, without reproach; a jolly
means to remove and take away Gluttony? In like manner Hercules [Kill-Cowe] (as
he is sometimes styled) who, tormenting upon a time, a poor Labourer, devoured
one of the Oxen of his Team: And for that rare act of his, got himself a Name,
or Title of renown? and generally all those other Gods, that make so much have
to be fed with the fumings, and incensings, and pourings out of all manner of
Offerings made unto them, in their Sacrifices.

These heathenish customs, hateful doings, horrible abominations usually put
in practice by those of your Party, approach they any thing near (think ye) to
that innocence, that excellency, that integrity of sound faith, and good life,
whereunto we are exhorted, and which we [all that unfainedly desire, not only
to be thought, but also to be indeed Christians] are commanded in our Religion,
and Doctrine? No such matter. Besides, we have other manner of light to lead
us, other Teachers, (namely Christ, and his Apostles, and Prophets, etc.) to
instruct us otherwise, and to instill into our hearts obedience, and reverence
unto what enjoined we are, or, upon whatever terms, councelled and advised by
them. From whom we, upon every occasion (whatsoever too many of us, God knows,
either through weakness, or, at least, willfulness, have not the power, or
goodness to perform as becomes their Disciples) are nevertheless at all
times lovingly invited in the words of our Savior, [ -- Whatsoever ye would
that Mat. 7. 12.
men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the
Prophets.] Again, it is, with us a sin, not only to commit an evil actually
either in word, or deed, but also to do the same in thought, as being liable
thereby unto punishment before God (who discerns the secrets of the heart)
thought not so easy to be taken notice of by men, who cannot see the same, and
consequently punish the offenders by that means.

Yea, so exactly are we bound to carry our selves in point of Continency
(according to the Rules of Christ our Master) that even the eye is by him
forbidden us, thereby only to lust after any unlawful thing. In Point of
Anger not only the bloody hand, but also the bloody heart is restrained. In
case of swearing, not only that we swear not falsely, but also that not lightly
in like manner, or, not at all: not at all, that is, in our common and ordinary
discourse and talk, or, when as not legally called before a Magistrate,
thereby to attest the truth.

As for our [goods (of fortune] as we usually call the wealth of this world) to
possess them, as if we possessed them not, by not valuing them in comparison
of our chief good reposed in heaven. With respect whereunto, some, among us,
have taken little thought for possessing any; some, instead thereof have
embraced poverty: and, not a few, having first renounced the voluptuousness of
the belly, and vice of gluttony (a dangerous Mistrisse, and Mother of many
sins) have after that so consumed the part Mortal, by means of the immortal,
(it may be said of a truth) a man could not discern almost any flesh on them,
having acquired a law of virtuous living to themselves by not being carried
away so much as unto smaller sins, and whereof there is no account made that
they are so.

Is it not an excellent thing, thus, whereas others punish only acts outwardly
committed against God, or Man, we, the evil intentions of our hearts likewise?
and thereby endeavor, at least to cut away not only the branches, but the
root also, to stay not only the streams, but to stop up also the head of that
impure fountain from casting forth that noysomness which would quite poison us
after, through its more violent, and dangerous defluxions?

Tell me, in what place among you, and what People they are, that wish well to
these that injure them? Where is it (I beseech you) that your men do good to
those that hurt them? as if reproaches offended nothing, but the truth? Who are
they on your Party, that take it patiently when persecuted? that upon
withholding from you your Cloak, will render unto them your Coat also? pray
for those that curse you? and (in a word) by a singular sweetness, overcome
evil with goodness, endeavoring, by innocently suffering wrong, to make those
that afflict you therewith better, if it be possible?

But admit we should grant you, that by your manner of endoctrinating your
Disciples, in time, you might cause them thereby to cut off somewhat from their
former excess, and superfluity of naughtiness: how could you, for all that,
by your never so much instructing them in your Precepts, make them, or your
selves attain unto that perfection, whereunto our Religion aspireth? Seeing we
are not content with well doing only for the present, but think ill of our
selves, if not make a daily progress further and further in godliness so long
as we live in this world, and also cause the same to appear evidently unto all
that are acquainted with us. If not endeavor, with all our power, to do
thereafter, we should be very sorry, and fitly enough might be thought only to
resemble Moles, who are said to move continually, and yet not to stir far from
the same place: or otherwise to appear unto those that look upon us, like
Horses in a Mill, who, by the force of a whip, turn all day incessantly in the
same room, without advancing from where they began at the time, when they were
first set about their work in the morning.

For whatever mediocrity you suppose sufficient for those of your Party, by the
Laws of your heathenish Religion, to consist in: we hold it our duty to strive
still, and labor more and more to add virtue to virtue, grace to grace, one
good work still to another: as never thinking our selves perfect enough, or to
have done all that is commanded us, while living in this world: till, at
length, our race being run out here, we are brought unto the end of our
journey, unto that glory which is above, and after shall be revealed unto us,
for which we were created at first, and whether, through Gods mercy, we doubt
not but we shall attain at last, if, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, we
fail not to set our mind, and thoughts for recovering the same, on the love of
God the Father, through a lively faith in his only Son, and our alone Savior
Jesus Christ: who, by the mighty working of his power, whereby he is able to
subdue all things unto himself, will, without all peradventure, change these
vile bodies of ours, and make them like unto his glorious body, take off from
us the corruption of our flesh, and put on upon us the incorruption of his
Spirit, give us in exchange for this Bochin, or vail of tears here, the
endless comfort, and everlasting joys of that heavenly Jerusalem which is
above: or that secure Haven, after all our storms in this life, of never
failing happiness in the life to come: where we shall hunger no more, neither
thirst any Rev. 7. 16.
more, neither shall the Sun light on us, nor any heat: where there shall be no
more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, neither any more pain: Where the Lamb of
God, that takes away the sins of the world, shall feed us, and cloth us, and
cherish us, and lead us continually unto flowing waters of the Fountain of all
felicity, and content for evermore. To whom, with the Father, and Holy Ghost,
three Persons, and one ever living, and wise God, be all Glory, and Honor, and
Dominion, and Might, and Majesty, and Thanksgiving, now at present, and world
without end, Amen.

FINIS.

