Jovis 13 die Junii Anno Regni Caroli Secundi Regis 13.

ORdered, that the Thanks of this House be returned to Dr. Earl Dean of
Westminster, and Mr. Grenfeild Preacher to the Society of Lincoln's-Inne, for
the Sermons they Preached yesterday, and that they be desired to print their
Sermons: And Mr. Smith is desired to return the Thanks of this House to Mr.
Dean Earl, and Mr. Pryn to Mr. Grenfeild.

Will: Goldesbrough Cler. Dom. Com.

THE FAST: As it was delivered in a SERMON At St. Margarets in Westminster,
before the Honorable House of Commons upon Wednesday the 12th. of June 1661.
being the day appointed by His Majesty and the Parliament, for a Solemn
Humiliation upon the late abundance of Rain, and the danger of Famine, and
Pestilence likely to ensue thereby. By THO: GRENFIELD A. M. Preacher to the
Honorable Society of Lincoln's-Inne.

The Second Impriesson.

Luc. 22. 28, 29. You are they which have continued with me in my temptations:
And I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me. Vbi
malos praemia sequuntur, haud facile quisquam gratuito bonus est. Salust. ad
Caesarem. Suum cuique tribue,
Hoc fac and vives.
LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane, 1661.

To the Honorable the House of COMMONS, Now in Parliament Assembled, (...).
Gentlemen,
YOU have desired me to Print my Sermon, and I desire you to Practice it;
because, it is never so well printed as when it is practiced: And give me leave
to tell you, that if I could order you so well, as you can order me, you should
practice it as well as I print it: Nevertheless, I will perform my part.

Our present age has been an age of wonders, I offer only three (and those the
greatest of them) to your consideration: We have had the best of Princes
barbarously murdered; A banished Prince miraculously restored; And a loyal
people (as yet) but badly requited.

To the first of these you owe your solemn sorrows, for the second your
constant thanks, and to the third your just compassions.

For these I was willing to obey your commands, for these I chose my Text, for
these I have pleaded, and for these I have done what I never did before, I have
printed what was pleaded for them, that, in case they miss of any other or
better remembrance, (as they have done hitherto) yet they may meet with some
slender one at least upon a paper.

It Is confessed, you have done your duty well and handsomely to the two first of
these wonders, by answering them both, with proportionable and becoming
affections; you have mourned soundly for the first, and reforced lustily at the
second: These things you ought to have done, yet not to leave the other undone;
undone it is as yet, and so are they for whom it should be done; and they can
say it from as profound an experience, as any part of Mankind, Eccles. 8. 14.
There is a vanity, which is done upon the earth, that there be just men, unto
whom it happens according to the work of the wicked: Again, there be wicked
men, to whom it happens according to the work of the righteous.

It is this Subject, I am now upon, a very poor one, yet a very good one, and a
very good one, because a very Loyal one, and if Novelty makes any thing
acceptable (as it does) then this paper may challenge your acceptance, because
it treats of a Subject never (as yet) thought upon, of a Subject never handled
by any, but very coursly, very wrongfully.

It is now in your power to do them right, that have suffered wrong, and to
feed and relieve these hungry ones, and the honor of the Action will be this,
that hereby you will be followers of God: For, the Lord executes judgment for
the oppressed, he gives food to the hungry, he loses the prisoners, and
raises them that are bowed down, Psalm. 146. 7, 8. Be ye therefore merciful
even as your heavenly Father is merciful: As he is now, he is merciful both to
the just, and to the unjust; be merciful to both you may, but, to be merciful
to the unjust only, and not to the just also, this is cruelty; if honest men
may not have the preference in your mercy, you cannot do less, then let them
go sharers with others, that have far less (if at all) deserved it.

It Is very possible, (and, I fear, very probable,) that many years may not
bring forth such a Temper, and Complexion of Parliament, as this is, in which
you sit: for it is a thing as full of Hazard, as the project of the great
Elixir, which misses a hundred times, before it hits once; your children to
many Generations may sadly desire to see one of the days of such a Convention,
and yet not see it: Therefore, behold, now is the accepted time; behold now is
the day of salvation: To day therefore (after so long a time) whilst it is
said, to day; harden not your hearts; if you do, and (with Esau) sell your own,
and others birthrights, afterward, when you would inherit the blessing, you
will be rejected, though you se^k it carefully with tears.

You love, and are for Loyalty, I know you are; and if you be, then cherish
what you love: let that tree have the most, and best care and water, the best
soil and fence, which gives you the fruit you most love.

It was a cruelty no where to be found; but in a Nero, Ardet Roma, dum cythara
canit: And shall we (as Israel, Amos. 6, 4, 5; 6.) lie upon beds of Ivory, and
stretch our selves upon our Couches, and eat the lambs out of the Flock, and
the Calves out of the midst of the stall? shall we chant to the sound of the
Viol, and invent to our selves instruments of Music? shall we drink wine in
bowls, and anoint our selves with the chief ointments, and not be grieved for
the Affliction of Joseph? If so, what will follow? even the judgment we now
fear, ver. 7. the banquet of them that stretched themselves, shall be removed.

I am apt to think, that David blushed, when, having obtained rest from all his
Enemies round about, and sitting quietly in his house, he told the Prophet, 2*
Sam. 7. 1, 2. See now, I dwell in a house of Cedar, but the Ark of God dwells
within curtains; and they were very course ones too, for they were made of
Goats hair: Such a blush would become you, and you will never look so handsomely
as when this brings up the Reds into your Cheeks, to consider, that the Lord
has given you rest, and has set you down peaceably in your houses; and yet
all this while, these Men (like the Arc) remain clad in course and torn
garments, and though the foxes have holes, and the birds of the Air have nests,
yet these men have not a place where to lay down their heads.

-- pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
Methinks, it is enough to make you shake, and sweat again, to consider how open
you lie to the just complaints of these poor souls, if they should bespeak you
in the language of the Apostle, (then in a case much like theirs now) 1 Cor. 4.
8. etc. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings without us,
and we would to God, ye did reign, that we also might reign with you: For we
think, that God has set forth us last, as it were men appointed to death; for
we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men: we are
fools, but ye are wise; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honorable, but
we are despised: even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and
are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place: And labor,
working with our own hands; being reviled, we bless; being persecured, we
suffer it; being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world,
and are the offscouring of all things unto this day.

And if this be their Case, (as indeed it is,) then, how just and ingenuous
will it be for you, to consider it: And remember, that if it be just and good
with God, that our light afflictions, which are but for a moment, should work
for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory: then certainly he
will not take it well at your hands, if their heavy afflictions, which have
been for many years, should work nothing for them, but a far more exceeding and
insupportable weight of want and misery.

I have forgot the Name, but I remember the Virtue of that great Commander, who
when his Army was much distressed in point of Aquation, and a bottle of water was
presented to himself by one of his Soldiers, he flung it on the ground, and
this after it, God forbid, that I should drink, when my poor Soldiers are
perishing with thirst: And the kindness of Alexander (if Curtius may be
created) was as great as himself, who in a cold frosty night sitting by a great
fire in an open field, and espying a poor Soldier upon an out-gard ready to
drop down dead with the Cold, ran to him, took him up in his Arms, brought him
to the Fire, set him in his own Chair, rubbed and chafed him with his own
hands, and with much ado brought him to life These wise men knew this to be the
way, to oblige an Army to them.

I leave this with you, to apply, and to divine what I mean by it; and withal,
you may do well to remember, how many of your own families received both their
Honors and Estates from the Norman service: That just Prince thought it his
duty to requite his Soldiers, and if you would know the English of Miles,
Eques, Comes, etc. which you now wear about your Eschutcheons, they are flowers
which grew up out of that Field, far unlike those weeds, which now spring from
a service as ingenuous and just as that for which the Herauldy is so much
altered, that they yet wear no other badg, then Pedes, Pauper, Famelicus, for
being Loyal to their Prince.

Methinks, it is not so handsome, to see a Nation (that was lately Gules all
over) now to stand checkered Argent and Sable, and to behold our late great
Mercy of our Sovereigns Restoration, like that Pillar Exodus 14. 20. Cloud and
darkness to some, but light to others; nor are Things well in Tune, when (as
at the building of the second temple, Ezra 3. 13) we cannot discern the noise
of the shout of joy, from the noise of the weeping of the people, when one part
(the more ancient and righteous) may weep it out with the Poet, -- Haec ego, --
tulit alter honores,
Sic vos non vobis --
And another (more novel and criminal,) shall triumph it with an O quam bonum
jucundum, etc. Oh how pleasant and profitable a thing it is to fight against
our Sovereign! whereas the truth is, Justice can never speak better sense, then
when it does upbraid such demeriting persons with that Sarcasm of the Apostle,
Romans 6. 21. (...)? what fruit would you have from those things whereof you are
now ashamed? For the end of such things is Death.

And let no man recriminate this address, from the intemperance and debauchery
of the Persons, for whom it is made. I remember the check and aspersion, given
of old by the Pharisees to Christ, who censured him for eating with Publicans
and Sinners, when he had no where else to go: It Is a very hard piece of
Justice, to censure and condemn men for eating and drinking in public houses,
when they have no Houses left them of their own, to eat and to drink in.

If there be Oaths and Atheism, etc. more visible among them, then others, it
will lie very much at the doors of their Oppressors. David had lost almost all
his Religion by the contemplation of the good success of evil men, Psa. 73. Do
them right, and try what they will be, surely those consciences, which have
worn about them such deep impressions end resentments of Loyalty and Honor all
this while, (and that at so great a disadvantage) must in charity be hoped to
have other good principles of Morality also, which though perhaps they lie now
in a swound, yet they may be awakened into practice by your just
Encouragements; and it is ten to one, but you will thereby restore them, not
only to their Rights and Fortunes, but to their wits and virtues. A breath from
your lips is able to quicken this field of dry bones into an Army of Vertuoso's.

I will not prescribe to your Wisedoms what to do for them nor adventure at
reasons of State, why something must be done: There are many and great ones,
but you can give them to your selves; they are those of Religion, which I offer
you, and if Justice and Charity be your duties, and the Compass of your
Actions, then this is.

If you will do no more for them, yet remember them, give them (at least) a
place in your Annals and Records; God has (among many other Books) a book of
Remembrance, Mal. 3. 16. and in this Book he records the sufferings of good
men, Psalm. 56. 8. Their tears are put up in his bottle, and written in his Book.

And it seems by that passage concerning Mordecai, Hest. 6. 1, 2, 3. that it
was the manner of the Eastern Princes to record the services and sufferings of
good Subjects to posterity, as soon as they were done or suffered: And there
were Scribes among the Jews (if my conjecture fail not) whose peculiar office
it was to do this; and truly the example of Ahasuerus there, deserves to be
commended to the practice of Princes, ver. 1. he was reading one night in his
book of Records, and found the good service of Mordecai, in discovering a
Treason against his Person. v. 2. and then puts a question (and it is Question
rege digna) what honor and dignity has been done to Mordecai for this? v. 3.
'twas answered, there was nothing done for him. But it was not long ere
something was.

If these and the following lines, may have the happiness to move you to put
the some question for our Mordecai's, What has been done for them? and upon
finding, that as yet nothing is done for them, to put it further to the
question, What shall be done for them? God shall have his will, I my end, they
the comfort, and you the honor of so just and brave an Action.

Which shall ever be the Prayer of your most devoted Servant in the things of
God and his Righteousness. THOMAS GRENFEILD.
Lincol'ns Inn, July 6. 1661.
ISAY 58. 5, 6, 7. 5. Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to
afflict his soul? is it to bow down his head as a Bull-rush, and to spread
sackcloth and ashes under him? will thou call this a fast, and an acceptable
day to the Lord?

6. Is not this THE FAST that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness,
to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break
every yoke?

7. Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor
that are cast out to thy house, when thou see the naked that thou cover him,
and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh?


YOU are met this day upon a very great and important work, and you have
summoned hither a poor and weak man to assist you in it; one that had more need
to be fasted for, then able to direct others, one who is (as at no time able,
so) at this time not willing to dress out the busi^esse before us with
Elocution; and the rather, because as it is the custom of Mourners, to dispoile
their garments of all Ribbonds and other dresses when they Mourn; so I think,
if plain garments be fashionable there, a plain Sermon will be seasonable here.

This people (here concerned in the Text) were a Nation much addicted to
outward and formal duties, and among others to this of Fasting; the second
verse before the Text, will describe you this; And how punctual and ceremonious
they were in it, the 5. verse (which is part of the Text) does decypher: It
seems, this formality ran down the whole current of that generation: for when I
look almost home to the end of it (in the days of Christ) I find the same
humor stirring amongst the Pharisees, of whom Christ says, Mat. 6. 16. that
when they fasted, they were (...), that is (as one interprets it) they would
look like Scythians; and they did (as is observed in the Text before mentioned)
(...), that is, they either covered their faces with black-hoods, or else (as
one accutely observes it out of Antiquity) they used a paint or fucus to make
them seem sad and mortified; and the great error of them was, to think, that
when this was done, the Fast was over.

Now the business of this Text (with the cohaerents) is to reprove, and with
reproving to reject, this formality of fasting, and to commend and teach the
true reality of it.

And (indeed) these are the parts of the Text.

First, a formal fast reproved and rejected, v. 5. Secondly, a real fast
prescribed and accepted, v. 6.
And both these are done in the way of expostulation, which argues a more then
ordinary vehemence in what is spoken.

First, an expostulation in the Affirmative, verse. 5, Is it such a fast? which
is an ardent Negation, signifying that by no means it is not at all such a fast.

Secondly, an expostulation in the Negative, v. 6, 7. Is not this the fast,
etc. Intimating a most vigorous Affirmative: Certainly, assuredly, this is the
fast that I have chosen.

So that in the first, all formalities of a fast (when they go alone) are
rejected; these Jewish formalities in the Text, to afflict the soul, to bow
down the head like a Bull rush, etc. And on the same score our Christian
formalities of fasting all the day, meeting in the House of public Worship,
making long Prayers, and hearing five or fix Sermons, one on the neck of
another; these (I say) when they go alone, are rejected; and our own
observation can testify, they have been so.

And in the second, the real, proper, genuine duties of an ac^ptable Fast are
prescribed and directed: and those are two.

First the duty of Justice unto men oppressed, v. 6. Secondly, the duty of
Charity of men ejected, v. 7.
And this is the fast that God has chosen:

That, which (without any violence) is deducible from the Text, may be reduced
to these three Particulars, within which I shall confine all I have to say.

First, that fasting is a duty. Secondly, that God in some cases does reject
it. Thirdly, what must be done to make it acceptable.
1. I begin with the first. That fasting is a duty, this is plain in the Text;
where though we have rejectionem modi, yet not rei, of that manner of fasting,
not of fasting it self, ver. 4. We have not a peremptory, Non jejunabitis, but
a non sic jejunabitis; and in the 5. verse it is only tale jejunium, not a fast
at large, but such a fast that has nothing but formalities, and mediate duties
in it vocem and praeterea nihil, a cymbal-fast, that makes a noise and has no
charity; this Good rejects.

And the reason is because to the moral goodness of an action, there is
required not only the matter and bulk of the fact, the manufacture and outward
body of it, but many circumstances to make it good. St. Aug. observes it in the
point of delivering up Christ unto death, how much the end and intention in an
act does diversifie the act it self; Pater tradid^t filium (says he) Judas
Dominum, Christus serpsum, one and the same act (viz) the giving up of Christ
was mercy in God, love in Christ, but treason in the Apostate: So here, as the
Apostle says of the law, 1 Timothy 1. 8. that it is good if a man use it
lawfully; so is the duty of fasting, good or evil, as it stands qualified by
the end and intention of the persons.

In the 4. verse before the Text the fast was evil, because the intention was
so, The fast for strife and debate, etc. and verse 6. and 7. of the Text, the
fast is allowed to be good and acceptable, if it stand associated with the
duties of Justice and Mercy,

Clear it is then, that fasting is our duty, and the more clear, because we
have occasion for it.

The first: one is judgment impending or incumbing, at the door, or in the
house. Isa. 22. 12. Israel was in danger of an Invasion, and in that day (says
the Prophet) did the Lord call to weeping and mourning.

Though we read not of any Prophet, that by word of mouth required the people
to it, yet there was vox virgae, Mic. 6. 9. the Rod had a tongue, there was a
Summons in the present Providence, there was a Hanibal ad portas, the Persian
was at the gates.

And lest the Call of Providence should be thought not loud enough, we have an
express summons from the Word to this duty, Joel 2. 15. 16, 17. the 15. ver.
gives us the Precept, Sanctify a fast, etc. the 16. verse summons the Persons,
and those are all concerned, the people, congregation, young and old, etc. And
the 17 verse gives us the duty, Prayer; Spare thy people, O Lord, etc. and this
was the practice of Israel who like a flock of sh^ep, though in times of safety
and peace, they wandered abroad securely in their several pastures; yet when the
Dog, or Woolf drew near, they ran together to this Duty.

Secondly, another occasion to this duty, is some important enterprise or
undertaking, that has danger and difficulty in it: Thus did Hester, who going
to pacify the anger of Ahasuerus toward the Jews, and to gain his favor (a
thing dangerous, and difficult to be had from so great a Prince) bids the
people fast for this, and not eat nor drink three days, night or day; and (I
said she) and my maidens will fast likewise, and so will I go to the King,
(though it be not according to Law,) and if I perish I perish; And as the
enterprise was great, so the fast made it prosperous: Thus the Apostles, being
to ordain, and send abroad Ministers to the Gentiles, (an affair of greater
danger and difficulty, (and importance too) than the former) they prayed unto
the Lord and fasted, and having so done, they laid their hands on Barnabas and
Saul, and sent them away, Acts 13. 2, 3. which practice of theirs (methinks)
give no mean warrant to the observation of our Ember weeks, preparatory to the
Laying on of hands.

The things must be great and good; and when so, they must be fasted for; not
for strife and debate, nor to smite with the fist of wickedness, not for a
prosperous Rebellion, or Regicide (for that is the English of the former,) such
fasts are to be fasted for, and fasted from, and the late signal confutations
given out by Providence upon such fasts, are evidence enough, we ought not to
fast for such things. And indeed as all other service, so this of fasting, (as
the Apostle styles it) Romans 12. 1. it is (...) a reasonable service.

For first* God expects from us, a demeanor suitable to our condition; and as
he was justly condemned, that came without a wedding garment to the feast, so
may he no less that wears it at a fast.

Hosea 11. 10. We are required to walk after the Lord in his dispensations, and
when he shall roar like a Lion, then ought we (like good children) to tremble;
It Is a piece of most intolerable insolence, for men to laugh and sport
themselves when God frowns: this in Israel was so offensive, that, Isai. 22.
14. because, when God called to weeping and to mourning, there was found
amongst them joy and gladness, eating flesh, and drinking wine; etc. therefore
that iniquity should not be purged from them till they dyed: It seems to be a
most unpardonable, and killing iniquity; it adds wings to the leaden feet of
vengeance, and sets on work her iron hands; it makes her come faster, and
strike deeper; it was this that brought in the deluge upon the ancient world,
Matthew. 24, 38. because they were eating and drinking, etc. therefore the flood
came, and took them all away.

Secondly, a discreet observation of judgments (either near us or upon us,)
will naturally beget such a temper of mind in us, as will produce this duty;
For in the way of a natural operation, when we are in pain, in fear, in danger,
or under any sort of discontent, we weep, we cry, we pray, we fast; when he
flew them (says David) then they sought him. Damocles (though set down at a
plentiful Table) yet could not eat bit, because of the Sword, that was so
subtly hung over him; where ever there is a prospect or fear of a judgment,
it will produce this; it is true, if a man were a beast (and they are little
less that do so) void of foresight and consideration, he might be allowed to
graze on though it thunders, and like the swine eat his meat as lustily an hour
before his throat is cut, as at any time before; And let not our Hilariors take
it ill, that I cannot range them amongst any other sort of Cattle: For to be
senseless and sensual at the approach of judgments, is for want of judgment;
the very Heathens themselves (when in this Condition) were not strangers to
this duty: Nineveh fasted from the King to the Beggar, and from the Beggar to
the Beast for the threat that Jonas gave them: And this also makes it a
reasonable service.

Thirdly, the reason of this duty further appears, in that the very outward act
of fasting does qualify and dispose a man unto those other duties, that are
more material; for if Prayer, Confession, Contrition, are duties that do much
conduce to deliverance and mercy; and if it be Gods usual method never to take
us up till he finds us on our knees; when are 'we so fit for these duties, as
when we fast? For the corruptible body (as you have it Wisd. 9. 15.) presses
down the Soul, and the earthly Tabernacle weighs down the mind that museth
upon many things. Now we have many things to muse upon in this duty, and
fasting unclogs the soul, and takes off that mire and dirt that hangs about the
wings of the mind, whereby it mounts much higher in all spiritual acts; And
therefore the caveat of Christ is good, Luke 21. 34. Take heed to your selves,
lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenesse
((...) the word is) ne ingraventur, lest your hearts be made heavy.
Intemperance takes off the wheels of the Soul, and makes it drive heavily.

A duty then it is, in that there are just occasions of it, and strong reasons
for it: but let it be never so much a duty, and never so often done, yet in
some cases God rejects it. And this translates me over into the second
particular, which is to make inquiry in what cases, and for what causes, God
does reject the fastings and humiliation of men.

Rejected they are, it seems, sometimes: For in thever* before the Text we find
an express prohibition: You shall not fast as you do this day; and though it
may seem strange to find a Yea and a Nay in God, to command and inhibit the
same thing; to make it sometimes a duty, and yet charge it as a fin; there must
be some reasons for this, and it nearly concerns us to inquire what they are.

First, then God rejects our fastings, when he finds nothing else but form and
outward solemnity in them: It is the saying of Christ, Luke 16. 15. That which
is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God. What is
highly esteemed among men you may find it 1 Samuel 16. 7. Man looks on the
outward appearance, but God does not, he cannot endure an outside when it goes
alone. Here in the Text God abhors their humiliation for this very reason, in
that they made it up with a bundle of Ceremonies, gestures, cryings aloud,
forbearing meat, looking sad, and wearing sackcloth, and so did only
Histriones agere personate a fast, and were no more concerned in it, than the
Actors are concerned in the matter of the plot,

Secondly, God rejects our humiliations, when they are set on work merely for
the removal of judgments, or the attainder of mercies; to fast merely for the
one, as St. James tells us, that there is a faith of Devils, so we may call
this the fast of Devils: that eternal humiliation and contrition that is now
practiced in Hell, and those Howlings, Weepings, and gnashings of Teeth, that
are there among the damned, are the result and effect of their never-dying
torments. And to fast merely for the attainder of the other, is no better then
the fast of dogs and swine, who howl and make a noise because their Trough is
empty; and God gives it no better name, when he tells them, Hos. 7. 14. That
They did not cry unto him with their heart, but howled upon their beds and
assembled themselves for Corn and Wine: It is therefore the proper errand of an
humbled people to confess their sin, and to beg pardon and grace, and let
providence take care for the rest; especially, when it stands encircled in a
promise, that if we seek these first, ex abundanti, all other things shall be
added to us. It concerns us of this Nation to consider this, and rightly to
state the reason of our humiliations: for we have had fastings for judgments
(and have on this day,) but not one as yet for sin.

Thirdly, it is not every fasting for sin that God accepts, but in some cases
does reject it, though it be for sin; And that is, when we humble our selves
for such sins, which lie in our own power to reform and remove: There is the
same Nonsense and Absurdity in this case, as when an able lusty fellow lies in
a ditch and cries, God help. We have a pregnant instance of Gods rejection of
our fastings in this case, in that of Joshua, Josh. 7. 6. A sin was committed
by Achan and concealed and the people for that sin were defeated more then once
by the men of Ai; Joshua a public Magistrate (upon this) fell to his
humiliation, rent his clothes, fell to the Earth upon his face; put dust upon
his head and prayed; But all this God rejects, and in the 10. verse gives a
smart check unto it, get the up, wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? and
in the 13 verse calls him out to practice, Up, sanctify the people, and made a
diligent enquiry after the accursed thing; God has given the Magistrate a
Sword, and he must not bear that Sword in vain. When sin and profaneness abound
in a Nation through the Magistrates neglect or Cowardice, it is not his nor our
fasting will remove it; because he has a more effectual means in his hands to
do it: And in Gods account such a fast is as ridiculous as if an husband man
coming into his Vineyard, and finding it orerun with Briars and Thorns, should
fling aside his pruning hook and fall to his prayers, that God would weed them
out.

Fourthly, God rejects the fastings of men when they except and reserve the
practice of some beloved bosom sins unto themselves; this is noted with a more
then ordinary indignation, Jer. 7, 9, 10, 11, Will you steal, murder, and
commit adultery, and swear falsely, etc. and come and stand before me in this
house which is called by my name, and say, we are delivered to do all these
abominations? is this house which is called by my name, become a den of robbers
in your eyes? behold I (even I) have seen it, says the Lord. We may English it
thus, will you come and fast before the Lord for fear of Famine and Pestilence,
and put exceptions to Rebellion, Regicide, Oppression, and the detainder of
other men's bread? Is this the fast that I have chosen? one such Dalilah is
enough to destroy the strongest Samson; one such Agag, is sufficient to undo
the tallest Saul; one excepted sin, will make void the best of fasts and as
long as Achan, with his wedge and garment lay undiscovered, unbrought out, let
not Israel except to prosper; such a day as this ought to be a day of
slaughter, and if God at another time will deal impartially with us for our
sins, then it concerns us now to deal impartially with them, and not to roll
any one (no not the most beloved one,) as a sweet morsel under the tongue, for
fear it prove as the book which was given to Saint John to eat, though sweet in
the mouth, yet bitter in the belly. I have known the whole work of a Surgeon
defeated, by such a partiality as this; and, because he searched not at the
bottom, though he skinn'd it over to the eye, the wound did fester and
suppurate, and he was forced to begin again: If you will make suant work in
your fasting, bring out the bottom of your sins, do not keep back a part, and
this may heal the land.

Fifthly, The fastings of men are rejected, when they will not be convinced of
some sins that they are so indeed, as in the case of shedding innocent blood,
when we have shed it, and call it justice; fast while you will in this
persuasion, God will not accept it, it is plain enough Isa. 1. from the 10. to
the 15. ver. In the 10. ver. God gives his own people very sad names, Rulers of
Sodom, and people of Gomorrha; and in the following verses, he gives all their
services a very sad reception: To what purpose is the multitude of your
sacrifices unto me? I delight not, etc. Who has required this at your hand, to
tread my courts? incense is an abomination to me, the new Moons and Sabbaths,
and the calling of assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity even the
solemn meetings my soul hates them, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to
hear them; and when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you;
yea when you make many prayers, I will not hear.

A strange dislike! and were there not a reason given for it, never enough to
be wondered at, That God should abandon the very service that he does command,
and what is that reason? God that does nothing without the highest reason gives
you his in the bottom of the 15. ver. (and indeed it is like some choleric
distemper in the bottom of the stomach, which makes us vomit up all we eat,)
Your hands are full of blood: When blood is upon a Nation unacknowledged,
unrepented, it mars all the services of it.

Lastly, God does reject the fastings of men when they are undertaken to
promote bad ends, and wicked purposes: such a fast was that of Jezabel, 1 Kings
21. 9. She proclaimed a fast, that under the color of a trespass against that
proclamation, she might obtain the life and vineyard of Naboth: And the
fastings of Israel are here rejected in this Chapter, because they were
undertaken to promote strife and debate, and prosperously to smite with the
fist of wickedness: And in the 3 ver. more especially the reason is given,
because in the day of your fast you find pleasure, that is, (as the vulgar
renders it,) invenitur voluntas vestra, You bring with you your own wills,
desires, designs, and hope to carry them on by fasting; and, as it follows, you
exact all your labors, Omnes debitores vestros repetitis, You beg of God a
prosperous vengeance upon those you think have wronged you; such low and base
ends do no more justify a fast then when a Robber prays for an advantageous
Encounter, or a Pirate for a fair wind at Sea; If we thus bring in the tables
of Money Changers into the house of God, and come here to truck with him, for
the grant of our own desires, he will overthrow those tables, and scourge out
such Merchants: If we fast to satisfy our own ambition, cruelty, or
covetuousnesse, we pervert the end of this duty, by bringing that hither to be
cherished, which should be brought hither to be slain; and truly (if I might
have leave to give my judgment,) I cannot understand why so great a defeat has
been given out from God, upon those many humiliations (seemingly to me very
solemn and serious,) which were acted by this Nation, and especially in this
place, for these last 20. years, insomuch as we might expostulate as this
people did in the 3. ver. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not;
wherefore have we afflicted our Souls and thou take no knowledge? I say, I
can give no reason for such disappointment, but this, we proposed base and
degenerate ends in our fastings, we fasted to devour the comforts of other men
with a better stomach, and to make our selves rich by their ruin.

You see then that the fastings of men may be rejected, and you have seen in
what cases, 'twill now be seasonable to put such a question, as he did in the
Gospel, Good Master, what good thing must I do that I may obtain eternal life?
so here, what good thing must we do, to make our fasting acceptable unto God?
The answer to this, you will have in the third particular upon which I am now
entering.

The proper ingredients therefore of a Fast to make it acceptable are not for
to seek, for you may quickly find them in the 16, and 17. ver. of Isa. 1. Cease
to do evil, learn to do well.

First, Cease to do evil, then do we fast indeed when we fast from sin; it is
not our witholding meat from the body but our withdrawing all sorts of
supplements from our lusts, that makes a fast; The lusts of our hearts have
wide mouths and craving stomachs; Ambition, would never cease aspiring, till it
perch on the circle of the world; Covetuousnesse would ingrosse all the riches
of the Indies; Revenge, would glut it self with the blood of others; and it is
the work of those that fast, to tie up these, and keep them short, to lay
siedge to them, and intercept their provisions, the best way to k^ll them, is
to starve them out; That expression of the Apostle is very apt, Gal. 5. 24.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh: now, crucifixion is to fasten
and bind down a living creature to that which is cross and contrary to it. Our
lusts are those living creatures, and to crucify them is to feed them with
contraries; Pride, would have a Crown of Gold give it a Crown of thorns;
Luxury, would have the generous wine, give it vinegar mingled with gall: it is
no fasting except this be done, and therefore Saint Bernard, does elegantly
upbraid a fast that is kept without this, Carnem non commedis, sed comedis
fratrem, a vino abstines, sed ab inju^iis tibi non temperas; it is a sad fast to
forbear bread and meat, and the while to devour the flesh and blood of thy
brother.

Secondly, Learn to do well, this indeed is the very glory and accomplishment
of a fast. But what that doing well is, that is the question: To Worship God is
to do well, to hear, to pray, is to do well, but yet this is not the doing well
here required; yea, this doing well is rejected and spurned at of God, if there
be no other sorts of well-doing going with it; and what that is you have in the
17. ver. of Isai. 1. Relieve (or righten) the oppressed, judge the fatherless,
plead for the Widow.

It Is clear then that the duties of Justice and Mercy are not only the
Ornaments, but the essentials of a fast; they are made so in the Text, where
there are any bands of wickedness they must be loosed, any heavy burdens they
must be undone, any oppressed ones they must go free, any yoke it must be
broken, any that are hungry thy bread must be dealt unto them, any that are
poor and cast out they must be brought to thy house, any naked thou must cover
him; and good reason, for in the bottom of the verse, he is thine own flesh, at
what wideness soever we are differenced by other things in the world, yet the
poorest man alive is thy own flesh, and in all thy acts of mercy to him, thou
art merciful to a part of thy self; This is the fast, and how importunately the
Spirit of God harps upon this string, and points us (as it were with the
finger) to this, even to this sort of duty, you may further see in Zach. 7. 9,
10. where, after a reproof given to their formal fastings, verse 5. a rule is
subjoyned for them what to do: Execute true Judgment, and show Mercy and
Compassion every man to his Brother, and oppress not the Widow, nor the
Fatherl^sse, the Stranger, nor the poor, and let none of you imagine evil
against his Brother in your heart. It is a strange preference, and much to be
wondered at, which God gives to the duties we owe to man, before those we owe
to himself? methinks it were enough to say, that the second Commandment is
like unto the first Math. 22. 39. but to say, first go and be reconciled to thy
Brother, and then come and offer thy gift; to say, I will have Mercy rather
then Sacrifice, as Gods goodness in this to be wondered at, so man's duty from
this is to be concluded on, that our works of Mercy, Justice, Charity, must be
done by us with as great a zeal, and with a greater earliness, then those very
services which we do to God.

There is now left naught remaining to trouble your patience with, but my
application and your practice. You are here met in the house of God, and what
to do? to fast; and for what? the suspicions and fears of a famine like to come
upon us, from our late abundance of Rain, threatening to spoil the Fruits of the
Earth. It Is very well, that any thing will drive us home to God; but yet it is
observ^ble how early we are in this duty; we fast for a judgment that is not
yet upon us, further then the fear and suspicion of it: It would be much more
ingenuous to be early and quick in fasting for the sins of the Nation, as we
are for the dangers of it: those (I am sure) are ripe enough and ready for the
sickle; we are much beyond the Suspicions of sin, we are under the Commissions
of it; and yet, as yet, we have had no fast for these. It would very much
beautify the beginnings of this blessed revolution, and fortunate change of
things we live under, to begin with such a fast as this: but, it seems, we love
our bellies very well, and, as some followed Christ for the loaves, so we fast
for fear we shall want the loaves; we fast for fear that we shall fast.

But since it is so, that the work of this day stands stated to my hands, upon
this bottom, it will be convenient before I can direct you how to be rid of
this judgment, to give you my judgment whence it comes: For assuredly it is no
brutum fulmen, no arrow shot at rovers, no accident slipped out of the womb of
chance without any signification in it: no, no; as God is the highest Reason,
so all that he does comes from it, and is guided by it; his very judgments
themselves are reasonable judgments: and therefore though many things come
forth from God, the causes of which shall not be known until the day of the
revelation of his righteousness; yet in the general he bids us believe, and
would have us know, that he has not done without cause all that he has done,
Ezekiel. 14 23.

Well then, a reason for this judgment there is, and what is it? to tell you
that it is Wickedness in the general, is to fling an whole loaf at your head,
and not to cut it for you; but yet the Psalmist tells us so, Psalm. 107. 34. He
turns a faithful land into barrenness for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein, and as God told Adam, Genesis 3. 17. that the ground was cursed for his
sake (that is, for his sin,) so if our ground now be like to undergo a Curse,
it is for our sins; And for what sins? Certainly, for some sins above others;
for, as the Clouds send down no other waters then what the Earth sends up; so
there is something comn up from us before God, that has drawn down our present
judgments on us.

There have been diverse interpretations past on this late abundance of Rain;
The Star-gazer charges it upon some notable configuration in the Heavens, but
yet (as our late Astrologers confessed they could not read our late revolution,
and blessed return of the King in any conjunction of the Planets, but gave it
clearly up to be a Miracle:) so if you now examine their Almanacks, you shall
not find a word foretelling all this foul weather; which makes me think, it
is more then a natural* it is a judicial effect.

And therefore others (that are no good friend to our present welfare) will
adventure to make a malicious gloss upon the present judgment, and whisper
it, at least in corners, that it is for the Kings coming in, for our
importunate desires of his return, and for our great rejoycings at his
presence: And they observe (with some pleasure to themselves) the great Rain
that fell at the first treatment of his Majesty in the City, the great Rain
and Thunder upon the day of his Coronation, and the great Rains that have
continued ever since, and they make bold with Scripture to prove this to be the
cause of the judgment, from 1 Samuel 12 17. where Samu^l tells the people thus:
I will call unto the Lord, and he shall send thunder and rain: that ye may
perceive and see that your wicednesse is great, which ye have done in the sight
of the Lord, in asking you a King. But I question not, but this interpretation
is too private and wide enough: Therefore to come nearer home, What may the
sins be? Truly the Nation stands now guilty of such sins, that I could find in
my heart rather to pray for a famine then to pray against it; For as fasting in
the way of a physical operation is good to cure many diseases, so there be
many sins (especially those of pride and luxury) which famine would be an
excellent means to remove, by removing the food and fomentations of them.

What our sins are, may be read in the very face of the Judgment; that, as the
Hetrurians of old erected a College of wise men to be their fulminum
interpretes, their Expositers of Thunderbolts; and as Physicians now by the
signature they observe in a plant, will guess shrewdly, what it is wholesome
for, and hurtful to: So there is a signature in the present judgment, and by
the Features and Complexion that is in it we may Calculate its Nativity, and
judge whence it comes.

First, then, what think you of the sin of Sabbaoth-breaking? a sin now more
frequent, impudent, and unpun^sh^d, then in those late black days, in which
greater sins were counted none at all; This blessed day is now as much mangled
and broken, as once the Lord and Master of it was; and as the Poet deriding the
immoderate dresses of a girl, told her that she was minima pars sui, so is
this day, so divided, and laden with affairs and sins, that it is now become
the least part of it self, and you may seek for a Sabbath, in a Sabbath, and
yet not find it. And whereas it is an holy day, now other days are innocent to
this, those we spend upon our callings, this upon our sins, and now do but see
how this judgment is fitted to this sin, Lev. 26 34. where Moses tells the
people that the land should enjoy her Sabbath, and lie desolate: because the
men of the land will not keep their Sabbaoths, therefore the land it self shall
keep hers; and such a Sabbath is now l^ke to be kept for this year by a great
part of our land.

Secondly, next what think you of the sin of swearing? a sin whereby the devil
cheats a man more then by any, by being damned for it, and getting nothing by
it: never did bullets fly thicker in the hottest battle, then oaths now in this
wicked City; you cannot pass the streets, but your ears will be box2d by an
oath at every step, and it is a wonder to me, if these arrows which are shot
bolt up right and levelled point-blanck at God, do not recoyle upon the heads
of those that shot them; but how this sin does more particularly contribute to
the judgment we now fear, you may see Jer. 23. 10. where we are told that
because of Oaths (Curses) the land mourns. There is a sort of ground which
husbandmen do call weeping ground, and it is barren and good for little; we have
such now, whole Counties lie bathed in the tears of Heaven, and that because of
Oaths; for if by them we pull God out of Heaven, and tear him in pieces between
our teeth, if we use his name so vainly as if there were no such being, it is no
marvel if the Clouds tumble down upon us, when we leave none in Heaven to
govern and hold them up: He that thinks or lives as if there were no God, shall
be cared for here, as if there were none.

Thirdly, what think you of the sin of Adultery? whether this may not beget a
Famine, Jer. 5, 7, 8. When I fed them to the full, they then committed
Adultery, and assembled themselves by Troops in the Harlots houses, they were
as fed horses in the morning, every one neighed after his neighbors wife,
shall I not visit for these things says the Lord? and what is the visitation
for these things? you shall find it verse 17. a famine, this that we fear,
though coming another way, yet from the same sin; They shall eat of thine
harvest, and thy bread which thy Sons and Daughters should eat, they shall eat
of thy flocks and thy herds, they shall eat of thy Vines and thy Fig Trees;
etc. and it is a pun^shment both just and proper, if thou borrow strength from
the creature to squander it away upon unlawful beds, it is fit that God should
take the creature from thee: If a stallion grow unruly, tie him up to an empty
rack.

Fourthly, what think you of Intemperance? a sin that brings forth this
suspected judgment, both physically and judically too. Physically it is no
marvel if there be a scarcity when we fill our Tables to such a height to feed
a few, as will suffice for many; committing a miracle contrary to that of
Christ's, who fed 5000, with five loaves, and we feed but five with some scores
of dishes.

And judicially this judgment lies much at the door of this sin, to wit the
Luxury of man, for if you mark it, this plague of Rain hurts not the grass so
much as the grain, the horse and ox are provided for well enough, nay the
Country man tells me that Cattle are like to be gainers by it, it is because
they are temperate; but it is the Luxurious and debauched part of mankind that
are like to be the losers, in that Wheat and Barley are the greatest sufferers
in this deluge: and he that told me that the Barrels of Beer and the Buts of
Wine were seen to swim about the Cellars here in Town, made me presently think,
It was to punish our Drunkenness; For as a Father spils the Wine and breaks
the Cup when he sees his child but in danger to be fluster'd; so God does
language it in this judgment, that it was our Luxury that brought it, by
destroying the Tools and Utensils of that sin.

Fifthly and lastly, I will mention one sin more which (I fear) has
contributed somewhat more than the rest to this judgememt, and that is our
public defayler in the duties mentioned in the Text, The want of Justice and
Charity; and indeed (to tell you the truth) I chose this Text, and have spoken
all this while upon it, only to introduce what follows; and give me leave to
be very plain and home with you.

There is a party yet alive in England (if they be alive and indeed it is as
much as they are) that have been, and do still own the name of, true
Englishmen (for the rest live only by an Amnesty, and are Englishmen but of
one year old;) but these I am speaking for are true old English men, and great
sufferers for being so: in that, they live and are let pass, not only without
reward, but restitution; not only without respect of others, but the recovery
of their own. Astrologers have amused the World of late with reports of strange
and wonderful Conjunctions; never were there such strange and monstrous
couples as are now seen marching together in England, Loyalty and rags, Loyalty
and lice, Loyalty and hunger, Loyalty and a prison: Poor Loyalty! the flower
and credit of every good Christian, how hardly art thou used, to be unequally
yoked with such as these! his complaint in the Gospel about wages was nothing,
in comparison to that which these can make, Matthew. 20. 12. These last have
wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal unto us, which have born
the burden and heat of the day: but these men can say, We have born the burden
and heat of the day, and have not received a penny for it; but they received it
who did nothing, if not worse than nothing.

It Is a smart and a true one of him that said, It seems a hard piece of
justice, that the price of public freedom (when restored) should be the ruin
only of such as did assert it. It Is the fashion of this Town to give you once a
week their bill of Mortality, and to instance the several diseases by which
they dyed: but I find not this disease mentioned, So many dyed with the sense
of a d^s-regarded loyalty. With a little pains I could present you with a black
Bill of at least a hundred Gentlemen that dyed in and about this Town by no
other disease but this, and want; and yet (as Job) though they saw no
deliverance, they still held fast their integrity, and carried it with them to
be regarded and rewarded in another World: I could show you whole Cart-loads of
old shoes and moldy bread, all the household stuff that is left* to these poor
Gibeonites; I could tell you (from a very good hand) of a stout Royalist, that
(like Lazarus) came into our Hall and carefully gathered up the parings of
bread; which not only the men, but the mice and dogs had left; (for our City
dogs are so sinely fed, that they scorn to eat that, which he was glad to find.)

And it is this endangers a famine, and provokes it; there is a signature in the
very judgment, like Adonibezeck, Judges 1. 7. As I have done, so God has
requited me; so God goes about this way to make you and them all of a piece, by
tasting the same sauce with them, and by letting you to feel what it is to be in
want; methinks, it is the very language of Heaven, If you will not help them, the
Earth shall not help you: God will reduce your fair fields and fatned selves to
the same leanness with them, and then 'twill be in fashion to want when great
men wear it.

Let me give you my just fear; that as the present unkindnesse (if not
injustice) to this sort of men is very great, so I do believe you will never
thrive, neither in Creatures nor in Councels, nor in any undertakings till this
be amended: For it is a crying sin, if St. James be to be believed, who tells
us, James 5. 4. That the hire of the laborers, which is kept back by fraud,
cries, and with that loudness, that it enters into the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath; and what does this cry obtain? Miseries, verse 1. and what Miseries?
Your Riches are corrupted, and your Garments moth-eaten, your Gold and Silver
is cankered, and the rust of them shall be as a witness against you, and shall
eat your flesh as it were fire: And as nothing thrived in Israel as long as
Achan sat abrood on his stolen wedge and garment, so though we gild over our
Plunders and Sequestrations with the specious title of the just acquists of
war, yet let not England hope to prosper till there be (...), Acts 3. 21. a
restitution of all things.

It is this just and most advantageous work which I commend with the greatest
seriousness to your care and Council; that as you have been indifferently
severe in the vindictive part of justice, so you would show your selves men in
the restorative part of it, and fill up your office in both parts of it by
punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that have done well, 1 Pet. 2.
14.

If you would stand free from the judgment you fear, do this and it will prove
an Antidote: He commend to you but this one instance for your warrant and
encouragement, 2 Samuel 21. in the 1. verse we read of a famine that was in the
days of David, and David enquired of the Lord, and his answer was, It is for
Saul and for his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites: No part of the
H^story tells me that he slew them, which makes me think he only used them
hardly, increased their Servitude, and made their lives a burden to them, and
indeed this is a piece of murder; and for this there was a famine.

Have we no such Gibeonites among us? that are as yet thought good for nothing
else, but to cleave wood and carry water, to do the drudgery and mean offices
of the Nation? we have, what need we be at the cost to Trade so far as the
Indies for Blacks and Slaves when we have enough at home? neither let us any
more upbraid the Mohammedan cruelty for making Vassals of strangers, and binding
such only to the oar whom they knew not under any other notion, then of a just
prize of War; we make Slaves among our selves, and that of those who have been
at the greatest charge for our liberty. Have we not a people endeavored to be
suppressed and destroyed by our late Saul? Did any thing but bonds, and chains,
and blocks, and halters, abide them here at home? and was any place but a
Jamaica, a Poneropolis provided for them abroad? And as yet, these (the just
heirs and owners of relief) are not relieved: It Is not a further vengeance on
their enemies that they desire, nor the hanging up of the Sons of Saul; what
will the blood of others do them good? if they loved that, they would never
have been so prodigal of their own, what then? let our David send for them as
David did for these, and debate the matter with them, as he did, verse 3. What
shall I do for you, and wherewith shall I make the atonement, that you may
bless the inheritance of the Lord?

This inheritance of the Lord (the Land of our Nativity) is like (it seems for
this year at least) to go without a blessing; let the same words be heard from
the lips of our David, and let the same question be put in your Councels, what
shall we do for you? It Is quickly answered in the Text, which sets me down where
I first set up: Loose the bands of wickedness, undo the heavy burdens, let
the oppressed go free, break every yoke, deal your bread to the hungry, bring
the poor that are cast out to your houses, cover the naked, and hide not your
selves from your own flesh; and though it may seem a work of cost, it is not
without reward, ver. 8. etc. Then shall your light break forth as the morning
and your health shall spring forth speedily, and your righteousness shall go
before you, and the glory of the Lord shall gather you up, Then shall you call
and the Lord shall answer, you shall cry, and he shall say, here I am: Then shall
the Lord guide you continually, and satisfy your soul in drought, and make fat
your bones, and you shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water,
whose waters fail not. And you shall build the old wast places, you shall raise
foundations for many generations, and you shall be called the repairers of the
breach, and the restorers of paths to dwell in.

Which Duties that ye may do, and which Mercies that you may obtain, the Father
of mercys grant through the Mercies and Mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-lane.
THe alliance of Divine Offices, exhibiting all the Liturgies of the Church of
Engl. since the Reformation, by Hamon L'estrange, Esquire; in fol.

The Souls Conflict, being eight Sermons preached at Oxford, and so much
recommended by Dr Hewit, in 8.

Dr. Browns Sepulchrall Urns and Garden of Cyrus, in 8.

Two Essays of Love and Marriage in 12.

The Royal Exchange, a Comedy in 4 by R. Brom.

Five new Plays, by R. Brom, never before printed, in 8.

Poems by the Wits of both Universities in 8.

Crumbs of Comfort, 44. times Printed, in 24.

A treatise of Moderation, by Mr. Gaul in 8.

St Bonaventure's Soliloquies, in 24

Mr. Baxters Treatise of Conversion, in 4.

The Common Law Epitomized with Directions how to prosecute and defend personal
actions, very useful for all Gentlemen, to which is annexed the nature of a
Writ of Error, and the General proceedings thereupon, in 8.

Golden Remains, by that most Learned R S^war^ D D. Dean of Westminster and
Clerk of the Closet to King Charles the first, being the last and best
Monuments that are likely to be made public, in 12.

Mr. Sprat's Plague of Athens, in 4.

Jews in America by Mr. Thorowgood, in 4.

The Royal Buckler, or a Lecture for Traitors, in 8.

A view of some late Remarkable Transactions, leading to the happy Government
under our gracious Sovereign King Charles the Second, by R. L'estrange Esquire; in
4.

All the Songs on the Rump, in 8.

The Pouttracture of his sacred Majesty King Charles the Second, from his Birth
1630. till this present year 1661. being the whole story of his escape at
Worcester, his travils and troubles.

The Covenant discharged by John Russell, in 4.

The Complear Art of Water-drawing, in 4.

Mr. ^^ys his Translation of the 6th Book of Virgil in 4.

Mr. Walwin's Sermon on the happy return of King Charles the Second.

A perfect Discovery of Wirchcraft, very profitable to be read of all sorts of
people, especially Judges of Assize before they pass sentence on condemned
persons for witches, in 4.

A short view of the Lives of the Illustrious Princes, Henry Duke of
Gloucester, and Mary Princes of Orange deceased, by T. M. Esquire; in 8.

Aeneas his Voyage from Troy to Italy an Essay upon the third Book of Virgil,
by J Boys Esquire; in 8.

The Holy Cheat^ proving from the undeniable practices of the Presbyterians,
that the whole design of that party is to enslave both King and People under
the color of Religion, by R. L'estrange Esquire;

FINIS.

