AN EPISTLE BY THE Life of Truth In the Love of God, to all THE BRETHREN In
ENGLAND Greeting, who are called QUAKERS, BUT More especially the South, East
and West parts of this ISLAND, Throw him who daily wishes Grace, Mercy, and
Peace, and the love of God may abound in all the Children of the Firstborn.

Printed in the Year 1665.

An Epistle by the life of Truth in the love of God, etc.
Friends,
MAny a time since my Confinement in this place of Edmondsbury, both night and
day I have remembered you, and have waited for an opportuty to visit you with a
few lines, having no other way at present to manifest my love unto you;
therefore, now it is upon my spirit to recommend these things following to your
consideration, for the encouragement of all the Travelers toward Zion, and for
the comforting of all the Mourners therein, that none might faint in their
journey, nor be discouraged at these things, which they may meet withal, which
will only be for the trial of their Faith, that the approved may be made
manifest, and the Hypocrites discovered, and every false birth be brought to
its end; and for this end is the Lord risen in these last days, in which he
has gathered a people out of the many gatherings, and from the mouths of the
false Shepherds, and has brought them to the true Shepherd, even to Christ
Jesus the Light of the World; and not only so, but has given them power and
strength, and ability to walk in the same Light, by which many of the mysteries
of Gods Kingdom have been opened, and the mysterious working of the power of
darkness discovered, by which many, as the first born from the dead, have
walked in the Light of life, and have witnessed the sweet refreshments, and
Heavenly comforts from the Lord, to be manifested to their poor Souls, which
has raised a love in their hearts to the Lord, and has kindled a zeal, and
raised a fervent desire in them to follow the Lord to the end, by the guidance
of his eternal Spirit; this I know is the frame of the Spirit of all them that
have received Gods truth in the love of it; and since that day of the
manifestation of the love of God in Christ the light, and since we received,
believed, loved and obeyed it, the Lord has been as a Rock unto us, and as a
tower for us, and as a refuge in the times of our enemies pursuit; for no
sooner had we turned our backs of spiritual Egypt, but we had many pursuers and
mighty enemies within and without; Oh how did we tremble, and what fear was in
our hearts, and how did the Lord appear for us in the day of our Childh^od in
the truth, yet did he help us, and deliver us out of the hands of our enemies,
and kept us to our admiration, so that though we were cast down the Lord did
not forsake us, but brought us from the Oynions and Garlic, and the flesh pots
of Egypt, and allured us into the Wilderness, where he has spread our table,
and has spoke comfortably to us, and has given us water out of the Rock, and
bread that the world knows not off, and has made us a way through the
Wilderness, and a path through many a thicket: Well, what may we say of the
goodness of the Lord? Oh how may we set forth his excellent Name, who has
brought us into the way everlasting, and has lead us as with a cloud by day,
and as by a pillar of fire by night, thus has he taken care of us as a tender
Father, and has not left us in a day of distress, neither forsaken us in the
hour of Calamity, blessed be his Name for evermore. Therefore, dear Brethren,
and Sisters and Friends, who are made witnesses of this the goodness of the
Lord, and have tasted of the incombes of his life, and have been found faithful
witnesses to his truth received by you: Well, your Names shall not be
forgotten, neither shall you miss of your expected end, which is the Salvation
of your Souls; you are highly favored in his sight, and he delights in you,
you are a sweet savor in his nostrils, and as a diadem in his hand you are his
choice ones, and he will never leave you, yet shall ye not go untryed, neither
shall ye dwell at ease, but shall be as a traveling woman, and as one that
labors to bring forth her first born, and as laborers in the Vineyard, who
shall receive a reward: Therefore, every one who have tasted of the goodness of
the Father, and have drunk of the brook by the way, look not out, neither be
discouraged at what trials or exercises thou may meet withal, for now is the
Lord risen to plead with all flesh, and to shake all that can be shaken, and
all things below begins to have upon them the face of blackness, and people,
and nations, are as the waters, or as the roll ng waves of the Sea that cannot
rest, fear and perplexity, and distress on every side, a day of darkness such
as has not been for Ages and Generations, is coming, a day of horror and woeful
lamentation, to all the ungodly who live at ease, as if there was no end of
their riches, neither time to wast their delicacies; Oh the Lord has seen, and
the Almighty has taken notice, and is now come to try all the Professors of
his Name that the Professors may be known from the possessors, and that it may
be known there is a God in Israel, who can do whatsoever pleases him;
Therefore dear Friends, blessed are you that trust in the Lord, and wait upon
him in the Covenant of l ght, you shall be preserved in peace with the Lord,
and shall enjoy his presence, for that is the marrow of our Religion, even Gods
presence, therefore put on strength ye children of the most high God, who have
none to fly to but unto him, though the foxes have holes, and the birds of the
air have nests into which they are creeping, yet will they be found out, for
the Lord is searching as with candles, and the beast shall hate the Whore, and
shall make her desolate, and she shall appear as she is, and from the Lord
shall drink a bitter cup without mixture because of her Fornication, and of her
treachery and hypocrisy, holding forth the Golden Cup filled with
abominations, by which many have been deceived, but much farther she shall not
proceed, her end is near, her desolation is at hand, and it shall be known that
the Lord alone is to rule in the Kingdoms of Men. So happy will they be that
are faithful to the Lord, and have him for their guide, and take not council of
man, for rich men are vanity, and poor men are a lie, but of the Lord and of
his truth there is none, for he sets free, and gives power to all his Children
to obey him, who is the God of Salvation, who leads them through many trials,
and makes them white thereby, and supporteth them in the deepest exercise,
though many at this day are saying as Peter did, Master, save thy self, yet we
know, he that saves his life shall loose it, and he that loses his life for
Christ's sake and the Gospel shall find it; And because of this our faithful
Testimony many are saying as Eliab did to David, who came down when they
shouted to the battle, I know thy pride and the malice of thy heart, thou art
come down to see the battle; then David said, what have I done, is there not a
cause? And this is our cause at this day, wherein many are defying the Israel
of God; though we have not neither shall we go out with Sword nor spear,
neither with pride nor malice in our hearts; but in the name of the Lord, and
in the strength of the mighty JEHOVAH, in the meek and the quiet spirit;
therefore let none discourage you, ye valient ones, for the Lord is with us,
and who can be against us, we seek not our own glory, but the glory of the Lord
alone, and for his sake have and do suffer grievous things, because we love our
peace with him, he has clothed us with innocence, which is the strength of
our loins, and refreshed us with the incombes of his life, which has been the
comfort of our hearts; therefore, let not the frowns nor flatteries of any
prevail upon you in this cloudy and dark day, but stand still and in patience
wait upon the Lord, so shall you witness him unto you, your everlasting reward;
and as you wait upon him, in whom you have believed, so will you know him
fitting of you, for life and death, or bonds, or liberty, for prosperity or
adversity, and in every state ye will be content, so shall you be as a bride
adorned for her husband, and shall witness the Lord to be with you; and though
he take you from the Earth, yet are ye with him, and can make your appeals unto
him, and say as good Hezekiah did, Lord remember how I have walked before thee
with an upright and with a perfect heart; the Lord will have pity on thee, and
the Almighty will spare thee, and gather thee unto himself; but fear, a snare,
and the pit shall be the portion of the ungodly; for, the Sinner cannot stand
in judgment, nor the ungodly in the Congregation of the Righteous; for now the
anger of the Lord is kindled, and his arrows are flying abroad, and the
destroying Angel is gone forth from the presence of the Lord, by which already
many Fathers are left Childless, and many a Wife now Widow, and many Children
parentless; and yet for all this, few turn to the Lord by true repentance:
Well, the Lords anger is not yet over, but his hand is stretched out still,
it is yet but the beginning of sorrow, even that I may cry and say, Ah sinful
Nation, ah people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, will not the Lord
visit thee, and the Almighty be avenged of thee? who has given thee line upon
line, and precept upon precept, who has corrected thee in love, that thou
might return, but thou would have none of his Council; and yet the Lord
through his infinite love has plucked us as brands out of the fire, and has
brought us to sit under the Vine where none can make us afraid: And now dearly
beloved Friends, who are as the first fruits unto God, keep your Habitations,
for the time is near that that Scripture shall be fulfilled, which says,
Nation shall rise up against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and every
Kingdom divided against it self shall not stand; And these things ye may hear
and see, yet be not troubled, for what have we to do in this matter, our
Kingdom is not of this World, neither is our Crown of rejoicing in visible
things; for it shall be as it has been spoken, The people of the Lord shall
dwell alone, and shall not be numbered amongst the Nations. Therefore, be still,
be still in this day, while all people out of truth, are as the troubled waters
that cannot rest, nor find peace, nor satisfaction in all they enjoy; therefore
ye little Remnant, who are called, chosen, and beloved of the Lord keep retired
in the true breathing Seed, which is only satisfied with the incombes of the
Fathers love, in that wait in the patience, and in the meek spirit, so shall
the blessing, love and mercy of the Lord be your portion, and your daily
recompense, from the Almighty, and happy for ever shall ye be that are kept
faithful in your Testimonies, and are found in Gods Worship in this his day,
wherein he is trying all the sons of Men, and sifting them as wheat; the
faithful shall be preserved, and by the Lord be into the Garner gathered, where
safety ye shall witness, and daily satisfaction enjoy from the Almighty, and
shall be ready for your dissolution when ever it shall please the Lord to call
you.

So to the hands of the Lord, and into the arms of the Almighty do I commit
you all, making mention of you in my Prayers to God daily, beging that the Lord
may fill refresh and satisfy you with his own likeness, that his power may be
with you, and his glory rest upon you, that to him ye may be as a garden of
Spiees, and as Plants full of living virtue, that glory to God alone may be
given, and to the Lamb, by you all for evermore. So the God of Heaven bless
you, and water you with the dew from above and keep you in an Heavenly
watchfulness, that as the Valleys receive the small rain, so ye may receive
power, and strength from the Lord over every adversary, enemy, trial and
temptation, that in the way of Righteousness, ye may run to the end of the
race, to the glory of the Lord for ever, Amen, says the Soul of him, who for
the Lord and his truths sake loves you, and remains your Friend and Brother
in tribulation and rejoicing,

From Edmundsbury Gaol the 17th. day of the 19th Month, 1665. Tho. Green.
Friends here are well, and the Presence of the Lord is with us; We are in all
in this Prison upon all Accounts twenty four, and their love is to Friends
every where.

This to be read amongst Friends in the fear of the Living God.



THE END.

