THE Grand Inquest, Or a full and perfect ANSWER To several REASONS.

By which it is pretended His ROYAL HIGHNESS THE Duke of York May be proved to
be A Roman Catholic.

LONDON, Printed for James Vade at the Cock and Sugar Loaf, near S. Dunstans
Church in Fleet Street, 1680.

Courteous READER*
HAving seen a Pamphlet some time since, Entitled, Reasons whereupon the Duke
of York may most strongly be reputed, and suspected to be a Papist: Not
knowing, but that it may come into the hands of some, whom I would not have
Poy(...) with those fallacious Arguments; I thought it my Duty to Answer them:
That the World may see the Malice and Rage of some Seditious Persons, who, by
loading the Duke with Scandalous Aspersions, endeavor to lessen his esteem
with the King: And, if that will not do, to brand his Reputation in the opinion
of the Credulous Multitude; That they may the sooner introduce their own
Maxims into the Government; which are not more fatal to the King, than
Destructive to his Subjects.

Therefore, kind Reader, beware, and think not, whilst these Stigmatize the
Duke, they are Innocent themselves: It Is their Guilt makes them endeavor to
overthrow the Government; And, they had rather see the Nation Ruined then
themselves brought to answer their breach of Laws: And observe it when you
will, Whoever shall go about to Fortify the present Government against Faction,
and Rebellion, shall, by the Seditious, be reported to introduce Popery; Or, to
be Popishly affected: Knowing, at the same time they do so, they win upon the
giddy Vulgar, who have no greater Antipathy then against the Bishop of Rome:
And by this Device, commonly, they deliver themselves from that Punishment
which they ought justly to undergo. And, this, to me, is a better Argument,
that the Duke of York is no Papist; since the Seditious only would have him
thought so, then, all the Reasons they have given, can, probably make him one.
Your belief of this will complete my wishes, which are, that you may be Happy,

Farewell.

A full and perfect ANSWER To the REASONS Whereupon the Duke of York MAY Most
strongly be reputed, and suspected to be A Papist, etc.
Reason 1.
BEcause 25 Car. 2. When an Act was made to throw Popish Recusants out of all
Offices and places of Trust; The Duke of York did lay down several great
Offices, and Places of Trust; As Lord High Admiral of England; Generalissimo of
all his Majesty's Forces, both by Sea and Land; Governor of the Cinque Ports,
and diverse others; Thereby to avoid the Punishment of that Law against Papists.

Answer 1.
This Act of 25 Car. 2. does not reach the Duke of York. For, it was made (as
the Reasoner well observes) to throw Popish Recusants out of all Offices, and
Places of Trust: And, to displace them from the Household, Service, or
Employment of His Majesty; Or, of His Royal Highness the Duke of York; which
words, Or of His Royal Highness, the Duke of York, are a plain Exception of his
Person, and, that he is not within the meaning of the aforesaid Act. For the
words of the Act bear this Natural Construction, (viz.) That no Person or
Persons whatsoever, are intended to be in any place of Trust, or Service, about
the King, or Duke of York, but such, who are well affected to the Established
Government of this Nation.

But, admit the Duke had taken the Test, as in the Act mentioned, when he was
not obliged to do it: Had he not too officiously declared himself, even in that
point, that the Parliament did not think convenient to oblige him? Would not
his Adversaries have insinuated into the Vulgar, that what he did, was a force
upon him, and not his own inclination? Nay, what should he have gained in the
opinion of the People, by passing such a Complement? Are not many in the House
of Lords, notwithstanding this Test, traduced for Papists? And, many more to be
Popishly affected? Are not those that do not humor them according to their
Capricio, called Recusants? And, those who affect coming to Church, called
Church-Papists? By this, it is plain, the Duke did not lay down his several
great Offices because he was a Recusant; Or, to avoid the punishment of that
Law against Papists; But for some other Reason, best known to the King and
himself: This shall suffice for an answer to the first Reason.

Reason 2.
In 30 Car. 2. When an Act was made to disable Papists from Sitting in either
House of Parliament, there was a Provisoe inserted in that Act, that it should
not extend to the Duke of York, on purpose, to save his Right of Sitting in the
Lords House: Though he refuses to take those Oaths which the Protestant Peers
ought to do.

Answer 2.
This Act, nor any thing contained in it, does in the least asperse the Duke of
York, as a Papist: For, if, out of respect and kindness, the Parliament would
not reach Him with an Oath, (of which they knew he had no need) but, only
inquire into themselves, to find out who were Papists, and who not, by this
disabling Act: Was it not necessary that a Provisoe should be inserted into
that Act, that it should not extend to the Duke of York? I wonder therefore,
with what impudence this should be construed to be done on purpose to save his
Right of Sitting in the Lords House, though a Papist; when the words of the
Provisoe will bear no such Construction? But rather, value him as a Person of
that Honor, and Generosity, that they could do no less than distinguish him
from the rest of his Majesty's Subjects: Especially, since he is so nearly
related to the Crown; Has so well deserved of the King: And, has been so often
thankt for his good Services, by Themselves.

Reason 3.
That His Majesty in his Speech on the sixth day of March, in the one and
thirtieth Year of His Reign, does give for a Reason, to the Parliament, why he
sent his Brother out of England? Because he would leave no man room to say,
that he had not removed all causes, which might influence him to Popish
Councels.

Answer 3.
This Reason is not strong enough to make any person suspect the Duke to be a
Roman Catholic: For, when his Majesty did complement his Parliament; and, had
acquainted them with what great things he had done for the Uniting of the minds
of all his loving Subjects to himself, and one another; by excluding the Popish
Lords from their Seats in Parliament; the Execution of several men upon the
account of the Plots; and of the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfry and Disbanding
the Army then on foot: at last his Majesty declares Above all, I have commanded
my Brother to absent himself from me, because, I would not leave the most
Malicious Men room to say, I had not removed all causes which could be
pretended, to influence me toward Popish Councils. Was ever the sense of a
King, and of a loving Brother so evilly wrested? For, when his Majesty commands
his Brothers absence, Is it not to stop the mouths of the most Malicious? And,
is their spiteful calling of the Duke Papist; Or, inclining him toward Popish
Councils called, by his Majesty, any thing else, than a Pretense? What then
shall be said to such Malicious Pretenders? If, even their own requests
granted, though never so unreasonable, will not give them satisfaction: It
behooves therefore, his Majesty's good Subjects to be more Unanimous and hearty
to one another: That so it may break the hearts of all Malicious Pretenders,
who, under the Vizzard of Liberty, Property and Religion, Endeavor the
Destruction and Ruin of the King and Kingdom.

Reason 4.
There have been diverse Letters read in both Houses of Parliament; and at the
secret Committee of both Houses, from several Cardinals, and others at Rome:
And also, from other Popish Bishops, and Agents of the Popes in other Foreign
parts, which do apparently show the great correspondence between the Duke of
York and the Pope: How the Pope could not choose but weep for Joy, at the
reading of some of the Dukes Letters: What great Satisfaction it was to the
Pope to hear the Duke was of the Catholic Religion: That the Pope has granted
Briefs to the Duke: And sent him Beads, with ample Indulgences; and much more
to this purpose*

Answer 4.
I perceive we are not like to want such Men as William Prynne to search into
Princes Cabinets. God forgive them that do it: But, if it fare with them as (in
King Charles the First's time) it did, with others, upon that account; I shall
not wonder: It Is prudence in Princes to keep a correspondence even, among their
Enemies: Must therefore, their Subjects quarrel their proceedings, that know
not what it tends to? A Civil Behavior or Complement is the least that is due
to the Turk, or Pope: We are obliged to Trade in those Countries: Yet, we
cannot, with safety, and Security, without a Correspondence: Neither can any
Foreign War be Commenced without Allyances: And, who are more proper to
transact such Affairs, than prime Ministers of State? Those are to be wondered
at, who call the Duke Papist: When the Reasons they give for it, are no more to
be valued, than the Rheum that issued from the Popes Eyes, when he read the
pretended Letters: The Pope might, probably, weep, when he heard the Duke was a
Papist: It being such a report as formerly, ruined the Romanists in England;
And brought our most Protestant King Charles the First to the Block: And, under
such another pretense against Popery, probably, the Duke may Suffer, though no
Papist: The Pope's Joy, may be great, for the Fall of Charles, and James, But
his Tears are for his Catholics; who are many times obnoxious to the Law, but
must always be the Sacrifice to the unhallowed Fury of Faction, and
Fanaticism. In Fine, it is strongly to be believed, that those who will not
relinquish their Scismatical Ways; and, gross Lying: Will not, at last, stick
at Perjury, and Subornation: And therefore, no wonder if such simple Pamphlets
of Briefs, Beads, and Indulgences, and such Stuff, is part of the Dukes
Accusation.

Reason 5.
That the whole House of Commons have declared him to be a Papist in their
Vote, Sunday April 1679. Wherein it is resolved, Nemine Contradicente, that the
Duke of York being a Papist, and the hopes of his coming, such, to the Crown:
Has given the greatest countenance and encouragement to the present Conspiracy,
and Design of the Papists against the King and the Protestant Religion (2) What
this Conspiracy is, will appear, by a Declaration of both Houses of Parliament,
March 25, 1679. Wherein it is Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, By the Lords
Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that, They do
declare, They are fully satisfied (by the Proof they have heard) That there,
now, is, and, for diverse Years last past, has been, a Horrid and Trasonable
Plot and Conspiracy, continued, and carried on, by those of the Popish
Religion; For the Murdering His Majesty's Sacred person, and for Subverting
the Protestant Religion: And, ancient, and well Established Government of this
Realm.

Answer 5.
It is affirmed, in this fifth Reason, That the House of Commons have declared
the Duke of York to be a Papist: I should sooner have believed it, if the King,
and House of Lords had concurred with them: Or, rather, if the Duke of York had
declared it Himself; But, till then, I must suspend my Belief, what ever is
said to the contrary: And it would be prudently done of all Persons, (none
having Authority, (as things stand) to inquire into that matter) to do so too;
lest they depart with as little satisfaction, of what they came about; as those
Doctors who came to Queen Elizabeth, to question her about the Real Presence in
the Sacrament: To whom, that Oracle, made this wise Answer.

Christ was the Word that spoke it,
He took the Bread and brake it,
And, what the Word did make it,
That I Believe, and take it.
Reason 6.
That besides all this Proof: And much more to this purpose: It is most
notoriously evident, He has for many Years absented Himself from all Protestant
Churches, during Religious Worship.

Answer 6.
Should many Years absence from Church, during Religious Worship, be a Badge of
Popery; then all, or, most of the Non-con-formists must go under the same
Livery; And, the Duke by that Reason might be esteemed a Phanatick, as well as
a Papist: Therefore since this Reason is illegal: And has no force of Argument
in it, I shall pass it by: Only, I shall hint thus much to the Reasoner: That,
had he enquired of the Dukes Chaplains; He would not have been so ignorant of
the quality of that Devotion, and Piety, that the Duke does constantly exert.

Reason 7.
By the Evidence of Credible Witnesses, He has been seen at Mass, Receiving the
Sacrament, and at Confession.

Answer 7.
The Reasoner would do well to consider that, (according to the measures
himself has taken) a man may have been of several Opinions: And, after that, be
a true Protestant, of the Church of England: But, since all the foregoing
Reasons to prove the Duke a Papist, are only Sophistical, Malicious, and
Spiteful, the Reasoners Witnesses to make good his seventh, and last Argument,
are not to be believed: For, admit the Duke had been at Mass, etc. If they be
honest Papists, it is not to be thought they would inform against the Duke: If
they are false Knaves, they ought not to be Credible Witnesses: Besides, there
is something to be said for Curiosity: The Duke, as other Protestants, may have
been at a Quakers, Or, other Fanatic Meeting, or at Mass; must this, therefore
render him suspected to be of this or that Opinion? No, I rather think, that
those who are true Protestants, according to the Church of England, by hearing,
and observing the Errors of the One, and Ridiculousness of the Other, are
better confirmed in our Protestant Doctrine: And, further, this Argument is to
be looked upon as most fallacious: For, if the Reasoner be unable to prove the
Duke to be a Papist, by his Witness that he has ready to produce: Yet, he may,
by the same Evidence, prove him to be a Member of the Church of England;
allowing, only, Our Liturgy to be the English Mass, which, to the hot headed
Phanatick seems to be as Criminal and Superstitious as the other, so that the
Reasoner seems to aim at nothing else, but to make the Duke declare Himself:
And therefore, he will call Him Papist, or what he pleases, rather, than be
ignorant of what he so eagerly desires to know: And, probably he is so
inquisitive, because he would suit his Religion, according to a prospect of the
Times, (as it is very likely, he has often done heretofore) which, this
reservedness of the Duke perhaps, may hinder: And, to such nimble Wits, it is a
great disgrace, to be outwitted, in paying an early Devotion, to what is like
to succeed, be the Doctrine what it will: And, for this cause, perchance the
Reasoner may think himself obliged to remain an Atheist, till he knows better
what to trust to: But, now if these Answers shall give him, Or, his Adherers
any Satisfaction, I shall be very glad: And, that I may the better secure them
from that wicked Sin of Atheism; I say, that those who will not allow the Duke
to be a Protestant do seem (Together, with Himself) to condemn His Royal
Father, who Educated Him; And also, the Clergy of England, and the whole
Episcopal Party, who do adhere to him, and think him Innocent of these
accusations: Yet, these have taken the Test.

I shall conclude with this serious Admonition to all those who are Traducers
of Others, and Disturbers of Government, under the Masque of Religion; That,
they speedily pull off their vizards, and, really, appear what they pretend to
be, Loyal to the King, and mindful of his Countries good: Otherwise, the time
may come, (and, the sooner the better) That their Disguise shall be torn off by
the hands of Justice: And, when the People shall see their Wolfish Faces; And,
(how under their Sheeps Clothing) they have been deluded by them; Then, Then
will be the Joyful Day; Then shall Treasons, and Factions Cease; when the
Traitors and Seditious shall suffer according to Law.

FINIS.

