A TREATISE OF THE Nature and Use Of the Bitter Purging Salt Contained in
EPSOM, And such other WATERS.

By NEHEMIAH GREW, M. D. Fellow of the College of PHYSICIANS, and of the ROYAL
SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1697.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THat this Salt is made and sold in greater or lesser Quantities, by Francis
Moult Chemist, at the Sign of Glaubers-Head in Watling-Street;

And this Translation at no other Place.

(...)

TO THE READER.
THE Reason of my publishing this Book in English is, the general Use I observe
to be made of the Bitter Purging Salt in this Town and elsewhere, by all sorts
of Persons, and that promiscuously, in all Cases, as Peoples Fancies or Humors
prompt 'em, without any Advice beyond Public Fame, or the good Woman that last
visited.

The Sellers of this Salt are likewise such as use to dispose of other
Catholic or Universal Medicines, who neither know how to direct the Buyer, nor
care what becomes of the Taker, so as they attain their End, their part of the
Profit. There is indeed this difference; That other Medicines that have grown
Popular were always ushered out with printed Directions, or Certificates of
it is Virtues and numberless Cures, as Daffy's Elixir, Spirit of Scurvy Grass,
Atkins 's Oil for the Gout, etc. Nay, the very Disciples of Ponteus afford for
public Benefit a printed Encomium for a Voucher to the Twelve-Penny Packet.
This I thought sufficient to Vindicate my Translation of Dr. Grew's Nature and
Use of the Bitter Purging Salt, which I intend to give to those who buy any
quantities of the Salt. And I Would have the Reader take notice, That this is no
Quack-Bill, no boasting Rhodomontado of any Ignorant Pretender, no gilded Bush
to set off bad Wine, but the Observations of an Ingenious Physician, Fellow of
both Societies, and published by him in Latin, for the Information of the
Practicers of Physic, and for no Private Interest or Profit. But, I can scarce
believe the Doctor ever foresaw the Consequence of his Commendations would be
the pushing every Body upon the Use of it Hand over Head; therefore I doubt not
his Pardon for my Translating it without his Knowledge, my Design being not to
discover the secret Method of its Preparation, but to prevent by these
Directions the Mischiefs he tells us may ensue the Abuse of so good a Medicine.
Farewell.

Part the First. OF THE NATURE OF THE Bitter Purging Salt.
CHAP. I. How the bitter Purging Waters were first Discovered.
THE Mineral Waters arising near Epsom in Surrey, the chief of all the bitter
Purging Waters, were found out by a Country Man, in or about the Year 1620.

For near, the first Ten Years, none but the Country People made use of them,
and they only to wash External Ulcers.

Afterward the Lord Dudley North, Father to Francis the late Lord Keeper,
laboring under a Melancholy Disposition, for which he had formerly Drank the
Spaw-Waters in Germany, was resolved to try the Virtue of these Epsom Waters
flattering himself (I suppose) that he had found Chalybeate-Waters at his own
Door.

However, though they answered not his desire and expectation as to their Nature,
yet he did not repent of his Experiment, but from that time drank these Purging
Waters, as a Medicine sent from Heaven, with abundance of success.

Many others, encouraged by his Example, tried the operation of these Waters;
and amongst the first, Maria de Medicis, Mother to the Wife of King Charles I.
the Right Honorable George Lord Goring, Earl of Norwich, and many other
Persons of Quality.

These, and all others, who drank the Epsom-Waters, came not for Pleasure but
Health, and therefore always consulted their own, or some Neighboring
Physician, for the Rules they were to observe.

In a little while Physicians came of their own accord to these Waters by whose
Authority they acquired so great a Reputation, that 2000 Persons have been
there in one Day, to drink or divert themselves.

About 30 Years since, many of the Inhabitants of London, whose Business or
Poverty obstructed their going to Epsom, had the Waters sent to them.

Thus the Ice being broke, others brought great quantities to Town, which they
sold as well to Sick Persons as Apothecaries, and continue still to do so.

No wonder then that so few sick People go to these Waters, it is not that the
Modern Physicians esteem them less, but because the Numbers of such as Drink at
home, and at other Wells of the same Nature, do every Day mightily increase.

For a few Years after the Discovery of the Epsom-Waters was published, others
of the same sort (found out by Enquiry or Chance) grew into tolerable Repute
and Use. The Names of the Principal are, Barnet in Hertfordshire. North-Hall in
Hertfordshire. Acton in Middlesex. Cobham in Surrey. Dullidge in Surrey.
Strettham in Kent.


Besides these, the Curious and Inquisitive may discover very many more to us
unknown, especially if they take along with them this Direction, that sweet
Waters generally arise from the tops of Hills, but these from the Bottoms.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature of the Bitter Purging Waters.
THese Waters have no taste, but a moderate bitterness, which is very sensible.

Some that have Traveled into Syria and Egypt, mention bitter Waters in those
Countries; and St. James, in his Epistle, takes notice of sweet and bitter
Waters, as very common things in the Eastern Parts; all which bitter Waters,
it is probable, are of this sort.

These Fountains are not of an equal Strength nor Virtue, but some are much
stronger than others; with the strongest Dullidge is justly reckoned with the
gentler Epsom.

These Waters in their Springs are without smell, but kept some Days or Weeks
in Vessels close stopped, they putrify and stink, especially in Summer time;
which will happen to all Waters, and sometimes also to the clearest Spring
Water, as we are told by those that Sail near the Equator.

Pour a little of this Water to Sirrup of Violets, and 'twill remain blue and
unchanged, as if 'twere mixed with common Spring Water.

By the adding Lime water, it gives a whitish Muddy color, as if some drops of
Milk were mixed with it, and the white parts will, in about an hours time,
subside in the form of a cloudy curdling, produced from the Union of the chalky
Lexivial, and the acidity of the Cathartick Salts.

All these Waters will curdle Milk, if it be added to them when they are hot,
or boiling, but not at all if mixed when they are cold.

The Waters of any of these Wells, evaporated in a glazed Earthen, or any other
proper Vessel, will yield a kind of a Cream a top, and a sediment at the bottom
of the Vessel, of both together, 6, 8, or 10 Drams from a Gallon.

This Cream is of an Ash color, Stony substance, and resembles Plaster, but
certainly not at all Lixivial, for every one knows that the Lapis Calcarius, or
Limestone, calcined, although actually cold, will grow very hot by pouring Water
upon them, and emit a very great and thick fume, and that applied to any part
of the Body 'twill burn. Therefore Surgeons use it for a Potential Cautery;
but the forementioned Cream calcined in a Crucible, and Water poured upon it,
causes neither smoke nor heat, nor does it acquire any the least Pungency.

Sometimes, as in Acton-Waters, the thin Minute Particles of which it consists
Will be very resplendent and brittle, and wholly insipid, though Calcined as
aforesaid, yet by the pouring on any acid Liquor, chiefly by Spirit of Nitre,
an Ebullition, with a sensible heat, will be excited.

The lesser part of this Sediment is like in substance to the before-describ'd
Cream; the remainder is purely Saline, but compounded of two kinds of Salts,
one a Muriatick or Sea Salt, the other a Salt proper or special to these
Waters, whose Nature and Virtues I here design to treat of.

In Epsom-Waters, the Muriatick Salt is about the 20th part of the whole Saline
Composition; it is something more in Dullidge, and in most of the
forementioned Springs.

In its biting Taste, as well as in the Figure of its Chrystals, it is not unlike
Common Salt; whence it is that Waters, in which there is less of this Muriatick
Salt, purge not so strongly as others.

The other Salt, as we have said before, is the proper, or peculiar Salt of the
Purging Waters; it is made after the same manner as all Lixivial Salts, viz. by
Evaporating, Filtring, and Chrystalizing, Calcination only excepted. In this
Preparation, the Earthy or Plaistery part, is first to be separated from the
Saline; then the Muriatick Salt, and a yellow and thick Liquor from the proper
Salt of the Waters.

CHAP. III. Of the Nature of the Bitter Salt, peculiar to the Purging Waters.
THis Salt, if it be rightly prepared, is of a delicate whiteness equal to new
fallen Snow.

This bitter Salt is much more evident in the Salt it self, in a dry Form, than
in the Water, and smites the Tongue with a very penetrating Pungency, but
without any Acrimony.

If you dissolve a Dram of this Salt in a Pint of Common Water, which is its
Natural proportion, 'twill have the same property of curdling Milk, and be
ennobled with the same bitter Taste and Purging Virtue peculiar to its Mineral
Water.

And therefore it is not improperly distinguished from the Sal Mirabilis, (made
of Oil of Vitriol, and Common Salt) and from all other Salts, by the Name of
the Bitter Purging Salt.

This bitter Purging Salt, from the different manner of evaporating its Water,
or degree of Cold, to which it is afterward exposed, and other circumstances,
will shoot into Crystals of a greater or lesser Magnitude. But let the
Dimensions be what they will, the Figure is the same; for most of their
Crystals, if they shoot not too thick, are small rectangular Prisms, with four
parallel sides; the two opposite sides something flatter than the other.
Sometimes they have two more sides, and are Sexangular; but these are so small
that the naked Eye can hardly discover 'em.

Their length is about half an Inch, but their thickness not above a fith,
sixth or seventh part of their length; their Basis, a lump of the same; the
Summit very different, having sometimes three, but for the most part four
sloping Plains, and with the forementioned parallel sides make obtuse Angles,
or pointed, or oftener sharpened, like a Pen Knife: One of the sloping Plains is
generally bigger than the other three taken together, and of a Pentangular or
Sexangular Figure; the opposite to this Quadrangular or Pentangular; the other
two Triangular and less; the last, sometimes invisible, without a Microscope.

These Cristals, in their Oblong Figure, do most resemble Saltpeter; in their
Rectangular they come nearest to Sea Salt.

This bitter Salt, dissolved in common Water, and standing some Days in a Glass
Vessel, shoots into Branches like little Trees round the sides of the Glass: To
the producing this Figure, the before-describ'd Cristals of this Salt and of
Sal Nitre (the points of which are terminated sometimes into Right, sometimes
into Acute Angles) are very proper; the sloping Plain of one Cristal joining to
the parallel Plain of the others. Which I have also demonstrated to be done in
the Generation of Leaves, by the Figure of their proper Salts. Plant. Ang. 9.
lib. 4. p. 1. c. ult.

Where note by the way, That in that Discourse I have set down the Figures of
Sal Nitri and other Salts, not altogether as they appear to us, but, probably,
as they do exist in the Plants themselves.

Five Drams of this bitter Purging Salt, mixed in a Vial with half an Ounce of
common Water; and shaken together, by that Agitation only and the gentle Heat
of the Hand in Winter, will all presently dissolve, except a few Grains; by
which you observe it to be more dissolvable than any other Salt.

It Is distinguished also by its Specific Gravity from all other Salts; it is
heavier than Allom, lighter than common Salt, and than Nitre, as we shall
hereafter prove in the fifth Chapter.

A dissolution of this Salt, and Salt of Tartar, and any other Urinous or
Lixivial Salt, will generate a white Coagulum, or a Nuetral Salt, of the taste
of neither, but something Styptick.

Strong and new Oil of Vitriol, poured upon this Salt, will cause a moderate
Ebullition; from whence we may conclude it to be of an Alkaline Principle, and
in some manner Lixivial.

But if you add any other Liquor that I know of, either Acid or Alkali, to this
Salt, 'twill neither ferment nor grow hot.

This Salt in a Crucible, with a strong fire, will melt and swell like Allom
into a white Porous and boiling Calx.

But this Calx will (except about a 40th part of the whole) dissolve in a
sufficient quantity of common Water, which the Lapis Calcarius, or Limestone,
will not.

This Calx, in a Crucible, with a vehement fire for an hour, will be as hard as
Alabaster, nor will it afterward be softened by the Air: Much otherwise it is
with the Limestone, which Calcined, and exposed to the Air, falls to Powder.

Although by this Calcination it loses some part of its weight, yet its
bitterness continues, and is rather increased.

The Calx of the bitter Purging Salt, by the affusion of Spirit of Salt, or any
other Acid, will presently ferment, which is more or less conspicuous according
to the strength of the aforesaid Spirit; from whence also we may allow it to be
in some sort Lixivial.

From a Pound of this Salt Distilled in a Glass Retort well Luted, with a
Rever-beratory Fire, you will have in the Receiver a little above half a pound of
an Acid Spirit in smell and taste, every way equal to common Spirit of Salt.

Oil of Vitriol poured upon common Spirit of Salt, yields a dark and smoaky
Vapor, which will likewise happen, if you drop the same Oil very strong into
the Spirit of the Purging Salt.

It Is very well known, that all the Chalybeate Waters will change to a Purple,
by the addition of Galls, as will White Wind Vinegar, though more obscurely; but
the infusion of Galls will be in no wise altered by the Spirit of the Purging
Salt, though an Acid, nor by the Spirit of {sulphur}, or Oil of Vitriol, from
whence, as well as many other ways, the different Nature of these, and other
Acids, may be shown.

I took 8 Glass Bottles of River-Water, and with some drops of Sirrup of
Violets colored them all blue alike; one of which I let stand without any
thing else added to it. To a 2d I put a little Sal Nitri; to a third some of
the bitter Purging Salt; to a fourth a little Limewater; to the fifth a
dissolution of the Calx of the Purging Salt; to the sixth an infusion of white
Tartar; to the seventh the Distilled Spirit of the Purging Salt; to the last, a
little of both Limewater and the Purging Salt.

In the three first, the Cerulous color remained only a little faded.

In the 4th and 5th, the Cerulous color was converted to a manifest Green; in
the former turbid and paler, in the latter like a Smarag'd, very deep and clear.

In the 6th and 7th it turned purple; in the first obscure, but the latter was
like a true Amethyst.

The green color, in the 4th and 5th, vanished in about 3 hours, but the 5th
was much deeper, and more durable.

From this manifold Experiment we may observe, that as Nitre, although by
accension it will yield a fixed Lixivial Salt, and by Distillation an Acid
Spirit, yet has neither a Lixivial, nor Acid taste, therefore gives neither
green nor purple color to the Sirrup; so we may conclude the Purging bitter
Salt to consist of like principles, that is not solely Acid, but also
Alkalious, and a little Lixivial.

But it may be evidently demonstrated, that its principles do partake of both,
by the acidity of its Spirit, and the green color; its Calx gives Sirrup of
Violets like Aqua Calcis, and other Lixivial Liquors.

In the last Bottle the color was deeper and more durable, by the combination
or union of the twofold Alkalious Salt, the bitter Purging Salt, and the
Calcarious, as Ink is made by the union of two Astringents.

And it is very plain, that the existence of these Salts, and their efficacy in
altering Colors, depends not on the fire, because the infusion of white Tartar
will, like the Spirit of the Purging Salt, die the Sirrup of a purple color.

Lastly, Take notice that I call the Alkaline Principle in this Purging Salt
potentially, and after a sort Lixivial.

For, as we have observed in this Chapter, you can perceive no Lixivial taste
even in the Calx of this Salt, which does not hinder, but that an Alkaline
Principle may be in this Salt, as appears from the fore cited Experiments, though
it has never endured the fire, but after Calcination it is proved to be I know
not how Lixivial.

I call it Lixivial, tho that, nor any other Name in Use that I know of, is
justly adapted to its Nature, for there is a want of proper Words to express
our meanings in nothing so much as in Philosophy, such as should lead us
through the Footsteps of Nature, and Intelligibly express its admirable variety.

CHAP. IV. Of the difference between the bitter Purging Salt, Allom, and the
Muriatick Salt.
FRom the forecited Experiments, and those we shall now mention rightly
understood and compared, 'twill evidently appear that the Purging bitter Salt,
though it may have some Qualities common to other Salts, does differ in its
Nature and Species from all other Salts.

Very many have confidently affirmed it to proceed from an Aluminous Minera,
but inconsiderately, for from whence is it they prove it, but because they
coagulate Milk, which is no reason at all, for by the same ridiculous Argument,
Vinegar, Wine, Beer, and whatever curdles Milk, must be Aluminous.

Nor does it appear from hence, that like Allom, when melting, it swells and
rises in bubbles, for Borax melted will have the same Elevation, but Borax does
not curdle Milk, therefore is not Aluminous, nor from thence can the bitter
Purging Salt be so.

Moreover, from an Ounce of Allom calcined half an hour in a Crucible, there
will remain half an Ounce of Calx. To this pour a sufficient quantity of common
Water to dissolve the Saline parts, and there will remain about 52 Grains of an
insipid and simple Earth at the bottom of the Vessel, which is six times as
much as the like quantity of the Calx of the bitter Salt will leave behind it.

Nor is the Spirit of Allom Distilled with a strong Fire any thing like the
Spirit of this Salt, for the first has a greater acrimony, and much less
grateful taste; and which is worth Observation, a Fetid smell very like to the
Spirit or Gass of Sulphur.

The taste likewise of this bitter Purging Salt and Allom is so different, that
nothing can be more; for that of Allom is austere and has no bitterness, the
other no manner of austerity but wholly bitter.

Besides, they are evidently distinguished by their Natural Figures for the
Chrystals of Allom, the Factitious at least considering its Altitude are
something flattish, and consist of 8 Planes; two, viz. those at top and bottom,
Sexangular and Parallel: The greater and less sides of these Planes are so
placed alternately, that the 3 greater answer to the 3 less. About these are
placed 6 Quadrangular Planes with unequal sides and angles, the greater bending
toward the Center of the Crystal, and the less accordingly

How very unlike this is to the before-describ'd Figure of the Purging Salt,
may easily appear by comparison.

Nor can this bitter Purging Salt with more Justice be reckoned amongst the
Muriatick or common Salts, which well purified has a very different taste from
the Purging Salt, and also from Allom; its Figure is likewise as different, for
it shoots not long ways, but contracted almost in the form of a Cube.

Besides, the Purging Salt calcined in a Crucible, with a strong Fire, emits no
visible vapor, nor loses more than half of its weight; but common Salt thus
calcined, as it is much more fluid, so it ascends in thick smoaky vapors,
leaving scarce an 18th part of the whole in the Crucible.

Neither (which may seem strange) does the Spirit of common Salt Distilled, as
the Spirit of the Purging Salt, coagulate Milk, unless added to it when it is
Boiled.

To be certain of this, I tried the following Experiment.

To a Pint of River Water, impregnated with a Dram of the bitter Purging Salt,
and boiling, I threw in 3 or 4 Spoonfuls of Milk, and let it boil again;
presently the curdled Milk swam upon the Water.

It did the same with as much of the Spirit of the bitter Purging Salt.

Lastly, Instead of the Spirit of the Purging Salt, I used the Spirit of common
Salt, and that much stronger than the former Spirit, in the same proportion and
method, but the Milk remained fluid in its Natural state without any
coagulation.

CHAP. V. The difference of the bitter Purging Salt from Nitrous and Calcarious
Salts.
NOR does this Salt differ less from all kinds of Nitrous Salts; from which, by
its bitter taste alone, its enough distinguished.

Nor less by its Figure, for the Chrystals of Nitre shoot not into four
cornered Parallel Planes, but always into six; nor into right Angles, but
obtuse, and their tops seldom terminate in 4 sloping Planes, but mostly in 2,
and sometimes in 6, and those more equal than in the Purging bitter Salt.

The Purging bitter Salt thrown into the Fire is not at all inflamable but
Nitre burns with a bright flame and roaring noise, till the most part of it
evaporates.

I have said the most part of it, nor do I retract my assertion, for in the 3d
Chapter we have observed about a 20th part to remain after the deflagration,
which is in no wise Nitrous, but Lixivial, from Wood-Ashes mixed with it by the
Nitre-Makers.

But further, the bitter Salt in a Spoon, held over the flame of a Candle, will
melt in a moment, and bubble up as if thrown in to the fire; but Nitre, with
such a heat; will scarcely melt, but take up at least 8 times the space of the
other, and emits a most resplendent flame.

On the contrary, though Nitre melts with difficulty, it is when melted much more
fluid, for in a Crucible, in a strong fire, it boils not like Allom, or the
bitter Salt, but flows like Rosin or melted Metals.

From Nitre melted in a Crucible arise thick Exhalations, which you never see
from the bitter Salt, though in the strongest Fire.

Add likewise, that they differ from one another in their power of coagulating
Milk.

For half a Dram of the Purging Salt, thrown into half a Pint of Milk, will
turn it very gray; but Nitre mixed after the same manner, though in much greater
proportion, has no such effect.

The solubility of Nitre, as we have before proved, is two parts in three less
than the Purging Salt, for half an Ounce of common Water will, in the Winter,
by agitation and a warm hand, dissolve not above a Dram and half of Nitre.

Its gravity is likewise very different, which appears by the following
Experiment.

I put Oil of Turpentine into a Cylindar to the height of 3 Fingers; I then put
in two Ounces of the Purging Salt, which raised the Oil a Finger higher, but
from an equal weight of depurated Nitre, the Oil was elevated not higher than 3
fourths of a Finger; therefore the bitter Purging Salt is a 4th part lighter
than Nitre.

But Water impregnated with the Purging Salt occupies a less space, its bulk
considered, than the same quantity with as much Sal Nitri dissolved in it.

That is, Water instead of Oil mixed with the Salts in a Vial; when they are
dissolved, the former subsides lower than the latter.

Lastly, I Distilled Dantzick Vitriol, Sal Armoniack, and a like quantity of
the bitter Salt, instead of Nitre, in order to make the Aqua Regia. Now if this
had been a Nitrous Salt, this Water would, like Aqua Regia, have dissolved
Gold, but we could find no such power in this Water.

Nor is it the Nitre of the Ancients, for it is nothing like that of the
Egyptians so often mentioned by Hypocrates; something like which is described
by Dioscorides and Pliny to be of a purple color and biting; nor that of
Etius, like Earth calcined and quenched with Wine.

Nor, lastly, can it be reckoned with the Sal Calcarius; for the Purging Salt,
or Water only, coagulates Milk with a much harder Curd, and greater plenty of
Serum, than the Lime Water will.

And, if that Power of Coagulation were equal, how many Liquors have we
mentioned that curdle Milk, which are neither Calcarious nor Aluminous.

Spirit of Nitre, dropped into the Cream that swims atop of the Limewater, or
upon Lime it self, will cause a visible Ebullition; but the same Spirit will
have no such Effect upon the Purging Salt.

There can be no where more difference in the taste of Things, than between the
Purging Salt and the Calcarious; for the one is Lixivial and Sweet; the other,
as it were Cold and Bitter.

Lime will, by pouring a little Water upon it, presently fall to Powder. On the
contrary, the Calx of the Purging Salt powdered, will, by the same means, run
immediately into a hard Substance, and in a few Moments be like a Stone.

Lamb's-Conduit Water, mixed with Limewater, will in a very little time grow
white, with a dark clowdy Curdling; as it will with the Purging Waters: But, if
you mix it with Water impregnated with the Calx of the Purging Salt, no
Muddiness nor Color will follow.

Common Water impregnated with this Salt, and afterward evaporated, will
restore you the whole quantity you dissolved, without any waste; but Limewater
evaporated, the Salt is for the most part transmuted into a stony and tastless
Substance: The Cause of which is, that the Saline Parts of the Aqu. Calcis do
so intimately embrace and unite with any other Aerial Salt, that they make a
third Nurtral Salt; as in Oil of Anisseeds and Vitriol, shaken together, you
have a Refine, properly so called, which, if you wash, will yield you no manner
of taste.

This may be illustrated by the following Experiment. I kept Limewater in a
Glass close stopped with a Cork, and as much in an open Vessel, for a Week or
longer; that in the stopped Vial had no Cream upon it; but that in the open
Vessel where the Air could freely arrive at the Water, was covered with an
insipid and stony Cream.

But Water, in which the Purging Salt is dissolved, kept in an open Vessel, and
many Days exposed to the Air, will have no Cream at all on its surface: And
that which appears in boiling the Purging Waters, is not in the least
Calcarious, as we have formerly proved.

Add also the very different solubility of these Salts; for half an Ounce of
the Bitter Purging Salt will be easily, and without Heat or much Agitation
presently dissolved in six times its quantity of Water. But to the dissolution
of so much of the Calcarious Salt, is required two Gallons and a half of Water,
which is 640 times its weight. For so much common Water is necessary to
edulcorate an Ounce of Calx Vivens; which done, there remains in the bottom of
the Vessel about half an Ounce of pure white and Insipid Calx.

But the Bitter Purging Salt is eminently distinguished from the forementioned
(if there were no other way) by its Medicinal Virtues, as we shall evidently
demonstrate, in the latter Part of this Tract, where we speak of its Use.

In the mean time, we do not deny a small Portion, as well of Nitre and common
Salt, as of a stony Substance, may be contained, not only in the Purging
Waters, but even in the Salt it self. And, indeed, it is probable that no Body,
existent in Nature, is purely simple. Silver, every one knows, is mixed with
Copper or Lead; Gold, with Silver in the same Mine Vein; nay, and Metallic
Mass: But it does not follow, that Silver and Copper, or Gold and Silver, do
hereby constitute a third Species; but the two, or more, separable Metals exist
together.

Nor, can we infer an Identity of Bodies from their agreement in some
qualities; for Lead and Gold do so agree; both are solid, opacque, ductile,
fusible, heavy Bodies, etc. and therefore are both Metals; but nothing is Gold,
that has not all the qualities of Gold.

For Gold does not differ more ways, nor in a more eminent manner from Lead,
than the Bitter Purging Salt is distinguished from all other Salts; and
therefore is in its own Nature the most Noble.

CHAP. VI. Some additional Observations of the Nature of the Bitter Purging
Salt.
THE most special Qualities of this Salt, that we have already described, are a
taste gently and almost simply Bitter; and of all sorts, that we know, most
resembling the Crystals of Silver in similitude of Taste. For these, indeed,
are bitter, but very much so, and not without some Austerity joined with it.

I have in another place observed the Lapis Calaminaris to have some Qualities
common with Silver, therefore I dropped into the Powder of this Stone some
drops of Spirit of Nitre; and the fermentation over, I washed the mixture with
common Water. This Water, like the Chrystals of Silver, is not only very
styptick but bitter, and is the only bitter Mineral that I know of, except the
Salt of Luna, and the Purging Salt. But whether the Purging Salt do arise from
any Silver Minera, wholly or in part so, or from the Lapis Calaminaris, or
rather from any other, I leave undetermined, being never able to get any of the
true Minera of this Salt.

But this is very plain from the forementioned Experiments, that the Bitter
Purging Salt is compounded of some parts in their nature Acid, and others
Alkaline, and a little Lixivial.

In Salts compounded of various Principles, the Proportion, the Nature and the
Union of those Principles are to be considered.

Some Acid Particles are frequently found in Lixivial Salts, but in a small
proportion.

But in Tartar, which is the Salt of Wine, the Saline Parts are much lesser
than the Acid, which exist in a much greater proportion.

And it is almost the same in the Bitter Purging Salt, with this difference
only, That in the former the Acids are actually mixed with the Alkaline, but in
the latter Potentially.

Moreover, all Lixivial Salts are Acrimonious, but those commonly called
Testaceous are not without reason accounted the more gentle.

As likewise are some Acid Liquors, such as the Juice of Wood Sorrel, a
Dissolution of the Cream of Tartar, etc. but the Purging Salt is gentler than
any of these.

Indeed, by Distillation it gives an Acid Spirit, but this Acid Taste is not
perceptible till its Principles are intimately dissolved and divided by a most
violent Fire.

For the Salt it self has neither Acrimony nor Acidity.

Nor is it Tastless, but very subtle and biting, and therefore a most
Efficacious Medicine.

Its Admirable Subtilty will appear by its penetrating any Earthen Vessel, if
not very well Glazed about the bottom; of which, on the outside, there will be
a woolly or hoary Concretion in color like an Amethyst.

The Principles of this Salt are also more closely united than in Tartar, and
afford many other Remedies. For the Union is so firm, that one of its parts,
viz. its Acid, cannot be above the one half of it separated from the other, and
that not without a reverberatory Fire. Whence it is, that when other gentle
Purges frequently elude the Physicians expectation, this does very seldom or
never deceive him.

For such Medicines do work most upon the Humors of the Body, which are least
alterable by those Humors: In the number of which this Salt, and other
Minerals, are to be accounted.

Last of all; This Salt, though it does consist of different Principles, is very
pure, if rightly and diligently prepared; insomuch that it does not retain the
thousandth part of any extraneous Body with it self.

For, if you evaporate destill'd Water, impregnated with an Ounce of this Salt,
'twill yield not a Particle of any Heterogeneous Salt, stony Sediment, or
Cremor, but the very same Ounce of most pure Salt.

The End of the First Part:
Part the Second. OF THE USE OF THE Bitter Purging Salt.
CHAP. I. Of the more General Use of the Bitter Purging Salt.
THE Use of the Purging Waters of Epsom, etc. is so excellent and manifold, and
so very well known to London Physicians, that no Body can doubt of it.

For in many grievous Diseases, Experience has proved 'em a most efficacious
Remedy, endued with no unwholsom Quality; which, rationally prescribed, I never
knew attended with any unexpected ill Effect.

One Objection there is brought against these Waters, with some show of Reason;
it is, That the Waters in boiling separate a stony Cremor: From whence we may
fear a Matter may be supplied, fit to generate the Stone in the Body.

This Objection is answered by two Experiments; one beforementioned; and the
Second drawn from Physical Observations. For it is plain, from what we have
before proved, That this stony Cremor does not arise upon the Purging Waters,
nor upon Aqua Calcis, unless exposed to the Air, and in an open Vessel; and
therefore no stony Substance can be generated by the Waters in the Body.

But, say they, the Air is mixed with the Humors of the Body. We grant it; and
likewise with Waters; as may be demonstrated by the Air Pump. But Waters cannot
petrifie without the free and open influx of the Air. Add likewise, That the
Air cannot enter the Body, but as it were through a Strainer.

Secondly, Practice contradicts this, for it is notoriously known, not only to
me, but to many other Physicians, That after drinking these Purging Waters
plentifully, by intervals, for 20 to 30 Years together, Persons have been
always free from the Gout or Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder, and enjoyed a
perfect Health. And the forementioned Lord North, who drank both Epsom and
Barnet Waters, live'd free from those Distempers to 85 Years of Age.

And this Lime-Waterm, which so suddenly proceduces a stony Substance by the
admission of the Air, is frequently and safely given by physicians. And our
Sugar-Refiner use it in the purifying their Sugar; by which means the Treacle
is better separated from the concrescible part; and it acquires a greater
fineness and whilteness.

But, if the Purging Water is a good Medicine, how much more is the Salt to be
accounted so? For, if we should, for Arguments sake, grant what is objected
against the Waters; yet that will make not at all against the Salt, depurated
from its stony Substance.

Moreover, if the Water you take do abound with plenty of the Muriatick Salt,
sometimes it may Purge too violently; but the purified Salt, which is freed
from it, is of all Purging Medicines the most gentle.

It Is likewise totally free from the Malignant Quality of most Catharticks; it
does never violently agitate the Humors, nor cause Sickness, Faintings, or
Pains in the Bowels. It never fails a Physicians design in Purging the Patient;
nor ever puts him in fear of a Hypercatharsis.

Besides, the strength of the Waters is not at all times alike; for it is either
increased by a dry Season, or diminished by a wet; it is stronger in Summer,
weaker in Winter; and it is common for those that fell them, upon occasion, to
mix 'em with common Water: From whence the Physician, prescribing the usual
Dose, frequently fails of success. But the Salt of this Water, purely and
rightly prepared, is every Particle alike, and endued with the same Purging
Virtue.

Add to this, That the London Physicians do not prescribe the Waters crude,
but, for the most part, boiled: For taken this way, the Dose being lessened,
and the Strength increased, they slip easier through the Stomach and Guts. In
Summer you boil to the consumption of a third, but in Winter to half the
quantity; which will require two or three Hours. But the Purging Salt of the
Water, dissolved in any convenient Liquor, and once boiled, is a Medicine
always in a readiness; accommodated to Apothecaries, chiefly to sick Persons,
who, in urgent Cases, suffer much Pain and Uneasiness while the Waters are so
long a boiling, and may often times be in danger.

The last, though not the least, considerable is, That the Water kept a little
too long, especially in Summer or hot Weather, will stink; but the Salt of this
Water, neither Age nor Place can corrupt.

But some, I foresee, will Question the wholsomness of this Salt, from the Acid
Spirit it yields in Distillation; but this Objection does as much oppose the
Use of the Water, as of the Salt contained in them: For the same Reason, we may
as well pretend to leave off the Use of Honey, Sugar, or White-Bread; every one
of which, by the help of Fire, will yield a Distilled Spirit violently Acid and
Biting.

Wine also, and the wholsomest Food, when its Principles are let loose by
Fermentation, or any other way, do obtain Noxious, and sometimes Poisonous
Qualities. Nay, even the Food of Infants, their Mothers Milk, will in a warm
place presently turn Acid; but by dissolving the Purging Salt in a proper
Vehicle, its Principles are neither depraved nor divided, but it is given in its
compact Body, or united Essence, as we are fed with the forementioned Eatables.
For as the Salt it self, so also the Water we drink, from which this Salt is
prepared, is sensibly, though moderately bitter, and without any mixture of
Acidity.

CHAP. II. Of the Method of prescribing the Bitter Purging Salt.
THis Salt may be taken Dissolved in any Vehicle agreeable to the Palate, or
grateful to the Taste of the Patient; such as Spring-Waters, Barley-Water,
Water Gruel, Posset Drink, Whey, etc. I do most commonly prescribe common Water
Boiled, and Aromatiz'd with a little Mace, to two, three, or four Pints; of
which I add half an Ounce, or an Ounce, or a greater Dose of the Salt. As for
Example:

Take of Spring Water two Quarts, Mace a Dram, boil a little and strain it;
then dissolve in the strained Liquor an Ounce or 10 Drams of the Salt for an
Apozem, to be taken in the Morning in the space of two hours, hot, warm, and
sometimes cold, with a little Exercise.

This Apozem you may give by it self, or during the Working of other Purging
Physic. It is proper also, when there is occasion, to add Senna, Manna, or
both, to the Mace, to promote the efficacy of the Salt, in this or the like
Form:

Take Spring Water four Pints, Mace a Dram, Senna three Drams, boil them
gently, and add of the Bitter Purging Salt an Ounce, Flakey-Manna an Ounce and
half, or two Ounces, and strain it.

The Lord Dudley North was the first that drank the Purging-Waters with Milk,
which did not at all agree with his Stomach, because he mixed them cold; but
Physicians afterward altered the Waters, by adding Milk when they were
boiling, which way, if you please, you may also most safely take the Salt it
self. For Example:

Take of the Salt an Ounce or 10 Drams, dissolve it in 3 Pints and half, or 4,
of common Water, and when it boils pour in half a Pint of Milk, and strain the
Curd from it.

In the Summer, when Medicinal Waters are every where frequented, the
Chalybeate, or the Purging-Waters, taken immediately from their Springs, is the
best Vehicle.

A Dram, or a Dram and half of this Salt, taken in 3 or 4 of the first Glasses
of Tunbridge, or any other Chalybeate Water, for the three or four first days,
will render the Humors and first Passages better prepared for the design of
Drinking.

Chalybeate-Waters do frequently bind, which will be prevented by a small
quantity of this Salt dissolved in the first and last Glass.

But it is best of all taken in its own Waters, for a Dram of it, dissolved in
every Draught, does Purge with more certainty and a less quantity of Water, and
by consequence is less burdensome to the Stomach; it is sometimes also very
proper in Glisters, to mix 3 or 4 Drams of it instead of Sal Gem.

CHAP. III. Of the more particular Use of this Salt, and first of all of its
Use in Diseases of the Ventricle.
WHat I shall now insert of the Purging-Waters and their Salt, is not from
uncertain conjectures, but is demonstrable by the daily Experience of other
Learned Men as well as my own; all whom have used both the Salt and the Water,
in the following Diseases, with happy success.

And first of all, this Purging-Water, or its Salt, is a most Amicable Medicine
to the Stomach, exciting an Appetite, and promoting a good Digestion; which it
does partly by its Acid Principle, partly by the bitterness of the whole, or
its Alkaline Mixture.

But chiefly from the former, because it affords a Spirit in some sort
Analagous to the Spirit of the Salt, with which all Meats are seasoned; and
also from the latter, for we do every day Experience the Stomach to be
strengthened by this, and most other Bitters. It Is also well known, that the
Appetite is chiefly strengthened by the Use of Compound Salts, for almost all
Pickles are prepared not with Salts alone, but with Salt and Vinegar. French
Red-Wine we allow to be very wholesome with our Food, because of its Tartarous
Salt, of all others, the most Compound; and Salt of Steel, a very Compound
Salt, is as Famous among Stomach-Medicines.

The two Universal Digestives, Bread and Spittle, do one of them contain an
Acid, and the other an Alkaline Salt, and mixed supply the place of a Compound
Salt.

And the Natural ferment of the Stomach consists of Acid and Alkaline
Particles; the first from the Arteries, or the Blood, the latter from the
Nerves, or the Excrement of the Animal Spirits, which may be proved by very
many Arguments not here to be insisted upon.

Therefore while there is the Natural proportion of either Salt in the Stomach,
Concoction is duly performed, but when either prevail, sometimes the Acid,
sometimes the Alkaline, are necessary to restore it to its Office.

When the Concoction of the Stomach is Vitiated by too much, or improper Meat
and Drink, Vomiting often follows; for the quieting which, the Bitter Purging
Salt, or Waters, is a most excellent Remedy, for the same reason that the Salt
of Wormwood, and Juice of Lemons, is so Famous, though this Salt is highly
preferrable to it, with one stroke destroying and carrying off the Peccant
Salts.

Also in the Cardialgia, or Heart-burning, and other pains of that kind, no
Medicines can be more safe and efficacious, nor in a hot Hypocondriack
Disposition.

In the forementioned Cases, I have sometimes prescribed the Purging Waters,
or Salt, without any other Medicine, but more often with the assistance of
other Remedies, as Bleeding, Vomiting, and the like; for it is not the part of a
prudent Physician, in dangerous Diseases, to trust his Patients Health, and his
own Reputation, to one only Medicine, though never so Famous.

Remedies of this kind may be infinitely varied according to the Indications.
Some Forms of which I shall here add.

For a lost Appetite.
Take of Spaw, or any other Chalybeate-Water, or if not to be had, Spring Water
Aromatiz'd with Mace, a Quart, or three Pints, of the Bitter Salt half an Ounce
six Drams, or an Ounce; drink it warm and fasting. And all sorts of
Chalybeate-Waters may be drank warm, which is better, and without the loss of
its subtle Spirit, by dipping a Bottle close stopped into hot Water for a few
Moments, and after pouring out a Glass, stopping it as before. While you take
these Waters an hour before Dinner, take also 20, 30, or 40 drops of Elixir
Proprietatis, in a Spoonful of Sherry or Hock, and Wormwood, and continue their
Use every Day, or every other Day, for four, five, or six times. Or,

Take of the Conserve of Roman Wormwood two Ounces, Garden-Scurvy-Grass an
Ounce, Candid-Ginger half an Ounce, Aromatick-Powder of Cloves a Dram and half,
of Winters Bark, of the true Salt of Wormwood, of each a Dram; with Sirrup of
Cloves make an Electuary, and take the quantity of a Nutmeg every Night going
to Rest; and of a small Wall-Nut every Day an hour before Dinner, with a little
Wormwood-Wine, if the Patient be not subject to the Headache.

Or, Take of the Filings of Steel new and shining 3 Ounces, Roman Wormwood half
a handful, Roman Cypress-Roots, Calamus Aromaticus, of each a Dram, Galangall
the less; Cinnamon and Saffron, of each half a Dram, White Wind or Sherry a
Quart, digest in a Vessel close stopped, with a gentle heat, for 3 Days, shaking
the Glass every Day, and take two or three, or four Spoonfuls, two hours before
Dinner.

In Vomitings.
Take of any Chalybeate-Water, or Maced-Water, three or four Pints, and
dissolve in it six, eight, or ten Drams of the Purging Salt, to be drank in the
Morning, hot or cold, as you please; and repeat it three or four Days
following; or every other Day, if there be occasion.

And to this join the Use of the following Pills.
Take of red Roses, of Cinnamon, of each a Dram, Cloves, Salt of Steell, of
each a Scruple, Saffron half a Scruple, Chimical Oil of Mint eight Drops, with
Sirrup of Steell; make 24 Pills. Take three every Day two Hours before Dinner,
and at Night going to rest. Sometimes a Fomentation of red Wine, with Venice
Treacle, red Roses, and Mint infused in it hot, is very profitable.

In a Bastard Colic.
Take Senna two Drams, Macea Dram, boil in Spring Water to three or four Pints.
Add to the strained Liquor six, eight or ten Drams of the Purging Salt. Take
this Apozem as there is occasion, either with or without Senna, and by it self,
or with the following Pills.

Take of Stomach Pills with Gums 25 Grains, of Steell-Filings powdered ten
Grains, with Syrup of Steel; make four Pills, to be taken going to rest, and
the Apozem as above, the following Morning, and repeat 'em for three Days
successively, or longer. Sometimes it is necessary to mix Extract of Gentian, or
some other Bitter with the Pills, and also a little Laudanum, if the Pain be
violent.

In a hot Hypocondriack Distemper.
Take of any Chalybeate-Water three or four Pints, dissolve in every draught
half a Dram or a Dram to eight times, and drink it cold. Or, instead of
Chalybeate-Waters, use simple Milk-Water, or distilled from Borrage or
Pimpernel.

In the Heart-Burning.
In this Disease the Salt, taken as in the former, will have very good success.

CHAP. IV. Of the Use of the Bitter Purging Salt in Diseases of the Intestines
and Parts adjacent: And first of the Colic.
IN this Disease there is no need to advise the Learned and Experienced
Physician in the first place to let Blood, and seldom or never to omit it. Then
it is most Advisable to give this or the like Glister.

Take of the common Decoction for Glisters one pound, with the addition of 3
Drams, or half an Ounce of Senna; to the Ingredients to it strained, add half
an Ounce, or more, of the Bitter Purging Salt, Species of Hiera Picra a Dram
and half, or two Drams, brown Sugar two Ounces From the Use of these, and the
like Glisters, Chollick Pains are often dissipated; at least, by their passing
up the Intestines, the way is opened.

Oftentimes Pill Rudii one Scruple, or half a Dram, with a Grain of Laudanum,
is given with good success. And sometimes crude Mercury, if the Patient will
swallow a sufficient quantity; that is, four, five, or six Ounces: Especially,
if taken with two Ounces of the Tincture of Hiera Picra in White Wind, or any
other proper Purging Medicine. But the most Noble, of all Remedies, is the
Purging Water, or the Salt taken in this, or the like manner.

Take of Spring or River Water, aromatiz'd Lib. iij, Chamomile Flower, or
Mint-Water six Ounces, Bitter Purging Salt an Ounce, or ten Drams, Flakey-Manna
an Ounce and half, or two Ounces; make an Apozem, and let the Patient take
about 17 Ounces at a time, hot, so often that the whole may be taken in an
hour, or an hour and half; yea, though some part of it be Vomited.

The force of this Medicine may be sometimes increased by the addition of the
following.

Take one or two Spoonfuls of the Tincture of Hiera Picra, before every draught
of the Apozem.

In Worms.
This Salt, if the Nurse give the Child a Dram and half, or two Drams, in its
Pap, 'twill exterminate the Worms, especially if the Physician will give before
it, in any proper Vehicle, a Grain or two, or three, of Mercurius Dulcis,
according to the Age of the Patient, or Chrystals of Silver.

Or if the Purging Salt be given in Bitter Glisters, in the Stone,
Here also, as well as in the Chollick, we must begin with Bleeding, which very
often requires a repetition.

To this, a Vomit is properly added of the Vinum Benedictum, or Salt of
Vitriol, especially if the Patient has a Nausea; by the force of which, the
Stomach, generally the offending part, is not only Unloaded, but the whole
Nervous Body continuous with the Kidneys, and in this case very much affected,
is mightily relieved.

Then give the following Glister, especially if no Stool succeeds the Vomit.

Take of Chamomile-Flowers a Handful, Seeds of Cummin, Sweet-Fennel, Parsley
bruised, of each an Ounce; Marshmallow-Roots, cut and bruised, two Ounces; boil
these in common Water to a Pint, in the strained Liquor dissolve
Venice-Turpentine an Ounce, the bitter Purging Salt half an Ounce, Syrup of
Althea three Ounces.

If the pain increases, add to the Glister 40 or 50 drops of Laudanum. These,
or the like Glisters, will frequently bring away the Urine, either with, or
without a Stone, or Stoney Matter, and the Pains vanish.

But if the pain continues stubborn, we must have recourse to the following
Apozem, as a most powerful Remedy.

Take of Barley-Water Maced 3 or 4 Pints, of the bitter Purging Salt 6 or 8
Drams, Syrup of Althea 3 or 4 Ounces, take this warm in an hour and halfs time,
more or less, although the Patient does Vomit some part of it.

In heat of Urine.
The abovementioned Apozem is effectual, whether it proceed from the Acrimony
of the Blood, or from a Venereal taint.

In suppression of Urine.
Which happens either without a Stone, or with so great a Stone as to stop the
Urinary passage.

But if this Disease has continued for some days, Bleeding, and that
plentifully, is the first thing necessary; then a sharp Glister, with Syrup of
Buckthorn, and the Purging Salt, must be Administered, and while it Works, drink
the forementioned Apozem, or some Draughts of it, and expect success,
especially if before every Draught you take a Spoonful of the following Mixture.

Of Fennel, and Saxifrage Water, of each an Ounce and half; Salt of Ambera
Dram, Tartar vitriolated a Scruple, Millepedes prepared two Drams, Syrup of
Althea an Ounce Mix.

In a Diabetes.
In which most dangerous kind of Disease, if there be need of a Medicine that
will gently purge, and cool very much, this is the safest of all purging
Medicines, and, indeed, the almost only one; by the help of which, and the
constant Use of the Chalybeate-Waters, I have recovered some young persons from
the very Gates of Death.

In the Jaundice.
Also in this Disease, bleeding is seldom to be omitted, but sometimes to be
repeated if the Patient be Feverish. Vomits are here very Useful, for as much
as they exterminate the Morbifick Sordes of the Stomach, as well as press out
the Boil stagnating in its Vessels; and therefore, if there be occasion, it
ought to be now and then repeated; but if the Use of these, or other Remedies,
prove unsuccessful, we may suspect the Biliary passage is stopped, either by
the bigness, or number of the Stones generated there: Therefore we ought to
persist in this Method prudently, and with courage.

In any sort of Jaundice, Calculous or Simple, the Purging Water, or its Salt,
is an excellent Medicine, given in this or the following manner.

Take Pill Ruffi half a Dram; Rhuburb, Volatile Salt of Urine, of each half a
Scruple, with Syrup of Wormwood; make 6 Pills, and take them at Night going to
rest. The Morning following take this Apozem:

Shavings of Hartshorn two Ounces, boil them in 3 or 4 Quarts of Water, to two;
then add Mace and Turmerick of each a Dram, boil a little, strain and add an
Ounce of the bitter Purging Salt, as much Syrup of Steell, and make an Apozem,
to be taken as above directed.

If the Physician sees fit, in the place of the Pills give the following
Draught.

Take of the Tincture of Hiera Picra an Ounce and a half, or two Ounces of
Syrup of Cichory, with Rhuhurb an Ounce, Tartar vitriolated half a Scruple; mix
and take it at six or seven in the Morning: Two Hours after drink the foregoing
Apozem, and repeat these Medicines at least every other Day. If Aloeticks are
too hot, give in their place the Infusion of Rhuburb.

CHAP. V. Of the Use of the Purging Salt in Cephalic Diseases: And first in
Madness.
Where, besides Bleeding and frequent Vomits, Chephalick Unguents, Setons in
the Neck, Vesicatories, especially to the Legs, Catharticks and other Remedies
are frequently used.

But to quicken the working of all, even the Helleborate Purges, nothing is
more proper than the Purging Water, or its Salt, prescribed after the following
manner:

Take of Bawm and Borrage of each a handful, infuse 'em in four or five Pints
of boiling Water, in a Vessel close stopped, for half an Hour. To the Infusion
strained add of the Bitter Salt ten Drams or less, Syrup of Violets three
Ounces; mix and make an Apozem, to be drank by it self; or, instead of
Posset Drink, with any other convenient Purge. Or, take 8 Drams of the Salt in
8 Draughts of the Spaw, or other Chalybeate Water, in a morning fasting.

In the Intervals of other Catharticks, especially in the Summer, it is very
beneficial, taken in the preceding Method; for it wonderfully quiets the raging
Disorders of the Humors and Perturbations of the Spirits.

In the Headache.
In which Distemper, especially arising from a hot Cause, or in a hot
Constitution, I have never found any thing so efficacious as the following
Method:

In the first place bleed a sufficient quantity, and from such Veins as the
Circumstances of the Patient do indicate.

This done, give a Vomit, if the strength will permit: After, let the Patient
take the following Medicines:

Of Scammony powdered, Rhubarb powdered, Mercurius dulcis, each half a Scruple,
or 12 Grains, with Syrup of Buckthorn, make five Pills, to be taken at four or
five in the Morning, and sleep after 'em: Three hours after drink the following
Apozem:

Of Water aromatiz'd with Mace 3 or 4 Pints, of the Purging Salt 6 Drams, or an
Ounce, Syrup of Violets two Ounces; mix and take it, keeping your Chamber.

Repeat this Apozem and Pills every 3d or 4th Day, and without the Pills in the
intervening Days; and continue this Method for a Fortnight or three Weeks, if
the Case require it.

In a Virtigo.
Here also we must begin with Bleeding in the Arms, especially if the Disease
be the consequence of too much drinking. Then apply Cupping Glasses with
Scarification to the Shoulders and hinder part of the Head. For in this
Disease, as well as in the former, and for Inflammations of the Eyes, I do
always prescribe 'em to that part rather than another, and with better success.

These things premised, take the following Pills, etc. Of Mastick Pills two
Scruples, Chemical Oil of Marjoram 5 Drops. Take 'em at night going to rest,
and next morning the following Apozem.

Of Spring Water aromatiz'd a Quart or three Pints, distilled Water of Sage
four Ounces, of Marjoram two Ounces, of the bitter Purging Salt 6 Drams or an
Ounce, mix and make an Apozem, to be taken as afore-mentioned.

Sometimes it is good to take before every Draught a Spoonful of the following
Mixture.

Of Marjoram and Sage of each two Drams, Roots of Gentian, Species of Hiera
Picra, of each two Scruples, White Wind four Ounces; digest 12 Hours in a close
Vessel, and clarify the expressed Tincture by settling.

CHAP. VI. Of the Use of the Bitter Purging Salt in some other Diseases: And
first in Hysterical Fits.
IN this Disease, after the most terrible Symptoms are quieted by Opiates, ten
or twelve Drams, or two Ounces of the Tincture of Hiera Picra in equal parts,
White Wind and Hysterical-water may be given, with very good success. But, if
the Physician thinks fit to purge with a more temperate Medicine, the bitter
Salt may be properly and safely taken; especially, if, in the room of the
Aromatiz'd Water, you use the Spaw or Bawm-water, as a Vehicle for the Salt.

In the Wandering Gout, vulgarly, but erroneously, called the Rhuematism.
For this seises the Muscular Parts only, and that none but the Joints. It Is a
stubborn Disease, and frequently eludes the force of many Medicines.

Bleeding must begin, and be repeated at least every other day, to four times;
and, if occasion, to five or six.

After the first or second time, a Vomit is very proper; for, as long as the
Stomach is disordered, it daily transmits a new supply of Morbifick Matter to
the Blood and Joints.

But Catharticks, and of the strongest, sometimes for several days together are
never to be omitted; for one strong purge does often weaken this Disease, more
than bleeding 3 or 4 times repeated.

But the operation of the Purging Waters, by the help of their Salt, when the
Patient is Feverish, (as they almost always are) is much more gentle, and
performed without any fermentation of the Humors, if taken in the following
manner.

Of the Powder of Resinous Jallap half a Dram, Scammony prepared six Grains,
Calamelany half a Scruple, with Syrup of Buckthorn; make a Bolus to be taken at
five in the morning, sleeping after it two or three Hours; and then drink the
following Apozem. Of Pearl-Barley an Ounce and half, Currance three Ounces;
boil in Spring Water to a Quart or 3 Pints, adding toward the latter end Mace
half a Dram, and when it is strained, of the bitter Salt an Ounce, Flakey-Manna
an Ounce, or an Ounce and half. If the Patient be difficultly wrought upon, and
other Indications require it, add to the first Draught six Drams, or an Ounce
of the Syrup of Buckthorn, and repeat the Bolus and Apozem every 3d or 4th day,
as the Physician shall Advise, or with longer Intervals, till the Patient be
perfectly recovered.

In the beginning and increase of the Disease, at least every other Night, and
always after a Purge, let a proper Opiate be given to prevent any new
Ebullitions of the Humors, and their Influx upon the joints. When Purging must
be forborne, because of a Fever, or the weakness of the Patient, Vesicatories
are applied above or below the Joint with very great benefit.

And sometimes the Serous Latex of the Blood is so very hot and fiery, that it
will not yield to the united strength of the forementioned Remedies, without
the help of Blisters, to separate some part of it from its remaining more
Balsamic and gentle. In this Disease, Sweats, though very plentiful, seldom
profit, but Diuretics very much; and therefore the Apozem, with the Purging
Salt, is very proper, working at the same time both by Urine and Stooll.

In the time of the Cure, abstain from all Wine, Vinous and Malt Drinks;
Posset Drink is, of all Liquors, the most proper for their constant Drink.

In a Scorbutic Itch,
Not Contagious, but arising from the Scurvy, and affecting sometimes the whole
Body; at others a particular part, as the Pudenda, etc. I have often Cured with
the Apozem alone, without any other Purgings; and some perfectly tired out and
tormented with perpetual scratching. I Have blessed with a happy Deliverance,
especially if you join with the Use of the Apozem the Chalybeate-Waters, and
drink them daily and plentifully instead of Malt Drink.

This Apozem is likewise very profitable when the Smallpox are dried off, and
may very properly be drank with common Catharticks instead of Posset Drink.

Lastly, It Is good for Travelers, who by much riding, especially in the
Summer, are generally Costive; but two or three Drams of this Salt, in a
Draught of Spring Water, will cool and relieve them.

CHAP. VII. Of the Abuse of the Bitter Waters and their Salt.
IT IS the Duty of a Physician, not only to show the Use of Remedies, but also
to Admonish the Reader of their Abuse, by which he prevents a treble injury to
himself, to the Patient, and the Medicine; therefore this Salt must not at all
be used in some Diseases, and in others with particular respect had to the
Causes and Symptoms.

In all Hydropicks it is hurtful doubtless, because the Natural heat of the
Blood is decayed, and the Spirits contained in the Grumous part of it are very
poor.

Moreover, in such persons, the Use of moist things, though in their Food, do
increase the Influx of the Serum of the blood into the Morbid parts.

It Is also improper in a Synochus, where though the Cause of the Disease must be
sometimes lessened by Purges, yet such must be moderately hot, as the bitter
Potion, Pill Ruffi, and the like, by which the Concoction of the Humors may,
at the same time, be promoted; and therefore all things that cool too much
ought to be avoided.

Nor is it good for such as labor under Intermittent Fevers.

Nor in a Chlorosis, or Green Sickness, where warm Fermentations must be
excited; and because the Humors are too Acid, they must be altered with
stronger Alkalies.

This Salt is also forbidden to all that spit Blood, lest by its exquisite
Subtilty, and penetrative Force, it should tear open the Mouths of the Arteries.

And in the Cholera Morbus, where violent wastings of the Spirits do attend, as
sudden Evacuations.

To the quieting such turbulent and overhasty Motions of Nature, Cordials and
Opiates are to be given by intervals; but, after the Disease is tamed, if
Evacuation be needful, the Patient of a Bilious Constitution, whether Natural
or Accidental, he may take this Salt with a good prospect of success.

It Is not proper for Paralyticks, lest it more enervate the Muscles, already
destitute of their native Heat and Vigor. But, if the Disease arise from a hot
Cause, as Wine, or Vinous Liquors, this Salt may be given safely and profitably
to the Patient.

It Is not to be given Women with Child, without a great deal of Caution.

Nor in a suppression of Urine, before you certainly know it does not proceed
from an Ulcer of the Bladder, or a large Stone; for in both Cases the Patient
ought to abstain from all Diuretics. Otherwise we have given it with admirable
success; I mean, for the forcing away of Urine and Stones of no little
magnitude.

FINIS.

