A-la-mode PHLEBOTOMY NO GOOD FASHION: OR, THE COPY OF A LETTER TO Dr.
HVNGERFORD, Complaining of, and Instancing in the Fantastic Behavior and
Unfair Dealing of some London Physicians when they come to be Consulted withal
about Sick Persons living at a Distance from them in the Country.

Whereupon a Fit Occasion is taken to Discourse of the Profuse Way of Blood:
Letting formerly unheard of, though now adays so mightily in Request amongst us
here in England.

By RICHARD GRIFFITH of Richmond in Surrey. M. D. Formerly Fellow of University
Coll. in Oxon, and now Fellow of the Coll. of Physicians of LONDON.

(...).

Phocylid. LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Joseph Hindmash, at the Black Bull in
Cornhill. 1681.

TO THE READER.
READER:
I Know 'twill be expected, and it is, I confess, no more than what is
Reasonable, that I should here give thee some Brief Account of the Causes
inducing me to make these ensuing Lines Public. If either I, or another man
have received any Personal Injuries in Relation to our selves or our
Professions, what has the World to do with that? Those, and those only, are to
be made Acquainted therewith, whose Particular Concernment it is to Arbitrate,
and do Acts of Justice between Man and Man. To raise a Hue and Cry for the Loss
of every Triffle, and set the Beacons a burning upon the Approach of every
Petty and Inconsiderable Vessel? would make but a strange kind of Disturbance
in a Kingdom or Commonwealth: And no less degree of Madness may it appear to
be, for Men of Private Condition to write Letters of Sad Complaints to one
another about the Matters appertaining to their own Particular Affairs, and
then to put them in Print when they have done, with an Epistle before an
Epistle, and Solemn Appeals to the whole Body of the People to pass their
Verdict upon the Case, who are most like to be in the Right, and who in the
Wrong.

And then to make a Description at large how such an one was taken Ill, and
what several Sorts of Medicaments were thought upon by one Physician, which
were all again disallowed of by another; and so by that means, to swell up a
Public Narrative with little else beside an Account of their own Fewds and
Janglings, and Paltry Discontents may seem to be an Enterprise of just as
weighty a Concernment as the other was before, and undertaken to every whit as
Wise and Useful a Purpose: Because if they do fall out or fall in, as the
People are wholly uninteressed in the Quarrel, so are they likely to be neither
much the better nor the worse which Party soever gets the Victory. Is it not
usual for most men whose Livelihood comes in after the same Manner to Wrangle
and Squabble, and render one another as Despicable as they can, to the end that
those who appear to be the Bravest Champions in the Encounter may be able to
bear away the Greatest Share of the Employment to their own Side? And is it not
enough for the Spectators to be set a Laughing at them for their Foolery when
they do so? But that Proclamation must be made for all others that would be apt
to pass by without taking the least Notice of what had happened, to be invited
to come in and deride them likewise.

These two, as they lie the fairest in the Way, so are they the most Material
of all other Objections beside, that I can think of; and could we but get clear
of them, I see no great Reason to the contrary, but that the whole of what has
been Propounded, did it not fail in some Points relating to the Manner of its
Performance, might be looked upon as Passable enough; but that is a Thing not
at all to be either Disputed or Justified by us here in this Place; but rather
to be left to the more impartial Determination of such, as shall be willing to
be at the Trouble thoroughly to examine it.

As for what concerns the former of these, I have only this to plead on my own
behalf, That notwithstanding the Instances put may indeed seem to have a
Respect, but to one or two particular Persons at the most. Yet the Reason of
the thing is of a much larger Extent as comprehending under it no less than a
whole Community of Men; there being scarce a Country Physician now living in
England, but who either has been already, or else at some time or other in
probability may come to be involved therein; and therefore what has been
affirmed of one or two, may in a Sense proper enough be applied to them all in
General: And then the Benefit arising from the Memorandum's given, can never be
excepted against as restrained unto a few.

And albeit it be scarcely to be imagined for any actually Resident in the
Country to be so invincibly Stupid, as not to be convinced beforehand, of the
Truth of what they shall find asserted, either through their own Experience, or
the Complaints of those they at some times or other may happen to have had
Communication withal. Yet ought it not however to be esteemed of as lost
Labor, to be confirmed in the Belief of what they knew to be so, by the
concurrent Testimony of others besides themselves. The doing so friendly an
Office may serve as an Additional Corollary to their Heap, and be useful to
them, if for no other purpose, yet at leastwise to excite their Care and awaken
their Diligence for the preventing such Inconveniences for time to come, as
without it might possibly have been so much the more apt to have befallen them.

But as for such young Gentlemen, who are in a manner unacquainted with the
World, and who living still in the Universities, have both their way of
Employment and Place of Residency as yet wholly to choose: Such an Allarm^s
this may prove to be of much greater Consequence to them; for they by making a
due Improvement of so Seasonable an Advertisement, may consider the better how
to dispose of their own Affairs, and not be ensnared in a Noose all on the
sudden, they never so much as dreamt of, as thousands others have been before
them, to the utter undoing both of themselves and Families, as might be easy
to show how and which way; but that all is so manifestly discovered in the
Sequel of this Tract. I shall therefore make the more haste to the other
Objection as yet behind.

And here again, though the Examples produced may be but one or two for Number,
yet are they virtually as many as the Inhabitants dispersed up and down the
whole Nation; who might all of them have been served with the very same Sauce,
had they but fallen under the same circumstances the others did, and but sent
for the same or suchlike Wise and Faithful Counselors to have afforded them
their Assistance, or may yet in good time, when ever the like Difficult
Occasion happens to present it self: And then neither can the Usefulness of
what has been Observed be manely a ^le to Exception upon the latter Score.
Because all such as in succeeding Times shall chance to fall ill of any
Dangerous Distempers have an Item given them, if they please to take ^t, of
diverse Material Points; which o^herwise perchance they would not have been
altogether so well aware of. As first of all to take it into their Serious
Consideration, Whether or no it may not be much better to make a Beginning with
a London Physician, if it must ^ome to that at last, as a surer means ^o engage
him to the greater Faithfulness and Circumspection in what he Undertakes.

Secondly, Whether having consult^d with a Neighbor at the First, it may ^ot
be adjudged convenient to Adhere ^o much the closer to his Directions.

Thirdly, Or if it shall be held meet ^o seek out for an Assistant, that may be
Partaker of the same Cares: It may ^ot be good Advice to make choice of ^
Person as well remarkable for Honesty, as Learning; it being the most likely
for such an one to be Contriver of the least Mischief, as well as to be in a
Capacity of doing the greatest Good. My Meaning is to have it well weighed,
whether such men as cannot be denied to have a Competent Stock of Learning in
their Heads, but withal are known to have a great deal more of Pride and
Malice, and other suchlike Naughty Principles in their Hearts* may not be apt
to pull down more with one Hand, than they are able to set up again with both,
and so prove in the Issue instead of Helpers to be the greatest Hinderers of
all.

Or Lastly, to have it debated, Whether or no some earnest Injunction t^ deal
clearly and uprightly in the Matters they are entrusted withal, without either
Prejudice or Humor, or Affectation of Vain Glory, or out of any other
By-respect whatever, besides purely the good and welfare of the Patient they
are sent for to Consult about, may be e're a whit unseasonable. I know some
will be apt to smile at this last, as supposing it to be a mere Folly to go
about to oblige those by Obsecrations and Entreaties, that could never be
prevailed upon by any Sense of Honor and Conscience, and the Engagements they
have sometimes taken: But then they are such as have neither Conscience nor
Honesty, to which an Obligation (if to any thing) ought to be fastened; that we
have been all this while speaking about, and so they are soon answered.

Besides, It Is none of the smallest Obligations they lie under, to treat one
another civilly as often as they meet together in Consultation; which Rule, how
well it is observed, the many Slanders, Backbitings, and sometimes open
Reproaches, which are wont to fall out upon that Occasion, do more than
sufficiently witness: And then let any one show me a Reason why those that are
false to their Engagements in one Respect, should not as well be the same to
them in another, whenever it suits with their Interest to be so? And though,
it is true, a good Man may do well for the Sake of Virtue alone, and though he
should have no Supervisor at all to oversee him in his Actions: It Is neither
impossible nor unlikely but that the Bad may receive the Surest Check of all to
put a stop to the fullest Career of their evil Practices from some Accidental
Considerations; such as is the Fear of Shame, and Censure, and Public Report:
And if they have any feeling left them what the meaning of these things is,
it is scarcely imaginable but that they should have the Faculty ^omething the
more quickened and rubbed up, when they perceive their Do^ngs pryed into, and
had in Suspicion by other men.

Some other things there are, which were all people but so Charitable or
^ngenuous as to take in the sense they were either intended or did naturally
^mport, would stand in little need of ^n Apology, they are so Innocent and
Harmless; as namely, the Insisting for ^o long a time together upon the
Sickness of a single Person; the seeming Reflections that are made in some
Passages upon the Female Sex, and the cause of Scandal offered to all
Physicians ^n general, by laying so foul Aspersi^ns to the Charge of some of
their Particular Members. But in regard there are so many turbulent Spirits in
the World, apt to cavil at, and pervert the Meaning of almost every thing they
meet withal, that is but capable of a wrong Interpretation as well as a right.
I shall, for their Sakes, and for the preventing any ill Consequences that
might be apt to ensue upon their distorted Commentaries, crave leave to add a
few words for the Vindication o^ them also.

In answer to the First, of which i^ may not be altogether unworthy the Noting,
that the Composing huge large Volumns, filled with nothing else but the
Observations that have been made by Physicians upon the variou^ Estates of
several Diseased People, and the Remedies applied to each of them together with
the different Successes and Events that have followed thereupon was never (that
I could yet hear of looked upon by any (though the mos^ Critical in their
Judgments) as any matter of Absurdity at all: And then wha^ just Reason can
there be assignable, wh^ the same Favor should not be allowe^ of, when an
Example comes forth unaccompanied and single by it Self, especially seeing such
a Case is like to be so much the more narrowly sifted into, and set forth with
all its Circumstances; whereas many things of a like Nature thronging in a
Crowd together, cannot be attended to with an equal Regard, but must, and will
of necessity prove an hinderance to one another.

Whence it often happens, that what might very well have deserved a more
serious and thorough Disquisition, comes to be huddled over with too much
Brevity; which in all Cases is no other than the immediate Parent of Obscurity,
and the Grandmother of Confusion and Mistakes, and by that means a Necessity is
occasioned of making Repetition of the same things several times over; as we
find it in diverse Authors, which had they been handled more copiously at the
first, and debated upon with that deliberation which the matter might have
required, might have served but once for all; and those other Tautologies which
we meet withal so often afterward, have very well been spared.

And then in the Second and Third Places, for the Reason is one and the same to
both; because some few of a Kind or Profession have been represented as
Blameworthy; therefore, to imagine that either any others, or all the rest of
those Orders, who neither are, nor ever were intended to be such, should find
themselves agrieved thereat, is just such another wild and fantastical Surmise,
As to suppose that all the Individual Persons belonging to any Community
whatever, should be either Wise, or Learned, or Good; if that could but be made
out for an Hypothesis to build upon, then indeed the taxing of any one of the
whole Rank, might well be interpreted an insuring of them all: As they say it
fares with the Strings of some Musical Instruments (...) a Room together, if
wound up to an equal height; touch one, and you would stir them all: But so
long as the contrary is known to be most undeniably true, it can be no
Disparagement to the best Societies in the World to have it spoken, because so
easily to be proved that there have been, are, and ever will be some Faulty
persons amongst them. Nay, it is so far from being any Diminution at all to the
Worth of those that are in no wise guilty, that it commends it but the more,
and sets it off with so much the purer a Luster: Because had there been no
Vice, there would have been no Virtue; and were it not for the Badness of some
Men and Women in the Wotld, there could never possibly have been any Good. Nay
the very World it self, setting aside Monsters and Prodigies, and other
suchlike Deformities of Nature, could never in any sound Sense have been said
to have been made perfect; because this Comparison above, gives Beauty and
Ornament to most of the things that are found in it, which would have neither
the one nor the other if considered in themselves. We account some Persons to
be Discreet, and Just, and Temperate, but they are the Fools, and Knaves, and
Debauches that make them such. And those very Ladies which are wont to Attract
the Eyes, and engage the Affections of almost every one they come a near,
little think how much they stand indebted to the Blemishes of some of their own
Sex for the place they hold in the good Opinion of their Admirers. And
therefore I can see no reason why any Women, whose Displeasure is worth the
serving, should pretend to take any thing amiss that can be said of them as
deserve to hear ill. Not only because there can be no great hurt in Slandering
any one with a matter of Truth, but upon the very account of their own
Interest: For if they are such as most Women would be thought to be, and I,
for my part, am willing to believe they are, unless the Faults and
Misdemeanors of those who are their Foils, had by some means or other happened
to have been rendered conspicuous: Those very Qualifications, upon the Score of
which they are wont so highly to value themselves, had never in the least
measure come to have been taken notice of.

And this might very well have sufficed for the answering each of the two
Particulars at once, might it have been but applied in the same proportion it
bears to both of them alike. But in regard so much has been spoken in order to
the excusing a word or two, and that when let fall but by the by only; because
a little slenting upon that Sex, which is so much given to take Exceptions:
Whereas the very Scope and Drift of the whole Design has been for no other end
(as the Title Page truly enough seems to intimate) then the exposing the
Unworthy Dealing of some Physicians to public Scorn and Contempt. I cannot but
hold my self obliged in the best sort I can, to bespeak the formable Opinion of
those Learned and Worthy Persons, who though wearing the same Titles, and
inhabiting the same Place with them, do yet (I believe) as much abhor and
detest their Leiger du Main Tricks, as either I my self or any other man; and I
do hope, and rest pretty well assured, That as there has not been any one
Syllable of ought spoken by me intended to their Prejudice: So that neither it
will be so understood by them. I do from my Heart believe the Generality of
Physicians now living in London, to be the most Able, Learned, and every way
well qualified Persons of any that are to be found again of the Profession
throughout all Europe beside, as they have ever had the Honor, and that most
deservedly, to be accounted of. The more then the pity, that these their good
Parts should be abused to so ill purposes, by some rotten and corrupt Members
amongst them; and so much the more need (one would think) there should be to
set some Marks of distinction to difference the one from the other. And if I
out of a Fit of Zeal for the public Good, rather than any great depth of
Judgment, have been so little mindful of my own private Interest, as to set a
helping hand to the promoting that which I conceived to be so honest an
Undertaking; I hope no good Man will see any just reason wherefore to be
offended with me for it. I may perchance deserve something of his Pity for
intermedling in a Brangling Business, which might have been much better for me,
to have passed over in Silence, but surely nothing at all of his Displeasure.
Particular Premises can never include any sufficient medium, for the warranting
any Universal Conclusions. No more can the vicious Inclinations of some few of
a Profession affix any just matter of Ignominy upon the Reputation of those
that are good; But enough of this has been already spoken to under the former
Head, which if it shall not be adjudged Satisfactory, I have only one short
Request to make to them to whom it is not, and that is, That they would be
pleased but to make the Case their own: as to speak the Truth of it, It Is
impossible for any one rightly to apprehend the Concernments of another man,
unless he do so.

Let such but imagine themselves to have been at a great deal of Cost, and
Pains, and Expense of Time more valuable than the other two; to have fitted and
qualified themselves for an Employment for the Service of their Country; and
when they had used their utmost Diligence in order to the attaining that End,
and had at last pitched upon a place of Abode every way commodious to their
liking: How would they whistle it to have a Malepert man of their own Rank (and
some years their Junior in that College, whose very Statutes obliges each
Member belonging to it, to a civil respectfulness one toward another) without
other provocation or Cause of distaste given him, other than what proceeded from
the Malignity and Depravedness of his own cankred Nature;) sally forth amongst
their Patients, and there bestir himself the best he could to possess their
minds with wrong Notions of their Distempers and prejudices against all
rightful ways of Cure taken by them, and all this out of a wanton Humor to
bring them into a Disrepute with their Neighbors, and to convert the good
opinion they might otherwise have been apt to have had of them into a mere
Loathing and Abhorrency.

Nay, let me yet put the Question a little further home, and ask them, Whether
or no, if they had right on their side, and were able to make it appear so to
the World, they would forbear to use the only means that was left them, for the
justifiing themselves and Actions, for fear of giving offense to such as had no
just reason to take any; and so out of I know not what scrupulousness of fancy
suffer their own Credits, and the lives of their Patients, so often as the same
Project came to be renewed, to lie at the mercy of those who never had, nor
were never like to have any regard at all to either. If they say they should
not, as it is most probable they will, then neither am I by their own
confessions to be blamed for what I have done; but if they should, though the
groundless scrupulosity of some be no warrantable Rule for others to take
example by; I care not much however, for this one time, if I do submit my self
to the most rigorous severity even of their own Award; and so let them censure
me as they think fit. And now I have made this bold challenge, I cannot foresee
that so great hazard I am like to run thereby; because to be a Sot and a Dunce
and an utter Ignoramus are the highest of Titles, the learned Rabbis, I have
been endeavoring to decypher by their good would ever allow us poor Country
Physicians to be in any capacity of attaining unto; as the constant series of
their deportment toward us, and sometimes their discourses bolted out
occasionally make evidently enough to appear: And then I Would fain know what
sinister Accident that can possibly befall us in any undertaking we set about,
can render our Persons more contemptible or our Condition much worse. But be it
as it will, whatever may become of me and my small concernments when the
business is brought to the upshot; I do not altogether despair but that (as it
falls out with the unhappiest Projectors) some benefit may chance to redound to
others, though I my self should be made a loser thereby, and that will be the
compensation for the prejudice I am put to sustain, every way as ample as I
desire.

It was, for ought I know, and, which is somewhat more, am apt to believe, and
now and then when I think upon it seriously to please my self (I confess) with
the conceit thereof) prove an occasion of the saving much useful Blood and
Spirits in the Bodies of a multitude of good people, who upon the reading over
the Arguments contained in this little thing (though prosecuted I must needs
acknowledge with weakness enough) shall not be altogether so forward to lend an
ear to every plausible pretension, as otherwise they would have been.

And it is not altogether impossible, but that some who by one chance or other
may happen to peruse these Lines, and are withal conscious to themselves of
having deserved the Character they shall find bestowed upon them (though it is
very likely withal they would never be brought to acknowledge so much) may when they
perceive their Actions taken notice of, be induced so far forth to reform their
manners, as not to insult over their equals in every thing but pride and
conceitedness, with half that dominering Lordliness that formerly they were
wont. And it be but out of fear that as the thing is come to be commonly known,
so the next time they come to act it in public, it may as publicly be laughed
at.

And to speak the plain Truth of the matter, though I all along make my self a
party principally concerned; the occasion that has been offered is admitting of
no other way of management. Or at leastwise this being the best that my dull
and barren fancy was able to suggest to me; yet the main Scope I have from
first to last intended, has layen couched under these two particulars
beforementioned, which if I obtain, I shall have had my end; but if I miss of
it, though every thing else should succeed that may seem desirable upon any,
or indeed all other accounts besides whatever, it will signify but very little
or nothing to me. But I both must, and shall for ever look upon my self to have
been totally disappointed.

As for what concerns the lateness of this Publication, so long after the
occasion given: I have only one short word to allege in the vindication of my
self, which is, That though I had finished what I have now written timely
enough yet there being some things contained in it of a reflecting nature,
which could not be avoided. And I being then engaged in a business, the most
important of all others to the concernments of Humane Life; which was not to be
meddled withal and any thing like Controversy at the same time. I was in a
manner compelled to give respit to the one, till I had fully accomplished the
other.

Farewell.

SIR,
HAving been lately informed of a pleasant passage befalling you in your
practice concerning your Patient. Sir H. F. I have made bold to be a little
curious in enquiring into the truth thereof; and so much the rather, because
the Catastrophe excepted in very many particulars, more than a little
resembling a Case I have had of my own.

I was given to understand how, that after Sir. H. F. upon a Fall he had
received near Windsor, was committed to your care. A Physician from London, by
the importunities of some friends of his, was brought down to visit him. How
that the many Arguments of their Discourse insisted upon almost all the way
they came, was to bewail the lamentable Condition of the unfortunate Gentleman,
whose hard hap it had been to catch his harm so far distant from London; the
only place (as they conceived) where the means of Relief in that and the like
dangerous misadventures was to be sought for; That his Lady was much to be
blamed for not looking out for better advice sooner, and for having so little
reason with her, as to rely upon the fumbling skill of a poor Country Doctor.

How that the Learned Man, so soon as ever he was carried into the Parlour, was
observed bitterly to inveigh against the irregularity of your Prescriptions;
without so much as taking time to see any, or hear any account given of what
had passed before his coming thither; most magisteriously to have issued forth
his orders for the taking away of thirty Ounces of Blood from your Patients
Arm, Peremptorily alleging there was an absolute necessity for so doing: The
only possible scruple remaining with him, being this; whether or no such
wholesome advice might not come somewhat of the latest, through the supine
neglect of those foolish people who had been all this while about him to so
little purpose; as the usual pretense upon such occasions is wont to be with
all the Fraternity of like Principles with himself; so that if the Business had
come to have succeeded well, the credit of the Action, had been wholly his, if
otherwise, the Odium and Disgrace thereof had fallen to your share. A pretty
trim Invention this, and a cheap way of gaining glory to ones self; because
hazarding nothing at all the mean while for it; unless it be a Patients life;
or another man his good name; or so forth: A couple of petty and inconsiderable
things.

I hear, how that the Lady was a little surpised at such unwonted confidence;
and considering with her self; that he had lost Thirty Ounces already, was not
altogether so forward as was expected, to give entertainment to this so sudden
a motion; whereupon she was severely chidden for her waywardness; and given
further to understand, that unless his commands were punctually observed, her
Husband was, in reason, to be looked upon as no other than a lost man; and so
she might do even as she pleased, choose whether she would have his Life saved
when it was offered, or not: But she, it seems, being a Person to be swayed
with some thing else, besides passionate words, and big looks, remained utterly
disatisfied with these his hasty conclusions, and absolutely refused to follow
his directions, unless happening to be seconded by your approbation: that the
Doctor was bemadded thereat, threatened a departure out of Town, at break of
day, next morning, (pretending I know not what urgency of occasions) unless
your more early arrival there happened to prevent him. All which subterfuges not
serving his turn; but you appearing beyond expectation, and both disliking and
confuting his councels, and they thereupon being rejected as unsafe; I am
credibly informed the Gentleman to have been restored to some memory again, and
as well recovered of his Malady (all circumstances duly considered) as would
reasonably have been expected.

If it be so, Sir, I heartily congratulate your safe escape, from this notable
underminding stratagem, that was so artificially contrived, for the blowing up
of your reputation, and glad I am with all my heart, that the inventer thereof
(be he who he will) was so luckily catched in the same trap, he had designed
for another. Truly such a facetious story as this is, deserves to be laughed at
right heartily; because ending Commically: but had the Plot taken effect, and
the blame of the miscarriage lighted upon your head, together with the loss of
your Patients life to boot, ^'de fain know, how either you, or the wisest man
living in your stead, could have been able to have helped your selves.

Give me leave to tell you, Sir, that you have run a kind of desperate hazard;
because happening to be brought of by a mere contingency, all the security you
had being bottomed upon the slight Basis, of but a single woman's opinion: And
where there is one in that or a like case, the decision of the point being
referred to their arbitrament, would have given it on your side, there are five
hundred would have inclined to the opposite party; and have been apt to have
cried out without any further examination of the matter, that the doctor from
London had said it, and it must needs be so: Ay indeed must it, Ay and all
that, and a great deal more; and this had passed for an argument as
irrefragable as demonstration it self: as good have set your self against a
Torrent with a pitchfork, as to have presumed to have muttered the least
syllable in opposition against it. But all must have been done, and you must
e'ne have suffered: There had been no remedy: For if he had dyed, no body had
killed him but you, for not causing him to be let blood in a sufficient
quantity sooner. But if he had happened to survive, then the Gentleman from
London, had shown himself an incomparable Artist and performed an unexemplified
cure, not only saved a man's life, that is a matter of small moment with such
rare Practicioners, but what is somewhat more dificult, restored him to his
senses and memory again: which without the interventions of his happy
assistance had been irrecoverably lost. Then had not only the Patient himself,
but his Dependents and Family been indebted for their preservation, to this
most excellent person: And it had been an obligation of so endearing
circumstances, as never to have admitted of a plenary recompense by any
possible acknowledgments, that could for ever after that have been paid him:
Then had he rode back to London in most triumphant manner, vaunting and boasting
in all the companies he had come into of the happy relief he had given to one
in the country, just at the very instant of being cast away, through the ill
mannagery and want of skill of one that passed for a Doctor amongst them. And
then the Country Doctors, they must have been frumped and scoffed at; just as
the poor Curates are wont to be at an Act or Commencement, and forced to look
simply, so often as they had chanced to meet with any that had been disposed to
have been pleasant with them. And now what a sad and woeful condition are you,
and I, and a hundred more of us in, who by the inauspiciousness of the Planets
we were born under, are condemned to take up our Abodes in Country villages, to
be thus always liable to such disadvantages as these are, and left to the mercy
of a part of extravagant hotheads, to put tricks upon us at their pleasure.

He that is a Heathen in his principles, and a mere Atheist in his practice, in
fine, that is either a fool or a knave, or both or all together, whether he be
Emperick, or Surgeon, or Apothecary, or Legal Physician, if coming but fron
London, and dignified with the Title of a City Doctor, he carries all before
him; and is at liberty to make havoc of us, with the turning of a finger, in
spite of all the defense in nature, we are capable of making for our selves;
Unless through their own hair-brained, rash actions they happen to be plunged
into a manifest absurdity; as in the case but newly recited; and another of
mine parallel to it as shall be showed anon.

As thus; the evidence of the matter appears as transparent as Crystal, and he
who has but half an eye in his head, cannot choose but be made sensible of it,
at the very first blush; All we who live near the City, must unavoidably upon
the declining condition of our best Patients, evermore be Subject to have some
or other of them to be brought down upon us. The new Physician is like the
riseing Sun; every ones eye is cast upon him for some Ray of comfort: his
presence always brings hope along with it, at least, though it should afford
nothing more, And what ever falls from his mouth, hit or miss, is usually
esteemed of by the company as little less then Oracle. The women never fail to
gather about such a one at his first arrival; whose hearts as they are ever
tender, so are their tongues talkative: And I pray, Good Sir cry they, what may
your Judgment be in this matter, life or death? we have had a restless night
here: such and such things have been administered before your coming: we wish
they may not have been too hot nor too cold: Do you believe them to have been
all proper? Ah! this is luscious language to a proud heart and a haughty mind!
this feeds the swelling humor till it be ready to burst again, and this
flyblows the man's head with conceitedness, so as to make him utterly forgetful
of his duty both to himself and others: For whilst the bladder of pride is thus
bloated up, he takes himself for some other Creature then what really he is,
and looks upon all his equals with pity and disdain. And now he is put into the
way his Genius so much inclines him to, he may very well be let alone to act
his own part: For seeing others have been forward to declare the good liking
they have of him, he is resolved not to be over-bashful in setting a value upon
himself; be domineers, and he dictates, and his sentences are all irreversable,
admitting of neither disquisition, alteration nor appeal; but must all be
submitted to with a blind obedience, and an implicate faith: and nothing in
fine can ever be performed regularly, and as it ought, unless happening to
agree with the exact platform of this wise contrivance. There is no tutor
insults more imperiously over his young pupil, then some that I could name, do
over those they are super-induced to consult withal: especially if they find
any of the family peeping in upon them to make observation of their Actions:
for then something must be spoken in a key higher then ordinary: Some latent
Error upon a more serious review discovered, and the pen snatched out of the
others hand to mend it withal, and if it be but on purpose to show who gives
check to the consultation, and where alone the Legislative Power lies.

It Is true if he be a man of uprightness and integrity, as there is a number of
such in this City, to give them their just due: then he either Justifies what
was done formerly, if in ^his conscience he believes the Physician to have
proceeded according to the rules of art. But if otherwise: he fairly debates
the matter with him, and labors either to convince him by making it appear
where the mistake ^ay, and is willing upon your reasons shown by the other to
be overcome by him: and brought over to his opinion.

But if on the other hand as is not seldom seen (and we have already supposed)
he proves to be disingenious and base, and devoide of that moral honesty, which
all Physicians by their education, and some by virtue of their relation to
particular Societies are more especially obliged to, as there is no profession
of men whatever, but must of necessity have some that are bad amongst them.
Then he projects all the ways he can how to salve his own credit, and consign
the other over to the condemning power of the giddy multitude, who as they are
always ready to take up the most malicious slanders upon Trust without so much
as examining the reasonableness of them, whether likely to be true or false; so
are they as industrious to improve a calumny to the utmost; and help it forward
with all the agravating circumstances, it can possiibly admit of.

He usually tells them for his part, that truly he could have wished it had been
his fortune to have been sent far sooner. Several things being proper to be
done at the beginning, which are not altogether so seasonable at the full
height of a distemper, much less at what time Nature is almost overcome; but
that which he prescribes is the only thing as the case then stands* possible to
do the party good, and if that will not, he knows nothing else can.

There are degrees of wickedness, and if the man be not fully fledged therein,
it may be this reprehension shall serve the turn, which though but gentle in
comparison of the unmercifulness of some others, yet (if believed) is of
sufficient validity to clip the wings of his Antagonists (for such he esteems
and such he takes him to be,) so as to keep him from ever soaring over-high in
the good opinion of his neighbors. But now if he bent to be mischievous
indeed, either through the propensity of his own nature or prompted to be so by
the instigation of others: Then he goes a down right way to work, and finds
fault with every kind of thing right or wrong that has been made use of, before
his coming: And all the questions he makes are raised for no other intent
whatever, but merely to deprave.

Was the Patient let blood, why what cools or chils him? There being more need
of Addition then Substraction, of pouring fresh into his veins (could it
conveniently be effected) rather then letting any out, because in this case the
distemper is to be carried off by fervent and a more quick Circulation of the
blood, whereas now it Restagnates and Suffocates the man, who might have done
as well as any one in England, had he not most unfortunately happened to have
been abused and over-tampered withal.

But if there was no blood at all taken away, why then the case becomes clearly
altered, and that was the only Remedy Imaginable, and ought to have been
celebrated upon any condition; but now it is too late, the humors being all
quarred and settled about the Noble parts, which might easily have been drawn
away by Revulsion when time was. And then he gives a grave no^ with his head,
and a shrug with his shoulder as intimating some worse business then all that
to lie behind, which he good man out of mere modesty and pity to the others
ignorance, is heartily ashamed to make mention of.

If he finds he has been purged pretty titely, that has utterly dejected
Nature: if but gently, then it has done the more mischief, by stirring the
humors only, and not thoroughly removing them, if moderately and between both
extremes, then 'twas wholly improper, and should not have been done at all,
but he should rather have been sweated or vomited, or any other course taken
with him then that which was, and the like is to be said indeed of any other
application what ever. All which, and a great deal more, being most maliciously
suggested by him, and with the same Rancorousness of mind entertained by the
Gossips of the place, (I speak in the general, and would have my words taken as
they are intended, in reference to the whole English Nation) who are always
ready at hand to make their observations how matters go; Away they run with it
immediately, and happy is that Woman that can make the first step over her
neighbors threshold, to carry a Report of these lamentable Tidings; how that
the Doctor from Land, is just now come, and says there might have bin an other
gets course taken with the Patient than was; and had he bin but sent for
sooner, he could most undoubtedly have saved his Life. Upon which, without
farther proof, taking all for granted to be as it is related, they both lift up
their hands to Heaven, and bless themselves, that one who pretends any thing to
Physic, should be so strangely overseen; and yet now they think ^on't again,
who could ever have expected any other from him; for they, for their parts,
never took him for any other then a pitiful shallow-brain'd man; And this puts
them ^n mind how such a one, and such a one di^d under his hands, and they lay
much after ^he same manner too, and none of them were blooded neither, and
truly they be^ieve them to have all gone after the same way, and to have been
merely destroyed for want of an able Physician.

I Would have such silly souls as these are, but consider a little with
themselves, whether the place where Physicians have their education be not one
and the same to all; and when they have done that, peruse the weekly bills of
Mortality in London, and see if they don't find some figures there as well as
all Ciphers; Nay if the Numbers of their dead do not equal, to say no more,
those amongst us in the Country, all due proportions being alow'd; and then let
all the world judge if these bold Undertakers be not hugely to be credited,
that can have the impudence to talk thus

There are some Stratagems never to be made use of above once; and if they do
happen to come about a second time, are sure to be discovered, provided
against, and bafled but here is a piece of Artifice beyond all Precedent, never
to be worn Threadbare or ou^ of fashion, but like the never failing Cordial it
self holds out everlastingly; and recours^ may be had to it upon every
occasion, An^ as it has been Practiced time out of min^ (though perchance never
publicly declaimed against before now) so is it at length become hereditary,
pleads a kind of Prescription, and passes for current even from Generation to
Generation; it being by constan^ observation, found exactly calculated to the
Meridians of all Country parishes in and throughout England.

And if we consider over and above the length of it is duration, and vastness of
its extent, the sweetness of the Custom it self, and how thoroughly it has been
snatched by a great many of those, whose interest it is to have it still kept
up, we must needs conclude it a task exceeding full of difficulty, let what can
be said against it, ever to procure it totally to be laid aside again; and it
be but for these two reasons following: First of all, That it is a Project
making such dead sure work then ever it is put in Practice. Secondly, that it is
so easily performed. For it is but a bold man's crying out against a wrong
course, and his being sent for too late, and there is a firm foundation laid
for the raising what ever malicious superstructure Mr. Slanderer shall Judge
convenient, and he who is but qualified according to that most excellent
Character we have been all this while making a description of, and has once let
fly these words; is ipso facto upon that very account perched up above the
common Standard of all his equals, and vested with an Authority far surpassing
the absoluteness of any Judge; for whereas a Judge is to act by virtue of his
commission barely, and has his power limited and circumscribed by the known
Laws of the land, whereby he is under a necessity of following the tract of a
dozen plain Countrymen, the Verdict of every one of which is to take
Precedencie of his sentence; here is one has the Law put into his own hand; or
rather indeed; who makes his own List his Law, and takes upon him to Arraign,
Judge, and Condemn at mere Random and Peradventure. A Pish, and a Tush, and a
distorted countenance, are of authority sufficient to dispatch the credit of as
good or a much better Physician then himself in a breathing while, if happening
to have the place of his Residence without the Precincts of the City-wards: And
the very name of a Country Doctor puts in a bar of Exception to all he can
either say or do; and in a word renders him a mere outlaw to the least pretense
of claim, to either civil respect or fair usage: And all they who are thus
exalted above them, look upon themselves as privileged to trample them to
pieces, like so many Worms or Mushromes, as often as the hasty mood chances to
be upon them, it is an ancient custom it is true, as has been supposed; and
that is all that can be said for it: But it is as wicked as unreasonable; indeed
so very wicked a one, as that, though it may, and does oftentimes no doubt
Minister occasion of laughter to fools, and such as who, so they can but be
merry, care not at what rate it is they purchase their present pastime; yet
would it if well thought upon, set a considering man a trembling to ponder with
himself what are wont to be the fruits thereof in the horrid consequences that
do attend it.

And I could wish that all such, as cannot but know themselves to be highly
guilty in this particular, my meaning is of opposing and thr^atning the
despised men we have been all this while speaking about, and that for no other
reason, then that no reason at all which has been likewise assigned by us,
would but a little lay the matter to heart* perchance the diversion they shall
give themselves would not be altogether so full of merriment as sometimes it
has been, and the forethoughts of an after rekoning might prove some allay to
the great contentment, many are apt to fancy to themselves in their chewing the
Cud upon the blasted Reputations of other men. For the thing however light and
trivial it may happily appear to Vulgar eyes, is not so in its own nature, but to
be reflected upon by such as will Judge rightly of it, under a far different
Notion: because when once this common bank of charity comes to be tumbled down
it is easy to discern what an Ocean of inconveniences, and those none of the
meanest sort neither, stand ready to enter immediately upon the breach; Because
he that has once shown himself a busy body in endeavoring to prove his
Brother a fool: It Is ten to one if he do not in the next place discover himself
to be an Errant Knave, by adventuring upon those mad prescriptions which
otherwise he would have been ashamed of: For has the other taken a wrong course
indeed, and has he said it then? rather then to give his own tongue the lie, he
is engaged in point of credit to run counter to all the other party has done
before him. And when once matters arrive to that height it may very well be
suspected that he who made but little conscience of breaking the ninth
Commandment, will be as regardless of violating the Sixth; and he who could
think it no crime at all, to bear false witness against his Neighbor, will
with as little regret of conscience, be inclined to the Commission of Murder:
Especially when it may be brought about after an indirect way: And when egged
on thereto by Pride and Malice, and a fearlesness of ever being called to an
account; but instead thereof being so surely provided of a Cloak-Father on whom
to lay the obliquity of the Action, in case of its happening to be searched
into. This makes him all for Projects, and experiments and trying of
conclusions.

Nero, when he had set the City of Rome on fire, could afford to make the
better pastime at the flames thereof, because he had the Christians ready at a
dead lift, to entitle to his wickedness: and just so, and no otherwise do these
mischievous and ill natured sort of men serve the poor Country Physicians when
ever they come amongst them, let who will inflame the reckoning, they are
evermore put upon it, to pay the shot: Because they and none else, in case the
Patient happen to die, are to be accounted of as his Murderers; but if he
chance to escape, as the only instruments of bringing his life into jeoperdy.
So that fall back, fall edge, they are certain evermore to lie next harms way.
And take the Dilemna by which Handle you please, either is like to prove but a
wrong one to them. The others like his holiness, are not so much as capable of
commiting the least oversight, or if they do amiss, by a strange kind of
transmutation, their Vicious acts are all turned into virtues, only by becoming
theirs. It puts me in mind of some great Commanders in a Sea Fight, who they
say after they have been insconsed in Cable, and inveloped about with Cordage,
even from the head to foot, are then fiercest of all, to give forth their
orders for the joining of the battle: and after the same manner do these prime
Artists let out their mad receipts upon the bodies of the miserable Patients,
and when they have done that, stand by, and see how well Nature and the Disease
combat together, and are all the while (to the praise of their great prudence,
be it spoken) free from danger, and out of Gunshot themselves.

It strikes me with amazement, sometimes when I think on it, that the besotted
Relations that are about the sick party are not offended at such a fulsome way
of Procedure, but can be content to hear them out in what they have to say, and
suffer them to go on in a slandering backbiting way, without check or control,
as some do, so as to flesh and encourage them in this their sly kind of
Knavery, and it is a wonderful strange thing to me, that they don't urge them to
make good what they say face to face, seeing the parties are so near together,
who are of these different persuasions, and seeing it may be done with so
little trouble, to the end they may be the better enabled to come to the
knowledge of the truth of the business, and to pass some little estimate how
matters stand themselves, though every Man is not a Physician, yet he must be a
very dolt indeed, who is not so far forth a Master of his own Reason, as to
understand sense when it is spoken upon so common a Subject, and their are few
bystanders at a bar of Justice, but upon a faithful opening of the cause on
both sides between the parties, may be able to give a guess something near the
matter where abouts the issue is like to rest. Whereas they, who have an ear
only for the Plaintiff, can never Judge of things impartially; but must
unavoidably be Subject to mistakes and incertainties, and it be but for this
only Reason, because the knowledge they are capable of having, is no more than
contingent; if happening to be true, well and good: it is more than he who
receives the information, could reasonably have been assured of, and
consequently ought not to acquiesce in; because it was equally probable that it
might have been false. So that albeit in the profound Mysteries of Artificial
wrangling, it be looked upon by those who are well Versed therein, to be a huge
step toward the carrying of the Cause, to be able to cry Whore or Thief first:
Yet amongst sober and discreet persons, the Case is far otherwise; and that
very Circumstance of Pre-occupation, in drawing up the Charge against another,
instead of aggravating the Crime, does but abate the Clearness of the Testimony
given in, and render the Complainants Allegations so much the more suspicious.

To speak hardly behind ones back, and to be the Inventer of little detracting
Stories, to the Dispraise of another Man, who may be supposed in the Opinion of
the world, to stand upon Grounds equal with ones self, is a practice so mean
and ungentile, and creeping base, that it is a Riddle to me, that any who does
but pretend to either Learning or Parts, or an ingenuous Education, should ever
condescend upon the most tempting provocation, to make use of it. What then we
shall think of those who can speak smoothly to a man's face, and yet upon the
turning into another Room, so soon as ever they can fit themselves of an
opportunity and place to vent their Malice in, must be darting out their
slanderous Suggestions against those they just before seemed marvellously to
approve of? This is an Action so purely Diabolical, and smells so hot of
Brimstone, that those Nostrils must be dull indeed, that scent it not at the
first Breath. It can be resembled to nothing more fitly than the killing a man
when fallen fast asleep, or the stabbing of one behind, what time he least of
all thinks on it. Surely all such as have hearts bad enough to propound the
doing of such vile things as these, if their Wit were but proportionable to
their spite, one would think however, they should be deterred from the
performance of them; because if their meaning come once thoroughly to be
understood, as it is plain enough to every indifferent capacity that it should;
they might very well expect to meet with a good smart Chiding, instead of a
welcome Entertainment, and so no doubt they sometimes do, as in the Case but
newly instanced in, and diverse others, which every ones Experience may be able
to furnish them withal. But such, alas! is the Folly and Madness of the World,
that People are generally so tame, as to suffer themselves to be miserably
imposed upon by these palpable Abuses; and under a pretense of having their
Eyes opened, are content to be led about by the Noses any whither; they are
made to believe, that a strange Cure, (such as theirs is, be it what it will)
can never be wrought but after a strange and extraordinary manner. Their own
Doctor, poor man! it is true, might happily do well enough, were he to wade in
some shallow Stream he had been acquainted with before; but as the Case stands,
he is now quite our of his Depth, and at a plunge what to do, and which way to
turn himself; that is in plain English, less daring and adventurous about mad
projects than themselves; and when once they have brought simple people to that
pass to swallow any thing they would have them, then let them alone to make the
best of their easiness of Belief; for now they have gained the point they aimed
at, and like the Wolves in the Fable, when they had persuaded the Sheep to
leave off the Company of the Dogs, whom they pretended to have had some evil
Design upon them, have it in their power to deal with the wretched defenseless
Creatures as they list, and worry them at their pleasure.

The Daughters of old Pelias, when they were once thoroughly possessed with an
opinion of their Fathers being made young again, what desperate undertaking was
it that they either scrupled or boggled at: the Poet tells us, that she who was
the most Pious above all the rest, showed her self the most forward, and active
instrument, in cutting the Old man's throat, and draining his very heart blood
out, and all out of a ridiculous hope that much better and fresher might be
transfused into the room of it; which dutiful Office, so soon as ever they had
performed, away flies she who had given them this good Counsel, hurried by a
pair of Winged Dragons in the Air; and so they were finely left in the Lurch,
with the Ghostly Spectacle of a Father's murdered Body before their eyes to
gaze upon, and to bewail their own Credulity when it was too late.

The parallel is the same to a hairs breadth, in the Case we have been
describing. The Patient waxes ill, and upon Summons, down comes a man of rare
Parts and profound Skill (or is believed to be such at leastwise, and then it is
the same thing in some respects, though not in all) and he looks gruff, and
talks big; and usually the more extravagant his Discourse is, the more it is
admired by those who desired his Assistance; for should there be any reason to
be given for what he says, that would utterly spoil its Excellency; because
capable of being understood, and appearing like something vulgar and common,
which they did not expect to hear from him. And then so soon as ever the Word
of Command is given, though perchance so hastily, that it is impossible for any
mortal Wight living within so narrow a Compass of time as is then taken, to
arrive to the perfect knowledge of all Particulars necessary to be considered
of: Yet notwithstanding all that, without so much as examining what proportion
it may bear with the present Exigency of the Party, or suffering others to do
it for them; What running, what hurrying, what posting, what packing, to have
it speedily put in execution! Every Minute seeming seven years till the Will of
the Learned be fulfilled. And when the Remedy does come to be made Trial of,
instead of growing better, it may be the Patient becomes much worse than he was
before; and if it be a desperate one as is not seldom seen, then immediately
upon the applying of it, he falls downright into a sinking condition, and so
dies away under their hands; and then they look upon one another like a company
of Amazed, Giddy-Brain'd and Besotted Wretches; and whatever they confess with
their Mouths (if they have any kindness at all for their deceased Friend) wish
in their hearts at leastwise, they had been better advised.

As for his part who did the Mischief, to carry home the Comparison, he is far
enough out of hearing, before ever the effect of his wretched Counsel comes to
take place; and when he knows it, so little is he concerned thereat, as that he
is in as fair a way as ever for the trying such another Experiment. And the
next time he is invited out upon a like occasion, the very self same Game comes
to be played over again, some few Circumstances of Time and Place only
excepted; and he puts the same Tricks upon Physician, Patient and Bystanders,
and abuses every one of them in their Order, as has been already shown; and so
he runs round in a Circle, and no one knows how to trap him; ^ay, ten to one,
if some of the most able Gossips of their Tongues upon the Place, don't take
his part for all this, and justify every thing he has either said or done, if
it be but merely to maintain matter of Argument to discourse about, or to
render their own Physician the more ridiculous, or for ^ome other vile Reason
not at all deserving ^o be enquired into.

And this I have ever persuaded my self ^o have been one main Reason why so
very few Physicians, however otherwise Learned and honest men, yet if happening
to live without the Verge of the City of London,, seldom or never to come to
attain to the Greatness of an Estate equal with them, who either are
Inhabitants of the City it self, or else happen to have the Place of their
Abode at a more remote distance from ^t, merely upon the account of issuing
forth of the ill-Natured Men above mentioned, upon their sick Patients* who,
let them behave themselves never so warily, advise never so regularly, or to
have been never so happy in their Practice; all is one for that, a hundred to
one but that at some time or other they shall have a Slur put upon their most
innocent Actions, which shall both sully their Credit, and bring their Persons
into a Disrepute; Calumny being ever of that defiling Nature, that like the
Dirt raked out of the Channel, if it be but lustily set on, it shall very
rarely be so washed out again, as not to leave something or other of a stain
behind it; especially, if happening to be performed by a Party, who in case of
underdoing, is in all likelihood to be condemned to the very same Penalty
himself.

It Is true indeed, there are two things, which considered of barely in
themselves, render it an extreme difficult Matter for any Countrey-Physitian
whatever, to arrive to any eminency either of Estate or Reputation: But if the
Accession of what we have been speaking of, happen to fall in likewise* then
next to impossible.

The first whereof is, the exceeding thinness of the Inhabitants they have to
do withal. Citizens, as they live close together* so many of them may be
visited in a little time; whereas a whole day will scarcely suffice for the
going from one Family to another in the Country, as the Case may be, and where
the gross Sum is but small, there a little Abatement brings it to just nothing
at all.

And the Second is, That Spirit of censuring Countrey-Folk are generally endued
withal; whether it be from the variety of Objects, multiplicity of Business,
the Genius of the Place, or Humor of the People, or what else may happily be
said to be the reason thereof, I shall not much trouble my self to enquire; yet
certain it is, we shall seldom or never observe these Inhabitants who take up
their Dwellings in populous Cities, to be half so diligent in searching into
the condition and qualifications of their next Neighbors, as your
Country People usually are, who as they pry narrowly with their Eyes, seldom
fail to speak as broadly with their Tongues whenever occasion serves, and to
Trumpet out all, and sometime more than all their Miscarriages for the
information of others, that they have been at the pains to make Discovery of
themselves. He that either is ignorant of, or unwilling to believe this
untoward Disposition of too many, let him but lend an ear to the frivolous
Reports that Neighbors in the Country are pleased to busy themselves every
day to spread about of one another, and he will quickly be brought to confess
that the matter of the Assertion is not altogether without Grounds. The Rule we
have given us to walk by, is, to love ou^ Neighbor as our selves, and to deal
by other^ as we would have others deal by us; in place of which, commonly
succeed Envy, Whisperings, Evil Surmisings, the worst of Constructions upon the
most harmless and innocent Actions, together with a Delight in nothing more
than the Ruin and Downfa^ of those very persons we are so much engaged above
all others to be in love withal* And whenever the Gentlemen we are discoursing
about, happen to strike in with a sort of People thus excellently well
qualified, how utterly impossible is it for their Designs to do otherwise than
take effect? It Is like the meeting of Fire and Brimstone together, where the
one is full out as aptly disposed to receive, as the other to Communicate. And
when things are thus prepared to their Wish, they are only with Casar, when he
overcame the gentlest of his Enemies, just to stretch forth their hands to
receive the Victory when offered: There is only need of an Attempt in some
Cases; and this is one of them. How happy then must those Persons be accounted
of, who are thus highly privileged above others? And how great an Act of
Self-denial must that be in case of a fair opportunity presenting it self, not
to make use of those Advantages.

I have always had this Notion thoroughly fixed in my head, ever since I have
had any thing to do with Commerce in the World; that the readiest way to
maintain the greatest correspondence with those we live amongst, was to
maintain the least of all. Because though intimate acquaintance be a Medium
proper enough if considered in it self, both to beget love and cement
affections together: Yet by accident and through the evil disposition of those
it oftimes happens to be found amongst, it produces a quite contrary effect,
and becomes the greatest Makebate and Incendiary of others again in the Nation.

The reason of which if we but consider things aright, is no whit difficult to
comprehend, in regard those who meet often together, can never well be supposed
destitute of some matter or other, fit to make the subject of their discourse.
And then it being not probable for all to be of the same mind, much discourse
cannot choose but gender a great deal of disputing; no disputation though
never so frivolous can possibly be managed without opposition; that and
quarrelling with some, are one and the same things Whence ensue distastes,
animosities, and heartburnings. These with with many after they have lain
festering in (...) their minds awhile, degenerate into implacable
maliciousness. Which gradation onee admitted of, as indeed it is as evident as
the Sun shining at Noonday, what can be more Natural than for those of the same
Neighborhood to be evil affected one toward another. To say nothing of a
thousand other little circumstances, which do almost every day fall out, and
minister new and fresh occasions for a petulant humor to work upon. To all
which may be added the unalterable disposition of some men, to envy all their
Superiors, malign their equals and despise whomsoever they conceive to be
beneath them. And then surely it mus^ needs be an extraordinary hard task, for
an^ to undertake to cohabit with such, and ye^ not at all to be liable to the
stroke of their invincible displeasure; here just such another vain attempt, as
to walk amongst bur^ing Coals, without danger to ones Feet, o^ be pudling at
the hole of a Hornets ne^ and never expect the mean while to be at a stung by
them.

And therefore what a mountain of disco^ragement has that Physician to brea^
through, and it be but upon those two accounts forementioned; who is
necessitated to take up the place of his residency in a Country village; the
good esteem of those he dwells amongst, being in a manner all he has to trust
to, and the only foundation whereon to build for the advancement of his future
practice.

Those persons at a distance being evermore willing to be determined in their
thoughts, by the testimony and character which shall be given by such as live
nearer hand, because as they have the more frequent opportunities of making
their observations of the man's actions; so likewise may they reasonably be
imagined to be the better enabled to pass a right sentiment concerning them, so
that if he fails here, it is like stumbling at the Threshold, he must look to
have good success no where, but to be affronted and baffled, in every action of
moment he shall happen to be interested in afterward, throughout the course of
his whole life.

Purely upon which consideration, and no other motive of what nature or kind
soever, though I had relation to many places since my leaving the University; I
never yet durst entitle my self an inhabitant of any one of them, but like some
Knight Errand upon his journey; or the Island Delos in the Sea, before the
birth of Latona her Children; have evermore kept my self in a kind of
locomotive posture. At length, wearied with the inconveniences that attend a
wandering life, I resolved upon fixing my abode at Richmond upon Thames, which
as it is a place for pleasantness of situation: so for candor and civility of
its Inhabitants, scarcely to be matched again throughout all England.

Where, before ever I could put my designed Purpose into execution, down comes
that Monster of Ingratitude Dr. Willis his quondam Journeyman, and serves me
the very same Trick for substance that the other Gentleman his Neighbor did
you. I confess the same part might have been acted by another as well as by
him. I have already supposed it, and the Subject Matter hitherto treated about,
is a sufficient Evidence thereof; but yet I have reason for my own part to take
it most kindly from his Hands, because I am principally to thank my self for
his being sent for, and because it was an Action so like the Authors own self,
and so patly suiting With his Genius.

For what could be more agreeable, than for one, who had the Foundation of his
Practice laid in the Defamation of his own Master, to contrive the carrying on
the remainder of the work by the self-same kind of Ingenuity. There are a sort
of Savage Creatures in Nature, that will be ready sometimes to take a leap at
the Throats of those who flesh them most: And there are some men that are like
them; but that by the way the more full Relation of the matter, be pleased to
take as follows.

About the latter end of the Month of January, I was sent for to a Lady of good
Esteem, aged upward of Sixty, of but a weakly constitution of Body, and much
addicted to the Scurvey and Gout; as the knottiness of her Joints, pains in and
about her Limbs, together with several other Indications not at all necessary
to be here recounted, made sufficiently enough to appear. Her Urine was pale
and clear, without the least show of Sediment; and her Pulse but low. The
reason of her present Indisposition was taken from walking abroad in a cold and
damp Garden. 'Twas ever her Custom, and she owned it, when ill at any time, to
consult with several Physicians, to hear what each of them had to say to her,
but to follow the Directions of few, or none of them, when she had done. And if
at any time some one above the rest proved to be so happy as to prevail with
her, to fancy ought of his Prescriptions, 'twas at best observed after so lame
and imperfect a manner, that by a kind of Synechdochical Interpretation, a part
was to be taken for the whole: And let what would be debated, and resolved
upon, and by whomsoever, she would be sure to reserve the casting Vote to her
self; and in the close of all, determined the state of the Controversy that
way which seemed the most agreeable to her own Opinion. I knowing her to be of
this Temper, and she expecting it should be taken notice of, ought in reason to
be so much the less positive in pressing any thing I perceived her obstinately
set against; but rather to endeavor to work her over by degrees to what I
looked upon in my Conscience to be mostly for her Good. There are some Natures,
may by a gentle compliance be brought to the doing of diverse things, who will
be compelled to just nothing at all.

That which she seemed to complain of principally at this time, was a Pain in
her Head and Side: As a Remedy against which I proposed Bleeding at the very
beginning; but that was a thing she utterly disliked of, and desired with some
passionateness of expression, that it might no further be insisted on.

The day was too far spent to admit of a purgative Potion, and which I at that
time a little scrupled at (I must confess) had it been more early, for fear of
calling in the Arthritick Humors toward her Stomach and Bowels. But the
application I was more especially inclined to, and that which she her self best
liked of (whose Approbation was in no wise to be left out) was a Carminative
Clyster, as considering most Gouty Bodies to be generally oppressed with
Windiness; hers I knew to be so in an eminent manner, and therefore conceived
so much the better hopes of drawing down such Flatulenties as might give
annoyance to either Part above mentioned by way of Revulsion. Upon the
admission of the Clyster, she avoided abundance of Wind, rested pretty well
that night, and was in some hopes of amendment the next day; but the Pains in
her Chest and Head, though something remitted, yet continuing in part, and her
Stomach but weak withal, I advised her farther to the keeping close to her Bed,
and the drinking once in five hours time three or four Spoonfulls of a good
sprightly Cordial, which I often found by experience to be of a very expelling
Nature, some few drops S. C. C. being thereunto superadded; and that between
whiles she should not forget to take plenty of Posset Drink, in which
Marygold-flowers, Sage, and Shavings of Hartshorn had been thoroughly decocted;
the intendment of which Prescription was chiefly bottomed upon these Reasons
following.

First of all, To secure her Stomach from the influx of Noxious Humors, which
upon the least disturbance might be apt to be congregated there, and keep them
off at a further distance.

Secondly, To digest and expel those Flatulenties that the Clyster had as yet
left unremoved.

And thirdly, Though I was not ignorant how indisposed a Body she had for
Sweating: Yet I did believe it however an apt means to re^serate and keep open
the Pores thereof, so as to let forth those Fuliginous Vapors by a kind of
insensible transpiration, which could not be avoided otherwise. Which last,
though it be a Doctrine understood but by a few, yet is it of general use; and
by all such as apprehend it as they ought, and ever will be looked upon in very
many cases as a Remedy inestimable; and I could heartily have wished that the
Lady her self had been one of that small number, who had been able to have
judged of that particular Intimation as of right it deserved, perchance it
might have been never the worse for her; or at leastwise have been willing to
have submitted to it upon the Authority of those that did. But Physicians are
only to give forth the best directions they can, and then to acquiesce in the
Integrity of their own Consciences. It Is a thing impossible for them to
transmit their Notions into the Heads of those who have not capacities to
receive them.

And then as for the so frequent repetition of the Decoction before recited, I,
who understood no better, dull Creature as I was! remained hugely well
satisfied in my own thoughts with such alike reasons to these. First, I
considered, that notwithstanding she had never as yet from the time of her
first illness, had any the least Symptoms of a Fever appearing upon her, as
indeed she never had any till the Tuesday before her death: Besides, what was
occasioned by one single Fit of an Ague (which upon the use of fitting
Remedies, as shall be showed in its proper place) never returned afterward;
Yet that was an evil however, both to be feared and armed against, and that not
only upon that one general Account, because few other Distempers of what kind
or nature soever, but what are often times found to be the Harbingers thereto;
but also because the acute pains in the Membranous Parts of her Body, and the
Inflammation in and about her Throat she had hitherto so often complained of,
might seem in some measure more immediately to threaten it.

Secondly, For that I had perceived her Stomach to be much infeebled, as was
very clear, to set aside many other Circumstances, from her exceeding proneness
to vomit upon every light occasion. Whereupon thought I, what more inoffensive
Nourishment and easy of digestion could possible have been administered to her,
than that was?

It came to my mind likewise, of how very thick and coagulated a substance the
Blood of Scorbutic People is usually found to be, and how destitute for the
most part of that Serous Humor that should render it more fluid, and be a
means to help it forward in the performance of its Circulation* And upon that I
was brought to conclude without any great matter of scruple, that the most
probable Expedient for the reducing it to a ^itting temper, must be by a
plentiful ingestion of something of a like nature, unto that which by its
absence had occasioned it to be so, and which might the soonest and most easily
of all others be communicated to the whole Mass.

But now, What thing is there in nature approaches nearer to an Identity with
Blood, than Milk does? abstract but the Color and some few accidental
Differences, and that man must have more than an ordinary subtle headpiece
who is able to resolve wherein the disagreement lies betwixt them, so as really
to distinguish the one of them from the other. From whence it follows by the
clearest evidence of Demonstration, that the loss of those useful qualities
whenever they happen to be wanting in the Blood, is best of all repaired by the
accession of some such others as are to be met withal in a Milky substance; and
therefore the Decoction recommended by us cannot otherwise choose but be of
singular use in the present case we are now arguing about, as must needs appear
to any one who has but a Stock of Reason, competent enough to make a due
comparison between such sensible Objects as shall be presented to his view.

In Milk there are three parts deserving consideration, two of which are of a
more gross substance convertible into Cheese and Butter, and both of them are
known to be great Supporters of humane Life; but the other remaining, is of a
thin and subtle Nature resolvible into Whey only. The two former may well be
looked upon as no whit subservient (...) our Design, not only because
disagreeable to an infeebled stomach through which they are to pass, and in
which they were to be more laboriously wrought upon before ever they could
become good Nourishment; but likewise because partaking in too great a measure
of those other qualifications which the Blood was supposed to abound withal
more than sufficiently already. But the Wheiey part, of which our Decoction
solely consists, both recreates the Stomach by a nourishment standing in need
of little or no concocting at all (which if it did, Nature could in no wise
afford at that time, as being otherwise more busily employed.) And being thence
carried away without any great matter of difficulty into the Veins and Arteries
where the Distemper is more immediately seated; may well be said to do greater
execution there: I say it again, and will prove it when I have done, much
greater Execution by its presence there, than any other Remedy beside of what
kind or quality soever. My Reasons are, because, as has been already intimated,
being once communicated to the Blood, it supplies it as much as is possible
with those qualifications it stood in want of before its arrival thither, is
capable of being impregnated with the Virtues of several Medicaments, and those
very useful ones too, which are not altogether so fit to be made use of in
their own substance; and then if considered simply and in it self, is apt to
obviate and prevent all that other train of horrid Symptoms, which diverse sick
people are found obnoxious to upon the smallest alterations. Was the Radical
moisture nigh-hand wasted before? This furnishes it with a fresh Supply. Was
the Circulation put to a stand? This renews its Course, and maintains it from
the time of its admission in a constant moveable Disposition. It Is this
contemperates the Heart, irrigates the Brain and Nervous Parts of the Body;
which, as they are the only Organs destinated to sensation, so if happening to
be drawn into a consent with others that are actually inflamed, presently
become heated and distempered together with them, so as to hasten on
Convulsions, Phrensies, an invincible Restlesness of both Body and Mind; and in
the conclusion of all, even Death it self. Upon which Considerations I was
always careful to see her well supplied of what I conceived so highly conducing
to her Preservation; and to put those who were Attendants upon her often in
mind of the same thing.

I perceived by the whistling of her Pipes that her Lungs were somewhat
oppressed, and in danger of Suffocation: and therefore for the timely
preventing any inconvenience that might arise that way, to the incommoding so
Noble a Part, advised her likewise from the very beginning to the use of a
Pectoral Lohoch, which by joining with the Spittle ^f her Mouth, might by its
gentle distillation upon the Aspera Arteria commix with the congealed Matter
contained there, and dulcifie the sharpness thereof; render it ^e^ Viscous and
Clammy, and by that means more inclineable to be brought away by Expectoration.

But this was rejected, as the Advice for Bleeding was before; and an answer
returned thereto of a like import with the former; how that sweet things as
they were always enemies to her, so she likewise in requital was the same to
them again. And that for her part, she was resolved neither to meddle nor make
with any thing of that nature.

So that sometimes the Rule comes to be inve^ted* Patients cannot away with
sweet things from the hands of their Physicians; and when it so falls out, ten
to one if they are not p^t ^on it to receive something of a bitter quality
(...) ^em: And to speak the truth, it is out fi^ng they should. Sick Persons and
Children having always a right indubitable to an Indulgence in all things,
which have not too great a tendency to their prejudice and harm.

But though Lambatives were excepted against, as a sort of Medicament contrary
to her Genius; at the time of my next coming I found she had provided her self
of a Pectoral Decoction, either of her own composure, or by the assistance of
some officious Neighbor of hers: which being made up of a many innocent and
harmless Ingredients; such as Liquoris, Figs, Maidenhair, Raisons of the Sun,
and the like; I gave it my approbation by speaking nothing at all against it.

But withal calling to remembrance how familiar a thing it is for Pectoral
Drinks to be mistaken; insomuch that to speak within compass, there is scarcely
one of a hundred, if the matter were rightly examined, would be found to make
use of them after a due manner; I ch^se rather to order something to be taken
in form of a Syrup, of which more hereafter in its proper place.

In the mean while, to make good the Assertion but newly laid down, let it be
but thoroughly considered of for what end, especially these Pectoral Decoctions
are prepared? Are they not (as the Name sufficiently indicates) ordained as a
Remedy against the Affections of the Chest; they are so undoubtedly, and so
understood by all. And yet for all that, the usual way of admitting them is so
very praeposterous and contrary even to common Sense and Reason, as must
clearly appear to any one who has but the least Knowledge of the Structure of
Man's Body, and the Relation the Parts thereof stand in, one toward another;
that it is utterly impossible but that almost the whole of the Preparation
should be rendered in a manner ineffectual for the attaining of those purposes
unto which it was primarily designed.

As for instance, and to descend to an enquiry into the particular nature of
the thing it self: Whether or no it be from the commonness of the Denomination?
all Drinks being generally looked upon in strict propriety of speech to denote
something, then the most useful, after it comes to be swallowed down; or from
the prevalency of an Erroneous Custom, the doing whereof, as it sometimes
proves all the warranty it has; so likewise for the most part all the reason
it carries along with it.

Yet so it comes to pass, that in case of all Catarrhs and Distillations;
whether risen from some cold, newly taken, or an ill habit of body going
before, or from what other cause origination, else imaginable. The Pectoral
Decoction, whenever it comes to be used; is with the same hasty speed suffered
to make its entrance into the Stomach, that all other Drinks commonly are. And
the poor silly Patients are apt to satisfy themselves very well in what they
have done when they so take it: and to expect the greatest benefit of all after
its admission thither; in so much that some persons have been known to take
down huge quantities thereof upon that only Score; and then to have fancied to
themselves some great matter of advantage to have redounded thereby; which if
happening to be so as they imagine, must needs be no other, than the working of
their own fancies indeed. Because the only possible way to come at the Lungs,
and so by consequence to do them good, is down straight way by the Larynx or
Windpipe (as has been formerly supposed) and therefore whatever Medicament
comes once to be transmitted beyond that; and is but imagined to have made its
approach to the confines of the Oseing, cannot otherwise choose but be past all
possibility of arriving at the Chest, unless any will be so vain as to imagine
it to fetch a compass about by the Veins and Arteries; and so to visit it in
its progress along in Circulation with the Blood; which Opinion, as it can
never be defended with the least shadow of reason; so neither can it be long
adhered unto by any sober and considerate man.

Because in the first place, the Stomachs even of the most healthful, are
constantly affected with an acid kind of Juice; which will be sure to impart
something of its own quality to whatever Liquor it comes to have any
communication or intercourse withal; and then after its departure thence into
the Venal and Arterial Vessels, whereby it becomes united as it were, and
incorporated into one Body with the Blood: what further degree of change and
alteration must it of necessity be supposed to undergo again? So that albeit
in its pristine Estate it may, and ought to be accounted of as purely Pectoral.
Yet after all these shiftings, changes, and variations; It would cease to be so
any longer, as becoming of a quite and clean different nature from what
Originally it was And therefore if happening from that time forward to
contribute any thing of Relief unto the Patient; it can in no wise be allowed
to do so under the former Notion of being Pectoral; but upon some other
accidental account: and so any decoction whatever, that was not Pectoral, might
have done every whit as well.

But farther, it being by way of Concession granted (though it can never be
proved that these first qualities, it was at first endured withal, have not
been all this while impaired; but to have remained altogether unchangeable; and
in the self same condition they were in from the beginning. Seeing nothing can
be said to operate after any sort whatever where it self is not. I would
farther demand which way, and by what secret instinct it should be directed to
its journeys end, so as to find out those very parts which stood in need of its
assistance; because in all likelihood some competent portion thereof must be
subject to be diverted in its course by sweating; othersome again be drained
away by Urine. And then as for the Residue which shall be translated thither:
It must either pass upon the account of Nutriment, or some other Title beside.
If the former, than no other part of the Body whatever, but what may lay as
fair a claim thereto, as the Lungs can be supposed to have; because Nature,
being the same common Mother to them all, designs the distribution of her
nourishment to every part of the Body alike; If the latter; It must in
probabilty make some reasonable stay there, in order to the producing so
generous an effect; which is another matter extreme difficult to conceive of:
because then it must all on the sudden shake hands with a new Acqaintance, in
whose company it is supposed to glide along, and with whom it had just before
as it were contracted a new League of Alliance; and which is it self always
maintained in a progressive, endless motion; as being still pushed on a little
more forwarder than it was before, by every repeated Systole of the Heart.
Besides after all that can be either said or granted, the advantage gained
thereby, amounts only to thus much; to be conveyed so far forth as the
extremities, or mere out-parts of the Lungs, whereas the Grievance calling for
Redress, lies much more inwardly and occult; even within the very Cavitie of
the Windpipe it self: and the divided and subdivided Branches thereof; (I speak
now of Catarrhs, and Distillations, for which these Drinks are frequently
misapplyed: not but that there are Cases in which the Lights may be affected
without any thing at all of a Distillation from above what time Pectoral
Medicaments are allowed to be alike proper, as they are now; but those being
but rarely seen in comparison of the others: and the very same way of
application we have been contending for, being most deservedly even in them to
be preferred: It makes nothing at all against what I have been discoursing
about) and that as proceeding first of all from the matter of the Catarrh so
falling upon them. Or Secondly, from some noxious quality accompanying it in
its Descent, both which are sure to set the Lungs a coughing: The One of them
as filling up that space which by Nature it was never ordained for: and so
consequently not long to be endured there: The Other by irritating those
Vessels it happens to approach unto by the ungratefulness of its Touch. And
neither of these two Inconveniences can possibly be remedied by any thing
remote, or kept at a distance from them.

No, it must be something nearer hand, that is to satisfy such Intentions as
these are. Something that by joining it self with the matter of the Catarrh,
may have an innate aptitude to abate its acrimony; take away or prevent that
viscide toughness, which after a little stay is wont to be contracted there,
and thereby become a means to help Nature, disburthen her self the more easily,
when a Fit of Coughing shall next succeed: and also may be able by some virtues
of a countervailing nature immediately to affect the very parts themselves that
have been prejudiced thereby; and that in the very same places where they had
received their harm, which can be admitted of no otherwise, than by way of
Lambative only; and so long as Pectoral Drinks are so taken, I have nothing at
all to object against the free use of them. But because I find the custom, but
now reprehended, so constantly put in practice; and that not only by the common
rout of ordinary People; but also such as would willingly be thought to be of
abilties, to render a reason for what they do: I have chosen to insist the
longer upon this tedious, though I hope not altogether unprofitable,
digression; which being at an end, I proceed to go on where I left off before;
only craving leave before I do so, to acquit my self from an Obligation I lie
under, of giving a brief account of the Medicament, I desired might be taken in
Lieu of the other, together with the manner of its preparation, which was no
other in short but this. To take some few Cloves of Garlic, and infuse them
for a convenient time in a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water made scalding
hot; and so to be boiled up with a due proportion of Sugar to the consistencie
of a Syrop.

This I knew to be of efficacy for the opening of her Pipes, and the
exonerating them of that burden they seemed at present so much oppressed
withal; and which could be hurtful to none who did not afterward catch cold
upon it; which inconveniencie I looked upon her to be sufficiently secured
from, as being under an indispensable Necessity of keeping within her Chamber;
and then by reason of her aversness to meddle with any thing, with the
composition whereof she had not before hand been made acquainted. I both
prescribed the way of making and applying it at large: Leaving her to the
conduct of her self and attendants, some few general directions excepted.

For now there began to be a seeming abatement of her first illness; and we
were all willing to conceive hopes, at leastwise, of a farther amendment
suddenly to follow after.

That Physician who shows himself overprodigal of his Visits amongst the more
fickle sort of his Patients, shall quickly give them a Surfeit of his company,
and therefore it may do well some times, and upon some considerations to
withdraw for a little time; though perchance upon others of lesser moment, a
longer continuance amongst them might not have been altogether improper.

Whereupon the Friday following; which was some two or three days after, I was
again sent for, upon a fresh Summons: The Nature of her Distemper, being now
much altered from what it was before; and disconverting it self apparently in
the form of a downright Ague, she had been held for some two hours space
together with a shivering all over, which afterward concluded in a burning
fiery Fit: at the time of my arrival there, I perceived her to be both hot and
feverish; and her Pulse, never so till then, exceeding quick and high.

The Result I came to upon the present exigency, was This; that an intermitting
Fever was by no means to be tampered with all till the Paroxysm were over. How
that Nature was then busy about her own work, which none could do for her,
especially at that juncture of time, so well as she her self; and therefore not
to be diverted; but the safest way I knew, and the most likely to help on with
the same design with hers, was by a plentiful drinking down of a decoction of
Cardumus Benedictus; that thereby the febrile matter would in probability be
somewhat diminished by Sweat and Urine: The Fermentation in her Blood, and heat
within her Bowels come to be the better qualified, and her Body by reason of a
Specific Virtue peculiarly incident to that Plant; rendered so much the less
disposed for a second Invasion at another time.

Adding withal, that the next Morning, when the present commo^ion was at an
end; I should adventure to give a purgative Potion, which might gently evacuate
her Stomach, where the Fomes of the Distemper was (as I conceived) principally
contained; and this I was the more inclinable to do, in regard I foresaw what
inconvenience was like to befall one in her weak condition, in case any more
such accessions as that should not have been seasonably prevented.

I have not forgotten what, I was suggesting e're while, my great fearfulness
of Purging her at the beginning of her Illness; as being unwilling to offer any
occasion of drawing any of those Humors more inwardly, which might happen to
lurk near her Stomach and the Regions thereabouts, and could very well have
been content to have been of that opinion still, had Circumstances remained the
same they were.

But Necessity, as it is always to be obeyed in the first place; so is it
capable of neither Consultation nor Advice, but is evermore determined to one
and the same thing. Whereupon the next morning I gave her the common Oxford
Infusion, much in use, I remember, what time I was a Student there, and which I
have had frequent experience of for many years since; some gentle Syrups only
superadded thereto, which wrought very kindly and moderately with her: And from
that time forward she never complained of her Aguish Distemper more: Her Body
continued soluble for some competent time after it. In order to the
resettlement whereof, she had a Bolus appointed her to be taken hora somni, ex
Conserv. Rosar. Rubrar. Flor. Ror-marin. an q, s. cum Dioscordii semi-dragm.
and sp. C. C. gut. 5. una commixtis; which also was repeated in the same
proportion the Night immediately succeeding that, and had an Effect answerable
to what might reasonably be expected from it.

Die Dominic. the Pains of her Head were pretty well assuaged, but apt to recur
still at times: And now over and above she began to be seized on with a kind of
Lethargick Drowsiness, so as to be much more heavy to sleep, than at any other
times of her former Illness: Wherefore fearing a settlement of Humors upon the
Nervous Parts of her Head; and in order to the preventing any such Accident
that might possibly have so fallen out, I forthwith caused an Epispastick
Plaster to be laid to her Neck, as also to each of her Ankles and Wrists.

She complained very much of a burning heat about her Throat, and the parts
adjoining thereunto; for the mitigation of which she had a Gangarism prepared
of Barly-water. q. s. in which the Leaves of Bramble, Cinquefoil, Columbines,
and Red Roses had been boiled; sweetened with Syrop of Mulberries to her taste,
and rendered gratefully sharp with two or three drops of Spirit of Vitriol.

She was inclinable to vomit, as has been noted heretofore; and for the
redressing of that, had a quick and lively Cordial constantly in a readiness,
Mithridat. un. Drach, superaddit: and ad moderatam dulcedin^m redact. Syrup
Caryoph: and Rosar Rubrar. an q. s. and a Julip of a sharp and delightsom taste
to refresh and comfort her so often as she was disposed to call for it; and over
and above the Medicament, beforre cited against the oppression at her Chest,
there was Syrup de Marrubio appointed for her, to be licking of at pleasure.

On the Monday I found her Estate to be but low; and considering that many
things had been refused at the first of her illness, which were not at all
fitting to be directed now; nor she in a condition fit to receive them if they
should: I began to cast about with my self; to conclude on something that might
be answerable to several indications at once, and that without too much
disturbance to an enfeebled Body in the applying of it. That which occurred to
my thoughts upon that occasion, was a Plaster to be laid to the Region of her
Stomach and Chest; yet so as to take in all those other parts adjoining, by the
accession of whose heat the Stomach it self is supposed to be comforted, and
digestion promoted* recip. Rad. Aristoloch Rotund; Gentian Bacc. lauri an cum
proportione duplice Myrrhae and cum Mellis q, s. reducantur in formam Emplastri

Upon the Trial of which Remedy I laid no little stress, could it but have been
permitted to have continued on. First of all, because the Application being
outward, and nature but weak, I apprehended it the more fitting, because it
might be made use of with little or no trouble. Secondly I perceived her
Stomach and Chest to be much oppressed with Wind; and this I looked upon to be
a proper means both to dissipate and expel it.

I have somewhere met with an Author, who in the Description he gives of the
Region of the lower Belly, and the parts contained within it, makes mention of
a person, who by accident had happened to be deprived of his Cawl, that common
Apron as it were of the Bowels; and that he was from that time forward so
seized on with a perpetual chilliness in those parts that were wont to lie over
against it, that he was forced to wear a Cloth bound round about him on the one
side of his Belly, in lieu of what should have been placed innermost for the
space of his whole Life time afterward.

Whether this be so or not; I have only my Authors words to bare me out. But as
for the Plaster before described, which in ma^y respects may seem to hold a
proportion with it I have had frequent experience of that, and wherever reason
and experience concenter in one, I love to make my self a party, and strike in
with them if I can; and when I have so done, It Is not every budg, conceited
man's opinion that shall make me quit my hold again. There is nothing but
reason, or at least some show and appearance of it, that can ever seem to be a
fit match to encounter reason, and he who has reason on his side in matters of
this nature, and can yet sit down well satisfied, and suffer himself to be
overborn by mere pertness, and confidence, and a Set of idle pretensions; which
when they come to be enquired into, vanish into emptiness; and nothing deserves
in my opinion no other Encomium for this his so high an instance of patience,
than that of a contented Coward. As for uny own experience, that I confess is a
matter carrying but little of conviction along with it in reference to another
man. But Truth is Truth, by whomsoever spoken, and he who is able, either by
the self-evidence of the thing, or any good, close way of arguing to make out
what he has to say to be but consonant thereunto, has little cause to trouble
himself aabout the censures of the world, but may deliver his mind freely,
without either Apology or Preface: But now these Ingredients abovementioned,
being in severalty such as included a potential warmth in each of them. What
could be more consentaneous, then to expect that, when their Forces come to be
united as it were, and congregated into one, they should be apt to impart
something thereof unto those parts over against which they had been so directly
placed, and were so very nearly in conjunction withal. The Stomach, though it
be both the place and principle Instrument of Concoction, is not however
supposed to disdain the Concurrent Aids of other Assistants in the performance
of that work. But the Liv^r, Spleen, and Pancreas, together with all the other
Neighboring Parts, ought to be looked upon as so many Fellow-helpers together
with it, if for no other reason, than as adding barely heat to heat, and so
contributing something of an Auxiliary Force so often as there should be
occasion; upon which Score some have not unfitly resembled them (to use but a
homely comparison) to the Fuel disposed of about the sides, and underneath the
Cauldron, which being once enkindled, it self is an apt means to set the other
a boiling, and then maintain it so when it has done; and therefore I was in
hopes (whether groundlesly or no, let others judge) that what was of so
enlivening and comforting a Nature, and withal could be so contrived as to
involve them all, and communicate liberally of its virtue to each of them,
might prove the most effectual Expedient above all others for the answering
such an Intention; that is to say, the subduing that excess of windiness, that
had been both generated and sheltered in those overchilled and empty Passages;
which I apprehended, as well I might, to have been one main occasion of her so
frequent Vomiting. For though I deny not but that many other Causes may, and do
often concur in the producing the same Effect; Yet is it Wind especially that
gives a disturbance to the Stomachs of such as have lost their Appetite beyond
any of the rest, and therefore ought in reason to be principally regarded.

Nature we all know to abominate a Vacuum; and whatever space is not
replenished with something else, will, and must unavoidably, be filled up with
Wind. But after a Fit of Vomiting, the Stomach is become emptied of that
Sustenance which of right ought to be contained there: And if it be at a time
when it is weakened with much Sickness, is unable to take more into the room of
it. Whence wind succeeds of course (according to the supposition but now laid
down) and from thence is conveyed by an easy passage into the Bowels, cavities
of the Spleen, Liver, and Sweetbread, and diverse other hollow Parts and
Passages, which for the performance of several good Offices are disposed of
thereabouts, and from thence is returned back again frequently to annoy the
Stomach, especially that which is pent up in the Colon, is by constant
experience found troublesome in this respect; for that being for Situation
higher most of all the other Intestines besides, and immediately placed under
the lower Region of the Stomach, by its perpetual heaving and raising up that
part scarce ever suffers it to rest in quiet; but having given it a disturbance
once, is as ready as before, to hasten on another Fit; and so on for a
continuance, till either Nature makes head against this Domestic Enemy, and
chases it forth of the Body (for the helping forward which design what is now
pleaded for, seems to me to be of no small efficacy) or else suffers her self
to be quite vanquished and overcome by it, and so Death steps in and puts an
end to the Contest. And to speak the truth of the matter, in case of great
weakness and a frequency of Vomiting succeeding thereupon; this grand
Inconvenience is so very necessary to be attended to, that other Symptoms in
comparison thereof, though otherwise dangerous enough, cannot in reason lay
claim to near so much of the Physicians care, because, unless Vomiting cease,
it is impossible for life to hold out long. And then because there are so many
other horrid mischiefs which owe their rise and original to that of Vomitting;
somewhat the more of regard upon those Accounts, if not for its own sake, ought
to be had unto it. Coughing up of Blood, is granted on all hands to be a
grievous Symptom, and the Consequences thereof are both extreme, dangerous, and
sad; but as the Case may stand, an avoidance of Blood from the Lungs, may very
well be, and is often times brought to pass by a Fit of Vomiting going before:
for what more violent exerc^se of the Body can possibly be imagined than what
is occasioned from thence. Nature seems to do the very utmost she can, so often
as put upon that act of Expulsion: and to set her self about the performance of
it, with no less than her whole Might. How do the Eyes sparkle, the Sinews
labor? and the Musculous Parts of the Body gather and unite their Forces to a
Head? And then is it so great a wonder, if in all this commotion and struggling
of the Parts, some one slender Vein or Artery of the Lungs should happen
either to be opened or burst in sunder. Surely whenever it does fall out to be
so, Nothing can more readily be accounted for, or more easily understood.
Again, Restlesness, Convulsions, and Lightness of the Brain, are other
frightful Affections; and looked upon by most, and that not undeservedly with
the greatest horror and amazement. And these also we very frequently
occasioned through a Fit, or more of Vomiting, as may most evidently be made
appear to any one that will but seriously consider of the matter. For in that
vehement agitation of the Body are have been just now dicoursing about, and
which must easily be comprehended by all who do but pretend to know any thing
belonging to the nature of sickness. When the Stomach becomes thus inverted,
the Liver cannot otherwise choose, but in that very act, to be mightily
compressed also: whence the Choler contained with in the Bladder of Gall, is
with the greatest violence imaginable driven forth into the Du^denum, and
thence again by a contranatural motion forced to ascend up into the hollowness
of the Stomach; as is most evident by the abundance of that Excrement, which at
such times, and upon such occasions is usually evacuated by the Mouth And here
by the way, I cannot avoid taking notice of that wretched Fallacy diverse people
are wont to put upon themselves, whilst they mistake the Choler so rejected
for a certain pernicious Humor that had lain lurking (as they imagined) for
sometime within the Receptacles of their Stomachs.) O, cry they, this Vomitting
must needs have done me a great deal of good; I see plainly it has, because of
its clearing my Stomach of that which common Sense and Reason informs me must
needs do a great deal better out than in, whereas that which they behold with
so much of contentment was never in their Stomachs at all (at leastwise under
that Form) till the Fit of Vomiting brought it thither: Nor had been there
then, if the Fit of Vomiting had never been; But I must resume what I left
before. I affirmed but even now those evil Affections of the Head to be
likewise oftimes in a great measure brought about by an Antecedent Fit of
Vomiting: And my Reason is, because the Choler was by that means forced to
mount again up into the Region of the Stomach, and when it arrives there, it
must be apt to spoil and embitter all that Supply of Nourishment that shall be
taken in afterward, and then commixing it self with what it finds there,
enforces Nature to carry it about the Body a second time, which being an
Excrement exceeding sharp and fiery above all others, and so very prone withal
to be gadding up into the Head, is by this Act of Cohobation (as it were)
rendered much more so then it was before; and therefore may very well be
supposed to produce those many and great Alterations there, which we have
before laid down in our Hypothesis.

And thus, as I conceived my self to have had some grounds of hope for a good
Effect upon the Parts already mentioned: So likewise upon the Chest and Lungs
themselves, and that for the self-same reasons before alleged; for they being
likewise comprehended by this External Medicament, and the Midriff together
with them. I did with as full an assurance look for a removal of all
Flatulenties thence, as from the Region immediately below it. Upon which Issue
I was induced to believe, that, as there would have been a far less distention
of the Parts; the cause which oppressed them being by that means taken away: So
likewise by consequence, that a much greater Vacancy of Place would necessarily
have ensued thereupon, and so a Course come to be found out for a more full and
liberal respiration.

These, Sir, are the Ends I aimed at, and these the Medicines I made use of in
order to the attainment of such Ends, which, what tendency they might have to
the purposes they were designed for, whether any, or none at all; a greater, or
a less than what succeeded in the room of them, though I have alleged
something of reason (I am apt to think so at least wise) for the Vindication of
my Proceedings, and could have added much more from my own Experience in other
like Cases: That Is a thing however to be left to the Decision of such as are
wholly unconcerned in the Matter, as being the likeliest of all others to prove
the most upright and impartial in delivering their Sentiments thereupon.

'Twas enough for me to be rounded in the Ear by one of the Female Sex; and
such are commonly the great Sticklers in matters appertaining to Sick People:
That let it be how it would, I might set my heart at rest for that, there being
one a coming, that would cause all to be taken off again in exchange for a
Liniment of Sperma C^ti and Oil of Sweet Almonds; she knew all the Ingredients
perfectly well beforehand, and was very sure it must be so; because as she
remembered; he had been sent for a little before upon somewhat a like occasion,
to a Child of some of her Relations obstructed in the Chest; as likewise to
many other where she had been, and he had always practiced the same Method;
insomuch that though two Doctors in one of the places had clubb'd their
Counsels together, and agreed upon a certain Plaster apposite every way (as
they thought) for the Distemper they had advised about; yet upon the Approach
of this prodigiously knowing man of it went immediately for that other of his
appointment, which was to be esteemed of as much the better.

Some of the same Sex were very importunate with me to have had a Vein opened
without farther delay, because there were some few Streaks of Blood discernable
in the Matter of her Salivation, what times her Spitting and Vomiting used to
follow her much together; which I being dissatisfied in, considering her low
and weak condition, wished them to have patience a little, till they had
consulted his better Judgment, who might possibly for some wise Reasons, not at
all appearing to my shallow Understanding, be much more inclinable than I could
tell how to be, to concur with them in their Opinion: which Conjecture proved
just according to what I had foretold; for before ever I could so much as set a
foo^ over the Threshold, or be permitted to offe^ one Syllable of what I had to
say, either for or against it, the Decree was irrevocably gone forth: Let seven
Ounces of Blood be taken from her Arm. And when I had desired for my share; but
the continuance of the Plaster before mentioned most humbly showing my reasons
for that, as I thought but modest request: 'Twas held a Boon too unconscionable
to be granted; but all must be ordered precisely according to his own way and
method. And 'twas honor enough to me to be the Amanuensis to so learned a man.
And yet for all, that, though in the height of pride and arrogance, 'twas an
impossible thing to wedg insomuch as one short word, I shall take the boldness,
now matters are cool again, to do somewhat more, and make a Survey of the whole
Prescription: and when I have done that, and made some few Queries concerning
it; refer it to your self and all the world to judge, whether there be any
thing more to be found (setting aside mere spruntness of Temper, and an excess
of Self-conceit) in this Man of Renown so much talked of, than in others his
Neighbors he lives amongst: or indeed, to speak in a more Debasing Style by
far, than in some of us, plain, honest Country Physicians; and that is a
Degradation with a Witness.

But before I proceed one ^ot farther, It may and will be necessary to obviate
an objection, which cannot I confess but be apt to arise in the minds of some;
and that is, how it can be possible for me to make reflections upon the actions
of a person I have formerly seemed to concur withal; and call into question
the doing of that which in some sense I may truly enough be said to have had a
hand in the doing of my self.

To which I answer the matter of our immediate concernment, dividing it self
into these two Branches: The One of them touching her being Let Blood; and the
other the fitness of the Medicaments at that time prescribed to be made use of.
The first of these being done, not only without my consent, but clearly against
it: I am left at liberty to show my dislike of that, and declare my reasons;
when I have so done, without giving color to any whereon to ground any the
least cause of exceptions against me for it.

Secondly, it being possible to join with another, as well in a Passive, as an
Active Sense; and to do a thing rather by constraint, than from any real
impulse of ones own natural inclinations. It may be pardonable enough to
protest against that at one time which one has been necessitated unto at
another. And you Sir, who are a Physician, and cannot choose but be sensible
what it is to have a Patient, of whose concerns you have been equally tender,
as if they were your own, ravished forcebly out of your hands through the blind
zeal of a Pack of (which though otherwise wise enough, yet as to such matters
as these, I may truly say) ignorant Relations, who must have their wills
obeyed, though to the ruin of their Friend; and then to have had odd Tricks,
and wild Experiments tried upon such a one before your face, and in spite of
your teeth; and after all this, to be in danger of being used much worse when
out of your sight. Surely these are things which though they may possibly be
apt at the first to set Choler a little a working; yet upon a better
deliberation, and a more serious review may seem to have as natural an effect
an other way; and that is to excite to a little compliance, though it should be
somewhat against the Hair; seeing it is a vain thing to make resistance, and
'twere but merely to observe how a poor Patient were dealt withal, and what
became of such a one at the last.

There is a Violent, as well as a Natural Motion; and both may be allowed of,
as expedient, according as the Case may be; and it is Excuse lawful enough
sometimes for the Obliquity of a man's Actions, that he had it not in his power
to have done otherwise, The very Heavenly Bodies themselves, though allowed of
on all hands, to be the most Regular in their Courses, all save one of them,
though they may have distinct Principles of Motion within themselves, are
forced notwithstanding; to give place to one that is quite contrary, because
violent from without; and the bare hope of being thereby put into a capacity of
doing some future good, has even in the account of State Policy, been looked
upon as a sufficient dispensation for the commission of some faults which ought
not otherwise to have been born withal,

But the way I shall choose to take to, as touching this second particular,
shall be to resolve of nothing that is at all disputable my self, but barely to
make a representation of that was acted, for others to pass Sentence concerning
it. And being in a manner forced upon the Vindication of my own Method,
endeavor to do it in such a way and manner, as to make it obvious to every
vulgar Understanding, that is not bent to be cross; and possessed with too
great a prejudice before hand, which had been the safest, and consequently the
most eligible of the two. And so long as I hold close to these Limitations
premised, can be content barely to state matters of Fact: Querie about things
doubtful, and leave them still undecided as to any determination of my own: I
don't see wherein I am to be looked upon as running Counter to any former
engagements, but may rest secure of the least imputation that can become
chargeable upon me upon that account.

And first of all, in order to the making good what has been thus solemnly
undertaken; it may be hugely well worth the while to enquire into the doubty
reasons that should infer so absolute a necessity for the letting so aged a
Person Blood, and that after she had lain ill for so long a time; and not only
so, but why the self-same experiment that had been tried but just before to so
little purpose; all circumstances remaining in a manner much the same, should
come to be put in practice a second time. (...) is to be noted, that after she
had been blouded; and observed to fail instantly upon it: and that that Account
had been given to the great Oracle of Learning: He returns them back answer
without the least scruple or hesitancie, that the same Action was by all means
to be repeated, and which for this only reason was omitted to be performed,
because what time the Messenger could be back to deliver his charge; she was in
the judgment of all the Bystanders in a dying condition.

These are all such Puzling Questions, and such perfect Riddles to me (and so I
am apt to believe they must appear to all others besides that are not utterly
destitute of their thinking faculties) that I cannot choose but stand in
admiration, that any who pretends to either common sense or honesty (to say
nothing at all of knowledge in Physic) should ever take the freedom of letting
himself loose to such Giddy-brain'd Extravigancies. Surely, this, if any thing
may well be accounted of as downright trifling in the most important Affairs;
a kind of playing at Cross and Pile with Peoples Lives. Unless we should rather
term it a specious way of propounding Remedies much more deadly than the
Disease it self.

But those who are willing to be thought Learned Rabbis, and Wise Men, are
seldom to seek of a Reason for their doings, though their Reasons sometimes may
fail of being true. The Cause alleged, as I well remember, for the taking
away of Blood the first time; and 'twas no doubt, upon those very mistaken
Grounds, that the same Method was prescribed to be used again afterward, was,
that 'twas a Plurisie of the Lungs: and all Plurisies making a dreadful sound,
because so universally requiring Blood: This with the Adaption of a New Name,
the Bystanders knew not well what to make of; but suspecting however the worst
to lie at Bottom; It went down as glibly with them, as 'twas uttered gracefully
by the Speaker. And yet all those, who have the least smattering in either
Grammar or Logic, will tell us; That a Plurisie of the Lungs, is no less a
Solaecism in Speech, than a Podagra in the Hand, or a Cheiragra in the Foot;
because if the Denomination be supposed to be taken from the Pleura, which is
the Skin incompassing the innermost part of the Chest; Then nothing else
besides can be properly said to be affected with that Distemper upon any
account whatever in contradistinction to that Part. But all the most charitable
Constructions are to be allowed to some Men's Words and Actions, and little
enough: and it is to be presumed, that those who have a vast Employment in the
World, cannot be at leisure always to speak Sense; and 'twould be a great deal
of pity to tie such up strictly to words, who abound with copious matter; and
who can never be supposed ignorant of the true meaning of the thing, let their
Expressions be never so absurd.

Wherefore to let pass such poor advantages as these; as not worthy the taking
notice of. I shall choose rather to insist on another course, as both comporting
much better with my own Genius; and (if I am not mistaken) much more
subservient to my design, which tends not so much to the exposing a Ridiculous
Expression as to the making discovery of an Enormous Deed. For the better
effecting whereof I shall take leave to lay down this firm and undeniable
Position: to wit, that every pain in the Side, that is accompanied with a
Cough, and a mixture of a little Blood with the Spittle, is not a sufficient
argument from whence to infer a Plurisy, be it of what part of the Body it
will; whether of the Lungs or Chest, it makes no great matter; and therefore
all such as shall fall to Bleeding of their Patients without Restraint; upon no
better a pretense than that, may chance to repent it afterward when they come
to bethink themselves better; and so may all such as have been so foolishly
credulous as to trust to their rash advice. No, there are other Symptoms to be
attended to of equal regard with these: And when ever they are found wanting,
the Distemper is to be looked upon, and really is so, of a different nature
from a Plurisie, whatever a hasty man may be apt to conclude to the contrary.
Ile' instance only in a Concomitant Fever, which is chiefly to be regarded
above the rest: and that was never discernible in this Lady during the time of
her whole ilness excepting only when an Ague-Fit was upon her; and then 'twas
impossible it should be otherwise, and just the Morning before she was let
Blood; what time her Pulse was observable to arise a little more than ordinary:
but as for the constant Tenor and Temperament of her Body, 'twas for the most
part moderately cool, (bating the inflammation in and about her Throat) and her
Pulse but low and smooth: and albeit there was some small mixture of Blood to
be seen in the matter of her spitting, yet withal it is to be remembered what has
been already observed, that 'twas usually at such times when a Fit of Vomiting
had gone before: and then what so great wonder is it, if a violent compression
of the parts of the Chest should prove the occasion of a little issuing forth
of Blood there, especially where the Vessels are weakest, and put most upon the
stress: and then why might not a Medicine that had been proper for the
resetling of the Stomach have been adjudged a very good step toward the
removing this inconveniencie also? I should have thought for my own part it
might have done every whit as well: but all are not of the same mind, never
were, nor never shall be: and what passes for sense with one, and really is so,
may yet be decried for folly by another. And there are a proud sort of People
in the world, old-excellent at beating down a good opinion, and when they have
so done, setting up another, that is stark naught, in the room of it: and as
they have a faculty of slighting whatever suits not with their own perverse
humors, so that which does, shall be sure to be made the most of, and it be
for this only reason, that it is a darling of their own fathering, if not
begetting: and because they are pretty well assured before hand of the facil
natures of the people they are to deal withal, whom they know willing to be
imposed upon by every silly pretense and idle imagination.

And yet I am fully persuaded, that all such as are not too unreasonably much
biassed in their judgments already, and can but be content to stay the
examining a matter under all its circumstances with a little seriousness, will
soon be brought to give in their Virdicts. That let what other course in nature
imaginable have been looked upon as possible to have done her good.
Bloodletting however must in all likelihood have been exempted from that
Catologue, and on the contrary, that all those that would have gone the right
way to have continued her Breath longer in her Body, especially when reduced to
so very low an Ebb; must have laid it down as one of their first Principles to
have kept her Blood still running in her Veins.

The Matter is as Transparent as Crystal, unless it be to such as are as
precipitate in their Counsels, as they are post-hast in all their Journeys
they undertake.

The only Reason why Phlebotomie is so generally agreed on on all hands: In
the Case of Pleurisies being no more in short but this; because there neither
is, nor can be any Pleurisy in nature, but what universally implies a Fever,
as that again a Fermentation and Ebullition within the Blood. And though a
Fever be commonly reckoned amongst the infallible Marks whereby to judge of a
Pleurisy; as if so be it were something in nature of a later date than it; or
that by force of its causalitie had some dependence thereupon, upon which score
we have been induced to give it the Apellation of Concomitant: The Learned will
inform us, that these words though spoken in the Vulgar, are yet to be
understood in the Sense, the Wise intended them, and then Fevers will be found
to be so far from being Symptomatical, that the Original of Pleurisies will be
rather owing unto them. And for the sake of this Fermentation alone it is, that
Bleeding is held to be of such indispensible necessity: for were but that away,
there could be no colorable pretense for Boud-letting at all; because so long
as ever the Blood continues in a Mediocrity of Temper, and so long it does;
whilst there is nothing of Fermentation in it; it cannot but pass along
smoothly, and uniterruptedly within the Vessels, as waters when they are low
move peaceably in their own Channels. But when once the Febrile Matter comes to
be set a working, and the Fermentation to arise to some height; the Case is
then different from what formerly it was; and the whole Mass of Blood appears
to be clearly another thing; Its motions becoming now much more brisk and
vigorous, and it is course more rapid; and like the violent streams occasioned
by a Land-floud, it neither knows how to flow quietly as it ought, nor yet to
be confined within its appointed Bounds, but as it is apt to swell high upon
every the least hindrance; so likewise to force open a wrong Passage, as
opportunity shall be given, and so becomes extravasate, and breeds Annoyance to
the parts it lies upon, which if we will speak to the point in hand, is the
formal reason of all Pleurities: for wherever the Blood and Humors are
extravasate, there will Tumefaction, for the most part, of course arise; That,
and Disunion of the Vessels, if upon membranous parts, infer pain; but pain
brings on inflammations; which by as necessary a consequence, attract a greater
affluence of humors to the same place; which, by their coming on, produce a yet
farther degree of heat, and that again affects the whole Mass of Blood, by
drawing it into a consent, and so the Rupture is made wider, and all other
Symptoms depending upon these, arise together in proportion with them. And now
the Blood passing by way of Circulation in a full Channel through the Chest;
and it being absolutely necessary for the preservation of humane Life, that a
continual respiration should be maintained and kept up there which being
impossible to be performed otherwise than by a frequent dilatation of the Lobes
of the Lungs, it comes to pass, that it meets usually with greater opposition
in the Chest, than in any other part of the Body besides; and this is the best
account I know of, that can be given of the so frequent falling out of
Pleurities. And when the Case stands thus, there is no other course imaginable,
always a respect had to the Ability of the Patient, but to breath a Vein
immediately; and so to give check to this impetuous motion; and it is absolutely
as clear and unquestionable a Method to slake its Fury, as the substracting
Fuel from a boiling Cauldron, is a means to restrain its heat; or the deriving
Waters from a Vessel almost top full already, is, to prevent its running over.

And whenever spitting up of Blood, and a pain in the side proceeds from the
Causes before recited, that Physician, who is against the letting his Patient
blood (where strength permits) may very justly be looked upon in the esteem of
all, as the Destroyer of his Life; because he defers the using the Means, which
in probability was the most likely to have effected the Cure; according to the
known Axiom, Qui vult Finem, vult etiam Media ad Finem.

But then on the other hand, he that will needs be taking away of Blood at mere
random and rovers, without any necessity putting him upon it, nay, when there
was all the reason in the world, why he should much rather have let it alone;
under a pretense of I know not what imaginary Discovery no where to be found,
unless it be among the wild Chimaera's of his own Fantastical Brain, deserves
in my Opinion, the same severity of Censure which the other did; because such
an one, by his unadvisedness, despoils his Patient of that Blood, which he had
not happily to spare, and consequently could not lose: without a manifest
prejudice to his Health, and so runs him upon a Mischief alike dangerous with
the former; it being possible to attain the same End, not only by diverse, but
even contrary courses, as we know those who depart from one another directly
North and South, may yet arrive both at the same Point, if they do but hold on
their Journey, and keep constant to their Meridian.

There is doubtless a Time and a Season to be observed for all things under the
Sun: The Wise man has long ago taught us that Lesson; and Common Reason and
Experience seems every day to inculcate it unto us. There is a Rise, and a
Stay, and Decrease in both Persons and Things, and every one of these different
Circumstances stands in need of a distinct manner of consideration; so as that;
what is proper at one time, may be looked upon as exceeding unfit to be done at
another. And if at the beginning of a Disease, when the Blood, is rank and
high, it may seem perchance to call for some moderate Correction, it follows
not from thence, that the same Method is to be insisted upon afterward, when
the Body has been weakened by long Sickness. And albeit those who have Youth,
and Strength, and Nature on their sides, may well enough depart with some
superfluous Humors, as the Case may be; yet such as are past these Advantages,
are not to be so dealt withal. An Aged person is scarcely to be let Blood upon
any conditions; and if at all, surely much rather at the coming on, than the
declination of a Distemper. And therefore that Physician, who upon the Bleeding
such an one, shall perceive him to fall into an apparent sinking condition, and
yet persevere in the repetition of the self-same course again, discovers
himself to be a man of a most perverse and obstinate Spirit; who, so he can but
satisfy his own ambitious humor of being willing to be thought never to be in
the wrong, cares not what Mischief he does to poor innocent Creatures, who put
their Lives into his hands, and resign up themselves by an implicit Belief to
the guidance of his Opinion. Methinks it should be an Argument to ingenuous
Natures to be the more trusty, by how much the more they find themselves to be
trusted; and to be therefore the more scrupulous of doing an Injury, by how
much the more they perceive it left to the Liberty of their wills, to do an
Injury if they please: But there are some in the world so highly conceited of
their own dear selves, they had rather die the Death than acknowledge a Fault;
and therefore no wonder they had rather others should do so, than be reduced to
the same Inconvenience. And yet this being liable to Mistakes, is a Matter so
very common, nay a property indeed so inseparable from humane Nature, that he
whose demeanor is such, as if he believed himself exempted from that which is
every ones lot, deserves, in my mind, rather to be pitied for his real folly,
than envied at for that imaginary pre-eminence he is apt to fancy to himself,
above all other men.

And seeing the so much controverted Point of Phlebotomy lights so directly in
our way, it may not be amiss, before we take leave of it, to enquire into the
Causes, how it came to gain such footing in the world, that was so rarely
practiced, and with so great caution and wariness in former times. Certain it
is, that men's Bodies are for substance now the very same they were heretofore:
And if we peruse ancient Authors, we shall find the Definitions of Diseases to
be likewise much the same. As for the Climates we live in, they are as
unalterable as the Heavenly Bodies which make them; and men were every whit as
ingenious, and learned, and wise then, as they are now; and yet to one that was
let Blood amongst the Ancients, we may oppose Multitudes of our own experience;
there being scarce a Disease incident to man's Body, for which Blood-letting is
not prescribed by some or other as a principal Remedy: And those whose Opinions
scarcely agree in any one thing besides, are observed however oft-times to
concur in this, the breathing of a Vein, and taking away a little blood, so
that it may seem now to pass amongst us for a kind of a Catholicon; the help at
a dead Lift, and being so often made use of, for contrary Ends and Purposes, to
become the only Medium that was ever yet found out for the reconciling
contradictions; a thing hitherto believed impossible, and beyond the power of
Omnipotency; and therefore what can in no wise be freed from the imputation of
a contradiction in it self.

Surely, there must be somewhat of Mystery in this Matter, more than what is
commonly discerned, and therefore to be at a little pains about the searching
into the Reasons thereof, may perchance deserve to be accounted of as something
more than barely lost Labor, if it be but to give light into some men's
Actions, which might be apt to pass otherwise unobserved, and to caution diverse
unwary people how to behave themselves when they come to be concerned in a like
Case.

I have heard one Bird chirp a different Note from all the rest of the Wood
besides; and if we may believe him, the Original of that pernicious Custom was
first of all derived from the French Nation; from which all the rest of our New
Modes and Fashions do receive their Institution. The Physicians amongst them,
had so long time entrusted the Apothecaries with the perusal of their Bills,
and the making up of their Medecines; and they on the other hand, by their
obsequious demeanor and diligent attendances, had so far forth gained upon the
good Opinion of their Patients, that at last they even made bold to take upon
them the Profession of Doctors themselves, and to administer Physic o^ their
own Heads, without so much, as staying for the others either Leave or good
liking.

And when the Physicians objected their want of Skill, and busying themselves
about such Matters, as they had never been bred up to, and consequently had
nothing to do to meddle withal; they Nicked them again, by showing the People a
way how to save Fees; and few being such infidels, as not to believe what
seemingly made for their profit, though otherwise attended possibly with many
real and preponderating Disadvantages, which they could not be wrought upon so
thoroughly to apprehend. A great number of wealthy persons, who had Money good
store in their Purses, to have paid an able Physician for his Advice, had they
so pleased, but not Brains enough in their Heads to understand wherein the
Fallacy lay, that was put upon them, instead of sending for a Doctor when they
came to be sick, would take a shorter Cut by half, and only apply themselves to
the Apothecaries.

How this was relished by all such, whose Interest lay at stake, and were made
sufferers thereby, is no whit hard to conjecture; and yet it would have mended
the Matter but little to have used many Words in disputing the Case with such
as were bent upon their own ways; and to less purpose would it have been openly
to have fretted and fumed at it (though there is no doubt to be made, but that
in secret many did both) especially seeing the minds of men are generally so
perverse as to be but the more forward for the doing of a thing, by how much
they perceive others whom they delight to vex, to be offended at their Actions.

Whereupon some of the Physicians who had more wit, and less honesty then the
rest, bethought themselves of a timely Expedient to put an end to this so
growing a mischief, before it was too late, to regain their reputation amongst
the people they were now more then in danger of losing, and bring back their
wandering Patients, that had gone astray from them, and all this without any
noise, or the least suspicion of being detected in what they went about.

They agreed amongst themselves, whenever they should be sent for, to advise
concerning a Patient, to bleed him at all adventures by one joint, and common
consent; and if it so fell out, that it had been done beforehand by any one
singly, and of himself, then they which came afterward were to justify the
Action, by giving it an approbation.

It Is beyond belief how the project took effect, how it overran all Paris,
and the parts adjoining immediately, and like a train of Gunpowder blew up the
poor dull Apothecaries with all their little pretenses and shifts, before ever
they were aware, so much as who hurt them, or from whence it was that the blow
came; and not only so, but the continuance of the custom has been a means to
keep them in a good Decorum ever since, who had otherwise been still as they
were wont to be, before they had that trick put upon them, most intolerably
insolent and impatient of all control.

For some of the Ringleaders being persons of known abilities, and they
beginning the dance, and the rest generally following their example; The people
all (like a Herd of Deer at a sudden noise) were surprised with admiration,
brought to stand at a Gaze, and could not tell well what to think of it, they
had natural Logic enough to infer, that if learned Doctor such a one, and such
a one, were clearly for bleeding their Patients, and then that* and if such and
such great persons, eminent for wisdom and authority in the nation, submitted
to that way of cure, surely the thing must needs be reasonable, if not
absolutely necessary; and if it were proper for one, why not for another,
seeing rich and poor, gentle and Simple are all made of the same mold, and then
how could they tell but that their own condition might stand in need of the
same remedy, as well as others; And then how much, or how little at a time, or
whether or no the action were to be repeated were all new Questions, and
weighty ones too, and therefore such as required a more then ordinary skill to
give a determination concerning them.

And albeit they could formerly have been pretty well content to have trusted
an Ignoramus, with the giving them a glister, or a purge, or something to sweat
withal, and so after an entrance made with someone or more of these, had
suffered themselves oft-times to be wheadled in further, then ever they
intended at the first; yet believe me this same taking away of blood seemed to
be a business of such high concernment, that they all began to be clearly of
opinion it was not to be committed hand over head, to the management of every
Rash and Pragmatical Undertaker.

There are some little things in nature, that prove oft-times the occasion of
very considerable effects; and what may be small in it self, may yet be great
in its production: A little spark may be the original of a mighty fire; A
little armor rightly disposed of, may do a great deal of good service, and the
Rudder of a Ship (to take one instance more) though for bulk and substance it
be but small, yet of how forcible an influence is it, for the turning, and
winding about the most capacious Vessels, to whatsoever point of the compass,
the Master thereof himself pleases?

And so to speak the down right truth of the matter: the piece of artifice we
have been mentioning; however slight, and dispicable, it may seem to those, who
have neither leisure; nor it may be Judgment, to conceive of it as they ought:
It Is realy one of the most sly and politic, and the most subservient to the
Physicians interest in its full latitude that was ever yet devised by the wit
of man, as will appear to all such as shall but take notice of these gradations
following.

First of all an opinion of the necessity of frequent Phlebotomie, passing for
current amongst the people, That brings in Physicians of course, to debate of
the weightiness of the affair, and it be but merely for this reason; The
astonishing horror and amazement humane nature in case of this remedy above all
others, is more especially affected withal.

Secondly, it sta^es of all such as are not constituted legal Physicians by
whole sale (as it were) and keeps them either from meddling, or making, any
thing to the purpose, with the administration of Medicine, and leaves them to
whom it rightfully appertains in the full possession and exercise of what they
desire.

As for the first of these, the reason thereof i^ founded upon a principle of
Natures own laying, and therefore what ever superstructure shall come
afterward to be well reared thereon, shall be sure to remain unshaken: The
Scripture it self informs us, that the blood of any thing is the life thereof*
and provident nature may seem to have tinged it with a crimson color, on
purpose to affright, and scare, to the end that men might take the better
warning, about the too hasty shedding of it: And the impression left upon their
thoughts, by that mean, comes no whit short of its intended designation: There
being scarcely any one thing, falling within the compass of a humane capacity,
of a more formidable aspect; or that strikes with a greater terror, then this
does. Diverse there are indeed (though that he be to be looked upon as no part
of their commendations) who can be well enough pleased at the rehearsal of
dismal stories, such as are Wars, Massacres and Murders; so long as they are
acted at a distance from them, and kept far enough out of their sight: but he
must be a Monster and not a Man, who can be the spectator of such real
Tragedies, and yet not feel something of a remorse the mean while arising
within his breast.

The eye of man, as it virtually includes all the other senses: So is it a
faculty which more nearly affects the heart, then any of the rest besides;
Witness that Sympathizing quality, discovering it self in most men; who though
they can afford to be cruel enough, both in their revenge, and corrections, so
long as they keep to the dealing of dry blows and no more, but when once they
come to exceed those bounds, perceive their anger to grow cool again, in an
instant; of Lions become Lambs, and have all their outrage converted into pity.
And if the observation holds generally true when extended unto others, it is
much more so when applied unto our selves, it being usual for the charity of
most to act then strongest of all, what time it comes to be brought the nearest
home. And albeit there are many, out of an affectation to be thought
stout-hearted, care not much (in this vapouring age) for owning any such
tenderness within themselves, yet such a thing really there is. And there are
but few (if any) in the world (let the Climate they were born in happen to be
where it will) but must have so much of the temper of the Welchman in them, as
to be more then ordinarily transported at the sight of their own blood.

And though it be most undeniably true, that there is scarce any one thing,
about which Physicians are commonly called to consult, but what at one time or
other, (if happening to be misapprehended) may prove of as dangerous
consequence to the life of man, as this of Phlebotomy, that is neither here nor
there; so long as it appears not with the same dreadful shape to the view of
the parties concerned.

There is a thing called Argumentum ad hominem, which is to be made use of in
case it shall be found effectual to do the business; when diverse that are much
better, and more convincing in their nature, are to be set aside; and therefore
Physicians in this respect; thought good to transcribe the copy they found set
them by the Carpenters; which is to drive that nail, not which stands the
fairest in their way, or which they have the greatest mind to, above all the
rest, but that which they perceive upon many little essays made, the most
inclinable to enter; so that if the letting patients see their own blood,
carries so much of terror along with it, above all other Remedies besides; who
should be entertained when a matter of that consequence comes to be debated
about; but those who are supposed the most knowing in the mystery; And who they
are, if men's perverseness will not, their own fears quickly will inform them.
And then as for the second; that follows on closely and unavoidably upon the
concession of the former; not only because it is an easy thing to hold a
Possession, where it is once obtained, but by reason of the constant assistances
that are afforded by the forementioned principle; for, and if so be it be to be
looked upon as dangerous, to acquiesce in the opinion of illiterate persons, in
the important matter of Phlebotomy, at one time, it will be so at another; and
then rather than not have them finaly excluded, the same remedy shall evermore
be pretended necessary, by some madheaded Physician or other, and it be but on
purpose to amuse the Patient, and fill his head with jealousies, and cross the
Empericks and Quack-Salvers, in their little designs. Else what could ever be
the reason why so many ancient, and in a manner bloodless people, should have
their veins pierced with so much eagerness upon every slight and trivial
pretense; as we usually see they are? whence should it come to pass? that so
many in the very lowest declination of their distemper, when the whole mass has
been depauperated and spoiled? so many of weak and windy stomachs, such as have
scarce heat enough within them, so much as to digest a potched egg, or a
little chicken broth, should yet have their languishing bodies ransancked and
searched into, for that blood and spirits, which alas they have not to spare,
and there were ten times more then what there is? and all this by the
prescriptions, and at the command of such as can quote you a Greek, or a Lattin
Author, and need be, and derive you a misapplyed text from the sage writings,
of either Gallen, or Hipocrates* Either this must be the reason we have been
but now alleging; or which is a great deal worse, none at all; unless we will
take this for one; that proud and self conceited men, have hereby an
opportunity put into their hands, of gratifieing their own ambitious (not to
say Fantastical) humors; as being consttuted by that means, the sole
Arbitrators of, what is believed to be one of the weightiest matters in the
whole world; and to have it put into their sole power, to determine thereof, as
they think fit.

And so many of them are wont to do indeed with as much carelessness and
indifferency of spirit as we find SVBTIL in the Comoedian dealing out old
MAMMONS money and coals; take fifteen or twenty ounces, you may take thirty.
And then to have a company of shallow witted and impertinent people to look
rufully, and be gazing and stairing in their faces the mean while, and awaiting
the grave sentence from their lips, with as much reverence, and solemnity of
behavior, as those who came for an answer to DELPHOS were wont to attend upon
the Oracle of Apollo there, o^ others of late times, to listen for a wise word
from Friar Bacons brazen head, before it burst to pieces; Are all such tickling
and transporting considerations (especially if meeting with a base and wretched
fancy) that it is not impossible, but that many, who have not a headpiece
capable of higher antainments, may be apt to rest pretty well satisfied with
such empty trifles as these: And to accuse such of Plots, and contrivances,
they were never in the least danger of being guilty of, would be a great deal
of pity as well as injustice, and therefore I shall make bold to rank such
amongst the common herd of Practitioners, who serve only to make up the number
of a party, and to write as near as they can, after the copy that has been set
them by their Leaders; that so; what they are not able to make good by their
own Slender pretenses may be backed with the authority of much abler men.
Whence it comes to pass, that what some take upon them to do through an excess,
The others are allowed to immitate thm in. through a want of wit; and so
knavery is used to justify folly: and that a while after fetched back as an
argument for the maintenance of Knavery again, because ^is general practice is
only sufficient to constitute a custom; which is so far from standing in need
of any abetters and friends; that it both supports it self, and gives
countenance and protection to all that are the Siders with it: but as for such
who are so scrupulous to make matter of doubting, at what is generally
believed, they are in common esteem to be looked upon as Pragmatical, and
Busy-bodies, and so not at all to be endured.

But then over and above the two foregoing advantages, there is yet a third of
very great concernment, in point of interest to the whole community of
Physicians; and that also arising from the before mentioned Unlimited
principle, which is not to be passed over in silence, it is so very remarkable,
and that is the diverse acceptance, the doing of the same thing, is wont to
meet withal whilst considered as proceeding from different persons* through the
working of fancy, and the mere force of imagination* My meaning is that what is
allowable in one should be made culpable in another: and as it is reported of
the pillar of the Cloud which came behind the Israelites Camp; That it gave
Light and Encouragement to their party, but was an occasion of confusion and
disorder to the Egyptians, which followed after: so may it truly be affirmed
of this politic fetch so much in request of late amongst some, that there is
not any one, nay all the other witty and wily ways of contrivance put together,
that could possibly have been thought on, from the beginning of time to this
day, that could ever have stood them in so much stead, nor yet given a more
mortal blow to the wounding of their adversaries, and weakening of their cause,
then this has done; Nay at that very same instant, when it is supposed to be
made use of by the others, and that upon the self same occasion as it would
have been by their own selves. This is somewhat strange, may some one say, and
so no doubt it will seem to all such as shall peruse these lines, at the first
appearance: but the reason of the thing will instantly prove it self, if a
little reflected upon, without the trouble of much straining or far fetched
deduction.

As for Example:

Let one, who is a Physician, take away any determinate quantity of blood, from
his Patient, whether it be right, or whether it be wrong, it is not to be
questioned, but that some arguments or other, may be produced in order to the
justification of such a way of proceeding. Now, and if so be the same Party
(either sooner or later it makes no great matter) comes to gather so much
strength as to be seen abroad again; who would offer to be so uncivil as to
deny the working of a great cure; though perchance he might have done every
whit as well, if not much better without it: nay it is not impossible but that
this loss of blood may have set the man into a languishing condition for many
years to come, notwithstanding this present show of amendment, or else disposed
his body for some second fit of sickness at another time; or which is yet
worse, be the occasion, in the long run, of the taking away something from the
number of his days: and yet none of all these things, because either at a
distance, or out of the reach of the observation of the parties concerned,
shall ever come to be taken notice of, to the Physicians prejudice, yea, if he
should chance to die that present Fit; there could be no more said, because
it is supposed no more could have been done; the mean^ having been used, and a
legal Physician consulted withal, who was in his way, and acting within hi^ own
Sphere, and therefore, what has any body to do to meddle or make about the
calling him to a^^ account, for his prescriptions, and so the busines^ is left
as it was found, without any further enquiry.

Whereas on the other hand, let the paltery Emperick, but Ape the Physician
herein, as he is won^ to do in other matters, it proves no less then the very
bane and downfall to all his projectons, and the first time he fails of
success, as it is impossible he should hold out long; what ever he has been
spending his cares about with such unwearied diligence from first to last,
flies all away in fumo immediately* The bubbles he has been raising, resolve
all into nothing, and the castles he has been building in the air, are all
demolished while you wink; and then, though it may be not till then, all the
form passages of his life, that are liable to any, the leas^ cause of
exception, come all to be surveyed and looked into; then it is who made him a
Physician? and whence came he by his skill? his Extraction and Education, the
way and manner of his life are all laid open to public view, and severely
descanted upon which might have passed unobserved still as hitherto they had
done, had it not been for this unlucky accident falling out, that such a one,
as he is forsooth* must be blooding sick people of his own head, and with out
any further advice; it is only the remembranc^ of that which stirs their
spleens, and awakens their indignation, so that though the man might have bee^
realy bad enough; yet his so bold meddling in thi^ one dangerous concern,
occasionally renders hi^ much more odious in all the other actions of his life,
then happily he might otherwise have seemed to have deserved.

And thus have I endeavored, to show upon these several accounts, how
serviceable a device this unlimited bleeding of sick people, is apt to prove to
the Commonwealth of Physicians in general, and could the matter have rested
here, and might it have been but permitted for as many of the profession to
have dissented from this way, as had had a mind to it, and to have used their
own liberty as they saw occasion; it might for ought I know have been never a
whit prejudicial to the Commonwealth of men neither, but have passed for a
question not very easy to be resolved, whether the entire body of the Nation,
upon the whole of the matter, would have been a saver, or loser thereby:
because that albeit it can in no wise be denied, but that diverse particular
members, may have already, and do daily receive a very considerable detriment
upon that score. It Is a matter of no small importance however to be freed from
those swarms of seducing Empericks, that would have been every where up and
down, buzzing the peoples heads to their exceeding much greater inconvenience,
had this expedient never been found out. True it is there are too too many of
them at present, and so no question there will always be in spite of all the
contrivances, that can possibly be invented, or honest and industrious Care
that can any ways be used to the contrary; but for ought I know there might
have been ten times more then there are, and sure I am, they would have been
much more pernicious, because much bolder in their attempts, were it not for so
witty (though I must needs say withal overpolitick) a piece of subtilty to give
check to their exorbitances. And therefore though we neither ought to do evil
our selves, that good may come of it, nor yet abett or justify the doing of it
in others; it is a thing however possible to be done: And when it does so fall
out, they only, who have had a hand in the encouragement or practice thereof,
are to be made accountable for it.

But matters, as to the present constitution of affairs, are so much altered,
and the Scene so exceedingly shifted, and changed, from what it was formerly;
that what through the prevalency of a Tyrannical custom, on the one hand, and
the Pride and Ambition of some few Physicians on the other (who by their good
Wills would have none live by their professions besides themselves) The
Controversy now lies not so much between Physicians and Apothecaries, or
Physicians and any other sort of Empericks besides: as between one Physician
and another. And as 'twas said of the Spanish Inquisition of old: though it was
invented at first, as a Trap only to catch Moors; yet that it proved afterward
a snare to the most upright and conscientious amongst the Christians: so here
the self same principle, which has served all along, for the suppression of
deluding Quack-Salvers and the discountenancing public enemies of all sorts,
is at length turned with an equal force against the honest Physicians, as ever
it was against the wors^ of them. And to such a height is the Tide now
swollen, and with such a mighty swiftness does the Channel flow, there is no
streching out so much as a hand against it, and it is no less then present
drowning, not to be carried along with the stream. To presume to controvert
what is generally taken upon trust, or warranted by interest, and prejudice,
and folly to boo^ (as has been shown at large) is become a crime unpardonable:
all one indeed as to confess ones self a cross-grained and illiterate Dunce,
and to know nothing what belongs to the art of Physic* and a Physician (as the
case now stands) is driven either to forego his reason, and refuse to be any
longer subject to the dictates of his own conscience; or else to leave of
meddling in his calling, and to put himself qui^e out of all; one of the two,
unless he can be content to live a life exercised with perpetual Janglings, and
Discord; and to be pointed at, as a mere antic for offering to stick to a
fashion almost utterly deserted, and which very few or none at all care for
appearing in, besides himself; which though Superannuated of late, is not so old
neither, but that some now living, can very well remember, to have been held in
good esteem, when there were a majority of Votes, and those of the best and
wisest men here in England for it; but then it was before the French Modes had
in this, (as in all other things) so generally prevailed amongst us.

I have not forgot my self; what I affirmed e're while, how that the notion
amongst them took almost with the same hasty speed that it was at first
propounded. And so it did, for they being an active, and nimble sort of people,
were both the more capable of receiving such an impression, and then over and
above being addicted to the drinking of much Wine for their ordinary Beverage,
whatever loss they happened to sustain upon the account of bleeding, it was so
much the better repaired, and made up again that way.

But in England, is was entertained far otherwise. and stoutly resisted both by
Practitioner and Patient for many years together. And unless it were now and
then by a whimsycal-pated man, who affected singularity, and to be seen to
tread in a pathway different from all others, it was seldom or never put in
practice, till here of ^ate; but upon very solemn occasions. And if ever the
nation do chance to turn wise again, and the ridiculousness of these modes come
once to be manifested to public view: it is not impossible, but that this
fantastical custom of bleeding upon all occasions, may come to be rejected
together with them; but whether they shall or not* it follows not by any
necessary consequence, that i^ we should allow them to be our Governors in the
Regulation of our Garments, that they should therefore be permitted the same
power in matters appertaining to our lives. And though we should suffer our
selves to be swayed altogether by fancy, in affairs of smaller moment, It may
however be hoped, that in time we may be wrought upon in those of a much higher
importance (especially after we shall have smarted sufficiently for our folly)
to take reason for our guide.

There are diverse grounds might be shown, for the probability of such an
expectation as this, some whereof have been a little hinted at, in the former
part of this discourse. But that which shall be made choice of now in the close
of all (setting all others aside) shall be taken from no other Topic, then the
nature of the thing it self, which if but thoroughly understood, and duly
attended to, as it ought to be, will stand in little need of any farther
enforcements to persuade to a steady belief thereof: which to the end it may
the more effectually be done, let us a little take notice of the structure, and
constitution of man's body. I name only the body, because that notwithstanding
the soul be to be reckoned as a part of the Man, as well as the body, and that
the most noble one of the two; yet that being for substance immaterial, and so
not in the least liable to alteration of it self, belongs not at all to our
enquiry, but the body only which is the Organ thereof and Subject to so
frequent changes and alterations does.

Now Philosophers, and Physicians both; who have been at a great deal of pains
to search into the Nature and Original thereof, tell us, and that truly enough,
that this Body of ours is at first constituted of the Seed of the Parents, and
the Mothers Blood; how that there being a perfect mixture, and joining together
of the two first within the Womb; and from thence the more noble parts having
received their delineation, the blood of the Mother is at length derived to
them, which gives Being to the rest, and augmentation to the whole; and to this
latter it is that the Embryo owes its farther growth, and accomplishment till
it becomes born into the world.

After which time the Infant is still supported by a continual accession of
blood, as it was formerly; with this only difference; that whereas before it
had it from the Mother in specie, ready prepared to its hand, it now receives
it under the form of nutriment, and is it self put to the trouble of some
farther alterations to bring it to that pass, as being fitted with Organs and
Faculties of its own, subservient to that end; which being an opinion not only
founded upon reason, but apparent even to common sense, and Anatomical
observation. The truth hereof since first taken up, has never been so much as
scrupled at, or entertained with the least hesitancy, (as there was no reason
wherefore it should) but passed for current, and unquestionable Doctrine, even
to this very day. And this brief account, though it might have been enough to
have satisfied an inquisitive man in very many things, yet as to all it was
not; because substances being but unactive of themselves, could not be judged
capable of the Alterations observed to be in them, without some superadded
qualities to make them so: and therefore 'twas no more than was necessary to
fetch one step more, and search out what they were; which having done, they
fixed upon these two as previous to the rest, to wit, the natural heat, and
radical moisture; and thereupon builded their conclusions, and from thence
deduced their inferences; and the reason of this, their proceeding was not
altogether without probability: for taking notice of the actual warmth they
found to be in most living Creatures, and a principle of life to lie concealed
in Vegetables; even in the very dead of winter, which came afterward actually
to exert and show forth it self at the beginning of the Spring: they were
brought to this resolution to conclude upon a certain, innate heat, to be
contained in every Particle of the Body of Man, (which they say first lives the
life of a Plant and Beast, before it comes to be advanced to the perfection of
a reasonable Creature, and for ever after to retain the same qualities and
affections incident to them both) and this to be always founded in a radical
moisture, which it lives and preys upon continually; and which in the
conclusion, when that comes to be wasted and spent, dies together with it for
company. These two qualities they supposed never long to continue in the self
same plight and condition; but however to be much more exuberant and vigorous
in the beginning, than in the latter end of the life of man, but in the middle
to seem to stand at a stay, as being set at an equal distance between either of
the extremes; so that distinguishing his years into these set-periods of time,
Childhood or Youth, middle Age, and old Age; there were scarce any considerable
changes incident to humane Bodies which they were not able to salve by virtue
of this Hypothesis; and which might not some way or other be reducible to the
blending together of these two qualities diversely considered, as the principal
occasion thereof.

Was the Party but now in his blooming years, fresh, and lively, vigorous, and
active; as apt to burnish in bigth, as to increase in stature; 'twas because
the constitutive principles, out of which he was at first made, were as yet
near their Original, which being fabricated out of the purest Blood, and most
refined Spirits in Natures choicest Laboratory, had not as yet fully attained
to the utmost of their force; but were still in a capacity of exerting their
activity more and more, according as the Nutritive Faculty should be disposed
to make use of them.

Did the same Party stand at a stay; 'twas because this innate heat had arrived
to the utmost of its power, beyond which it could not pass, and was able to do
no more than keep up those parts in sufficient repair it had already under its
jurisdiction: and that the moisture with which it was in conjunction, had
arrived to its vertical point also. But then, as is usual in the winter of our
years, was there an universal decay upon the parts of the whole Man? were the
Sinews stiff, the Senses dull, the Muscles dry and sapless; and did every other
Instrument and Organ of the Body in proportion unto these begin to falter in
the execution of the office, for which nature had appointed them? Why there
could be no other expected, when the heat and moisture, that should give
vigor, and preservation to every particular member, had been so far wasted and
spent; and an answer taken from that general Topic was looked upon by all as
satisfactory enough in these, and a hundred other the like cases.

What was the Opinion of the Ancients, and the Men of his time concerning this
Point: Ovid, who was known to be as good a Philosopher as Poet gives us clearly
to understand in the first Book of his Metamorphosis, where he has occasion to
describe the replenishing of the Earth with those various sorts of living
Creatures, that had been swept away with the Flood. Quippe ubi temperiem
sumpsere, humor que, calorque
Concipiunt; and ab his oriuntur cuncta duobus:
Cumque sit ignis aquae pugnax, vapor humidus omnes
Res creat, and discors concordia foetibus apta est.


As if so be the Productions of Nature, considered in her full Latitude,
depended principally upon these two.

And Sennertus a late Writer, to name no more but them, (as supposing all
others of intermediate Ages, who understood themselves as they ought, to have
been of their judgment) Treating upon the same Head, seems to illustrate the
matter exceeding fully by a homely comparison or two, tending to the same
purpose; which if minded with a little attention, may render the conception
thereof somewhat the more easy to be apprehended. Suppose says he a Vessel of
Wine should be continually drawing out, (or to that effect) and have the empty
space filled up again either with water, or a more thin Wine than it self,
although the change be not at all perceptible at the beginning of the
operation, because of the great disproportion, that is as then betwixt them;
yet in tract of time, when the loss is more on the one side, and the accession
far greater on the other, It will be made visible enough. And the Wine after a
long time of mixture, will cease to have any predominance at all over such
water, as being rendered much more thin and heartless by it. Etsi enim in locum
humidi radicalis aliquid semper reponatur, deterius tamen id est, habetque se
sicut aqua ad vinum, quae vino per mixta id debilius reddit; Jnstit. lib. 1.
cap. 6. And then a while after in the same Chapter he compares the natural heat
and radical moisture whilst in conjunction together, to the Flame of a Burning
Torch, which both wastes, and yet is preserved by the combustible matter thereof
at the same time; Perinde enim ut flamma in lychno oleum aut sebum depascitur,
and tandem absumpta materia, ex pabuli inopia extinguitur: ita etiam calor
nativus noster, instar flammae, humidum primigenium depas^itur, tandemque
humido deficiente, ipse etiam extinguitur. This was the account, or much to
this purpose, given by those of former times, and since: and according to these
suppositions and principles, in every thing almost they did, were the
Physicians wo^t to bend their course; and if it shall be said that comparisons
are not to be taken for proofs; and that such Notions as these could not but be
liable to much uncertainty, because apt to be mistaken; as many of those, who
yet contradicted them not, were wont to acknowledge themselves: It must however
surely be granted, that in Matters of this abstruse nature, a dimn Light ought
to be esteemed of as much better than none at all. And to act according to such
Positions as might both have a proportion to the things they related to, as
also to one another; and were capable in some measure of obtaining the end for
which they were propounded, to be much more allowable, then to leave all to the
determination of blind chance; or what is full out as bad, to the capricious
humors of a fickle man.

There is neither Circle nor Degree to be found in the Concavous Parts of the
Heavenly Bodies, to which they are commonly assigned: nor yet on the Surface of
the Earth neither, other than what is placed there by men's fancies* and yet
what a huge loss would Astronomers and Geographers be a^* had they no such
helps as these are to be guided by, to say nothing of Navigators, Architects,
Diallers, and several other most ingenious Artists, who find themselves
exceedingly helped by Rules and Directions taken from Positions merely
imaginary in the matters relating to their different employments; and by which
they are set in as sure and unerring a Method to order their affairs by, as
Demonstration it self is able to chalk out to them.

And though Physicians never were, nor never shall be able to give a through
resolution about those various and nice questions, they are necessitated
sometimes to be concerned in, with half that positive clearness, that those of
many other Professions: are by reason of the nature of many things so treated
about by them, admitting of no such evidence; yet without doubt it must needs
be a strange piece of indiscretion therefore to reject such common notions, as
the wisest, the most sober, and the most inquisitive amongst the Ancients have
thought good to deliver down to their Successors; and those again such as have
been confirmed by the experience, approbation, and authority of several others,
every way as knowing and judicious as themselves; which for several Ages
together have in a direct Series and Order of time still followed one another;
because they have not been so full of discovery as might have been wished; or
more convincing (as has been said) than the matter would bear. And 'twill be
yet a greater degree of madness, when we have so done, to leave our selves
nothing of a Rule to walk by; or if we do leave any, such as is obnoxious to
the same, if not far greater exceptions, than those which have been so cast
off, and rejected by us. Stick we then but to the principles delivered us by
our Forefathers: and this licentious way of Bloodletting will quickly be at an
end, as done out of a contempt of, and a direct opposition against them, as may
be shown clearly from what has been already laid down; and is easy in any case
that can be instanced in, almost universally to be made out; for either it must
be done in the time of youth, and then in all probability it cuts that estate
so much the shorter, and so becomes a hastener on of middle age; or if it so
falls out, that the party have arrived to his middle age already; then it
pushes him on a little farther to the state that is next behind that: but if he
be past his best, and in a declining condition, what time the experiment comes
to be practiced, it gives him a lift forward (...), still however, by causing
him to mend his pace; and advances him some few degrees nearer the last stage
he is to conclude his course in; and that fits him for the hand of death. And
so indeed it does in every one of the cases before put: but because but
remotely in the two former, I have only expressed that in the last of the three
estates, which was plainly enough implied in every one of them. For if old age
be the immediate harbinger to death, and middle age the forerunner of that;
then whatever thrusts forward youth toward a state of middle age; and which
yet again hastens on middle age so as to cause it to approach to the conditon
of old age sooner than otherwise it would, may truly enough be said to be the
procurer of death to all alike: and so by consequence, whenever Phlebotomy
shall be made use of; unless it be over-ballanced with the consideration of a
greater evil, which can be no other than an apprehension of the same thing upon
some other account to threaten us at a nearer distance: it ought to be looked
upon as such; and to have a natural source and tendency to the producing of the
same effect.

The force of all, which deductions before supposed, depends solely and
entirely upon the making out of these two following Propositions. First* that
the depriving of the Body of any determinate quantity of blood whatever, is a
never-failing means of shortning man's life. And Secondly, that all those
several Ages, into which man's life is capable of being divided, are either
shorter or longer in proportion to the time of his continuance here in this
world.

The latter of which is a Postulatum, as reasonable to be granted; as that all
the parts of the same thing collectively taken, should be neither greater nor
lesser than the whole which arises out of them; and that whenever the whole
comes to be shrunk into a lesler Volumn than before, the parts should be
imagined to abate of their demensions in a just proportion thereunto. And that
whatever it be that occasions a contraction in the one, should be deemed to
have an influence in producing a like effect upon the other at the same time,
unto each of which assertions the more ready assent ought to be yielded,
because that albeit the whole, and the parts may be called by several
Appellations; yet are they in truth and reality but one and the self-same
thing. To bring, all which, a little nearer home by a more full and thorough
application, It may not be amiss to cast our eyes backwards, and observe; that
in those first and primitive times, when Men lived longer upon the Earth, they
had each of them their Seasons of Youth, middle age, and old age as well as we;
but they were much more long and comprehensive than now they are. And the
parties who had their Lives measured by them, were necessitated upon that
account to make so much the longer pause before ever they stepped over from one
estate to another. Whereas upon the cutting short of humane Life in general;
These several Periods were reduced to a much narrower compass: and men as they
become sooner ripe, so were they the sooner rotten. And if we shall put all
this together, 'twill be no Parodox to affirm, that whatever shall be the cause
of substracting from the number of men's years, if derivable from their first
Principles, ought to be looked upon as the forwarder of them in their whole
passage between the Cradle and the Grave; but if accidentally befalling them
after their Conception, or Birth, then to be judged of, as having the same
efficacy upon their Lives for the remaining part, as then behind.

But then as for the former, though it may be equally true with this, yet is it
not altogether so perspicuous in every respect, that may deserve consideration
for the Proof of that Particular. I say in every respect, there being two
reasons to be rendered above all others that may seem to infer a necessity for
the abbreviating Men's Lives upon the taking away of Blood universally, and in
all cases. The one whereof, though it may happily lie plain enough to the
understanding of every man; and that at the very first Proposal; yet the other
does not, but requires something more of deliberation, and heedful attendance
thereto, to make it appear to be so.

That which is so very plain and obvious, is taken from the enfeebling and
impoverishing the whole Mass, which is observed to ensue upon the losing of
Blood in any wise: it being held for a Rule, that the Blood of such Creatures
as receive their growth and nourishment thereby, ought to be accounted of as so
much the more pure and sprightly, by how much it stands placed nearer its
Original; but to become, less and less such in a proportionable manner,
according to its greater or less departure therefrom. Whence Aged People are
said to be, exucci and exangues, both Bloudless and Sapless: not absolutely and
simply so, but such if compared with others, or with themselves formerly in the
heat and vigor of their Youth; and upon this Supposition alone, it is, that
the Succession of People came ever to take place amongst us; and one Generation
to make room for another, as has been held forth to us by the comparison of
Wine and Water mixed together, and shall be shown more fully hereafter by the
farther Prosecution of an Argument somewhat Analogous unto this.

The other, from the interruption given thereby, to the act of nourishing the
Body, which in its regular and due Economy ought always to be continued, as
being the only possible means for the maintaining the heat and moisture
thereof, which are evermore liable to decay, and which according to the
Principles of the Ancients, are held to be the two main Supporters of humane
Life, as we likewise have supposed; but the way and manner by which this comes
to be brought about, being of a consideration somewhat more remote, and
likewise more intricate to be conceived of. I shall for that reason take the
Liberty of steering so much the larger a compass in order to the explication of
it.

As for example, if the Parents be both healthful, and their Blood sound, then
the most refined part thereof which is separated from the rest, deposited first
of all in the Seminal Vessels, and afterward in the Womb, for the Production
of the Body of the Infant, cannot possibly miss of a most exquisite
constitution when coming actually to be made that, which Originally it was
designed for; and if happening to meet with such a supply of nourishment as is
every way convenient for it, first and last; and a concurrence of such other
circumstances as are duduly required over and above thereunto, there is little
doubt to be made but that it will have a duration proportionable to the
exactness of its composition, and the successfulness it has been attended
withal in and through its whole course; that is to say, that that Party to whom
such a Body belongs, and such other additional advantages have together fallen
in with it, as have hitherto been supposed, shall have a Life produced even to
the extremity of old Age.

Whereas let the Constitutive Principles be never so well prepared; if the
nutriment the Body is to be fed withal, be defective, as to the doing its
part; or be the Nutriment never so proper; if yet some other conditions
material to be performed, happen to be omitted, or circumstances misapplied, or
any external violence to be offered to it; a failure in any one, or more of
these points, renders all hopes that might have been conceived upon any, or all
the other former accounts taken together, utterly void on the other hand,
should all other desirable occurrences have fallen out; and the Seed of the
Parents barely to have been faulty, that one deficiency had been enough to have
proved a hinderance to all the rest, and the same Person, who might otherwise
have lived long and happily, and enjoyed his health without any interruption
for many years together; is for that only reason put quite and clean beside his
Biass; and either cut off suddenly, or cast into a languishing condition (it
may be) beyond all possibility of recovery. Multitudes of Instances might be
reckonded up for the making good either of these Allegations; but that I am
neither left to the liberty of giving my self that Scope, (nor should desire to
take it if I were) as being under the choice, as well as obligation of keeping
to that one particular inconvenience that is occasioned almost in all places,
by too immoderate Phlebotomie.

To prosecute which matter a little further; and yet withal to bottom our
discourse upon no other foundation than what we have been laying hitherto; or
rather which indeed has been laid ready to our hands by the observations of our
Progenitors, in case of the good disposition and natural healthfulness of the
Parents: The Principles derived from them, (being as is to be supposed)
well-furnished with a Supply of natural warmth and moisture; and they again
kept in repair by a continual accession of the same qualities afforded by the
nourishment, and influenced by as constant an additional heat, generated at
first formation of the Infant in the Mothers Heart, as afterward in its own,
upon the removal of the Afterbirth, and breaking off of the Umbilical Vessels.
The Body upon these considerations cannot choose but be looked upon as a
Mansion House exceeding proper for the Soul to reside in; and it be but because
the several actions necessary to the being and support of humane life, are so
readily performed there, over what they would have been in an Organ that had
been otherwise disposed; that is to say destitute of the qualifications before
remembered by us; to instance in particulars. Alteration and concoction, (I mean
not that of the Stomach only, but those more excellent and refined ones which
succeed it) and so nutrition and augmentation are all effected and brought to
pass by the interposition of heat and moisture; and then the nature of
Temperament in general; as also of the several Species that are contained under
it, depend very much upon the combination of these two qualities one with
another. And as Health presupposes a dueness of Temperament, so is it, its
self, for the most part presupposed as a condition unto long life.

On the contrary, let the Parents happen to be crazie to some certain degree
(to keep close to our former Supposition) and then whatever proceeds from them
will be apt to participate of the Infirmities of their Nature. According to the
intent of that known Axiom. Nothing can bestow that upon another, which it
first contained not ^^thin it self. And then by consequence if the Blood of the
Parents be contaminated and spoiled (as w^ see in diverse Heredirary Diseases)
the Offspring will fall out to be for temper much the same with them, and then
'twill either become Abortive and Perish before the Birth; or if living to see
the Light, be evermore Feeble and Consumptive, and so put into a constant
disposedness toward a final Dissolution.

So that notwithstanding to be healthfully descended be a matter of very high
importance, and to be adjudged deservedly as one of the first and main steps
toward the attainment of Long Life, yet it is not all that is required
thereto; but as we come into the World one way, and go out again diverse, so it
is possible for the best Constitution that is to miss of its Ends upon several
accidental accounts (as have been shown before) and miscarry as undoubtedly as
if it were inclined thereto from a Principle within it self. To which heads may
be referred all those outward acts of violence, which may and too often do
prove to be of Force enough for the destroying the best formed Infants in
Nature, whilst included in the Mothers Womb. As also the most vigorous and
athletick Persons living after they arrive to maturity of Years. To these Heads
are reducible all those Omissions, and overact^ngs, those many Mistakes,
Presumptions and Misapplications, those Debaucheries and other Ways of
Intemperance, which many are too fatally guilty of in the unhappy Lives we live
in, both in respect of themselves and others. In a word, to this Catalogue does
belong all those Legions of Mortal Enemies that do so constantly surround us in
the whole Pilgrimage of our Lives. Which though numerous enough, I have nothing
at all to do to meddle withal, more than barely to point at them; as being only
concarned in the particular Discovery of one alone; not therefore ever a whit
the less dangerous because but little taken notice of. And that is, as has been
mentioned often and again, the ridiculous and non-sensical Custom of Blood
letting so much in use amongst us, which I have constantly hithereto and do
still affirm to be prejudicial to every State and Condition of man, some few
cases only excepted, and shall thus endeavor more fully to evince.

Suppose we a Person of the most exact and well framed Temperament of Body that
was ever yet produced, and such a one to have been attended on with an
Affluence of all other desirable Circumstances whatever, there both must and
will be a perpetual wasting and falling away of the several parts thereof. Such
a mutability are we always subject unto (even the very best of us) from this
common State of our Mortality: which loss is evermore to be repaired and made
up again in true measure, by as constant a supply of Aliment assumed unto that
purpose; which Aliment could never be in any Capacity of producing such an
Effect, were it not for the Agreement the several Parts of it have with those
of the Body, to which they are to be united; and that not only in that common
Principle of first matter; which is one and the same to all Bodies in general,
but also in respect of those two necessary Qualities so often times before
mentioned of Heat and Moisture. For it is upon the account of that additional
and super-added Moisture that is conveyed unto it by the Nourishment, that the
Radical is maintained and kept up, which is the same for kind with it. And the
Primogenial Heat again is as necessarily upheld after the self same way and
manner, according to what has been so often repeated heretofore.

For whether this Aliment so assumed be to be taken from Bruit Creatures, such
as is the Flesh of Birds, or Beasts, or Fishes; or whether it be to be derived
from Vegetables, such as have their Rise immediately from the Bowels of the
Earth. There are both this innate heat and radical moisture still to be found
in the one as well as the other, and they are both evermore carefully preserved
by Nature, under all those preivous Changes and Alterations the Aliment
successively passes through; till such time as the last Act of Nutrition comes
to be performed, and the Nourishment to be converted into, and made one with
the Substance of the Body it self.

And first of all as for that Concoction, that is labored within the stomach,
which was a little glan^d at before, after the Aliment has been manducated and
ground small, lain for a convenient space fermenting and di^gesting within the
Cavities of the same, the more feculent drossie and impure parts thereof; are
separated and cast into the draught, but the refined still left behind to be
promoted to a yet further degree of Exaltation, where still the two Qualities,
before named, are sure evermore to be detained and kept back together with them.

And then again in like manner in the Liver or elsewhere, wherever the Second
Concoction comes to be performed, and the work of Sanguification wrought, the
same care is again taken for the Preservation of them both, as there was before
in the Stomach. For so we find them in an Eminent Manner to be contained there,
and that from the Observation of our very senses themselves; that the Blood is
always warm so long as Life remains within the Body; the Sense of Feeling is
sufficient to inform us, and that it is moist as well as hot, is over and above
made clear to us by the discerning of the Sight.

And so in the third and last place, when that great and Substantial Exchange
comes to be made, there is not the lest doubt but that the same Qualities are
withheld still. It being very improbable that Nature should preserve them thus
charily all this while, to part with them at a Season when they were likely to
be of the greatest usefulness of all to her: and if we enquire into the Nature
of this Cambium the immediate matter (say some) out of which the Restoration
of the Body is to be made, we shall always observe it held forth and expressed
by such Names and Appellations as do plainly enough intimate the same things
unto us.

And thus by this means are we arrived to an easy way of expounding what is
meant by that so perpetual wasting of the radical moisture in the Body of Man,
(so much talked of) and the repairing it again by an Additional Supply that was
with the same Constancy afforded it; as likewise to a clear Understanding of
the great Prejudice that is done to humane Bodies by deprieving them of the
Matter out of which this Supplement is only to be made. It Is the Humidity of
the Aliment received, that makes amends for the Loss sustained upon the other
Account; and put but a stop to that, and the first Stock wastes amain; as we see
evidently in a little bodily Sickness, (where for want of this wonted Supply of
Nourishment, Nature not being then at leisure to attend unto it, as being
called upon to a far more necessary work of fighting with the Distemper) how
strangely will the Members become emaci^ated all on the sudden And so in many
other Cases, where though the the things are not, yet the Proportion held in
them may be said to be one* and the same.

That Person who has a standing Revenue and other Additional Helps, amounting
to almost an equal value with that, for the defraying of his necessary Charge,
may yet happily be put upon such Expenses as shall exceed them both together, and
so be left unavoidably liable to a declining in his Estate. But now if this
Superadded Income happen totally to be Suspended, then that wasting which was
but slow, and as it were insensible, though sure enough before, will now become
quick and manifest; because the one main means that gave check to its Progress
is supposed to be taken away.

Which very same thing is yet further illustrated by that common Instance given
of the burning Lamp, which from the time of its first seting up, to that of its
final exstinguishment, may well be said to have a continual Tendency and Motion
to its last End. But then if other supplimental Oil of a much more gross and
impure Substance, such as is indeed through the greatness of its Alay, unable
to gender any Flame of its self at all, shall happen constantly to be poured
in, as the other is supposed to be drawn off, though it can never maintain a
burning to perpetuity, yet will it however by Contributing something of an oily
Substance to be joined ^o that which was upon the Wast before, be a means to
prolong the time of the Lamps duration; and cause it to hold out much longer
than otherwise it would have done. And then if it should so come to pass, that
there should be an utter Suspension, and withdrawing of this wonted
Contribution, though but for a while, the pure Oil will most undoubtedly blaze
out the faster for lack thereof, and there ought to be a proportianoble
abatement made upon the Account of the whole duration, for the Interruption
that has been given by that Occasional Intermission let it happen to have
fallen out when ere it will.

There is a certain Stock of Radical Moisture to be observed within the Body of
every man, which defuses it self thoroughout each minute particle thereof, and
without which it is impossible for any due Temperament long to be preserved; or
for the Soul and Body to be held in a State of Conjunction one with another:
This Moisture is supposed to be perpetually subject to decay, and that upon a
double account; First as being prey^d upon by the Heat it is contempered
withal; and Secondly, because the Substantial Parts in which it is founded as
an Accident in its Subject, are liable to be consum^d also; but the Blood of
Man is either the Immediate Matter, or at least wise the Matter but once
removed, out of which the Parts so decaying, are all to be framed a new, and
the Heat and Moisture which we have proved to be the inseparable Concomitants
of the Blood, are the same for kind, though not for Purity, with the Innate and
Radical, that are Seated in the several Parts of the Body. And it is only from
the Addition of them, as we have been still supposing, and in a manner enforced
so very long to insist upon the Proof of, because a Point so exceeding
necessary to be thoroughly understood that the Primogenial are upheld. And
therefore when ever it so falls out, that any stop shall be put to the
Continuation of the Act of Nutrition (as it is very improbable but that there
should be some, when ere the Blood out of which this Aid is only to be
afforded, comes, though but in Part, to be Subtracted and taken away) those
Parts of the Body, which both might and ought to have been recruted thereby,
will most certainly be deprived for some time, at leastwise, of such a
Proportion of Heat and Moisture as had been realy communicated unto them, had
this hinderance never been; because, as goes the Substance, so in like manner
goes the Accident; they live and die, rise and fall together: and when ever the
one is withheld the other of Course will unavoidably be kept back also; and
though it should happly be but for a time, that very Concession alone is
sufficient for our purpose; because, according to the Instances alleged, the
two Original Qualities before mentioned, must, for lack of such wonted
Accessions, be left under a necessity of so much the greater wasting and decay;
and as a consequent of that their final Extirpation, be so much the nearer its
Accomplishment.

Forces, when united into one, as they are allowed to be the stronger, so are
they upon that Account the better enabled to withstand any foreign Violence
that shall at any time be attempted against them; and not only so, but to hold
out so much the longer against their own natural Principles, inclining them to
a Dissolution. And therefore if those Qualities, which from time to time have
been constantly relieved (if not intended) by an Additional Supply of others
of like Virtues with themselves, come once to fail of the Supporte^s they have
hitherto been helped withal; What other can be expected, but that immediately
from that Instant, they should not only begin to flagg and bate something of
their Pristine Vigor, but also be much more hasty and precipitate in the
manner of their so doing; because now reduced to a necessity of spending
altogether upon their own private Stock, which they were not before put upon;
and though possibly so soon as ever Nature is able to reinforce her self, the
very same, or near as good Supplies as any afforded in times past, are sure
again to be sent in; and all things, so far forth as is possible, to be
restored to their wonted Condition. It Is questionable however whether or no
that Relief may not come too late to make amends for the loss sustained in that
interval; nay it is utterly impossible but that it should* because th^se
superadded Qualities, if considered in their own Nature, are suited to no other
end, than barely to keep the Primogenial from sinking, so fast as without them
they would have done; not simply from fading at all: For were it so, men would
never die, but live till they were Immortal. And therefore much less can they
be ordained to have the least respect backwards for the reparation of any
Antecedent Damage that may be supposed to have happened before their coming.

And if any shall be so perverse, as obstinately to maintain, that they can
discern little reason, wherefore to conclude a Suspension of the act of
Nutrition, because some few ounces of Blood have been drained from the whole
Mass; the abatement of so small a Quantity being very inconsiderable, if
compared with the total sum, perchance not amounting, upon a due Estimate, in
the departure of nine or ten Ounces thereof, to the proportion of above one, to
one and thirty.

And therefore that though it should so fall out, that Phlebotomy should at
Distant Seasons be often and again celebrated, it could never follow from thence,
but that enough and to spare might still be left behind for the carrying on the
so necessary work of Nourishing the Body, and that without the least hinderance
and Interruption thereof at all.

And should they proceed further to urge, as an enforcement of the Belief of
this their Opinion, the different Quantities of Blood, and extreme latitude, as
to that one particular, that is to be discerned amongst several Persons, as
extending, according to the Calculations of some, who pretend to be curious
about that enquiry, to upwards of a hundred and forty Ounces; And so upon that
account hold it but reasonable to infer, that what ever Quantity shall be
supposed to surmount the just standard of such a Proportion, as ought to
suffice for the competent Support of Men's Bodies, and a convenient transmitting
the humors thereof from one Part to another, deserves to be looked upon under
no other Notion, than as a timely Provision, laid up in Store by Nature,
against all such accidental losses of the same, as, by some Casualities or
other, might happen for the future to fall out.

I Answer, that neither of these Considerations, how plausible soever they may
appear to be, can ever be of force to weaken the Validity of any Assertion
formerly laid down by ^s; if we do but call to mind, that humane Bodies, as
they are observed to vary from one another exceedingly, in respect of the
unequal Quantities of Blood that are wont to be con^ained in each of them; So
neither will they be found to be at a much greater Agreement amongst
themselves, in point of Bulk and Stature. And consequently, all such of them as
^re of any thing a greater magnitude than those others they are compared with,
as they will require such an amplitude of Vessels as may best comport with such
their Dimensions; so likewise for the same reason will they stand in need of
such convenient measures of Blood, as may in some sort contribute to the
satisfying these their different Capacities, and be every way correspondent to
the more than ordinary Largeness of them.

And then, look what excess of greatness shall be allotted to any one man's Body
above another; the same in a like Proportion ought to be allowed to each
Particular Member, and Integral Part, into which the whole ^b, supposed to be
divided, if compared with other Parts and Members which are Constructive of
some lesser Body, unto which their own Total had been referred. According to
which way of procedure, by a deduction as evident as Demonstration it self.
That Blood that shall be adjudged convenient for the repair and maintenance of
those larger parts, ought to be exhibited in somewhat a more plentiful and free
manner than to those others that are less, and then what becomes of all those
Redundances and Superfluities that according to this Opinion are so much relied
on?

Besides, humane Bodies are known to differ as well in point of Temperament, as
they do in bigth and tallness: upon which account there are incommunicable
Degrees of Heat and Cold, ascribed by the Learned to either Sex. Men, they
affirm to be of a Constitution much more hot, Vigorous and Active than Females
usually are, whence it comes to pass, that they stand not in want of those
periodical Evacuations that the others cannot be so well without, the
Superfluous excesses of their Blood being otherwise corrected, and that as
either preyed upon and consumed by their own natural ^eat, or driven forth of
the Body again in Sweat and Vapor by the protrusion of the same cause: and if
so be one Sex may be set at so wide a distance from the other, in respect of
these two Opposite Qualities, as we see they are, and as is commonly believed
by all. What hinders but that the several individuals, comprehended under
either kind, may in a due measure and in some less Proportion be removed from
one another likewise, and then the as different Circumstances that unadvoidably
fall in with, and are appendant to the supposal of these various Qualities,
that is to say, as considered in a more remiss or intense Degree, are neither
hard to conceive, nor yet difficult to be accounted for. Because there is
nothing either more or less to be found in them, than what is occasioned by
Principles apt enough to produce such Effects by way of Natural Causality. And
so according to the Rules of common Discourse, and ordinary Reasoning, what can
be more necessarily concluded, than that all such as are of a Blithe and
Spritely humor, should require of Course a great deal more of Blood, and
Spirits for the supporting it, than others which are dull, and lazy, and
Phlegmatic, for the maintenance of theirs; in regard they are put to a much
greater Expense thereof every moment of their Lives than the others are. It
faring with the one as with the Earth in Summer. At what time let the Clouds
gather together never so fast, and the Water descend upon it, in almost never
so great abundance, it is forthwith returned back again in Vapor and
Exhalation; and unless it may for a Constancy have its wants supplied, with
fresh and repeated Showers, will unadvoidably in a very little while become
scorched and burnt up.

But with the others as with the same Element in the depth and dead of Winter,
when there neither is, nor can be the same avoidance of its moisture, because,
that heat, which should alone work its removal, is so exceedingly abated, over
what it was wont to be at the other Season of the Year, all things are not the
same to all men; and if that Assertion shall seem overstrange to any, it will
be less so, if we do but consider, that all men are not the same neither to
themselves, but vary and change Conditions almost as often as the Moon does
Shapes, to day appearing in one Humor, and to morrow in another; and as Rivers
are called by the same Names, by way of Analogy only, when the Waters out of
which they are constituted are hourly fresh and new, so may the same thing in
some qualified Sense be verified of men's Bodies too.

So that to resume our former Debate, there is no great Question to be made,
but that as every Body is fitted with particular Instruments and Organs, such
as may be convenient for its use, and composed of such Members as may bare a
Proportion to the whole; so likewise, with such Supplies of Blood and
Nourishment, as are every way agreeable to its Temper. And the Sanguine and the
Choleric, the Melancholic and the Phlegmatic, have each of them such
allowances as suit best with their several Constitutions; and then if the
Quantities of Blood that are observed to be in each of them be not alike, so
(if the matter were well enquired into) perchance neither is there Temperament;
and to the Dissimilitude of the one, may very well be ascribed the Inequality
of the other. And then upon either or both these Accounts, taken jointly or
severally (as the matter may seem to require) there may be grounds sufficient
shown for the producing a Reason, for whatever common Experience informs us of
as touching the present enquiry; without flying to mere Possibilities,
Contig^^ties, things which indeed may, but perhaps never will fall out, of
which more anon: But suppose they should both fail and be rejected as
unsatisfactory, and that nothing of a direct proof could be made out from
either of them, that is to say, that neither the Inequalities of men's Bodies,
nor yet the Disagreeableness of their Tempers ought to be allowed of as any
Cause at all, for the furnishing them with such various Supplies of Blood as we
usually find they have; which yet to me appears plain and reasonable enough;
and so it is like it may do to many others besides* I do not see however, upon
what Imaginary grounds, or colorable pretense, this laying up Provisions
against future Casualities, can possible be made use of as an Argument of any
Force at all to evince it; that being neither consistent with the usual Methods
of Nature in other like Cases, not yet with those commonly received Notions
that are vulgarly delivered concerning her; such as are acting Necessarily and
Perfectly; her intending but one thing at a time, and nothing at all in vain.

Whereas according to this Hypothesis, she would be taken up about the
Continuance of Matters purely contingent, as depening upon the Will of a mere
voluntary Agent; and that ofttimes, such a one as is determined in his
Resolutions, not by the Dictates of right Reason as he ought, but it may be by
chance or Fancy, or something worse than either.

And can any be so vain as to think, that so perfect an Agent should ever busy
her self in doing things at all adventures; as when She makes such solemn
Preparations for humane Bodies in general in all Ages past, that were to be
made use of but in ours, or in times not long preceding them, or but in some
parts of the World only; and those so very inconsiderable in Comparison of the
whole; for as for such wounds and effusion of Blood, as are occasioned by
popular Tumults and public Calamities of War; those though too too frequent,
are yet nothing at all, if compared with those premeditated ones, which happen
in time of Peace, and besides they likewise depend upon Principles altogether
as uncertain.

Much less can she be supposed to act, in a Contradiction to her own purposes,
at the same time, as she must unavoidably do, in case this Method were to be
admitted; her common intendment being believed, and that with reason enough, to
be the Welfare and Preservation of humane Bodies in the gross, and yet this
would be the ready way to ruin and destroy them; for nothing else can be the
true meaning of this hoarding up of such Superfluities of Blood, as the
Abetters of this Opinion must necessarily suppose; which let be in what
Quantity it will, if more than is at present sufficient, cannot well be
imagined but by its rankness and turgescenty, to breed something of anoyance to
those Bodies, it shall be bestowed upon; there being commonly as many Mischiefs
fall out, arising from the Excesses, as the Deficiencies of things, in almost
all Cases that can be instanced in; but however most undoubtedly in this, as
might be made appear evidently enough, by multitudes of Examples that might be
collected to that purpose; and which every ones Capacity, though never so mean,
may be able sufficiently to furnish him withal.

No^ the direct Course, Nature Steers in the Provisions she is wont to make
about Matters of this kind, is such as may comport with her Designations as she
is a universal Agent, and whatever reaches not up to that one Standard of being
universal, falls as much Short of being Natural: and that may serve as a
Direction to Judge by, what ought to be accounted of, as Natural, and what not.
The whole World as considered in its universal Extent, is the adequate Object
of Natures Care, and the Preservation, and Ornament thereof, is chiefly and in
the first place intended by her, as is attested among other Experiments, more
especially by that common one, so much taken notice of by Philosophers; to wit,
her great Solicitousness about the recording a Vanity, which, rather than it
shall be permitted, what ever particular beings happen to be near hand, where
such outrage is attempted; they are all to be summoned in to give their
attendance, upon that one common Cause; and if need require, put upon it, to
suffer in its Rescue.

But the World, as taken in that Sense, is too complicated a thing, not to call
for a more particular Regard, made up of the several sorts of Creatures
contained in it; as they again of Individuals comprehended under them: and it is
the good of those diverse Species, Nature, in the Second place, is wont to be
concerned for: and below that Degree of Universality, never vouchsafes to
Condescend: it is true indeed, Universals are all founded in Particulars, and
can have no Subsistence, not so much as that which is imaginary, but by their
means; and that common Influence bestowed upon the World in general, could
never reach the affect it was designed for, did it not first light in a very
particular manner upon them; but that being not intended at all for their
Sakes, under the Strict Formality of their being Singular; but upon the Account
of that one common Agreement, in which they all meet and concenter; what is one
way applied, ought always to be looked upon as otherwise intended; to wit, for
the Benefit and Advantage of the whole Community, without any respect at all
had, to this or that individual Person or thing; and that it is, to which way
soever we cast our Eyes upon the works of the whole Creation; there may be, and
are, from each Degree amongst them, Pregnant Instances afforded us; let us take
a view of inanimate Bodies, Vegetables, and bruit Creatures, as they stand
divided into their several Ranks and Orders, and they will be found to have one
common Nature, in which they all concur, and upon the account of which, the
Individuals belonging to each of them, are at an exact Harmony and Agreement
one with another. From thence it is, that they all of them partake of the same
outward Form and Portraicture, so that it is an easy matter at the very first
appearance to distinguish one kind from another, and to refer each of them in
particular to their own proper Class: from thence it is, that their whole
Structure, Make and Composition, when ever searched into, admitts of so true a
Proportion, and that the Actions and Operations proceeding from their Inward
Principles, come so Universally to agree; how else could it ever be possible
for the Trees of the same kind to bud, blossom and bring forth their Fruits
together, and all after the same likeness, and similitude, were it not for this
universal Concourse of Nature; and how else could they be Imagined to keep
Time, and Pace, and Proportion so exactly in every thing they do, but that
there is a secret and common Influence imparted unto each of them; and the like
may be said of each and every particular thing, that can be pitched upon in the
whole Creation; it is but reducing it to its own Species, and then it will be
found to agree with all other particulars of that kind, besides it self in its
Shape, Tendency and Operations. And it is the Preservation of that Consent; and
the maintenance of that common Agreement, that Nature always aims at in what
she propounds to her self; and so that may but be kept up, no matter what
becomes of the several Individuals contributing thereunto, they may all perish
and moulder away successively, as we see they do; and yet the other, for all
that be upheld to perpetuity.

And look what may be affirmed of other sorts of Creatures up and down in the
World, the same doubtless holds proportionably true in Mankind as well as the
rest. And so all Persons that partake of the same common Principles, will not
fail to share in the production of the same common Effects; the Faculties of
their Souls, and the Affections of their Bodies will be universally the same,
and the several Parts and Members which concur to the making up of the Outward
Man, will be sure to have all the same Habitudes and mutual Respects one
toward another: and wherever this Order ceases to be found, such Productions
are to be accounted of, no longer Natural, but Monstrous. The Geometrician,
having once gained the Dimensions of Herculus his Foot, was at no loss at all
to find out the Complement of his whole Body; because of the Natural symmetry
of Parts that was to be supposed in them, even from the greatest to the least:
so that if he know but how to calculate truly, there was no possible danger of
being mistaken in raising any false Conclusions.

But if an exact Harmony be to be observed in matters of less Moment, then why
not in so material a thing, as that a due Proportion of Blood should be allowed
to every individual Person; and if nothing can be natural but what implies a
Universality, to wit, one common Consent and Agreement amongst the Individuals
belonging to the same kind; and if there be no greater Reason for an Excess of
Blood to be provided for all humane Bodies in General, than a Deficiency, as in
Truth there is none, then the meanest Skill in Logic that is, will teach us to
infer a Mediocrity; and what may most conveniently suite with each Man's
particular Exigency, State and Disposition: for an Agreement they must of
necessity concur in; and it being once granted, that there was no more than
what was sufficient, before such Act of Phlebotomy, it follows by a direct and
clear Consequence, that there must be less, so soon as ever that comes to be
performed; and so must needs continue to be, till such time that loss shall
some way or other be recruited; which before it can be done, how many and great
Inconveniences, may be apt upon several Occasions to happen out, I leave to
each Man's particular Judgment to determine; and that serves fully enough to
evince what has been so long contended for; to wit, that the taking away any
determinate Quantity of Blood whatever, must unavoidably infer some Prejudice
to be done to the Party so deprived of it; some very few Cases excepted;
because, he has it not now in the exact Quantity allotted him by Nature, which
is seldom, or never out in the measures she takes, and as she rarely fails in
the shaping a Hand, or a Foot, so as to make it either too big, or too little,
for the Body to which it belongs; so no doubt is she as little to seek in the
apportioning other matters of an equal Concernment with them, when ever left to
be disposed of by her. 'Twere endless to wast time in the ^numeration of
Particulars, there being very few Diseases, which may not be said to afford us
Instances of this kind, and which may not be proved to take their Rise, or
Augmentation, or both, from the Indiscreet Application of this Universal
Remedy, as it is now vulgarly believed, but there is no prosecuting several
Arguments at one and the same time: and it is the Act of Nutrition alone that I
have pitched upon as my choice, and that I am engaged to keep to, which will
most undoubtedly come to be suspended or abated, or some way or other hindered
thereby, and then what the Consequence is, of necessity falling out thereupon,
has been already shown.

For, what else is Nature, but the directive Power of Almighty God in his
Government of the World, which therefore may be said to act regularly, because
rationally; but in all rational purposes, matters of Convenience are to yield
and give way to those of necessity, the chiefest Good, in case of Competion,
and where both cannot be attained at the same time, is evermore to be
preferred; and the greatest evil as constantly to be avoided, there must one be
submitted to; but if we shall diligently compare these two Offices of
Nourishing the Body, and Circulation of the Blood one with another, we shall
find upon due Examination had, the latter to be much the more necessary of the
two, and consequently the other to be suspended for some time, when ever they
happen to be inconsistent together, which will be in a manner as often as
Phlebotomy shall be made use of: because a convenient Quantity, and no more, as
has been sufficiently proved, being to be allowed to every man in that Estate
Nature has assigned him, when ever that Proportion comes to be abated of, she
is engaged to use her utmost endeavors, for the reproducing it with what
possible Speed she can, and then for her to augment and wast it at the same
time, to part with as great a Quantity thereof, about the repaires of the Body,
as she was wont formerly, and yet forthwith to make an amends for this other
accidental Loss, that is supposed to happen over and above, especially when the
other might very well be looked upon as a task sufficient (in Persons already
past their best, and now in a waining Condition, to be sure it is) is a matter
somewhat difficult to comprehend.

At other times, and upon other Occasions not altogether unlike to this, when
the contest has been between this very Act of Nutrition, and a Good,
confessedly greater than it self, that it has been respited for a while,
appears evidently enough in the Instance of Sickness before observed; where the
Life of Man is supposed to be brought in Jeopardy, but that the Life of man is
no less concerned, upon a Stoppage put to the Circulation of the Blood, is
every whit as clear, for what matter of greater Importance to the very Being
and Sustentation of Humane Life, can there possibly be assigned, than is the
free Motion and Transportation of the Blood and Spirits from one part of the
Body to the other: it is equivalent to the very Action of breathing it self,
which all agree upon to be a thing of exceeding great moment; nay in some Sense
to be esteemed of before it: it being possible for Life to be supported without
the one, as we see it is in all Children before their Births, and in some
Diverse, beyond the Seas, if the Testimony of Travelers concerning that point,
be any thing to be heeded, but never in any wise without the other; insomuch
that at what time soever the Heart and Arteries forbear to beat, the Body is
supposed, from that very moment, to forbear any longer to live, but even to
expire and die away together with their Motion.

A further Illustration of the truth of the same matter, discovers it self to
our almost every Days Experience, were we but at leisure to give heed thereto
as we ought; in each common Diarrhea, or Looseness of the Body, in which the
Strength fails, and the Flesh abates immediately, upon the breaking out of
that Distemper, which surely can be for no other reason but this, the
Nourishment now becoming slippery, and not making a stay long enough either in
the Stomach or Bowels, so as to be able to impart of its alible Juice to the
whole mass of Blood as formerly, the Blood thereupon forbears sending any
further Supplies to the several Parts of the Body, till such time as the wonted
order comes again to be observed; not that the Blood can ever be supposed to be
endued with a Faculty of Discerning between good and evil, or made to be any
way capable of the foresight of an Inconvenience to ensue upon the parting with
its own Stock, without good Security taken for having more laid in the room of
it; But what though it should not? Nature takes care of all beings alike, and
bestows Instincts and Directions where higher Faculties are wanting, for the
attaining several good and useful purposes; and then it is all one upon the
matter, as if it self were; upon whose account it is, that the very Lillies of
the Field, though they neither Weave nor Spin, come to be decked as Gorgeously,
and arrayed in as goodly a Sort as any of those Creatures that have Wit and
Contrivance allowed them for the procuring of their own Apparel; In allusion
to which Economy and overruling Power of Providence, are we accustomed to
say, in common Discourse, upon our taking Cold at any time, after the leaving
off a Garment, or being more thinly clad than usual, that the parts so
deprieved of their wonted Covering still looked for, and expected a Continuance
of what they had had before; whereas in strict propriety of Speech, to expect
and look for, are Acts too high and noble to be performed, by such inferior
Instruments, as are the Limbs and Out-parts of the Body. But inasmuch as Nature
is supposed to bear so great a Hand and Sway over them, so as to furnish them
with Dispositions, Habitudes, and Inclinations, in a word to have the Guidance
of them in many respects, much after the same manner that an Arrow is directed
to the Mark, or a Ship Steered toward the Harbor: such Expressions are aptly
enough suited to the Nature of the things they are designed for, and
apprehended by such as either use or have them without any Difficulty at all.

So that the Circulation of the Blood being known to be much more useful than
the Act of Nourishing the Body, and that the same Act of Nourishing the Body,
has been at some times, and is usually forborne to be exercised, whether it be
in case of Nature her being better employed elsewhere, or whether it be for
lack of a Supply of such Contribution as the Body was wont formerly to be
furnished withal; what hinders but that it should as well give place here (that
is to say, wherever Phlebotomy shall be made use of, seeing it is all one in
some Sense to be disfurnished of what we actually had, and not to be supplied
with what we should have had, and be suspended for some little time, so long at
leastwise till the present harms may admit of a Reparation, which be it more,
or be it less, if any at all, will be found sufficient for our purpose;
because, as has been already shown, the Act of Nutrition, if suspended at any
time, must unavoidably infer an Abatement to be made upon the whole Duration of
Man's Life; I say, the Duration of Man's Life, in regard the two primitive
Qualities, so often before mentioned, and which are held to be the Maintainers
of it, are so inevitably cut short thereby; and then the whole duration, not
only because it is impossible to Substract any one single Unite from the vastest
Number that can be named, without an impairing to the total Sum, or take away
the smallest Particle imaginably from any Species of continued ^uantity,
without making it less than it was before; but as being willing to comprehend
thereby any possible Alterations, greater or less, whether present or future,
that may possibly be occasioned thereby; nay, though they should be of so slow
and gradual a Production, as could not well be taken notice of all on the
sudden, by one transient and single view.

There being very many things in Nature, which, though falling directly under
the cognizance of humane sense, when considered of altogether, may yet be far
enough from being accounted of as such, if divided into Particles, and small
Tractions, and a respect be to be had to the precise manner of their being
brought forth. The Grass of the Field increases daily at almost every season
of the Year, and the Bodies of Vegitables and Living creatures, till such time
they arrive at their perfect growth, are incessantly passing from a less Estate
unto a greater, and yet who the most sharp sighted amongst you, can pretend to
an Infallibility of Judging the Sensible Alterations wrought either in the one
or the other; and the very same Proportion holds in the Determination of most
things that is observable in their Increase; it is to be confessed indeed, that
after some Pause made, and Competenty of time taken, to make a comparison
between the things themselves, it is very possible to make a due Estimate of
what may have happened, but that is not so much the Question in debate; it is
the shortness of time, and the smalness of the Change wrought in it, which
alone creates the Difficulty; and so again, there are many things which as to
common Appearance have not their Affects at present, and which seemingly act at
a very great Distance of time in the producing them, which yet are so far from
diserving to be slighted, upon the score of the insensibleness of their
approach; that on the contrary, they may seem rather to exact so much the
greater Portion of our care to be taken, in the better providing and cautioning
our selves against them: the Venom of some Beasts, how slowly, and as it were
with deliberation does it steal, and insinuate it self into the Bodies of such
Creatures, as have at any time been wounded by them; till at last, it comes to
take a full Possession of the whole Mass of Blood, and Vital Spirits, and brake
forth to open Acts of Violence: and yet all the while it has layn thus
dormant, may truly be said to have as great an Aptitude to destroy, as any the
most deadly Draught of Arsenick, or Ratsbane: and the neglect of some
inconsiderable Breach, when it should have been Repaired; how does it in time,
occasion Ruin and Destruction to the whole Building.

Herein lies the great Fallacy, which simple People are wont to put upon
themselves; they live a Life of Sense, rather than Reason, or indeed, Fancy
rather than Sense; and because they don't take notice of any present
Alterations, that may have happened; are the more inclinable to think, that
therefore there have been none at all; and because they believe, there have
been none for the present; are ready to conclude, that therefore there will be
none for time to come; and all this proceeds from no other grounds, than want
of Judgment, and Foresight; and so being unable, to determine their own
Thoughts, by any Solidity of Argument, they are able to make out themselves;
are the sooner prevailed upon, by Custom and Example, to do as others would
have them; and willingly suffer themselves, to be gulled and cheated out of
their Lives and Healths, only to gratify the humor of the next impertinent
Talker, that either comes in their way, or they send for to advise withal; who,
so he can but enjoy the delicious Sweets, of having things done after his own
way; cares not (it may be) what Mischiefs betides those Persons, upon whose
Bodies the Experiment comes to be made trial of; which is a matter, I could
wish every one that shall have Occasion at any time to be concerned therein,
would a little seriously consider of.

I did say before, that in case of the apprehension of some great danger, nigh
or afar off; which yet could be no other, than that of Death it self, or some
painful, or grievous Disease, that might be the Harbinger thereto; this was a
way, that both might, and ought to be submitted unto; as upon the Comparison
between two evils, the less is always to be chosen, because in that
comparative Sense, it ought to be conceived of, under the Notion of a good: and
so may this also, though in it self, it be no other than a direct means, to
abreviate the Number of men's Days, and abridge the Period of their Lives, by
Natures Bounty appointed them; as has been manifested at large.

And though diverse are of Opinion, that many after Bleeding, have been much
more lively, and vigorous; as also far more fat and corpulent, than ever they
were before; which may seem, to be an Argument of force, to render Invalid,
what has hitherto been contended for: let it be but taken into consideration,
that all Opinions, that have the good hap to be credited, have not always
Truth on their side; and if it were so, there would not be so many vulgar
Mistakes, as usually we find there are; and though it should fall out, for some
interval of time, to be as is pretended; yet that would evince but little, it
being observable, for some lucid Interval to happen, even in the most cloudy
Days, and some little Lightning (as they call it) that may be taken notice of,
before the approach of Death it self; which as it can be no sure mark, to judge
the State of the Sick Party by; so neither is it so much to be attended to, how
Patients find themselves for a little Space after they have been let Blood; as
what the constant Tenor and Condition of their Health, in its full latitude,
from that time forward, is commonly taken to be.

The Ram may give ground, but it is with no other purpose, than to make head
again with so much the greater Fury. And Bodily pains, as we find by daily
Experience, upon the taking of some Medicines, have appeared to be pretty well
appeased; which yet afterward, have broken out again, more violently than
ever. The Sprigs that are pared from off the Body of the Tree, at some Seasons
of the Year, if but pricked into the Earth, will make a show to bud and
blossom, as fairly to the Eye, if not fairer, than those Boughs that have been
let alone; but every one is able to give a guess, at the different event, the
one is like to have from the other; who has but Reason to consider, from whence
it is, that the cause of this their Flourishing proceeds: what is deferred,
is not for that reason, to be looked upon, as quite taken away; and an account
may be balanced by sums brought in as well at the Rere, as the Beginning: and
further, as touching that subsequent Fatness, which appears to some, to have
been occasioned upon the score of Phlebotomy: it is to be noted, that there is a
puffing, and swelling up of the Body, exceeding much different from a solid,
and substantial Nutriment; and though it should realy prove to be such as is
supposed, there is no Question at all to be made, but that upon a strict
Examination of the Matter, a Cause might very well have been discovered, from
the Rules and Principles of Physic, wherefore to have warranted, a just taking
away of Blood in such a Case as that was; which has constantly been alleged of
by us. And therefore nothing can ever be inferred, from what has hitherto been
allayed, as spoken in Opposition against any such manner of Proceedings, but
what tends much rather to the just Vindication of them: it being the rash,
heady, and precipitate manner of doing the thing, that we have been
endeavoring all this while to expose, not Blood letting in General, but
letting Blood without a Cause, and without taking time to consider, whether it
were fitting to be done or not.

It Is neither Absurdity, nor Contradiction, to condemn the use of the same
Remedies in some, and approve of them in others, because the most general Rules
that are, are by no means to pass unlimited; and Circumstances, when different,
stand evermore in need of as different a manner of Application. So that what is
hurtful in one case, may be profitable in another; as we find Opium and strong
Waters, to be of a singular use, when applied seasonably, and with care; and
yet the one is known, to be no other than a rank Poison, is considered in its
own Nature; and the other the worst of Enemies, to the digesting Faculty of the
Stomach: and so though the lopping off of a Limb, from the Body of a man, be a
most pernicious thing, and tends apparently to the bane and ruin of that
Party, upon whom such Cruelty shall be exercised; no one ever doubted it. Yet,
when a Part shall become mortifyed, and seizsed on by a Gangrene, then it is so
far from being accounted so; that the dismembring the man, is one of the
highest Acts of Charity, that can possibly be shown him; because the greatness
of the Danger, legitimates the desperateness of the Cure: and indeed, unless it
be in case of Apparent danger, a hazardous Medicine, ought never to be put in
practice, lest the Mischiefs that acrue thereby, should prove greater than the
Advantage. There is a Rule of Proportion evermore to be observed in such
things: and it is not the least part of the Physicians Office, to show himself
well skilled therein: and I see no reason, but that a Chyrurgeon, may as well
cut a man for the Stone, when he has never an one in his Bladder; or when he is
sent to dress a cut Finger, or heal a broken Shin, whip off Peoples Arms, or
Legs, without further Deliberation: as a Physician in many Cases, that might be
named (I don't say, in all) be dabling with their Blood: the latter being as
probable a way, for the doing of their Business, as the former, though ('it is to
be confessed) not altogether so course, and paineful; as it is the same thing in
some Sense; whether one be smothered to death between Down Pillows, or tortured
upon the Wrack; it is but a being done to death, either way. And yet there are
too many in the World, who are as brisk and flippant at it, as if it were a
matter of pure Indifferency in it self, and left to their sole Power, to
institute how far forth it might be conveniently made use of, that is to say,
that it might be lawful only for them to have recourse thereto; so often as the
freak took them on the Head, or they had a Mind to have their own turns served
by it.

And now Sir, having thus liberally paraphased upon the Presumptions of my own
moddling. I am in the next place to render an account, what the Opinions of
others may have been upon the very same Case; which when I have faithfully
given in, and made some brief Inquiries thereupon, it must be left to the
Decision of such as are unconcerned to pass Sentence upon the Criminate; and
declare at whose Door especially, the ill Management of the affair ought to be
laid; for that there was an Error committed by some body, is not in the least
to be scrupled at: that being a Consequence, plainly enough deducible from the
acknowledgment of us both; and want of Discretion, is a term of the smallest
Denomination, it can possibly be reduced to; because upon a full hearing of the
matter, as what had been administered before his coming; examination of of the
Pulse, Urine, and such other like Testimonies, necessary to be known; we both
returned our Opinions freely, and without hesitancy, that we saw no reason at
all, wherefore to make doubt of her Recovery: whereas, the Event falling out
quite contrary, upon the immediate change of her Medicines, the Fault (I say)
must be rather his, than mine; because altered by his own appointment, and some
of them, against my likeing; so that, if there were so good hopes, of her
Recovery before his coming, to meddle with her: it is strongly to be presumed,
she might have continued in the same probable way still, had he but kept away;
and this, I take to be, a fair and a honest Plea, in order to my own Acquittal;
let others, clear themselves as they can: I know but one thing, possible to be
objected against it; which has I confess been urged by some, in a neighbourly
way, who have been pleased, to concern themselves, in the Controversy: That it
is a Quality, not at all to be disliked of, in a Physician, to be making the
best of another Man's Practice; neither do I say, it is; only I must crave
leave, to start a new Query: Whence it should come to pass, that he, whose Life
was never at any time remarkable, for either the least ray of Grace, or good
Nature, should become thus transcendently charitable, all upon the push; so as
to be careful, to remove a Thorn, out of another man's Finger, and place it in
his own? I should think an Action of that Nature, to have proceeded much rather
from Incogitancy, and want of Foresight; (either of which are unpardonable
Blemishes in so great a Physician) in regard, when he perceived it begin to
prick, and fester, he was so very industrous, to have restored it back again;
but then 'twas a little too late, I thank him: And though it might have been
seasonable enough for his purpose, was never a whit for mine; and therefore, I
am not at all engaged, to give my assent to it: he, who absolves at one time,
can never condemn at another, for the same thing, though he has never so great
a mind to do it, without running himself upon a Contradiction. Poor Dr. Willis
could not, he knew it well enough, when it suited with his own Interest; else
he had never taken the Liberty he did, in playing upon him; though with shame
enough, considering what a Friend he had been to him, he knows where and when,
and so do others too: and that may be sufficient, to stop the mouth of one,
that is not utterly forsaken of all modest Principles; but if it should not,
and that he should still believe himself, to have the Freedom indulged him, of
saying and unsaying what ever he judges convenient for his own Designs, purely,
because he has to do with a Physician, who has his dwelling in the Country. I
could put him in mind of a true Story, by which it might be made to appear,
that there has been a time before now, when he and I have been of different
Opinions, and that when the truth happened to be of my side too; and if it were
so then, why not as well now; but that I am upon my own Justification; and it is
a Passage so full of Conviction, so pertinent to the Occasion, and so exactly
fitted to the taking down of a proud Stomach; I should be ashamed to mention
it. It happened some Years since, that he was sent into Cambridgeshire, to
visit a Gentleman of a good Family, who lay sick there; and such a repute had
he gained, from Willis his Commendations, that as full a Belief, was resigned
up to his unerring Judgment (as they thought) as some are wont to allow in
Spirituals, to the determinations of the most Ghostly Father; nor was he less
willing to assume, than they to be imposed upon; insomuch, that after a very
short summing up of the Evidence, and there upon perceiving his Case to be
wholly desperate, he bids them neither to flatter, nor deceive themselves with
a vain Expectation of what could never be; for that 'twas as impossible for
him, to escape the fatal stroke of approaching Death, as for one upon whom the
Plague Tokens had already broke forth; and that what he had foretold them,
would as undoubtedly come to pass, as the setting of the Sun that night, or the
rising of it the next morning, or in words to that effect. And as if this had
not been, to have made himself ridiculous enough, with the same false
confidence he returns home (and as I have been credibly informed) makes
Affidavit of the same things, in one of the Courts of Judicature in
Westminister Hall; though the chief grounds he had for his so doing, to the
best of my Remembrance, was taken from the spitting up of some small Quantity
of Blood, I imagine that might be a Pleurity of the Lungs too: and for ought I
know, make something the more on my side; for being so shamefully Wide of the
Mark then, as will appear anon; it is not unlike, but that the Remembrance of so
good a Token upon that occasion, might make him somewhat the more positive, in
presaging this Lady her Recovery now. There are a sort of men in the World,
that when ever they have been convinced of an Error on the one hand; think
they can never make any tolerable amends for it, but by diametrically crossing
over to the other Extreme. If any shall ask me, how I came to be so well
acquainted with the matter? I have only this Answer to return them; That the
Gentleman his Father and Mother being both my Patients, living at a great
Distance from their Son, and very much afflicted at the news they had received
of his sad and deplorable Condition, ordered me to make a Journey over to see
him, and to bring them back word how the case stood with him; whether when I
came, I found him much in the same Condition he had observed my Patient to be
at Richmond, that is to say, likely to do very well again; and so I informed
them at my return from him; who were glad with all their Hearts, to find they
had been so happily cheated in their Expectations, as the Gentleman himself was
(you may easily believe) who is since that time, so perfectly well recovered,
as that he may in probability live to see many wiser, honester, and more
healthful men than his Doctor, go before him: and so might this Lady too, for
ought I know, had she been so fortunate, as to fall into the hands of one, who
had either understood her Distemper better, and so known what to have given
her, or could have been content at least wise, to have let her alone with those
who did, but this by way of Parenthesis only. The whole of the Prescription
next, to the taking away of seven Ounces of Blood from her Arm, which has been
the matter of so long a Debate, was in the Order immediately following.

. Oil of Sweet Almonds, newly dispensed, iij. White Sugar Candy j. Let them be
mixed well together in a Mortar; and let her lick a spoonful thereof every
third hour.

. the common Pectoral Decoction without Hysop and Scabios lb ij. Let the
Liquors strained out, be clarified by Seteling, then strain out for good and
all; and of that let her take Draught ever now and then.

. Oil of Sweet Almonds iiij. Sperma Cet ij. Mingle them together, and make up
a^ Ointment; with which let her Side be anointed Morning and Evening, putting
upon it a Linen Cloth dipped in the same, made prett^ hot.

. Lynseed Oil, newly drawn, iiij. Syrup of Maidenhair ij. Let them be mixed
together* and let her take half this Night, at the time of her rest, and the
residue, either to morrow Night or sooner if there be Occasion.

. Black Cherry Water, Balm Water, An^ iiij. Epidemick Water, iij. Pearled
Sugar, a sufficient Quantity, so as to make it moderately sweet; let her take
four, or five spoonfuls of it in her fainting Fits.

I have but one Particular more, amongst all these, to bring my Exceptions
against directly; which is, that of the Lynseed Oil, and that would be too late
to offer now; but that they were likewise made before his arrival, for a
Gentlewoman having moved for it, as a Medicine of singular use, and now a Days
grown into great request, amongst the Physicians of the Town; I made bold to
reject it then, as unlikely to prove beneficial to her, because, admitting it
to have been administered to such as were of stronger Stomachs, and more able
Constitutions, such as might be supposed, upon those Accounts, the better
fitted for enduring a nauseous draught; it could not otherwise choose, but be a
little too nasty, and fulsome for a nice and delicate Lady, especially at such
a time, when she had been brought to so low an Ebb, as scarsely to be able to
taste the most pleasant Cordial Drinks, without vomiting them up again, but two
to one is too great Odds to be resisted with Modesty, and the Dr. his Opinion
jumping so exactly with hers, I conceived my self overcome by a Majority of
Votes, and thereupon submitted to the Ruggedness of the Medicament, though with
the same reluctance of Mind, as to some other Directions formerly mentioned.

So that you see Sir, those great Perfectionists, as lofty as their
Speculations are, and as much as they would make themselves our Superiors, in
the abstrusest and most misterious part of all useful Learning, are not so
deep read neither, but they may have Opinions sometimes, co-incident with those
of the weaker Sex; and surely when ever it falls out to be so, the Excellency
of their Seize, upon the Account of which they are so highly valuable, is
not to be sought for amongst them, but we are to turn our Eyes to the remaining
part of the Prescriptions, and examine well the other Particulars, not yet so
fully descanted upon, if we expect to find it any where.

And therefore, Dear Sir, do you, whose Experience is greater, and Judgment
more deep, be but pleased to put on your clearest Spectacles, and try what
Success you can have in the Attempt, and if you are able to discern what may
happily lie concealed from greener Heads; be so courteous as to obliege Mankind
with a more full Discovery thereof: If there be any Mines worth digging into,
and Depths worth the fathoming, let the World be made acquainted, with what
otherwise it is like, for ever to remain Ignorant of; and suffer not I beseech
you so advantageous a Piece of Doctrine as this may happily prove to succeeding
Generations (especially, in case of desperate Pleurities of the Lungs) to
perish together with its Renouned Author, only for want of a Commentator,
learned enough, to have explained the true meaning thereof.

I am somewhat the more impertinent in this my Request I confess, because after
the strictest Search, and most narrow Disquisition I was able to make into the
matter; nothing of that nature appeared ever visible to my shallow
Understanding, nor could I ever yet be convinced, from what I was able to
gather from the best of my own Observations; but that an Apothecaries
Apprentice, or Barbers Boy, if ere a whit towardly, and who had made but so
considerable a Progress in Learning, as to be able to read over Culpeper in
English, or turn to the Chapter and Section of any ordinary Receipt Book, might
have played the Doctor to every whit as good purpose; I write what my own
Thoughts are, possibly to men of a more refined Intellect, and Solider
Judgments, the thing may be apprehended otherwise; but I have ever been of the
Mind, that the best way of giving Approbation in what one does, is by
endeavoring to act, so as to be the most clearly understood; and there are no
doubt, abundance of People, up and down the World, that are much of the same
Persuasion; and therefore to me it is no wonde^ at all, that so many when they
come to be cast upon their Sick Beds, choose rather to commit themselves to the
Care of a doting old Woman, or pitiful Emperick, who are known to speak
Nonsense at every word, than such as are learnedly impertinent, and pretend to
give a wise reason for such things, as scarce any man living can tell what to
make of besides themselves, because they being convinced of their own wants,
and conscious to themselves, of engaging in a Province, that does not at all
belong unto them, and which others, how ever they are pleased to employ them,
are privy to as well as themselves, may reasonably ('it is believed) be looked
upon, as cautious and timorous men, though they can happily pretend to never
another good Quality besides: whereas such as are puffed up with an high Opinion
of their own Excellencies, and the greatness of their Parts, are apt to be
intolerable peevish, and humoursome, and conceited in what they undertake,
venterous at every thing, but scrupelous about nothing; and if they do happen
upon a right course at first, it is so much the better for those that are to be
governed by them; if not, they are to content themselves with Patience, seeing
it is to no purpose to argue and dispute the matter, with such as are resolved
to go on in their own way; I am not ignorant what the common Proverb is, Who so
bold as blind Bay-yard; and yet a sober man would choose much rather to be
carried on the back of a blind Horse, than a mad one, in case no better choice
could be had, and he that should do so, of the two, would be in less danger of
breaking his neck; and though it may be a frequent saying, and what is true
enough, if taken in a sound Sense, that if a man be appointed to die, he were
best however end his Days in following the directions of the Learned, it
cannot be denied withal, but that if a man be supposed to have Learning, which
either a Knave, or a Fool has the keeping of (which is a case, happening out
oftener than many are aware of) it may be as convenient every jot to die under
the hands of the unlearned, as with him; and upon Supposition, there be any
hopes of Life, it is not impossible, but that he may as soon recover too, and
perchance with running a far less hazard of so seeing it; the goodness of every
thing consists purely in, its aptitude to the acquiring such an end, and if
that fail once, the Denomination loses its Force, and becomes utterly
insignificant. A man may be said, and that truly enough, to have Learning,
which yet may lie so far out of the Road he is to travel in, as to do him but
little good for all that, and then he were e'ne as good have none at at all,
because it is no great matter, how little a man's Knowledge speeds, so it runs
but deep in the right Channel, and he be but skilful in the Art he makes
Profession of: we read of one, who confessed himself, a mere Bungler at
fiddling, to whom none ever denied the reputation of a very good Governor
notwithstanding, because he knew how to make a little City a great one, which
was the only thing he ought to have been well versed in; whereas Nero, though
an Excellent Musician, was but a bad Emperor, for his Deficiency in that other
Point, so indispensibly necessary to have been understood by him. Put case, my
Physician can make his brags of a singular dexterity he has, of transferring
the Blood of one Mastiff dog into the Body of another: if this be the means to
harden him in the taking away one Drop more than is convenient from mine,
wherein am I advantaged by that Bloody Experiment, though he should vaunt
himself of his having been frequently conversant in the riping up such poor
creatures alone. Recount the pleasant Histories of his grasping their En^^ils
with his hands, and thrusting his Fingers into their Hearts, whilst they lay
groaning, and panting, and struggling under his knife, (though by the way, I
know no Authority, that either he, or any else have, to exercise any such
Cruelties over them; nay, tho they should be the whole College of the Virtuosi
themselves that stood by, and encouraged him in what he did) but however,
whether they have or not, this I am very sure of, that it is like to prove
small matter of Comfort to any who shall be the Patients of such a one, to be
ere a whit the more ruggedly dealt withal, when they happen to fall under his
hands.

Nay though he should advance a step higher, and proceed to Pride himself, in
his vide Page Tractat. de Cord. Fol. 176.
having been the Ringleader of the Dance, for the putting Foreigners upon the
attempting that upon humane Bodies, which he (only because he durst not) had
begun to practice upon Bruit Creatures at home; admitting all he says to to be
true, as we have no great reason to disbelieve him in his Narrative; it is a
thousand, Pities I say, but that when it came first of all to be made trial of,
he himself like another Phalaris should have given handsel to the Experiment;
so far am I from enveying him, the honor of so worthy an Achievement, as some
it seems (the more malicious they) would have endeavored to have done; but,
though they had (to deal impartially on all hands) methinks, our modern,
Menecrates might have contented himself with something less than the Assumption
of Divine Honors, as the Recompense of his matchless and indefatigable
Industry, have brought in the Indictment against the Malefactor, under some
other Title than that of Sacrilege, and not have presumed to have compared
himself to either Jupiter or Aesculapius for the matter; all which the Allusion
must necessarily imply, especially, when a Resemblance nearer home, because
taken from Creatures, and those of his own Rank and Quality, might have become
him far better; my meaning is somewhat of an intermediate Degree between the
Butcher and the Canibal; but if nothing on Earth could have been found bad
enough for the purpose, rather than so vile a Miscreant should have ascended up
into Heaven upon such an Errand as that, he might with more probablity of
speeding, have directed his Course toward the Infernal Region, to have taken
one from thence, which if he had done, and no other could have served his turn,
what thinks he of the Prince of Darkness himself, who is styled the Enemy of
Mankind, and an Accuser of the Brethren; and then if we do but consult our
Lexicons, we shall find (...) and (...) to be terms of no such distant
Signification, but that they may very well be compatible to one and the self
same Person. And he who thorough his Savage Disposition and snarling Behavior
toward all men, has most deservedly been entitled to the one, may well be
supposed without either Breach of Charity, or stress of Invention to have the
other Appellation cast him freely into the Bargain.

But when all this is done, and so great a Freedom has been indulged to, unless
it could be made evidently appear, which way this happy Invention conduces to
the Promotion of the Practical part of Physic; 'twill be hard to render a
Reason, why such a remorsless Wretch should take upon him to abuse, and
undervalue all sorts of men he meets withal, only for being less cruel and
barberous than himself. As for what concerns the motion of the Blood, in and
about the Body of Man, so far forth as it conduces any thing to the Advancement
of the Physicians Art; the Discovery of that was made, and understood
sufficiently by all such as had any the least Pretensions that way, long
before, and if it should not, this emptying it from the Body of one particular
Creature to another, contributes so little toward it, and is of so small avail
to that purpose, that there is not one in an hundred would have been so
sanguinary, as to have fowled their fingers about it, had they been sure to
have gained the utmost of Skill was ever yet pretended to; I do not say, but
that Thousands could have been contented to have stood by as Spectators when
the thing was experimented by another hand; as we see all sorts of People,
forward enough to be flocking about the most butcherly Executioner, what time
he is most busy about his Employment; when yet it may be, there is scarce one
of all that Number, but would abhor the thoughts of being a chief Actor in the
Tragidy; insomuch, that the same Answer, which Helena returned to Paris, when
he pretended an Excess of Affection to her Person, above all other men in the
World besides, though in somewhat a different Sense, may not unfitly be made
use of, upon this Occasion. Tu non plus sentis, sed plus temerarius audes.
Non tibi plus Cordis, sed minus Oris inest.
It Is not thy Store of Wit, but want of Grace,
Which makes thee proud o'th Common'^ Place.


When a Sick Person comes to stand in need of the Physicians help, those surely
of all others are the most likely to do him good, who may be presumed to
sympathize with him the most feelingly in his Afflictions; whih how shall they
ever be able to do as they ought, who by an unnecessary addicting themselves to
so many base Butcheries, and repeated Acts of Cruelty, may seem not only to
have divested themselves of all Bowels of Compassion, and tender-heartedness
one toward another, but as much as in them lies, even of humane Nature it
self, that common Basis, upon which (if any thing) all subsequent Acts of
Charity are to be Founded.

And here it may be very well worth the taking notice of, that only that sort
of Tradesmen and no other of the whole Nation, are discharged by the Custom, if
not common Law of England, from giving their Attendances upon Juries, whose
Profession clearly consists in Bloodshed, though the Calling be otherwise
honest, and the Men serviceable enough to the public Societies they live
amongst; which was done no doubt merely out of a Principle of Prudence, and for
fear, lest by being accustomed to embrue their hands in Blood, when they had
only to do with Beasts, and had a just occasion for their doing so, they might
be too inclinable to the like Exercise, after they came to debate about the
Lives of Men, and had none at all; and for my part, I cannot choose but approve
of the laudableness of the Institution, as believing it to have been founded on
the highest reason, and am strongly persuaded, that those who shall succeed in
the Power of making Laws, will never be able to see cause, wherefore to alter,
or abolish it, there being no such way of curing an Inconvenience, as by a
timely preventing it in its first Courses, and a removal of all such occasions,
as may seem to have the least Tendency thereunto.

As there is a Gradation in evil, so is there a transition and passing over as
it were, from one kind thereof unto another; we find it is the Character that
is given of the good man, to be merciful to his very Beast: and the Proverb
assures us, he that has an unfeigned Love for the Master, must have some degree
of kindness for the Dog: and therefore by the reverse of the same Rule, who
ever has arrived to that Pitch of hard-heartedness, as not to know how to pity
a poor dumb thing, whom he has lying at his Mercy; yea, is so far from it, as
seemingly to take pleasure in finding out ways of tormenting it, when he needed
not, will surely be so much less compassionate to a man, when ever he gets him
within his clutches. And therefore, when I am weary of my Life, Id'e send for
such a one to choose, to consult withal about the surest and most likely means
to be used in order to my Recovery, but not till then. No more would others
neither, if they understood what it was they went about: it is ttue, when a man
comes to die by the hand of the common Executioner, and there is no other
Expedient to be found out, for the revoking a Sentence, that has been already
past, then indeed to be backward, in giving a good round Gratuity, for the
facilitating ones Passage in the way one is appointed to go, ought to be
accounted of, neither as a Part of Policy or good Husbandry; but to make
Presents to one, who under a pretense of saving my Life, shall in all
Probability go the ready way to take it from me, is an Error on the other
Extreme, which though many are too apt to run into, yet, few or none wiling to
be convinced thereof (it is like) by such as would be so much their Friends, as
to be at the pains to undeceive them; and therefore, when ever such shall come
to suffer upon that Account, as a great many have already done, as they have
none to thank for it besides themselves; so is it no great matter, whether or
no they shall ever meet with any, that shall be so charitable, as to afford
them any great store of their Pitties. I must confess, 'twould seem a pretty
thing at first glimpse, and does I believe to many, such especially, as are apt
to take what ever they hear upon trust, and never make any further enquiry
about it. To have a man dogmatical and pert at maintaining every Position he
lays down at any time by way of Scheam, and Diagram and fetch all the Proofs
he makes use of, from no other Topics, than those of his own Solitary
Experiments, Observations, and Ocular Inspections, which is a course, some have
taken of late Year, to purchase to themselves a Reputation for Knowing Men, and
very successful they have been in it, whereby, others who have taken notice of
the good luck they have had in such their Endeavors, have been animated to do
the like; and thereupon encouraged not only to obtrude their own wild Fancies,
and groundless Chimeres upon the World, singly by themselves, but to confute
one whimsical Opinion with another full out as vain, and then to be as grave
and serious, when they have been doing so, as if so be they were all the while
in earnest, and upon the prosecution of some real and worthy Design. Whereas
indeed and in truth, were the matter but duly weighed, and looked into as it
ought, amongst all the several sorts of shameless and fantastic nonsense, we
shall meet withal any where, there is none would appear to have been at any
time more abusively such, nor yet vaunted after a more absurd, and ridiculous
manner. There is a little Book entitled, Tractatus de Cord, stuffed from the
Beginning to the end, with little else besides Arguments of that kind; 'twould
be an Infinite Labor to enumerate them all: I Will only give Instance in one of
the first, as a Specimen of those which follow, and according to the Estimation
taken from thence, may the others reasonably be guessed at.

In Men and such Creatures, as receive their Nourishment from Flesh (says that
renowned Author) Itaque homini, and Carnivoris fere quibusque Animalibus,
Cordis seeds non in Centro, sed in superiore Corporis part constituta est,
etc. vide Page Tractat. de Cord, Fol. 2. The Position of the Heart is never
found exactly seated in the very Center of the Body, but rather somewhat above
it, to the intent, it might dispose of what Blood should be convenient to be
sent up to the Head, so much the more easily; for seeing that the forcing up,
and Distribution of the Blood, depends altogether upon the Contraction of the
heart and the Liquid Substance thereof, is not of its own Nature so freely
carried upwards, as to the Parts directly Opposite, or which are placed beneath
it. In case the Situation of the Heart, had been further from the Head, it
could not have been possible, but that that must have been more compactly
framed, so as to have sent it up thither with a greater Force, or else the Head
would sometime or other have wanted Blood for its own Support. Fieri non posset
quin aut ipsum robustius formatum, etc. must have been just so. Bold audacious
man, as if so be the Almighty could possibly have contrived no other ways for
the bringing his own Works to perfection, but what were exactly understood by
him; or that by his dissecting of Hearts, and the Observations made thereupon,
he had arrived to such a Degree of anatomical Experience, as to be able to view
Knowledge in that particular, with the very Searcher of Hearts himself: it is
such a proud kind of Expression, as one shall seldom, or never hear from a
Christian man, had the thing been never so certain, much less in a matter
absolutely false and ridiculous, as will appear in the further Examination of
it; as I do not see wherein Menocrates his (...), though a Heathen, and for
which he was accounted bereft of his wits, can stand chargeable of greater
Arrogance. But to proceed; In Animalibus autem qua longiori Collo, and quasi ad
victum porrecto donantur, etc. But as for such Creatures as have longer Necks
than usual, which are the Instruments with which they ^^^d their Hearts are as
far distant from their Heads, as any of the rest of the Parts of their Body
besides, and that without any thing of Damage to them at all, because, for the
most part, they suck their Food with their Heads hanging downwards, so that
though the Blood may have farther to pass in them, than in some other
Creatures; yet it is a convenience of a much plainer, and far more easy descent.

Whether this conceit be his own or not, is foreign to my enquiry, and but the
same thing to him neither, because if it be not his own, he thereby discovers
the wretchedness of his Judgment in espousing it, as not having wit enough to
discern where to pilfer with the greatest safety, in collecting matter, for his
little Treatise: if it be the wretchedness of his Fancy, for lighting on no
better; however, I for my part have no reason, but to suppose it to be his,
because he is so willing to have it thought so, and therefore, I shall crave
leave to demand of him, after what other way and manner, he would have either
them, or any other Creature else, to feed themselves (some very few only
excepted) then by hanging down of their heads, though not for the simple reason
alleged by him, to wit, that the Blood might by that means, so much the more
freely pass into their heads; but because their Eyes, which were their
Instruments of seeing, were placed there, which surely is somewhat more than
his were, when he treated upon that Argument, he would never else have
blundered so egregiously at his first setting out if he had.

And that may pass very well for one final Cause, and another somewhat like to
that may be, because their Mouths, which are their Instruments of Eating, are
placed somewhat thereabouts to: And there being a necessity for the Nourishment
first to be taken in at the Mouth, before it can come at the Neck or Stomach,
to be dispersed up and down the Body, for the Sustentation of each Member: It Is
pretty clear, that all Creatures almost, that are debarred from feeding on
Flesh, will be constrained, either to reach it from the Surface of the Earth,
or fish for it in the Waters, because they must seek for it some where or
other, where it is to be found; and then if they cannot bring their Food to
their Mouths, must be glad to bend their Mouths and their Necks too, whether
they be long or short, down to their Food, unless they can be content to be
famished to death for want of it.

Besides, the reason thereof can never possibly be that alleged by him here,
upon other far different Accounts, because if he be well Remembered, he teaches
us else where, Page 133 (or if he had not, it would have been no very hard
matter, to have informed our selves) that the motion of the Blood in 'its full
latitude, depends originally upon the Arteries, and is driven by their
pulsation even from first to last. Cum enim certissimum sit, Sanguinis Venosi
refluxum, non ab attractione Cordis ulla, sed a propulsu arteriosi Sanguinis
provenire, facile est concipere, quantum partium quoque situs ad facilit andum,
aut retardandum hunc motum conferat. Veluti enim in homine, cum in Pedes
erigitur, Sanguis a Venis Jugularibus, and Vena Cava descendente, citius and
facilius suo quasi pondere in Cordis Sinus delabitur (simili modo atque Venae
in Manu elevata moxvacuae, in demissa vero turgidae and plenae cernuntur) qui
vero est in Partibus inferioribus, and Vena Cava ascendente difficilius, and
contra Naturam suam, solum abarterioso Sanguine versus Cor propellitur, and Vi
quadam urgetur, in planum autem jacente Corpore Sanguis aeque facile ab
utrisque redit.

For seeing it is most certain, that the flowing back of the Venal Blood, does
not at all depend upon the Artraction of the Heart, but rather upon the
Succession and coming on of the Arterial blood; it is easy to apprehend how much
the situation of the parts conduces either to the facilitating or retarding of
that Motion; as in case of a Man's standing upright upon his feet, the Blood
tumbles down with a much freer Course, and more natural propensity from the
Jugular, and hollow Vein descending into the Ventricles of the Heart, as we may
see by a hand lifted up, the Veins art soon emptied, but in the same let down
again, as soon swollen and full; whereas that which is beneath the Heart, and
returns by the Way of the hollow Vein ascending, is wrought up with much
greater Difficulty, as being against Nature, and only by the forceing on of the
Arterial Blood, but when the Body lies stretched upon a Level, the Blood then
is reconveyed from either part alike.

By which words, it plainly enough appears, that nothing with a long Neck, can
ever be put in any great danger of having a Bloodless Head, any more than a
body set upon a long pair of Legs (a witless one indeed, some with a short one
may, especially, whilst they argue no better to the purpose about that
Subject) because if there were need of so strong a Spring to jerk it up to the
Head that stood perched upon the long Neck, by the very same reason, there
would no less ^orce be required for the sending it up the lower Limbs of that
Body which had the long Legs belonging to it. And therefore as some in railery
are wont to set the Hairs Head against the Goose Giblets, so may we upon very
good grounds, oppose the long Legs to the long Neck, because, there is the same
reason for the one, that there is for the other, neither greater nor less; for
as the Blood mounts the Head with Difficulty, so it slides down again with
ease, and on the contrary, as it falls into the Feet of it is own accord, it
must be forced back again to the Heart with so much the greater Labor, it will
never arrive thither else, because conveyed back not at all by the atraction of
the Heart, but by the forceing on of the Arterial Blood, Cum certissimum sit
Sanguinis Venosi refluxum non ab attractione Cordis ulla, sed a propulsu
Arteriosi Sanguinis provenire. And then if there be such a necessity for the
making the heart more compact for the sake of the long Neck, why not as well
upon the account of the long Legs, in regard the Arteria magna ascendens and
descendens, both receive their Original from the same Stock, and consequently
stand in need of equal Assistance for the performance of the Offices unto which
they have been each of them appointed? And as that Party, who is to travel a
Hill just backward and forward, and no more, is at an Indifferency as to the
whole of the journey he undertakes, whether he be to begin at the bottom or the
top first. So it is all one, whether the Blood, when it be to leave the Heart
caeteris Paribus, fall downwards into the Feet, or ascend upwards inro the
Head, Provided its Passage be looked upon as not completed, till it return to
the same part again; unless we will say, that he who commences his Journey at
the bottom of the Hill, is constrained to encounter with the greatest hardship
of all at the first part of his way, which is to be recompensed by a
proportionable Alleviation at his coming down again, whereas he that takes the
contrary Course, has only the advantage of the most pleasant part of his
Journey at his first seting out, and the worst at last; which amounts upon a
true casting up, to just nothing at all.

It Is not to be denied, but the Blood does pass with a great deal more
difficulty from the Heart to the Head, than from the same place to the
capillary Arteries of the Feet, but then if it be considered, how steep the
ascent from the Feet to the Heart is back again, and contrarily, how natural
the retreat from the Head is to the same Region of the Heart, after it has once
gained the vertical Point; there will be no better way, of adjusting the
Calculation than by setting one against the other: and then this seemingly
learned Discourse will be resolved into a Parcel of pureself-Contradiction, and
the great Anatomist convicted to have written he knew not what, in the matters
appertaining to his own Art. I have heard indeed of long billed Brids, that
would be apt sometimes to bewray their own Nests; but never before, of any with
long Necks, that unless they stooped oftentimes would be endanger of the
Staggers.

Besides the Assertion is manifestly untrue in Practice; there is no such thing
in Nature, as that long necked Creatures should be any more obliged to stoop
down with their Heads and Necks, than others are; and those that will but take
notice, shall observe the Swans, to swim along with as erected Necks, as either
the Teale or the Dab-Chick; and if I mistake not, to be diving with them as
seldom, and tho a Horse has a much longer Neck than a Bull, I don't see he
carries his Head ere a whit the less stately for all that, but rather the
contrary, and if he can but be allowed an able Rider to manage him, may be
prevailed withal to hold it so from Morning till Night; which had the other
Posture been altogether so necessary as is pretended, would scarcely have been
possible; besides one would much wonder, that the great Horse-Masters, who have
spent so much of their time, and hard study about such niceties; should none of
them have been Anatomists enough to have understood so much before; and that
the Grooms and Ostlers, who have evermore professed such great kindness to
Horses, should be such wicked Knaves, as to delight in tormenting them thus
cruelly, when they needed not, by causeing their Racks and Mangers to be set at
such an unreasonable Height, and forceing them to do Penance in a manner for
every morsel of Hay they eat. And yet the greatest wonder of all is still
behind, whence it should come to pass, that the Horses that are kept at home,
and have all this Injury done them, should look so much fatter and fairer, and
be so much fitter for Service, then those that are turned to grass all the Year
about, and permitted to feed themselves after their own way with their Heads
hanging down, and their Blood by that means, freely taking that Course which
Nature had appointed it. But to be serious, though they should hold down their
Heads longer than others, to make the utmost concession Imaginable, that could
never do neither; And unless they were supposed to keep them in that Position
for a Constancy, there must be some wiser reason sought out for, then what is
taken from the more easy conveyance of the Blood thither; because otherwise
their poor Heads would be in a Bloodless Condition; however, there needs no
other Argument to prove the Consequence, than what shall be taken from the same
Author his own words in another place of the same learned Treatise, for if we
look forward to the 156. Page. and so on, we are informed that a Quantity of
Blood equal to the whole Mass, passes through the Ventricles of every Man's
Heart, at lest six times in an Hour; and how that the same Proportion is
likewise to be observed in all other Creatures. Atque ita se habet in omnibus
Animalibus, etc. So that if one half of the Blood, or but near so much, be to
be disposed of by the upper Branch of the Aorta, as there is no question to be
made, but that it is; if these long Necked Creatures he mentions, should chance
to forget themselves never so little, and forbear holding down their Heads but
one Minute of an hour; what an unequal Distribution thereof, must necessarily
ensue upon it, and how would all the faculties of the superior Region of the
Body be at a loss for want of Spirits to act withal, by reason of the Head its
being in so great a measure disfurnished of them, according to this Hypothesis?
And yet we see they do forbear for a great deal longer time, and that
frequently too, without any the least show of Prejudice or Inconvenience to
them at all; which is a manifest Indication of the Author his being mistaken,
in the Doctrine he delivers, as he is indeed in almost every thing he any where
treats about; insomuch, that setting aside the Dele totum at the Beginning,
which he is pleased to place amongst the Erratas, (though others, full as
knowing as himself, are of opinion they deserve much better, and to be reputed
of as the only piece of wholesome Advice, that is to be found in the whole Book)
there are scarce two words coming together, that may not upon very good reasons
be found fault withal; but what is that to me, if it should be so; who am only
concerned to look to my self, and make good my own Station? It Is no such
delightful Recreation to me to be busying my self about other men's matters,
and calling them to an account for what they have done; could I have been
permited to have enjoyed my own quiet, and lived free from Molestation at home,
I should have been sparing enough of giving them the least Disturbance in any
of their Fooleries, let them have been never so many, or never so egregious.
And now I have been put upon it contrary to mine own Inclinations; so little
desirous am I of seeking after advantages of that kind, that I am herrtily
sorry for the Occasion offered me of saying so much as I have; tho in the
greatest plenty of argument. As I have been all along hitherto upon the
defensive part, so I desire to hold on still. And if I can but ward off my
Adversaries Blow, and hinder him from doing me the Mischif he designs, shall
never be at all solicitous about the following of my own, to the incommoding of
him though I had it never so much in my power to do so; because it is the
clearing up of my own Reputation, as it falls in with the General Design so
often intimated; and not the disparagement of his that I have a respect unto;
and if that might have been effected by a direct Course; as there would have
been little need of casting Personal reflections upon any man, so should it
never have been offered at by me. It Is true, I could have deciphered some Body
plainly enough to be understood, who has been exceeding fortunate at setting up
with a borrowed ingenuity, when he has had but a very inconsiderable Stock to
have made a Beginning withal of his own, made vast improvements of the
precarious comendations bestowed on him by some great ones who have been
charitably disposed, See Mr. Fr. Potter his Letter to I. A. Esquire, of the
Middle Temple, written in the Year 52. By which is made to appear, who was the
first In^enter of the transfusion of the Blood He used to say, it came into his
Mind by reflecting on the Story ^f Medea and Jason.
and having bin related to a numerous society of Men evermore good at crying up
a few of their own Members for transcendent in each particular Faculty, whither
happening to deserve it or not. And though I am pretty well assured, there is
not any thing can be more taking with the Vulgar, than to be showed a Master
Wit in his own conceit, turning Master Fool at last, in the Opinion of all
others besides himself: and that Multitudes of simple People, who have suffered
themselves to be deluded, by the false Appearances, and idle Pretenses of the
same Person's imaginary clerkship, could like it well enough to be rectified in
their Judgments, by receiving some better Information concerning him; yet for
me he is like to stand in the same fair Opinion with them he always did; not
only because it looks so unhandsomly, and makes so harsh a Discord, to be
saying all the Ill one can of a Person, from whom one has sometimes heard Ill,
but because of the Advantage that is given against the Truth thereby: to such
whose Assent is more truly valuable: by sideing with it so unseasonably.
Recriminations we all know to be none of the best means of defending a Cause
by, so far indeed from gaining the party who makes use of them, any acquittal
from the Fault he stands charged with, that they rather make one, where there
was none before; at leastwise, bring such an one under a strong Presumption of
being thought guilty, who otherwise might have passed for Innocent. But yet as
Commendations, violently extorted from a man's own Mouth, when wrongfully
accused, are wont, amongst equal Judges, to meet with somewhat a more
favorable censure, then to be looked upon under the strict Formality of self
praising; so on the other hand, it may well be hoped, that they who have
desired to live in Peace, and could not obtain it: when they come to be
injuriously dealt withal, and hardly spoken against without Cause, may be
allowed the Previledge of making their Apology after the best (not to say only)
manner they can; and then if they do now and then reflect upon their
Adversaries Infirmities, when it could not be otherwise avoided (provided it be
done with Truth and Soberness, not so much out of Anger and by way of
Retaliation; as in order to the Invalidating the malicious Suggestions they
find have been whispered against themselves; or for the prevention of public
Wrongs and Inconveniences, that in all Probability, without some such Course
taken, might have been offered to others) deserve something of a conivance, at
leastwise, if not to be held absolutely excused; as for my own part, it cannot
be denied, but that I have now and then let fall some sharpish expressions
against a Person of Eminency enough in his own profession; for if no Body had
been intended thereby, it had been a pouring out wotds to no purpose, and an
aiming them at Random; but then I considered with my self, before I did so, how
he came by it first of all, and what excellent good uses, he has made of it
ever since, and does daily; what sort of People his chief admirers are and have
been, and how they likewise came to be so, and by what means and artifices
they have been continued in their Belief: and the thorough Apprehension of
these things, made me I confess, somewhat the more bold, than otherwise I
should have been.

I abhor the thoughts of designing any thing of prejudice either to a good Man,
or a good Man's Friend; and as I am not under any obligation of saying all the
ill I can of such as are neither, so am I not wholly to keek silence upon a
just Provocation offered. There may very well be a distinction made between the
Man and his Baseness, and a Charity preserved for the one, and yet none at all
for the other. Not that I am forgetful where I have declared the chief Motives
prevailing with me to engage in what I have done, to be taken from the
consideration of more Public concerns than any thing relating to my self, and
so they were And yet that ought to be no hinderance to me in the asserting of
my own Just Rights; Or treating about other Particular Matters in time and
place convenient. Because these are things implying nothing at all of
contrariety but often time, a great deal of Agreement with, and sometimes
Subordination to one another. And it is not impossible but that an Example may
be single and multiplied at the same time, only by a different manner of
apprehending it. So that what is Acted by one Man, may be approved of by one
hundred; and the others wanted but an Opportunity for the doing of the same
things. And therefore I could wish with all my heart, as it has been the drift
of what I have propounded to my self from first to last, that when ever the
Description of any Man's actions or Demeanor shall have occurred in any former
Passages of mine, including any thing of ingratefulness in them; as it is
impossible but that if an ill thing be Acted, it must be Acted by some body, it
may however be understood in an abstracted sense; and by the help of the
Intellect still reduced to some such Order of Men whose either Folly or
Naughtiness may best Entitle them to such a Charracter; and that will save me
the trouble of heaping together multitudes of Examples for the Confirmation of
what I have been all this while endeavoring to make good. Only one Instance
more of my one knowledge, since the acting of what has been so largely related,
comes in so patly to my purpose, that it must and will, whether I will or no,
be a little taken notice of. I Will sum it up in a word or two, and then
conclude.

A most Ingenious, and learned Gentleman (and if such can be imposed upon, what
are we to believe of others) and one that I have had several times under my
hands upon the account of the self same sort of Distemper, was taken suddenly
ill of a Flatulency in his Hypocondria and Bowels; the Illness was apparently
subdued, as it had been oft-times before and that with much the same kinds of
Remedies; and all the Assurances given so far forth as humane foresight would
extend to, of a Speedy Recovery, without the least grounds or fear of any
possible Danger. And yet upon the arrival of a London Physician, blooded he
must needs be, nothing would serve his turn without it, which before he could
obtain, he was forced to beg and entreat hard for: I am ashamed to say how long
time together, and rather than have none at all, he would be contented with a
very little Quantity, some two Ounces, or thereabouts; and least he should miss
of that small Pittance too, was glad to take it away with his own hands.

Many silly reasons were pretended upon the score of the Scurvey, Jaundice, and
Sharpness of Humors, and the like; but the Principle, and the only true one,
never so much as mentioned at all. To wit that no other, after that had been
done, might be capable of putting in for a share of the Cure besides himself:
all little and inferior Remedies, being as it were lost, and swallowed up in
the great one; and being once able to say, he had fetched Blood of his Patient,
away he went immediately with a great deal of Complacency and Satisfaction.

Sir. I beg your Pardon for the tediousness of this Address, and making use of
a Case you have been so nearly concerned in; as likewise for the publishing of
both, without either your Knowledge or Order. As to what relates to others, I
have made my Apology else where, and therefore, there will be the less need of
saying much now in this place. The Office of an Informer was a thing I never
much delighted in, and all such as know me aright, will I believe bear me witness
as to the truth of that Particular; I am Conscious of too many failings of my
own to be over censorious of other Men's; and as for Peaceableness of Demeanor,
I don't know that ever I b^gun a Quarrel with any Man in my whole Life; of all
the Physicians that ever lived in England; I dare say, few ever were worse used
by Empericks, and Quaksalvers, and those of the vilest, and most despicable
sort if any of them can be said to be more such than others, then I have been:
and yet I cannot call to rememberance, that I have had my Passions at any time
very much transported beyond the Bounds of Moderation; and therefore surely, I
have little reason to countenance such men, to the depressing of honest and able
Physicians; neither have I at any time, if my words may be construed in their
true Gramatical Sense; and those who Judge of them otherwise, may pervert any
man's honest Intentions as well as mine, and so are little to be regarded.

Such as pretend to be of a Profession, they know nothing of, and were never in
the least fitted for, may be, and doubtless are exceeding bad men; but those
that degenerate from the honest Principles belonging to their own are a great
deal worse. And that is the utmost my words can amount to, taken in the most
rigorous Acceptance imaginable. There are Conciones ad clerum as well as ad
Populum; and if Divines may be allowed to speak against Divines, and tell them
of their Faults when they do amiss out of the Pulpit, why may not the Members
of other Faculties be allowed to imitate them upon a like Occasion? I confess,
the gravest and wisest Persons are the best qualified for the performance of
such an Office. But if they out of prudentiall considerations, best known to
themselves, shall think good not to be seen therein, rather, than to have it
wholly omitted; I for my part see no reason to the contrary, but why it may be
done by others.

Not that I am altogether ignorant what are the usual consequences attending
upon public Reproofs. And how ticklish a thing it is to be dabling in a sore
place, not inferior for tenderness to the Apple of an Eye. I expect no other
than to be called to a severe account for what I have written, and am as ready
to give it, provided my Auditor prove to be sober and ingenuous. But if a Sot
or a Buffoon shall take upon him to be Pragmatical, tho I think I may be bound
in conscience to pity such a one for his folly, or rudeness, and it be for no
other reason than out of a consideration of humane Infirmity, yet do not look
upon my self to stand obliged, by that, or any other tie whatever, to make any
Reply to him in either, be his Language never so mouthy or never so provoking.

Sir, I am, Your very humble Servant, R. G.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Author not being at leisure to wait in Town dureing the time of this
Impression, several gross Mistakes have arisen through the Printers
Inadvertency, which the Reader is desired to correct, according to the
Amendments following.

Epistle. for man^ lye^ ma^e liable for ^nsureing, injuring for formable,
^avo^abl^. f^r whistle, ^ish it. for that so great, what so great* for good
would, good will would. for the compensation, a compensation* for was for
ough^, may for ought. for they would never, they will n^'re. for offered ^s admitting,
offered admitting.

Page 3 lin. 26 dele was. p. 4 l. 5 read sane memory. p. 4 l. 11 undermining.
p. 6 l. 29 pack. p. 9 l. 5 his wise. p. 9 l. 29 or is willing upon reasons. p.
11 l. 13 if he be bent. p. 11 l. 23 that ^ools. p. 15 l. 7 smatched. 15 when.
p. 17 l. 12 thwarting. p. 19. l. 21 Dilemma. p. 21 l. 17 shall we. p. 27. of
the issuing. p. 31 l. 18 of all others. p. 32 l. 2 thing. l. 4 dele in. l. 23
e'ne just. p. 36 l. 8 determine. p. 38 l. 16 reserate. p. 39 l. 13 or alike. p.
40 l. 10 possibly. p. 41 l. 28 to our. p. 44 l. 8 less. l* 25 from them. p. 45.
l. 19 chose. p. 46 l. 28 cause or. p. 64. l. 25 duodenum. p. 67. l. 23 ceti p.
85 l. 22 stave's of. p. 94. l. 3 it is general. p. 107 l. 13 dele no sooner. p.
130 l. 12 times. p. 131 some measure. p. 132 l. 23 digesting. p. 133 l. 24
Cambium. p. 134 l. 31 emaciated. p. 138 l. 16. Supports. p. 140 l. 16 hold. p.
141 l. 25 whole can be supposed. l. 27 Constitutive. p. 142 l. 22 Heat. p. 145
l. 14 Reason. l. 17 Contingencies. p. 146 l. 4 possibly. l. 14. Contrivance. p.
147 l. 2 Effusions. l. 27 full out. p. 148 l. 6 no, the direct. l. 25 avoiding
a Vacuity. p. 154 l. 19 where one must be. p. 249 l. 14 Effect. l. 26 that it
is so. p. 152 l. 6 knew. p. 153 l. 23 enumeration. p. 158 l. 17 hear. p. 159 l.
21 imaginable. p. 160 l. 6 Fractions. l. 14 amongst us. l. 18 diminution. l. 30
Effects. p. 161 l. 15 into. p. 165 l. 15 Allowed l. 17 alleged. p. 167 l. 6
sent for. p. 167 l. 3 Prescriptions. p. 168 l. 7 Criminal. p. 169 l. 4 An. p.
176 l. 30 importunate. p. 177 l. 10 Gaining. p. 179 l. 16 loosing it. l 27
spre^ds. p. 180 l. 18 alive. p. 181 l. 11 dele fol. p. 182 l. 24 (...). p. 183
l. 2 streine. p. 184. l. 18 a -- after common. p. 186 l. 6. causes. p. 188 l. 8
Years. 16 Chimera's. l. 29 vented. p. 189 l. 14 dele fol. p. 190 l. 20 (...) 24
quae. 28 seed. p. 191 l. 7 conveiance. p. 201 l. 30 See Fr. Potter his Letter
to I. A. (...) kept by the R. Society.

Books Printed and Sold by Joseph Hindmarsh at the Black Bull in Cornhill.
REliquiae Raleighanae, being Discourses and Sermons on Several Subjects. By
the Reverend Dr. Walter Releigh, Dean of Wells, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his
late Majesty King Charles the First.

Sermons upon Faith and Providence, and other Subjects. By the late Reverend
William Outram, D. D. Perbend of Westminister, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Majesty.

An impartial Account of the Arraignment, Trial and Condemnation of Thomas late
Earl of Strafford, and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, before the Parliament at
Westminster, Anno Dom. 1641.

The Loyal Citizen; revived, a Speech made by Alderman Garroway, at a
Comon-Hall on Tuesday the 17. of January 1642. Upon occasion of a Speech
delivered there the Friday before by Mr. Pym, at the Reading of his Majesty's
Answer to the late Petition.

The good Old Way, or a Discourse offered to all true hearted Protestants
concerning the Ancient Way of the Church, and the Conformity of the Church of
England thereunto, as to its Government, Manner of Worship, Rites and Customs;
by Edward Pelling, Rector of St. Martin Ludgate, and Chaplain to his Grace the
Duke of Summerset.

Loyalty and Peace; by Dr. Samuel Rolls.

The Unfortunate Heroes; translated out of French by an English Gentleman.

The Progress of Honesty; by T. D.

Dauella, History of the Civil Wars of France.

The Good Old Way; by Mr. Pelling.

A Satyr on the Jesuits.

FINIS.

