THE ORACLE FOR THE SICK.

TO THE READER HEALTH.
IF to have opposed a sweeping Plague could ever establish a Physician's Gloyr;
whether you consider the Dangers he rescued others from, or those he run
himself into, or yet his Skill that enabled him for it; certainly for Us to
resist the Plague of an Empirical Infection, cannot now be our Dishonor. For,
take it from Us, every Disease undertaken by a Quack is altogether as dangerous
as the Plague. When therefore People do so generally die with the Tokens of
their Folly upon them, who can blame Us for exempting the living from this
Mortality? Yet in doing this We foresee, that Empiricism, like Infection, will
falsely be imputed to Us; he that Cures either, being at one time or other
avoided as sick of the same Disease. However, we hope your Judgments, better
informed by the good effect* of our Art, would clear us of that Scandal, were
not our Qualifications sufficient to rub the Pitch off our own Fingers.

All of the Honorable, the College of Phisicians in London, whereof we are
Members, have, to a Man of them, been affected with the dying Groans of Persons
Murdered by Intruders into Physic. These formerly appeared only now and then,
like the event of some petty Rencontre; but now they are heard so mournful and
so numerous, that Quacking looks as if it were attended with the effects of a
pitched Battle. Not a Week passes but some of us are called to these doleful
Objects; whom we generally find to have been treated much in the manner
following, viz. Upon our enquiry into the case it appears, the Sick was seized
with a Fever, whose symptoms as to us related, did portend no danger; We know a
Vomit would have been proper, the Intruder gave a Perl Cordial; The Party ought
to have been Bled, the Perl Cordial was repeated; some noble Diaphoretick or
Febrifuge should have been administered, the Perl Cordial was repeated; All this
while a low Diet should have been kept, but instead thereof Gelly-broths were
intruded: Thus through omission and commission the symptoms of a dying Man
appear, then come in Alkermes and a Blister; and a little before the
Passing Bell tolls in come We, to behold People Murdered, and our own
Prosession thus abused.

Imagine you, what Impression these Barbarous Cruelties must make upon such a
Body of Men, whose Charity, we do inform you, bears its proportion to that
Learning, which is admired abroad, and is likewise acknowledged here at home by
the most Malicious of our Enemies. How do you think, when the Laws are not
silent, can we be so, against such barefaced Offenders? Justly has the College
animadverted on several Empiricks in getting the Statutes of the Realm executed
upon them: And wisely has the whole Body thereof considered of prudential
Methods toward the obtaining the end and intent of the Law; viz. the
suppression of Empirical Man-slayers. Sundry methods have formerly been under
their Debate; the result whereof was, that some Undertaking like this of Ours
would prove the most effectual. Convinced therefore by such a general Opinion,
and moreover encouraged hereto by several of the Society, beside the unanimous
Resolution of Us five on the Point; We, for the Public Good, and, we hope, not
to the Discredit of our Profession, do proceed in the Method following, viz.

1. At the Angel and Crown in Kingstreet London, We have a Repository,
furnished with the most noble and efficacious Medicines; faithfully prepared
with our own hands.

2. Every day in the Week, from seven in the Morning till eight at night; one
or other of Us will constantly attend at the Repository, there to give his
Advice, and to dispense the Medicines with his own Hand; or else to go himself
or send another of Us, where a Visit is required.

3. Every Monday and Thursday in the Week, from two till six in the Afternoon,
We will all of Us attend at the Repository, there to advise and consult upon
such Cases, as shall then be proposed to Us, and accordingly to dispense the
Medicines; or to depute some of the Consultation to visit, when required.

4. Either at the Repository, or at our several respective Dwellings, We are
ready to give to the Poor our Advice gratis, and to supply them with Medicines
at low rates.

And, that it never may be said, We talk as much like Impertinents, as they
that oppose the giving of our own Physic, let every thinking Person well
consider the weight of what we have to say in favor of these our Proposals. We
therefore acquaint you, that the Laws have empowered Physicians in England to
give as well as prescribe Physic. But to the end, Reason, and not bare
Authority may prevail, believe it altogether as reasonable, as it is lawful for
us so to do. For every one that prepares a Medicine according to the
Dispensatory, unless he will be so insipid as to condemn what himself does,
must own that our College, who made that Dispensatory, is able to prepare the
things described in it; Or, that He is guided by the Directions of Persons, who
themselves know not how to perform, what they direct others to do: Which can
hardly be acknowledged by a Man, who otherwise perhaps thinks better of himself
than of the Authors of the Dispensatory. Moreover, if in less knowing Times the
best Physicians Prescribed and Dispensed their own Medicines with their own
hands (as Galen with his own hands prepared the great Treacle for several of
the Emperors of Rome, and gave most of his own Physic) what Weakness is it now
to think, in a Practicophilosophical Age, wherein Learned Men of all
Professions do so generally addict themselves to the search of Nature, that
Physicians alone should neglect their Province, and not know the preparation of
their own Medicines, which comprehends a great share of Natural Inquiries?
Among Men not professed Physicians, the Honorable, and Learned Mr. Boil is
Master of many noble Preparations in Medicine. In reference to Physicians, who
can be so injurious to the Memory of our Harvey, as to say, that He who found
out the Circulation of the Blood, and knew the Vital Process from the first
vibration of the salient Point in the Embryo, till it drew, nay expired its
vital Air, who dares say, He knew not the Process of a Dispensatory
Preparation? With what curious Medicaments has our Willis enriched Pharmacy,
who, to our knowledge, put his own hand to the Work? Nor have Physicians
abroad, such as Sylvius, Ettmuller, Wedelius and others, been sparing of their
own pains in making most curious Remedies. And do not think, that all Men of
Abilities in Pharmacy are dead out of our College; but to avoid palpable
Flattery in reciting of living Names, let our Adversaries name that one Man of
the College, who has not solid skill in Pharmacy. If they cannot name him, let
all Men, who value their Health, judge between Them and Us. Our College has
Published a Dispensatory, containing a complete preparation of Medicines; but
not one syllable of what any one of these Medicines is good for, the
Application of all (to prevent mistakes) being reserved to their Breasts, who
invented or approved them. Yet several of our bare Medicine-makers have
presumed to give these preparations to the sick improperly, they not knowing
the true Use of them; whereby many have been brought to untimely Ends. Nor is
this all, they, under pretext of their Calling, too often vary our Prescripts,
or by slandering them, prevent their being taken. Whose hands then, think ye,
should we trust but our own, in preparing our Remedies, if we either value your
Lives or our own Reputation? But more than all this, the most effectual
Remedies depend upon so long and such curious Processes, that only read men,
and they that know the intricacies of Nature, can prepare them aright: To
Adulterate them, it is true, is easy; and to buy them of such as fell cheaper
than they prepare carefully, is obvious; but if you will either buy them true,
or use them right, you must deal with Men of Art and not of Trade only.

And of what moment the Advice of a Physician in taking of Medicines is, were
not People too little sensible, We needed be less sollicitous in making them
more. But, as We said, Compounders not knowing the use or nature of Medicines;
because they can go no farther than the Dispensatory, which only shows the
making of them, We do assure you, that he runs a great hazard of his Life, who
in his Sickness takes any Medicine without the Advice of a Physician. For were
you but as thoroughly convinced as We do certainly know, that an improper Diet
does as surely kill as any Poison could, you would hardly adventure upon
Medicines, which produce more violent effects upon our bodies than food can,
without being assured by men of skill, that such Medicines are proper for you.

Knowing therefore the necessity of taking advice with all Medicines, and
finding in our Practice how difficult some Cases are; We have provided not
only, that one Physician shall always be attending; but that many may assist
one another in advising upon difficult Cases. So that all the day long you
cannot fail of a Physician at our Repository; nor every Monday and Thursday in
the afternoon of a Consultation of several. Where we hope, that as all persons
of Ingenuity understand a Physician's Merit, so all shall receive mutual
treatment from Us; nor shall the great Objection of the chargeableness of
Physicians hold against Us, inasmuch as we shall endanger no Man's Estate by the
price of his Health, nor will we demand any thing for our Advice of the
Indigent.

Thus, you see, the Good of all, and the Credit of our Profession is our
Meaning, which you have farther explained to you in the ensuing Book. In it are
contained all things that a Physician can well ask his Patient: and though
several things may seem superfluous and liable to Cavil; yet to the Judicious,
and to Men of Art, there will appear nothing such: For better it is, that many
Questions more than need should be put, than that any one less should be
forgotten. For instance; without the knowledge of a Patient's Constitution no
Advice can safely be given; without the knowledge of the Complexion or Color,
Stature and other Accidents, the Constitution cannot be known; and without all
the Questions mentioned in the beginning of the Book, no man can be informed
herein as he ought. By the convenience of this Book People wholly strangers to
Us may have our advice at a distance, as if present: And such as had rather we
should know the Disease than the Patient that is troubled with it, have hereby
the opportunity of receiving Advice, he to whom that Advice is given, remaining
altogether to Us unknown. Wherefore all Cavil at our plain Expression in Male
and Female cases is vain; since to hear some necessary questions asked, would
surely offend a modest Ear, which to read will not raise the least emotion of a
Blush: So that no person's Modesty (who has this Book) need be put to the
torture, in relating what some may think is here too boldly expressed; yet in
many cases of absolute necessity by Physicians to be known. But peruse the
advantages of this Book.

And thus, without Necromantick Art we can raise the Idea of an absent Patient;
when raised, without the inspiration of any Python We can shrewdly divine what
his Fate will be; and so, if either Knowledge of Secrets, or Foreknowledge of
what is to come, were ever counted Oraculous, Delos it self did never own a
much surer Oracle.

For indeed We have not only studied in the best Universities of Europe; but We
have put these our Studies into practice for many years in other Metropolitan
Cities of this part of the World, where several of us have been Collegiate
Physicians, as well as in this great City, where we now reside all as such.
Being therefore skilled in several European Languages beside the Universal,
Foreigners at our Consultation may discourse with Us in their own Tongues, and
may be as well understood as if they were in their own Countries; at least (if
they are learned) they may freely talk with us in Latin. And all persons,
whether English or Strangers may enjoy the benefit of the united Counsel and
Experience of Us all.

When We are not at the Repository, We may be met with, or heard of at our
respective Dwellings,

John Greenvelt in Throgmorton Street, next door but one to Broad-street.
Richard Brown in Winchester street. Christopher Crelle at the lower end of
Fryday-Street. John Peche in Chequer yard near Dowgate. Phil. Guide in
Salisbury Court in Fleetstreet.


THE ORACLE FOR THE SICK.
The Advantages of this Book.
. I. SUCH sick Persons as have not the Convenience, or are not in a Capacity of
calling in Physicians; by reason they either live at too great a distance, or
are in no condition to defray that Physicians charges upon a journey, whom they
make choice of above others, or that they either will not or cannot go to him
themselves, will here find these inconveniences removed. For here they have
every Remark and Question, which Physicians use to propound to their Patients,
from whence they take their Indications, and more than will serve their turn.

. II. By this mean many poor sick People will not henceforth be destitute of
Advice; as they are in the Country, and in places remote from great Towns: A
thing which redounds to the great Detriment of several. For that they are
necessitated to commit their Case to Surgeons, Apothecaries, Barbars, and
good Women dwelling in Villages, who are not always sufficiently instructed how
to describe a sickness aright nor it is accidents. Through which ill management,
the fick frequently dye of Diseases, in the beginning slight and curable, had
they but been well treated. And, which is most deplorable, the sick are little
sollicitous either in setting their House in order, or about their Estate of a
higher consequence, because they are not in the least apprehensive of any
danger they are in. Which fatal Accidents may henceforth in a great measure be
avoided: Forasmuch as one shall meet with none so ignorant, provided they can
but read, who may not be capable of giving sufficient instructions to Us
concerning the Estate of the absent Patient, and concerning his Sickness, by
the sole use of this Book.

. III. Those same sick Persons, who in the Country and places remote are under
Surgeons and Apothecaries hands, capable of stating their Case, and thereby
of consulting Physicians about their Diseases, will be much better attended,
whilst not any one Circumstance requisite to the entire and perfect knowledge
of their Disease, is forgot: It being notorious, that most of the great faults,
which are committed in the management of the Sick, proceed from this, that
their Diseases are not well known, one being taken for another. And seeing that
Physic is not an Art of Divination, as the ignorant Vulgar persuade
themselves, too much Circumspection cannot be used in stating the Case aright
to Physicians. And this will be much better done, when they that send, have
their instructions in Print, the reading whereof will lead them, as by the
hand, to the observing all things worth consideration, which might otherwise
easily slip their Memory. So that those, who otherwise would have been
negligent in their Relation, in order to have Advice from Physicians, cannot
now be so any longer: for as much as they are obliged to note, or make mention
of each particular Head in the Book.

. IV. And even Physicians themselves, of whom Advice is taken, being absent,
must of necessity by this Method be more exact in their knowledge and judgment
of Diseases, and in prescribing their Remedies. For they, as they are obliged,
returning their Advice with this Book, wherein the sick Party and the Disease
are drawn to the Life, and described, the defects of their Prescriptions, if
any there are, will be far more evident. As faults in Limning are best
discovered, when the Piece and the Original are both in view, or when the
Features of the absent Party are well known to us. Such will be the state of
the sick delineated by this Invention, by means whereof Persons skilled in the
Art of Physic may judge of the Abilities of that Physician, who gave his
Advice: Which can never be done in the way Men practice prescribing Piecemeal,
wherein a Man can only discern whether the Prescript be well dosed, and
possibly whether it came from a Physician experienced in the Practice of his
Art; but not whether it be prescribed pertinently, nor whether it be proper for
the Patient and the Disease, which is the principal thing. So that every
Physician, considering what it will conduce to his Honor, though now perhaps
he is conducted by Conscience alone, will moreover be concerned in reference to
his Reputation: Which will serve for a double Incitement to encourage, and a
double Obligation to bind him firm to his utmost Endeavor.

. V. Physicians, that have Persons of Quality under their hand, and such as of
whom it will be of import to remark from time to time, yea several times a day,
the state of their Sickness, will here also find a notable ease to their
Memory, and a great Abridgment. For having as many Books as they will mark at
diverse times, they can set down in each of these Books the then present State
of their Patient, after the manner of Astronomers, who set down from time to
time the State of the Heavens upon Paper; which State would otherwise slip out
of their mind, and hinder the judgment that they would make: As on the contrary
these different States of their patient will facilitate the consequences, which
they will draw from comparing them; so as to gather the Crises and the other
Movements of Nature, which they have to do withal.

. VI. There are several dishonorable Diseases, which hinder the Sick from
discovering themselves, and they by this Bashfulness render themselves
incurable: Whereas by this Book any one may conceal his or her Name, which
contributes nothing to the cure of Diseases, and may receive good and salutary
Advice.

. VII. And whereas Seeing is the quickest and most comprehensive of all the
Senses, here one will at once have in Sight a multitude of Questions, which it
would be tedious to hear asked and answered: And one may fix on what things are
considerable, passing by such things as to the Party seem worthy of little or
no consideration.

Now you have seen some of the advantages of this Book; the Use of it will
discover to you the rest.

. VIII. We need not here trouble our selves at all to answer those that take
upon them to decry the Inventions of others, and say that a man cannot
comprehend in one Book an infinite number of Circumstances, a diverse
Combination whereof varies the Case; since the Letters of an Alphabet alone are
sufficient to describe infinite Volumes. And when Physicians, Surgeons, and
Apothecaries, and in their absence other Persons who shall send or come to us
or others to ask Advice concerning a Distemper, do find matters extraordinary
in it, nothing will hinder, but they may add them; since Treatises of Nature do
admit Discourses of Monsters.

. IX. Little also can they hurt us, who tell us, this Invention is not our own.
May they not as well reproach Galen, who took his Doctrine from Hippocrates, and
he from others? It being no slight matter to put things in Order, and to
introduce a new Use of them. But leaving Vainglory to others, we shall reckon
it sufficient, that several Persons do receive benefit, without regard whence
it comes. And possibly, even they that would have something of Novelty, might
be the first in quarrelling upon that very account.

. X. Others may find the Reading of this Work troublesome and disagreeable,
because they may judge it, as it is, void altogether of Embellishment, and
without Affectation, when they perhaps may be desirous of florid Language.
Because they know not, that height of Expression is no more proper for
instructing, than Flowers are for nourishment; and since we intend the profit
of all Mankind indifferently, which is composed, for the greater share, of
people who have not leisure for these things, our manner of Discourse must be
accommodated to their Capacitie's, which will not prove useless to the
Intelligent, as the more exalted Terms of our Art would be to the less knowing.

. XI. Some will also think it strange, that we make an Enumeration so exact of
things, from which we may gather Indications; possibly, because they behave
themselves so little after this manner in their Consultations. But let such Men
know this, that they cannot with too much Circumspection treat the Almightie's
Masterpiece: Moreover, the things which super-abound, being not at all bad,
such as have a mind to make use of this Book may leave what they will, and mark
nothing but what they shall find pertinent to their Design.

. XII. They that reproach us, will not be wanting also to render us odious to
Phyficians of other places, as if we suspected them of ignorance, and as if
they knew not how to state a Case, when it is necessary to take foam sound
Advice. But we have too good an Opinion, yea better than those that envy us, of
the Capacity of all Doctors in Physic, who have obtained their Degrees in
famous Universities, too good certainly ever to call it in question. We honor
them, and are ready to consult with them; so far are we from the least
intention of harm to them. And one may truly say of this work, that as it will
serve as an Ariadne's Clew, to guide by the hand the meaner sort, who may be
destitute of Physicians, and other Persons, capable to state their Case; so it
will serve as a Medium to the more knowing Physicians, and who as such are
ordinarily fullest of employment, to save their time, which to them is very
precious. Moreover, they are not only at liberty by this Invention to state
several Cases, for one; but they may ease themselves of this trouble by the
meanest of their Servants, that can read; nay, by the Patients themselves.
Furthermore, they that are experienced know, that Physic is an Art of Society,
the Practice whereof is in this found different from the Law, in that a Lawyer
who pleads well, is never a whit the less esteemed, though he lose his Cause.
But the ignorant Vulgar judge rashly of a Physician by the event of the
Disease; from whose Calumny he cannot better protect himself than by
Consultation, which Men cannot sometimes have with the Physicians of the place,
because there is not a sufficient number, and no good understanding among those
there are, or because they are too much in the Patients favor, and will not
depart from their former Advice, or out of respect they will not gainsay one
another. There is not any way more advantageous to maintain the Reputation of
skillful Physicians, and of such as omit nothing in the cure of a Disease,
albeit the Success proves not always correspondent to their Care, than to
justify their Proceedings by other Persons disinteressed and capable of
judging: To which this Book will give more assistence than any hitherto.

. XIII. And thus will this Work henceforth be a Touchstone to distinguish
Physicians from Pretenders; These fearing nothing more than the use of this
Book and the Method it contains: Because one may easily by this mean know the
faults, which they have committed in their management of Diseases, and also may
judge whether they have known them well; whereas such as are expert in their
Profession desire no better, than to make any one a Witness of their Actions.

AND because in examining things, which a Physician ought to know, in order to
his understanding a Disease well, and that he may direct his Remedies to the
purpose, there are some Considerations common to both Sexes, some peculiar to
each, and others yet appertaining to Surgery; the first of the eight
Chapters into which this Book is divided, shall be common to both Sexes; the
second for Males; the third for Females; and the five last shall be
Chirurgical, treating of Swellings, Wounds, Ulcers, Bones broken and out of
joint; concluding with some things concerning the Remedy which has been given
the Sick, the date of the Book, an Answer to some objections, and an
Alphabetical Table. Some of which must be omitted by such as they concern not,
to wit, the Chapter concerning Males, by such as shall ask Advice for a Woman
or Girl, and then that of Females, when one desires judgment concerning a Man
or Boy; and so other Chapters.

The Use of this Book is in this manner; One must make a mark with a Pencil, or
draw a slight line with a Pen upon the number, or on that part of the Figure
which one would denote: With this distinction in reference to the Figures
representing the Body of Man or the parts thereof, that to mark a pain or any
external ail, the line ends on the Skin or the outside of the Figure, without
being continued with Points: but to signify an internal pain or ail of the
same Part, one must continue the line with Points.

As, to signify A B C


a superficial wound on the right Cheek I must represent it by the line [A,]
which simply ends on that part, without being continued by Points. But to show
a deep wound or pain in the left Cheek, beyond the line [B,] which ends there,
this line must be yet continued with more or less Points, accordingly as the
Ail shall lie deep. And when the pain or other grievance is any way extended,
the line must divide it self into two, three or more Rays, which must end round
about, just where the grief reaches: Thus, if you look on the lines that begin
at the Letter [C] one of which goes to the middle of the Forehead, another to
the Crown, and a third to the left side of the Head, they signify a pain in
half of the same, called a Hemicrany, and by the common sort the Megrim.

So, to represent the state of a sick Person, whose Father lived a long time,
but sickly and troubled with the Gout, who was begot by him in his old Age, of
a Mother in her youth and health. This sick Persons constitution is weakly; the
Skin without hair, clear, soft, thin and moist; the Color pale; of a middle
Stature; habit of Body lean; takes liquid Medicines with ease, but solid ones
with difficulty; hard to Purge, but easy to Vomit, etc. I must underscore it
with a Pen or Pencil, as you may see. And such as have leisure may write it out
on a Paper apart, leaving the Words which are not included or marked: And by
this means one will find the Sense complete, and not at all interrupted with
other words, useless to the matter in hand. As for example;

The Person for whom Advice is desired, is descended from a Father of a long,
middling or short Life, yet living Healthy, or who was troubled with the
Headache, Palsy, Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Consumption, Dropsy, Gravel,
Stone, Colic, Venereal Disease, Gout, Piles, Leprosy, etc. Who begat him in
his Youth; Manhood or Old Age; Of a Mother of a long, middling, or short Life,
or yet living: Healthy, or who was troubled with the Headache, Palsy, Apoplexy,
Falling Sickness, Consumption, Dropsy, Fits of the Mother, Gravel, Stone,
Colic, Venereal Disease, Gout, Piles, Leprosy, etc. who bore the Patient in
her Youth, in in her middle Age, or toward her old Age.

As to the Constitution, it is Hale, Middling, or Weakly.

The Stature, very Tall, Middling, or very Low.

The Habit of Body Fat or Lean.

Easy, or hard to work on by a Purge.

Easy, hard, or indifferent to take liquid or solid Medicines.

Vomits easily, difficultly, or never.

And so of the rest; For it will be easy to apply to the same use, and to
employ every word of this Book to give its meaning. As in pressing the Fingers
upon the Keys of a Virginal, you make some of them give their sound, while
others lie still; whence proceeds the Harmony of the Instrument. But if the
meaning of every Article of these Observations be not apprehended, or if some
(as we said) seem not pertinent to the Subject; such may be let alone, As
likewise one may to a whole Case add what he shall judge is wanting.

Thus have we done with the Essay, which we thought good to premise, for the
clearing of our grand Design, and the Practice of the same. Now we proceed to

CHAP. I. The Observations common to both Sexes, and where the first Marks
ought to be made.
THE Person for whom Advice is desired, is descended from a Father of a long,
middling or short Life, or yet alive: etc. Who begot the Party in his etc. Who
bore the Party in her Youth, middle Age, or toward her old Age.

As to the Constitution, it is hale, middling or weakly.

The Stature very Tall, Middling, or very Low.

The habit of Body, fat, fleshy or lean.

Has a Head very great, little, or well proportioned to the rest of the body.

The Forehead broad or narrow, high or low, or midling. Eyes sparkling, lively
or dull; large, midling or little; blew,

Hair thick or thin; curled, light, yellow,

Hair course, middling or fine, greasy, neither very dry, nor very moist.

Has a color good or bad, naturally or by accident. The Complexion white,
pale, red. The balls of the Cheeks a little or Small Pox.

Is straight or crooked, much or little,

Sleeps little or much, a long while, or presently after Dinner, quietly or
restlesly, not within a few or many days.

Has Dreams pleasant, displeasing or indifferent; dreaming of fire, water,
mire, or of flying in the Air.

Is easy or hard to work on by a Purge.

Takes solid Medicines with difficulty, indifferently well, or with ease: Takes
liquid Medicines with ease, difficultly, or indifferently

Dwells, or dwells not in the native Air, which is serene or troubled, subtle
or gross, enlightened or not enlightened by the Sun, and exposed to the Winds
on the East, South, West or North; unbounded or else enclosed with Mountains;
temperate, hot, cold, dry or moist and fenny, or near a River: infected or not
infected.

Eats and Drinks little or much in health; makes one, two or three meals a day.

Was ever temperate in eating and

Has to excess either smoaked or chewed Tobacco, or taken it in snuff.

Uses much, indifferent, or little Exercise.

Has much, indifferent or little business of the mind.

Is seldom, sometimes, or often sick of Diseases violent, or moderate; long or
short; slight or dangerous.

Has been accustomed to purge and

Has one, two, three or four Issues, in or by the head, ears, shoulders, arm
or leg,

Has had Scabs or Breakings out, or an Ulcer dried up, or running, a little or
long before, or since this Fit of Sickness.

Is of the Age of

Years Mo. Days. Hours. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 1 11 21 1 13 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 2 2 12
22 2 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 3 3 13 23 3 15 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 4 4 14 24 4 16
29 30 31 32 33 34 35 5 5 15 25 5 17 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 6 6 16 26 6 18 43 44
45 46 47 48 49 7 7 17 27 7 19 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 8 8 18 28 8 20 57 58 59 60
61 62 63 9 9 19 29 9 21 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 10 10 20 30 10 22 71 72 73 74 75
76 77 11 11 23 78 79 80 just, full, or or thereabout. 12 thereabout.

Has been ill, or kept Bed.

Years. Mon. Days. Hours. 1 2 3 4 1 1 12 22 1 12 5 6 7 8 2 2 13 23 2 13 9 10 11
12 3 3 14 24 3 14 13 14 15 16 4 4 15 25 4 15 17 18 19 20 5 5 16 26 5 16 21 22
23 24 6 6 17 27 6 17 25 26 27 28 7 7 18 28 7 18 29 30 31 32 8 8 19 29 8 19 33
34 35 36 9 9 20 30 9 20 37 38 39 40 10 10 21 10 21 41 42 just, or 11 11 22 11
22 23 thereabout. just, or thereabout.

Because of an Ague, which comes every day, or every other day; or there are
two well days and one ill, or two ill days and one well. The Fit comes at the
same or different hours, ebbs and flows, begins waking or sleeping with ^^ving,
restlesness: Which continual Fever is always at the same pass, or is higher
every day, or every other day, or twice on the same day: Or else is slow,
increases after dinner,

Which must be marked in the Figure A, B, or C; drawing the Line, which
signifies the pain, from the word Pain just to the part pained: and so for
Redness and other Accidents; with or without Points, accordingly as the Grief
shall lie deep or shallow.

A Scalding, Excoriation, Wart.
Pain, Stich, Redness, Swelling or Boil, Wound, Ulcer, Itch, Numbness,
Heaviness, Burning, Pricking, Throbbing, Racking, Tetter, Pimples, Scurf, Scab,
Kernel, Felon,

B Scurf, Scab, Kernel, Felon, Scalding, Excoriation, Wart.
Pain, Stitch, Redness, Swelling or Boil, Wound, Ulcer, Itch, numbness,
Heaviness, Burning, Pricking, Throbbing, Racking, Tetter, Pimples,

C Excoriation, Wart.
Pain, Stitch, Redness, Swelling or Boil, Wound, Ulcer, Itch, Numbness,
Heaviness, Burning, Pricking, Throbbing, Racking, Tetter, Pimples, Scurf, Scab,
Kernel, Felon, Scalding,



Has a Belly very hard and tight, or soft; much or a little costive, or pretty
loose, moderately; or with a Flux of the Belly: Goes to Stool oftener on the day
than in the night, or oftener in the night

Makes water often or seldom, with pain or without pain; makes much or Settling
at the bottom; which is white, and being warmed becomes clear, as before, or it
alters not at all.

Sweats not; or is apt to sweat, often or seldom, all the body over, or only in
some

Spits and raises with pain and coughing, or easily and without coughing; a
little or a quantity of Spittle; clear, thick, glewy, round, white, yellow, red
or black; froathy, filthy and like an Aposteme.

Bleeds not, or bleeds much, or little at the Nose, at the right or left
nostril, often or seldom, thin or thick, red and fresh or black; at the mouth,
by cough or vomit, or without coughing and vomiting; which thin or thick, red,
fresh or black.

In mind free: or has been or is still disturbed with some sorrow, dread and
apprehension, with, or without cause.

The place of the pain, which is marked

It tarries often or sometimes without feeling or moving: with or without loss

Has a dizziness in the head, continual or at times, with or without dimness
of sight, before or after meal.

Has startings often or seldom.

Has sore Eyes, with or without inflammation, redness, smarting, involuntary
tears, blearedness or matter; and that

The Eyes seem good, but the party cannot see at all; has some film, or white
covering over the sight of the right or

Has a pain in the ears, a humming, ringing, or some noise, inveterate or
lately come: great, little, or moderate: is thick

Has the Nose stuffed with something within it, as an excrescence of flesh,
which is soft, hard, red, black, ulcered or not ulcered, with or without ill
smell from something in the Nose: blows out little or much matter, thick or
thin, green, yellow, or white, or blows it not at all, or rubs

The Tongue is well, or cancered, or furred, of color white, black or yellow,
dry or moist, extremely rough, chapt and

The mouth is well, or bitter, salt, or stinking, with an ill breath, raw, or
not raw: the gums which cover the Teeth, are swollen, ulcered, eaten away, or
sound.

Has swallowed a Fish-bone, a Bone, or

Has a pain in swallowing, and seems as if some bit stuck in the throat; and

Belches sour, bitter, of an ill savor, or brings up wind or worms at the
mouth: has been weaned, or not weaned 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 days, weeks, months.

The Child has, or has not yet all its teeth; and there are wanting or cut 1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 great teeth upper or lower,

Has the Toothache a little while or a long time, on one side only or upon
both; the teeth being fast or loose, or not a tooth either little or great
decayed, rotten and

Has a Crick in the Neck, which hinders

Has a pain in the right or left side, which strikes up, or strikes not up to
the paps or armpits.

Can lie easily, indifferently, or with difficulty upon the sound or the sick
side.

Has shortness of breath, with or without rattling in the throat, redness of
cheeks, leanness of the whole body, or only of the legs and thighs.

Has pantings or beatings of the heart, very often or seldom.

Has ordinarily, or since the sickness

Sighs seldom or very often.

Has lost the relish of Victuals, at the

Has a pain in the pit of the stomach, an hour, two, three, four, five or six
hours

Digests well, or does not digest Victuals at all, and voids them by Stool just
as they were taken: or has much ado to digest them, or casts them up either
presently,

Peuks seldom or often, little or much of its Milk, clear or curdled,
presently,

Has a Vomiting and Looseness, with or without Cramp or Convulsion, and vomits
Matter, excrementious, white, yellow, black, green, or of diverse colors.

Voids by Stool often or seldom Worms alive, dead, long, short, flat, hairie,
in a great or little quantity.

Falls in a Swoon all of a sudden, by little and little, often or seldom, and
continues in it a little while or a long time.

Has a pain under the short Ribs on the right or left side, with or without
the Hickup, with, or without hardness and

Has a Belly of a good bigness, or puffed

Has a pricking pain in the Reins, which is marked in the Figure A, B, or C,
on the right or left side, or along the belly, with or without inclination to
vomit, with or without a pain of the thigh on the same

Has a pain of the whole belly, which is not eased by heat or cold: or only
about the Navil, which is eased by heat or cold.

Has, or is thought to have the Stone

Has a pain in the joints, with or without swelling, redness or stiffness:
which pain is assuaged by heat or cold, and is continual or comes by fits,
chiefly in Spring,

Has a pain in all the Limbs at once, or only in some one: which pain is deep
A, B, or C.

Has Pimples and Scabs hard or soft, all over the Body, or only about the
Forehead or the Head: which cast or do not at all cast forth Matter or Water
yellowish or clear: and in some other parts

Has, or has not Lice in the Head or all over the Body, in great or little
quantity.

CHAP. II. For Males.
HE is married, a Widower or a Bachelor.

He has not been able to keep his Seed 1, 2, 34, 5, 6, 7, 8 days, weeks,
months, years: which is thin or thick, watery, white, or he makes or makes not
water, before or after he has made water: mingled with his urine or not.

Runs often or seldom.

In a great, midling, or small quantity.

With, or without erection of the Yard.

Having, or not at all having his Yard swollen.

With, or without swelling of the Nut.

With, or without swelling of the Foreskin

With, or without smarting in the passage.

With, or without an Ulcer upon the Nut, or upon the skin that comes over it:
which Ulcer has edges hard or soft, has proud flesh, or is even or hollow, has
been

He has had for some days, months or years the kernels of his Groin large,
soft, hard, with, or without pain: which have Matter in them or not, of the
bigness coming down of a Gut, which goes up again in the night, or does not go
up again into its place,

He has pimples or warts upon the Nut, or upon the skin that covers the Nut.

He has a Carnosity in the passage of his Yard, that stops his water: which
may then be known, when putting in a wax Candle one finds some resistance.

Which Accidents have lasted

Years. Mon. Days. Hours. 1 2 3 4 1 1 12 23 1 12 5 6 7 8 2 2 13 24 2 13 9 10 11
12 3 3 14 25 3 14 13 14 15 16 4 4 15 26 4 15 17 18 19 20 5 5 16 27 5 16 21 22
23 24 6 6 17 28 6 17 25 26 27 28 7 7 18 29 7 18 29 30 31 32 8 8 19 30 8 19 33
34 35 36 9 9 20 9 20 37 38 39 40 10 10 21 10 21 41 42 just, 11 11 22 11 22 23
or thereabout. just, or thereabout.

CHAP. III. For Females.
SHe is a Maid, a Married Woman or a Widow for these 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11 Months, Years and more.

She has not yet had the benefits of Nature,

She has at this instant, or used to have them red, thin, thick, yellow, green,
black, pale, with or without clots of Blood: with or without smarting: or else
she has the Whites, thin or thick, also with or without smarting, in a great or
small quantity, continually, or at times: She has lost

She looks pale, or her skin is pale, greenish, yellowish, swarthy, together
with difficulty in walking, heaviness in her legs:

She is, or believes she is gone with Child 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 weeks,
months complete,

She feels, or she feels not her Child stir, or she feels it stir often or
seldom.

She has had some breach of the Water.

She is brought to Bed usually at her full time, with or without hard Labor,
which blow, sudden fright, loss of blood: Or else she cries out at her full
time, the Water coming away 1, 2, 3, 4 days before the Child, or but a moment
before it: or she has been in Travel these 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,

She has been well or ill delivered of a Boy or Girl these 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23

The Child presents, or comes not in a natural posture; but presents or comes
the Feet foremost, or presented an Arm: came double, alive, or dead, was drawn
away by violence, whole or in pieces.

She cleanses, or cleanses not in her lying in.

She nurses, or nurses not her Child.

With or without pain, inflammation, hardness, aposteme and ulcer in her

The Nipples either have, or have not the skin off.

She has a great, little, or moderate quantity of Milk; which is sweet or
sharp, white or yellowish: thin, and which runs too much being put upon the
nail, moderately thick: which swells not being boiled:

She can have no Children, and yet it is not her Husbands fault.

She has Breasts round or large and flat, great, midling or little, hard or
soft, and

She has a belly big and swollen, and yet she has passed the time of nine
Months: is of a good or bad color, and she feels nothing stir in her Belly:
which being touched sounds or does not sound.

She feels, or feels not a pricking pain in the Womb: and some matter comes
away or comes not from thence.

The Womb is ulcerated with or without

She has at the Orifice of the Womb a swelling of color, white, red,
blackish, with pain, hardness in the groins, in the bottom of the belly, in the
back, or other A, B, or C.

She has the Orifice of the Womb driven back inwardly, with, or without
numbness and chilness in the knees: she has this Orifice high, low, thick,
hard, soft, direct, or on one side: She has it closed at all times, or at some
seasons, after some Ulcers were healed up.

She has a falling down of the Womb,

She has Fits: with or without loss of motion and sense, difficulty of
breathing, and as it were a ceasing of breath and

CHAP. IV. Of Swellings.
Has, or has not Pushes, or risings of the small pox all over the Body, A, B,
or C, which are come out a little or in abundance, or they disappeared
presently: are larger or straiter at the bottom than at the top, blackish,
whitish,

Has a Tumor or Swelling great, in different, or small, and of the bigness of
half a Vetch, a Pea, a Bean, a small Nut, a Wall-nut, a Pigeons Egg, a Hens
Egg, a Gooses Egg, ones Fist, both ones Fists, ones Head.

Which began

Years Mo. Days. Hours. 1 2 3 4 5 1 1 11 21 1 12 6 7 8 9 10 2 2 12 22 2 13 11
12 13 14 15 3 3 13 23 3 14 16 17 18 19 20 4 4 14 24 4 15 21 22 23 24 25 5 5 15
25 5 16 26 27 28 29 30 6 6 16 26 6 17 31 32 33 34 35 7 7 17 27 7 18 36 37 38 39
40 8 8 18 28 8 19 41 42 since, just 9 9 19 29 9 20 or thereabout. 10 10 20 30
10 21 11 or thereabout. 11 22 23

In the part of the Body marked in the Figure A, B, or C.

This Swelling is hard or soft.



With or without heat.

Red, yellowish, pale, lead-coloured or black.

It came after some disease, or without

Upon, or without a fall or strain.

Removes, or removes not, when one touches it.

Came suddenly, or was a great while in coming.

Appears at one time and disappears at another, or is always at the same pass.

Is with or without itching.

With or without pustles or wheals.

The mark of the finger remains when one presses it, or does not remain.

Ripens or ripens not at the top.

Beats or does not beat.

Is hard in the beginning, or grows harder

Has swelled veins all about.

Has made a scar or scab.

Is with or without prickings.

Is heavy.

Is transparent, and one may see the light through it.

Is long, round, triangular, square, or of an unequal Figure.

CHAP. V. Of Wounds.
THe Wound has been received.

Years Mo. Days Hours 1 2 3 4 5 1 1 11 21 1 1 12 6 7 8 9 10 2 2 12 22 2 2 13 11
12 13 14 15 3 3 13 23 3 3 14 16 17 18 19 20 4 4 14 24 4 4 15 21 22 23 24 25 5 5
15 25 5 5 16 26 27 28 29 30 6 6 16 26 6 6 17 31 32 33 34 35 7 7 17 27 7 7 18 36
37 38 39 40 8 8 18 28 8 8 19 41 42 just or thereabout. 9 9 19 29 9 9 20 10 10
20 30 10 10 21 11 or thereabout 11 22 23

This Wound is superficial, or deep, in A, B, or C.

It was made with the edge or the point of a Sword, Poniard, or Knife, Needle
or Bodkin: or else it came by a fall from some or Firearms, at a distance or
nigh: by a shiver of wood or stone: by a bullet, the wadding or a piece of the
clothes sticking in the wound, with which blow the Patient either tumbled or
tumbled not:

Which wound either has bled, or yet bleeds much or little, in a stream,
springing

In which the flesh either is or is not carried

Which Wound is great or little, lengthways or across, from above, downwards,
or from below, upwards: has pierced or not pierced into some hollow part, has
passed in and out, or has not passed out:

CHAP. VI. Of Ulcers.
Has several Ulcers, or has but one Ulcer in the part or parts of the Body,
marked in the Figure A, B, or C. Which Ulcer came of it self without any
external cause, or it came after some Fall, Blow, Wound, Aposteme, Burning,
Prick

It is hollow, having a strait entrance, and wide within, with or without
hardness of the edges of it: or else is superficial,

With or without corruption of the bone: which sends out a little, indifferent,
much, or no matter at all: which is with Maggots: which Ulcer runs from place
to place, fretting the parts round about it: is encompassed on the inside with
a skin like a quill.

This Ulcer has been healed once, coming

Years. Mon. Days. Hours. 1 2 3 4 5 1 1 11 21 1 12 6 7 8 9 10 2 2 12 22 2 13 11
12 13 14 15 3 3 13 23 3 14 16 17 18 19 20 4 4 14 24 4 15 21 22 23 24 25 5 5 15
25 5 16 26 27 28 29 30 6 6 16 26 6 17 31 32 33 34 35 7 7 17 27 7 18 36 37 38 39
40 8 8 18 28 8 19 41 42 just, or 9 9 19 29 9 20 thereabout. 10 10 20 30 10 21
11 or thereabout 11 22 23

CHAP. VII. Of Broken Bones.
Has a bone broken in some one or A, B, or C, by a fall, blow or wound, by
firearms.

With a wound or without a wound.

Which is broken short off, or shivered across or length-ways, with splinters
or little pieces of bone, or without splinters.

Comes out, or comes not out: is within or without, above or below.

Has both the bones broke in the leg or arm, or has but one broke, which was
set instantly, or a long time after, or is not yet well set again.

Is knit again, or cannot knit.

The Skull is split before or behind, or near the Temples, or hard by the
Sutures, and the breach of it is great or little, with or without falling in of
the bone, the cleft reaching or not reaching to the second Table, or reaching
to the dura matter.

A piece of the broken bone is come out, or not come out.

CHAP. VIII. Of Bones out of Joint.
Has a Bone out of Joint, or out of the Pan, in one or several parts of the
Body marked in the Fig. A, B, or C.

This Bone is either quite out or but part part of it.

Was put out above, below, on the right, or left.

By Violence, as a Fall, a Wrench: or

It moves with pain, or moves not at all.

It is forced in, is even with the rest, or comes outward.

Came out of it self, or by accident, for these

Years Mo. Days Hours 1 2 3 4 5 1 1 11 21 1 1 12 6 7 8 9 10 2 2 12 22 2 2 13 11
12 13 14 15 3 3 13 23 3 3 14 16 17 18 19 20 4 4 14 24 4 4 15 21 22 23 24 25 5 5
15 25 5 5 16 26 27 28 29 30 6 6 16 26 6 6 17 31 32 33 34 35 7 7 17 27 7 7 18 36
37 38 39 40 8 8 18 28 8 8 19 41 42 just or thereabout. 9 9 19 29 9 9 20 10 10
20 30 10 10 21 11 or thereabout 11 22 23

Has suspicion of being poisoned.

He or she is not bound in his or her Body: or is Costive, or seldom goes to
Stool, but when he or she takes a Clyster,

Has taken a Vomit in this sickness

He or she has been bled in the Arm 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 times: in the Foot or
at the haemorhoid Veins 1, 2, 3, 4 times: the

He or she has been purged 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7

This Book was sent for Advice at 1, 2, January, February, March, April, May,
June, July, August, September, October, November, December: In the year 1686,
1687, 1688, 1689, 1690, 1691, 1692, 1693, 1694, 1695, 1696, 1697, School, 1699,
1700, 1701, 1702, 1703, 1704, 1705, 1706, 1707.

Behold here be the principal Remarks, that are requisite to be made upon the
Sick, and upon their Diseases, which are not here named: because there is much
more Hazard in naming of Diseases right, than there is Ease; which is the thing
we have industriously designed for all sorts of persons. These Remarks also may
be of service to people in health; whereby to ask Advice, how they may preserve
their health. Not to mention several other curious Uses of this Book; as it may
serve for a Table to take the Physiognomy of an absent Person by. But to
comprize all the circumstances of any one Subject, besides that it would be
very tedious, so men rarely arrive at that excellency, as to have the first
Editions of their Books quite perfect. It may sufsice, that these Remarks are
such as are ordinarily made by the best Physicians in Consultation, and that
they are sufficient for the knowledge of Diseases. Which may serve for an
Answer to the Censorious, who may blame this Work for having said too little.

As for those that find too much, they may leave something; yea, if they
please, they may content themselves with the following Table.

But whether the Patient be rich or poor, the Use of this Book will be
serviceable to either indifferently.

Now come the Critics, who say, that nothing is more easy than this
Invention: and they say no more than what has been said in all Ages against the
bravest Inventions: whose excellence consists in this, that they are found
easy when once discovered; these same Fellows thinking they could have done as
much. But let them have a care, that the easiness of our Enterprise turn not to
their Discommendation: forasmuch as they have taken no pains in a thing so
easy, and a thing which by Experience has been, and day after day will be
further acknowledged so beneficial to Humane Kind.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas the five last Chapters of this Book are Chirurgical, our Intent
therein is only to give Advice, and to leave the manual Operation wholly to
Surgeons. For since an external Tumor oft-times upon its recess, causes
internal Diseases, and again, since Fevers are often attended with Abscesses in
some external Part; a Physician's and a Chirurgeon's mutual Assistence is often
necessary to a Patient: And since a symptomatick Fever does ever attend
considerable hurts done by Violence, in every such Case Medical advice ought to
be joined with manual Operation. Considering therefore that several Cases
cannot be managed aright without the knowledge of these things, we have so far,
as aforesaid, insisted upon them. Nor are we insensible, what injuries the
Surgeons, that serviceable Order of Men, but Patients especially, do daily
suffer from Pretenders in this kind: But we will not so much as breathe a Vein;
leaving, as we said, all Surgeons business to whom it properly belongs: To
all Apothecaries also, who transgress not the limits of their Calling, and
consequently neglect not their business, we are ready to send our Prescripts.

THE TABLE
Of the Book, being an easy way to represent an absent Patient's case to
Physicians. Which may serve instead of the Book it self, marking with a Pen or
Pencil the Signs and Accidents, that appear in the Sick Person, for whom Advice
is desired. They that would be more exact, must have recourse to the Book.
A.
AGE of the Sick, or of the Sickness, 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
18 19 20 21 25 28 30 31 40 42 45 49 50 55 56 60 63 65 70 75 77 Years, Months,
Weeks, Days, or thereabout, Page 22.

Afterburden stuck, or came away whole or torn, p. 42. l. 12.

Ague, single, double, quotidian, tertian, quartan, p. 23.

Air native or not, exposed or not exposed to the Sun or Wind, p. 19. l. 27.

Almonds of the Ears down, p. 33. l. 17.

Appetite craving, moderate, small, disordered, p. 41. l. 11.

B.
BALD p. 18. l. 27.

Barrenness, p. 43. l. 7.

Beating of the Heart, p. 34. l. 3.

Belching, p. 32. l. 28.

Belly tight, hard, soft, loose or costive, p 28. l. 1.

Benefits of Nature, in or out of order, coming before or after their time,
red, pale, with, or without smarting, in a great, little, or moderate quantity,
continually, or now and then quite stopped, p. 40. l. 10.

Bite of an Animal venomous or not venomous, p. 48. l. 7.

Blear-eyed, p. 31. l, 5.

Bleeding at the Nose in a great or little quantity, often or seldom, p. 29. l.
21. At the Mouth, by Cough or Vomit, with, or without Pain, p. 29. l. 24. at
the Fundament, going or not going to Stool, mingled, or not mingled with the
Excrements. p. 29. l. 28.

Blind. p. 31. l. 16.

Blows the Nose, little, much, or not at all, lately, or always, p. 32. l. 3.

Bone broken, p. 51. l. 5. out of joint, p. 52. l. 2.

Born of a Father and Mother of a long or short Life, Sickly or Healthy, p, 17.
l. 9.

Breasts large, midling, or little, hard or soft, increasing or decreasing, p.
43. l. 9.

Brought to Bed in 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Days, p. 41. l. 26, before her time
at 4 5 6 8 Months, p. 41. l. 27.

Bruising great or little, p. 47. l. 26.

Burn, p. 49. l. 11.

C
CALLUS, p. 51. l. 20.

Carnosity in the Passage of the Yard, p. 39. l. 6.

Chapping and rawness of the Tongue. p. 32. l. 10.

Cheeks full, hanging down, flat, hollow, or middling. p, 18. l. 19.

Chest full, narrow, middling, p. 18. 24.

Chillness, great or little, p. 23. l. 6.

Chin long, short, middling, round or dimpled. p. 18. l. 20.

Coffee, p. 20. l. 15.

Coldness of the outer parts, p. 23. l. 25.

Color good or bad, naturally, or by Accident. p. 19. l. 3.

Constitution hale, middling, or weakly, p. 17. l. 26.

Convulsion, p. 30. l. 25.

Cough dry or moist, p. 23. l. 29.

Cramp, p. 34. l. 29.

Crooked before or behind. p. 19. l. 10.

Custom of Purging or Bleeding has been left off a little while or a long
time, p. 21. l. 8.

D
DEafness old or new, p. 31. l. 23.

Difficulty in Breathing, p. 33. l. 28. in walking, p. 41. l. 10. in making
Water, p. 28. l. 17.

Discharge of Urine, p. 23. l. 28.

Dreams, pleasant, displeasing, of Fire, Water, Mire, of flying in the Air, p.
19. l. 18.

Dryness of Mouth, p. 23. l. 13.

Drowziness, p. 24. l. 1.

Easy or hard to Vomit or Purge, to take Medicines, p. 19. l. 20.

Eats little, moderately, or much. p. 20. l. 7.

Excess in eating and drinking p. 20. l. 12.

Excrescence in the Nose, p. 31. l. 29.

Exercise of Body or Mind, much or little, p. 20. l. 29. p. 21. l. 1.

Eyes sparkling, lively, dull, large, middling, little, p. 18. l. 5.

F
Fall from on high, p. 47. l. 25.

Falling of the Hair, p. 37. l. 6.

Falling down of the Womb. p. 44. l. 5.

Faltring in Speech. p. 33. l. 11.

Fearful with or without cause, p. 30. l. 4.

Fever continual, p. 23, 24.

Film over the right or left Eye, through which something appears like flies,
not being able to see in a great Light, things afar off or near hand, p. 31. l.
9.

Fit irregular, regular, which comes every day, evening or morning, holding
two, three, four hours at once; there are two ill days and one well, p. 23.

Fits of the Mother, p. 44. l. 7.

Flux of the Belly great, moderate or small, p. 23. l. 18. and p. 28. l. 3.

Foaming at the mouth, p. 30. l. 24.

Forehead broad, middling or narrow, p. 18. l. 4.

G
GONE with Child, the first 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Month beginning or complete, p. 41.
l. 14.

Gripes, p. 28. l. 8.

Groans, p. 30. l. 22.

Gums, Swollen, Ulcered, or eaten away, p. 32. l. 18.

H
HAbit of Body, Fat, Fleshy, or Lean, p. 18. l. 1.

Hair light, red, brown, black, gray, white, curled, p. 18. l. 25.

Head very great, little, or well proportioned to the rest of the Body, p. 18.
l. 2.

Heat great or moderate, p. 23. l. 12, 24.

Hoarse, p. 32. l. 14.

Humming or a noise in the Ears, old or new, great or small, p. 31. l. 18:

I
Issue in the head, arm or leg, dried up, p. 21. l. 10.

Judgment impaired or lost, p. 30. l. 21.

K.
KErnels in the groin, p. 38. l. 24.

L.
LAme in the Hip, Leg, or Foot, Right or Left, p. 19, l. 11.

Letting of Blood to advantage, or not, p. 53. l. 9.

Lips thick, middling or thin, p. 18. l. 12.

Less or diminution of Motion and Sense, p. 30. l. 19. of Hearing, p. 31. l.
23. of Voice or Speech, p. 32. l. 13.

M.
MAkes Water often, seldom, much, little, drop by drop, easily, clear or thick,
p. 28. l. 15.

Matter in the Eyes. p. 31. l. 5. in the Ears, p. 31. l. 18.

Meals, one, two, or three a day, p. 20. l. 8.

Melancholic with, or without Cause, p. 30. l. 3.

Memory impaired or lost, p. 30. l. 21.

Milk in a great, little, or moderate quantity. p. 43. l. 1.

Mind free or disturbed, p. 30. l. 2.

Miscarriage by a Fall, a Strain* Blow, sudden fright, loss of Blood. p. 41. l.
26. p. 42. l. 1.

Motion impaired or lost, p. 30. l. 20.

Mouth wide, middling or narrow, p. 18. l. 15. well or ill, p. 32. l. 16.

N
Neck short, long, thick, slender, middling, p. 18. l. 21.

Noise in the Ears, p. 31. l. 19.

Nose big, long, short, middling, p. 18. l. 9.

Nurseth or nurseth not her Child. p. 42. l. 23.

O
ONE-Eyed, p. 31. l. 15.

P
PAin in the Limbs, p. 23. l. 11. of the whole or part, right or left, before
or behind in the Head, p. 23. l. 13. p. 24. l. 7. in the Loins, p. 23. l. 28.
p. 36. l. 1. p. 40. l. 21. in the right or left side, p. 33. l. 23. in the
Belly, Fundament, p. 28. l. 8. in making Water, p. 28. l. 15. Which is always
the same or alters, p. 30. l. 6. p. 36. l. 14, 22. Small, moderate, or great,
increasing in the day or night, and is more violent fasting, or after Meals. p.
30. l. 15. wandering or fixed, p. 36. l. 26. Is assuaged by heat or cold, p. 30.
l. 16. With or without Heaviness, p. 30. l. 9. Pain in the Ears. p. 31. l. 18.
in the Neck, p. 33. l. 15. in the Pit of the Stomach, p. 34. l. 15. in the
Joints. p. 36. l. 12.

Paleness, with difficulty in Walking, p. 41. l. 8.

Palpitation or beating of the Heart, p. 34. l. 3.

Pimples and Scabs, p. 37. l. 1.

Poison, p. 53. l. 1.

Proportion straight or not, p. 10. l. 10.

Pulse quick, moderate, slow: which beats high, low, moderately, p. 34. l. 6.

Purged with or without Relief, p. 53. l. 16.

R.
Rattling in the Throat, p. 33. l. 29.

Redness of Cheeks, p. 33. l. 29. of Eyes. p. 31. l. 4.

Restlesness. p. 24. l. 1.

Rubbing of the Nose, p. 32. l. 5.

Rumbling in the Belly, p. 35. l. 14.

S
SEed has come away for 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 days, Weeks, Months, Years; which is
thin or thick, white, yellow or green; with or without Pain, in a great
moderate, or small quantity, with erection or swelling of the Yard, of the Nut,
of the Praepuce, or of the Cods, with or without a painful Kernel in the Groin,
which has matter in it or not. p. 38. l. 24.

Shortness of Breath. p. 33. l. 28.

Sick aboout 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 16 days, weeks Months, years, p. 22.

Sick at the Heart, p. 23. l. 10.

Sickly or not, dangerously, or without danger, p. 21. l. 5.

Sighs, p. 34. l. 9.

Sight dim, p. 31. l. 9.

Sleeps long, little, not at all; has not slept for a pretty while, or for
several days, p. 19. l. 16.

Smallpox, p. 19. l. 9.

Smarting of the Eyes, with or without Redness and Inflammation of a long time
or lately, p. 31. l. 4. in the passage of the Yard, p. 38. l. 15.

Smelling impaired or lost, p. 32. l. 6.

Sobriety or intemperance, p. 20. l. 10.

Spits or raises with or without Pain and Coughing little or much, thin or
thick, white, yellow, red, black, frothy, like Corruption, p. 29. l. 16.

Squint-eyed, p. 31. l. 15.

Startings, p. 31. l. 2.

Stature tall, middling, or very low, p. 17. l. 28.

Sting, p. 48. l. 7.

Stinking Breath, p. 33. l. 16. in the Nose, p. 33. l. 2.

Stone in the Kidneys, Bladder, p. 36. l. 10.

Stones swollen, p. 38. l. 29.

Stools white, yellow, green, gray, red and Bloody, thick or thin, p. 28. l.
11. voided without knowing it, p. 30. l. 4.

Straining to stool, p. 28. l. 10:

Swallows easily or with Pain, p. 32. l. 24.

Sweats. p. 23. l. 19.

Seldom, often; the Sweats are not ranc, are clammy, hot, cold, little, or in
abundance, or sweateth not at all, p. 29. l. 4.

Swelling or tumor, great, moderate, small, hard, fost; which throbs or throbs
not long, round, or of another shape; equal or unequal, p. 44. l. 19. of the
neck, p. 33. l. 18. of the belly, p. 35. l. 15. of the legs, p. 35. l. 2^*

Swimming in the head, p. 30. l. 28.

Swoons seldom or often, p. 35. l. 6.

T.
Taste spoiled much or little, p. 34. l. 10.

Tawny visage, p. 19. l. 7.

Tears involuntary, p. 31. l. 5.

Teeth great or little, are not all cut, or are all cut but 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
stand close, or at a distance one from another, white, yellow, black or rotten,
p. 33. l. 3.

Thick of hearing, p. 31. l. 20.

Thirst, p. 23. l. 14.

Tobacco, p. 20. l. 27.

Tongue clean or foul, p. 32. l. 8.

Tongue-tyed, p. 32. l. 14.

Toothache, p. 33. l. 7.

Travail or childbearing, she has been in it, 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 days, p. 41. l.
25.

U
Ulcer or Sore came of it self, 2 3 4 5 6 7 days, weeks, months, years; or
after a fall or blow; even or hollow, with or without hardness of the Sides,
with or without Veins about it; with or without inflammation, little or much
redness, pain, proud flesh; with or without corruption of the bone; which runs
little or much matter, white, black, brown thin, thick; with or without stink,
p. 49. l. 9.

Voice lost or hoarse, p. 32. l. 13 Vomits little or much, p. 34. l. 29. with
relief, p. 53. l. 8.

Vomiting and Looseness, p. 34. l. 28.

Urine pale, yellow, red, bloody green, black, having a cloud in the middle, or
a settling at the bottom; is clear or thick when it ha^ stood, p. 28. l. 19.

W
Warts upon the nut of the yard, or on the skin tha^ comes over it, p. 39. l. 4.

Watching little or much, p. 24. l. 1.

Whites, p. 41. l. 3.

Wine, p. 20. l. 13.

Wombfallen down, ulcered, with smart or itching, p. 43. l. 20. p. 44. l. 5.

Worms alive, dead, long, short, flat, hairy, in a great or little quantity, p.
35. l. 3.

Wounds, p. 47. l. 1.

Y
Yawning, p. 23. 1. 9.


