Loyalty Essential to Christianity: BEING A SERMON Preached the Thirtieth of
June, 1685. Upon the Occasion of the News OF THE Damnable Rebellion IN THE
WEST: AND In the Course of the Constant Lecture in the Parish Church of Dedham
in Essex.

By Thomas Gray, A. M. Preacher there.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Clark, and Sold by Walter Davis in Amen-Corner,
MDCLXXXV.

Imprimatur.

C. Alston
, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.
TO THE Right Honorable and Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, HENRY Lord Bishop of
LONDON, One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
MY LORD,
I Am emboldned to hope for your pardon, in offering to the world so mean a
Discourse under the Patronage of your Lordships Name; because I am very certain
that you will never decline the owning that glorious subject it Treats of,
which in opposition to our Adversaries of both sides, is the peculiar and
unblemished Glory of our Church, in which your Lordship does justly bear so
great a Character.

The news of the horrid Rebellion, broke out in the Western parts of this
Kingdom, shrouding it self under the wonted colors that all such Villainies
assume, occasioned my offering these following thoughts, in the next ordinary
course of my Preaching, to my Country and plain Auditory; of whom it pleases me
to tell your Lordship, that I hope and believe they have heartily received the
Doctrines of Loyalty to their Prince, and Duty to the Church, as a part of
their Religion.

And concerning this mean Publication, I will confess, My Lord, that I was not
unwilling, by it, to let our Enemies know, that even the most inconsiderable of
the Clergy of our Church, will yet do their utmost to assert the glorious
Doctrines of it, whenever bold and malicious men shall attempt the dishonoring
of any of them.

And I hope it is not amiss for your Lordship to receive some Testimonies to
prove, That those of us, that judge ourselves the meanest of our Reverend
Brethren, among whom we are, will yet never, By Divine Assistance, desert the
great and hitherto victorious Champions of our Church and Cause: But that by
our Practicing and Preaching the Doctrines of sound and undefiled Religion
toward God, and of entire and unfeigned Loyalty to our Prince; we shall
endeavor to Continue to After Ages, the Memory and Records of what Principles
our Church has taught us, and what we have taught our People.

May it please your Lordship, To forgive this whole Address, and to accept the
dutiful Tender of my Vowed Prayers.

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Humble and Most Obedient Servant, Tho. Gray.
Dedham, July 8. 1685.
TITUS III. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to
obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good Work.
A Doctrine that is at all times proper and useful to be taught, though it has
had the misfortune that attends several other excellent parts of Christian
Religion, I mean, to be looked upon, even by the greatest pretenders to Piety,
as a matter of but very little consequence; and if it be acknowledged to
contain any thing of necessity in it, yet some evil instructors of our People
have taught them to clog it with so many limitations, that in truth it comes
but to very little with some of them. But however that be, yet they have
effectually discovered their endeavors to remove this necessary and excellent
Doctrine of our Religion as far from that, as they have from their own Breasts.
Certain it is, and our sad experience has but too too much confirmed it, that
in despite of all our Exhortations to the contrary, they had so far insinuated
their own prejudices into the minds of all that did but a little favor them,
that those of them that would not altogether disown the Obligations of our
Religion in this particular portion of it, did yet freely and openly censure
our public Discourses on that Subject, as mean, insipid and unedifying, and
hardly so good as Moral Preaching; which (by the way) is a disgraceful
lessening Phrase, as they imagine, which the Leaders of the Faction have
invented, thereby to render our Exhortations to the Performance of the very
chiefest parts of Practical Religion despicable, and so ineffectual to those
for whose sakes we chiefly intended them, and who in truth, through the crafty
insinuations of such designing Guides, did most need them.

But indeed, this was a necessary though a Hellish Policy; for they did well
enough foresee, that if we could but persuade Men to the careful practice of
Humility, Peace and Charity among one another, and of Submission and Obedience
to their lawful Governors in Church and State, Those Fundamentals of our
Religion, it would quickly and unavoidably have defeated all their Factious and
Schismatical Designs, which most palpably have succeeded, but in the same
Proportions, that those lovely and happy Virtues have decayed among us.

It is evident then that a Discourse of this Nature could at no time be
unseasonable to People in our Circumstances. But I have judged it more
peculiarly proper, to entertain you with a plain and honest Exhortation to a
firm and sincere Loyalty; and from this particular Topic, as it is a
Fundamental of the Religion we Profess, now, when there are found them among
us, that have entered into an open and damnable Rebellion against their Natural
Prince upon that Pretext; and that have the impudence to Publish the
maintaining and supporting that, for their design, which they have already, by
their desperate Actions, violated and dishonored in one of its most sacred
sanctions, and which does particularly recommend the Care and Practice of it to
the World.

I do not believe that you that hear me, have any particular need to be now
Admonished of this part of your Duty; but yet to discover the steadiness of our
own Principles, that I might prevent any of you from being so much as alienated
from your Duty in your Affections, or wheadled into thinking well of such
practices, by the Cry of the Protestant Religion, that I might lead you not
only to a dislike, but an utter abhorrence of such wretched Principles, as can
never tend to support or promote our Religion, but to dishonor and ruin it,
and that are as contrary to your happiness in another World, as they are
destructive of your interest in this. I have chosen to be obedient to this
Apostolical Injunction, Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good Work.

Two things I shall observe from these words, which shall be the limits of my
Discourse.

First, That Subjection and Obedience to lawful Governors is strictly and
necessarily enjoined by Christian Religion.

Secondly, That all Ministers of the Evangelick Dispensation are entirely
obliged to exhort their several Hearers to the careful and conscionable
Practice of this, as their just and necessary Duty.

And First, Of the first of these.

That subjection and obedience to Magistrates and lawful Governors is strictly
and necessarily enjoined by Christian Religion.

And because I remember to whom I am speaking, I will not therefore enter into
any tedious debates of the measures of this Obedience, and how far it ought to
be extended: For though it is most true, that some Persons have used their
utmost care to perplex this Doctrine with all imaginable difficulties, and the
Casuists of both extremes from us have equally conspired it, and to that
purpose have clogged it with a whole number of Limitations and Proviso's, and
will be putting of Cases, (of Conscience they call them) some hugely false,
others silly and impertinent, that never did, and it is but just possible to
suppose that ever they should need a Resolution while the World endures under
any sort of Government whatever; yet most certainly this Duty of Loyalty and
Subjection to Governors, as all other Lines of Practical Religion, is in it
self direct, and easy to be drawn, hugely intelligible, and obvious to the
meanest capacity, difficult to none but those that are loath to practice it, and
in this also it agrees with the rest of those incomparable Virtues in the
Christian Institution, that are of equal Necessity and Glory with it self.

And we need nothing more to prove how easy this Duty is to be understood,
than to consider the meek and obliging temper of mind that Christian Religion
requires in all its Votaries, and which it does also where Men are truly seized
with the powers of it most effectively produce; and also what every one of us
in all cases where we have authority, expect from those that depend upon us,
and so are subject to us.

I will therefore in few words give you the sum of this whole Duty of Religion:
and it comes to thus much.

That that Obedience which by the Laws of Christianity we owe to our
Governors, must be Active in all cases whatsoever, where we are not certain
that the same Laws have laid upon us any prior Obligation to the contrary; for
then the Apostles, St. Peter and St. John have answered for us, to the Council
that commanded them to preach no more in the name of Jesus, Acts 4. 18, 19,
Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken to you more than unto God,
judge you. But we must be certain then, for we all know that a doubting
conscience is no Judge, neither lays any Obligation, for it passes no sentence:
And further, the safer side must be chosen, which is, that we do not make our
selves guilty of a certain sin by declining Obedience to the Magistrate, upon
the score of avoiding that, which we cannot affirm to be evil. And moreover in
such cases, where it is most plain that the Laws of our Religion will not allow
us to be Active, in our Obedience to the Commands of our Governors, yet then
the same Laws oblige us to be Subject, i. e. to withdraw our positive
Obedience, in such cases where, because of our Obligations to a greater
Authority, we dare not comply with theirs, with Modesty, Meekness, Respect and
Reverence to their Persons and Authority, and if they please to punish us for
so doing, to bear it patiently, and without reproaching or resisting. So that
this is the sum of all. Our Religion obliges us actively to obey our Prince in
every of his Commands, where God has not interposed his Authority, and to
resist in no case whatsoever.

There are only two things that are material to be observed before I enter upon
the proof of the Proposition I named.

The first is, that when I affirm the Doctrine of Loyalty and Obedience to our
Prince, to be Essential to Christianity, I do not intend to be understood that
it is peculiar to that body of Laws, or that it was first made a Law by Christ,
but that it is strictly provided for by his Religion, so that he cannot be a
good Christian that is not a Loyal Subject; nay, I am sure it is no venture to
affirm, That this Doctrine is better taught and more strongly enforced by the
Laws of the Gospel than by those of any other Religion in the World.

Secondly, I would have it be observed that I reckon and take it for granted,
that all the Laws of common Reason and Equity, and such as are the foundations
of all Humane Societies are part of the Laws of the Gospel, so that whatever
Duty we owe to Governors by virtue of any of the Laws of Nature or Society,
that we must acknowledge to be part of our Christian Duty.

And now I shall consider our Obligations to the performance of this Duty of
Subjection to our Governors in the following Particulars.

And first, Nothing can be more proper to begin with in this case, than the
Determinations of our great Law giver, the Author and Founder of our Religion.
And he while he was upon Earth did, with great clearness of Doctrine, assert
the Obedience that was due to Magistrates, and did deliver it as a part of that
Religion he came to establish in the World. When the Question was put to him to
know his Judgment about one part of the subjection we owe to Governors, he
delivers his mind in an Universal Axiom, establishing all the Royal
Prerogatives of a Prince, commanding all his followers that they should, Render
to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Luke 20. 25. Though there were found
those that were so impudent as to accuse him of the contrary, Luke 23. 2.

And we find that he puts the Case of Persecution to his Disciples, and
foretells them what sufferings they should undergo, for the Preaching of his
Religion, from the Rulers of the World, and gives them directions proper to
that state, but all of them of a complexion utterly contrary to resisting or
despising Magistracy, urging upon all occasions to his followers the quite
different Doctrines of denying themselves, taking up the Cross, losing their
lives in this World that they might save them in the other; and everywhere
establishes, both by Precept and Example, the state and temper of Christians
after him to be that of suffering and sorrow, of patience and meekness, and
praying for their Enemies under it. And there is no greater evidence of the
truth of all this than that remarkable place, Matt. 26. 52. Locus notandus
omnibus subditis, as Musculus: How he reproved the eagerness of St. Peter in
resisting those that came to apprehend him, though it was an act sure of the
greatest Violence and Injustice in the World, and designed by them for the
utter ruin of himself, and the total suppression of his Doctrine and Religion;
yet he positively forbad him to proceed in what he attempted, and establishes
the contrary Doctrine with a minatory Prediction against all those that should
dare to do otherwise; All they that take the sword, i. e. to whom the jus
Gladii does not belong, shall perish with the sword. Which abundantly proves
that the most innocent Person, or the best Cause, must not be defended by force
of Arms against a Lawful Power.

Secondly, As a further proof of the Proposition, I will examine how the
Doctrine of Loyalty is established by the followers of the same Jesus, and who
no doubt, being guided by his infallible Spirit, delivered the Precepts of his
Religion according to his mind whose it was.

St. Paul, Romans 13. 1, 2, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for
there is no power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever
therefore resists the power resists the ordinance of God: and they that
resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, or if instead of Damnation
there, it should be read Judgment, and that too be understood only of the
Magistrate, as some would persuade, viz. That if the King catch those that
resist he will hang them; yet such a Prediction or Threatening, or if it be
less, viz. a determination but of the natural tendency of such practices to
lead to a shameful and untimely Death by the hand of Justice; yet that sure,
delivered after an Apostolical Judgment upon the whole Cause, is sufficient to
deter any thinking Man from them. But if it be indeed Eternal Damnation, (as
this alone Reason proves, because it is a Punishment assigned for Resisting or
Despising an Ordinance of God) which is here threatened to those that shall
resist Lawful Powers, that is enough to prove obedience and submission to them
a necessary Duty in Christian Religion.

The same Apostle also in another place, viz. 2 Cor. 10. 4. tells us, That the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God; The Holy Jesus
that gave such gifts to men of wonderful and miraculous Abilities, never
delegated to any of his followers, the Power of controuling or resisting
Magistrates, which yet he could as easily have done. S. Peter that with one
word struck dead Ananias and Saphira. Act. 5. must yet be obedient to the
Decree of his Crucifixion; and S. Paul that struck Elymas blind, Acts 13. and
did such mighty Wonders upon other occasions, must yet make use of none of his
Powers against Ananias, Felix or Nero: no Miracles to be wrought to oppose any
Judicial Sentences of Magistrates. The wisdom of Heaven had taken others and
quite contrary measures for the founding and preserving his Church in the World.

St. Peter also, 1 Epist. 2. 13. Preaches the same Doctrine; submit your self
to every ordinance of man, and founds it upon the Injunctions of the Holy
Jesus, for the Lords sake: And continues the Obligation to the several
Subordinations of Magistrates, Ver. 14. Adding, Ver. 15. that this was the will
of God, for the Glory and Honor of his Religion. And, Ver. 20. he puts the
Case of unjust suffering from or oppression by Governors, and directs the
carriage of all Christians in such a Case. If you be buffeted for your faults
and take it patiently, What glory is it? but if you do well and suffer for it,
you take it patiently, This is acceptable with God.

St. Jude also in his Epistle sharply reproves those that despise dominions and
speak evil of dignities, Ver. 8. denouncing God's severest Judgments against
the Gnostick Heretics for this among other of their impieties. And the
aforementioned Apostle St. Peter, in his second Epistle, Chap. 2. Ver. 1. speaking
of damnable Heresies; afterward, Ver. 10. mentions those that despise
Government, and are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities. I shall think now
that you truly believe this Doctrine of Submission to Governors, abundantly
proved to be a Necessary and Essential part of Christian Religion, by the
concurring testimonies of the sacred Pages, when I have only added; that
Rebellion and Sedition, Heresy and Schism, which are Disobediences to
Governors in Church and State, are ranked by the Holy Ghost among the works of
the Flesh, viz. as that is opposed to the Spiritual and Holy Doctrine of the
Gospel, Gal. 5. 19, 20, Now the works of the flesh are manifest, i. e.
notoriously known to be impure and contrary to the commands of Jesus, such as
these, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, -- Seditions, Heresies, --
Murders, Drunkenness, etc. Now we may see by the companions which the Spirit of
God has assigned to, Seditions and Heresies, that these are of the same Immoral
and Damnable nature with the other. And the Apostle affirms of these, Ver. 21,
That they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And, Ver.
24. He pronounces of these with the rest, that they are utterly inconsistent
with Christ's Religion. For they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts. And now for a Conclusion to all this, suffer me to
repeat to you, that numerous Catalogue of Prodigious Impieties in men, which
the same Apostle St. Paul, in his second Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 3. foretells
should overrun the World in the latter days, in the midst almost of which you
will find Traitors to be reckoned. Men shall be Lovers of their own selves,
Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, Disobedient to Parents, Unthankful,
Unholy, without Natural Affection, Truce Breakers, false Accusers, Incontinent,
Fierce, Despisers of those that are Good, Traitors, Heady, High-minded, Lovers
of Pleasure more than Lovers of God, having a form of Godliness, but denying
the Power of it: Enough it is sure to affright any man that has but a tolerable
value for the Holy Book, from ever being a Traitor to his Prince, when he shall
but consider what company the Holy Scriptures have placed such guilty and
miserable Wretches with.

Thirdly, The Divine Original of Sovereign Power proves subjection to it a
necessary portion of that Religion which has God for its Author. And it is a
Conclusive Argument that that Religion never came from Heaven, that teaches or
encourages any opposition of that Authority, which God himself has set up in
the World: For if Satan be not divided against Satan, most certainly then the
Wisdom of Almighty God is always consistent with it self. And moreover all the
greatest confusions that could happen in the World would be fastened upon the
wise Governor of it, if when he had ordained Powers and Sovereignty among men,
he should allow or encourage the resisting of them.

Now that the Origin of Sovereign Power is from God, is evident from many
places of Holy Writ. Hence Kings are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 6, And the Children
of the most Highest. Not only as being concerned in his especial care,
maintenance and provision, but also as partaking of his Authority, and having
that in them which is an emanation from, and resemblance of his own Government
of the World. And Prove. 8. 15, By me Kings Reign and Princes Decree Justice.
And the Prophet Daniel, Chap. 2. 21. tells Nebuchadnezzar, That it is God that
sets up Kings. And therefore they are called the Lords Anointed. And St.
Paul in the fore-quoted place, affirms the Powers that be to be Ordained of
God; and that they which resist the Power, resist the Ordinance of God, which
it is evident that nothing that comes from God can in the ordinary establishment
of things teach to do.

Whatsoever therefore has been impiously pretended to the contrary, it is
evident that the Original of Sovereign Power is Divine, and consequently if our
Religion be so too, it must teach a reverence and submission to those, that
have their Powers delegate from the Great Governor of the World.

Fourthiy, If it be considered that Obedience to Magistrates, and the not
resisting their Authority, be absolutely necessary for the Peace of the World,
and to secure the undeniable Interest of all Mankind; it will from thence, I
think, clearly follow, that it is a necessary portion of Christian Religion:
For, I think, it is a Proposition Universally true, That whatsoever is truly
necessary for the Interest of Mankind in their several Societies and Relations
to each other, is in the Moral Obligations to it, effectually provided for, and
secured by the Laws of the Blessed Jesus.

Now it is impossible but all must own that nothing can be more absolutely and
immediately destructive to the Interest of all Societies of men, than
disobedience to, and resisting of the Governors of them, and consequently upon
that very account, it must be repugnant to the Laws of the Gospel.

There is nothing the whole World has more entirely agreed in than the absolute
necessity of Government; without which all those intolerable mischiefs would
ensue, which every gratification of a private Humor or Eust could Produce.

And Obedience to Governors stands upon the same invincible Necessities that
Government it self does; for without this, the other is but a name and a
speculation, impossible to subsist or to serve any of the needs of Mankind. I
will name a few of those horrible mischiefs, that would certainly destroy the
Peace of the World, if the resisting Governors were upon any pretext allowed
lawful.

And first, Every private man's Rights, Liberty and Property, would be exposed
to every Invasion, and could not possibly be fixed with any sort of certainty
or safety. Search the Annals of the World, and see if these darlings of Mankind
were not always exposed to Rapine and Ruin, whenever the Sovereign Power has
been resisted; it is the natural and certain Consequent of a Rebellion against
the Supreme Governor, to spoil and oppress particular Persons. The stories of
our own Late Horrible Confusions are fresh enough in men's memories to prove
this to be true.

Liberty and Property has been the cry of the Faction a long time. It was to
secure these as they pretended, that they raised that Horrid Rebellion during
the Reign of that Royal Martyr of Blessed Memory, the Father of our present
Glorious Monarch, and the remaining Ruins of many Families and Estates can
witness how well they did it.

And the Present Rebellion will give a good account, no question, of the
preservation of the Liberties and Properties of men when we shall know how many
honest People are undone by their Violences and Outrages, besides what the
Actors in it have exposed themselves to from public Justice, which if God be
merciful to us will shortly overtake them.

And moreover, if one Traitor succeeds in his Attempts, the same or better
Principles will induce others to disobey him, and so there is no end of
Confusion and Disorder.

Secondly, If it might be admitted lawful on any Pretext whatsoever, to resist
Governors, unless the reserved cases were effectually stated, published and
owned, which I think is not possible to be supposed, the mischievous effects
would be the same, as if it might be done on any account without reserve.

And if this were done, yet we know that the Populace is so easily wheadled by
the Heads of a Faction, with the noise of a few taking words; and are so ready
to receive any impressions that may prejudice them against their Governors, and
so easy and forward to determine in favor of those that dare to oppose them,
that if there should have been but one reserved case in which it were lawful to
resist, it is no hard thing to believe that all and every thing would have been
drawn to it; and one such exempted case would have rendered all Government
unable to preserve it self, and liable to be unhinged by every Designing Rebel,
that has but cunning enough to manage the Many Headed Beast, into the
clamouring up of his Pretenses and abetting his Designs, than which nothing can
sooner or more certainly destroy the best and wisest establishments of any
Society of men in the World.

Thirdly, Another mischievous effect of opposing Magistrates, is the Letting
and Disturbing the course of public Justice, in all its Branches, which thing
alone necessitates the decay of a Community; and which naturally results from
that evil I am dissuading from.

For when Governors are forced to take care to secure themselves against
Rebellion and Invasion of their Authority, how can they be at Liberty or indeed
have the Power, (if the Party that opposes them be Formidable) of securing the
Rights of their Subjects by the peaceable Administrations of Justice.

For then Malefactors that are single escape from Justice to make up the force
and numbers of them that Invade it: And indeed of such Dregs of Mankind do such
Tumults generally consist.

Then private differences about Property must be delayed, 'till it be seen
whether the Government be able to support itself, and secure the execution of
its own most just Determinations. And in the mean time it is not unlikely that
all that do wrong will be at least abettors of those that oppose Authority, if
it be but that they may the longer continue their Usurpations upon the Rights
of their Neighbors; and the injured Person has his wrong greatned to him by
the delay, and is discouraged too in his Obedience to those that should and
cannot relieve him.

Lastly, That I may Epitomize the proof of this whole matter. It shall be
sufficient to add, the consideration of the sad stories of our Late Confusions.
How many are there still among us that need no more than their own Memory and
Observation to convince them, that nothing can be a greater plague to a Society
of men in every respect, than a Popular Rage? And those of us that did not live
in those days, yet cannot sure be altogether ignorant of the wretched effects
of that Unchristian Anarchy, if we have but a little considered the occurrences
of our own time.

We can never be so liable to be injured by the worst of Monarchy, as by the
Invasions of Government under any pretense whatever. And moreover, every man, I
think, can bear a wrong or injury from his Prince with more patience and less
vexation, than he can from the unruly Rage of his Inferior or Servant, or those
that he has maintained by his Charity; and yet these we must expect, and
suffer, whenever Rebellion breaks out; as is evident from the History of the
Late Times, (as we call them) in very many Examples, Tragical enough. I am
persuaded that I am not mistaken when I affirm that there were more Acts of
Violence, Rapine, Cruelty, Injustice and Irreligion, committed in this our
Nation, during the few years of the prevailing of that Fatal and Execrable
Rebellion over us, than can be found in all our Histories to have been done by
all the Male-Administrations of Government, though surveyed with never so much
prejudiced Judgments. How many among us, both in their Persons and Estates, do
bear those scars, that are at once the loud Proclaimers of the Loyalty and
Glory of them that wear them, and also of the Tyranny and Rage of them that
gave them?

If then it be evident, as I think it is, from all has been offered on this
particular, that Obedience, Loyalty and Submission to Governors, is the
undeniable Interest of Mankind, it follows strongly, that it is effectually
provided for and secured by the Doctrines of Jesus. For the Son of God, when he
founded his Church by the delivering his Religion to the World, that all men,
and particularly Princes and Governors, might not want any sort of motives that
might be proper to recommend it to their Love and Protection of it, took
effectual care, by establishing the Duties of men one to another, and of all
men to their Rulers, upon the same forcible Obligations and Penalties, that he
did those to God himself, to secure so persuasive an Argument, as that of the
Interest of all Societies and Relations of men, on the behalf of the Doctrine
he was then to establish.

Fifthly, I will go on to prove the truth of my Proposition, from one of the
Grand Designs and Intendments of Christian Religion in the World, to which,
resisting of Governors is utterly contrary. Now one of the great purposes of
the Gospel was the establishing of Peace and Charity among men. See how it was
Prophesied before of the days of the Messiah, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9, The Wolf
shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid -- And
the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox -- And the Reason is given, Ver. 9, For
the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the Waters cover the
Seas. The Author of our Religion is called, The Prince of Peace, was born in a
time of Universal Peace, and at his Birth the Heavenly Anthem sung by Angels,
was, Peace on Earth, Good Will toward, or among men: When he was going out of
the World, his Blessing was, Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you,
Joh. 14. 27. And while he conversed with his Disciples, he makes Charity to
become the very Character of a Christian, Joh. 13. 35, Hereby shall all men
know that you are my Disciples, if you have love one to another. The whole
Institution that he left, I mean the Gospel, is called the Gospel of Peace. He
that sent him to reveal it, is the God of Peace, the Message and Commands it
carries do correspond, Live peaceably with all men. Follow Peace, without which
no man shall see God, is the one half of that which is of so absolute necessity
to happiness, that it can never be attained without it. But how effectually and
summarily all this is defeated by resisting of Governors is so plain that it
needs no Proof.

And moreover, which was hinted before, it is utterly inconsistent with that
temper of mind that Christianity requires in all that pretend to espouse it;
even Meekness, Charity, Gentleness, and the like. All which it requires so
strictly and absolutely, so universally, and without the least color of
exception, that it is impossible for him to be a Hypocrite, I mean, to be able
to pretend to the least shadow of Piety, that acts contray to such a temper;
for he is a notorious opposer of the Religion of Christ in its greatest
Fundamentals, and in despite of all other Varnishes and Pretenses whatever,
this alone pulls of the Vizard, and presents him to the World as a stranger to
the efficacy of Christian Principles, if he be a Contentious and Uncharitable
man, Gal. 5. 22, 23, The fruit of the spirit, i. e. what it certainly works in
that mind where it inhabits, is Love -- Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Meekness, etc. so many several names being given to the same
Essential Virtue of Charity does easily teach us how it delighted the holy,
kind and charitable Spirit of Jesus, to impress such Characters upon all that
should own and believe its Revelations. And again, Col. 3. 12, 13, Put on
therefore as the Elect of God, i. e. as become those that are dear to, and
highly valued of God, bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of mind,
Meekness, Long-suffering; these are those parts of our Religion that are so
closely recommended to us, and that render us highly beloved and esteemed of
God, because they do constitute in us a God-like temper of mind, and make us
the Children of our Father which is in Heaven, and because the Practice of them
renders our Religion truly Glorious and Lovely in the World. Now Rebellion and
Disobedience to Governors must needs be wholly inconsistent with this temper of
mind that is before described, forasmuch as it arises from Rancour, Discontent,
Malice, Ambition, Cruelty, Impatience, Pride, Peevishness, and the like evil
habits of mind, which how well they agree with what the Evangelick Institutes
do require and promote in us, let all men that know them judge.

Sixthly, Another thing that inevitably concludes for what I have been so
earnestly exhorting you to, and is a result of what I last named, is the
consideration of that due submission to, and acquiescing in the disposals of
Divine Providence concerning us and all we have, which we are bound to, both by
Natural and Revealed Religion.

I shall not suspect that you do so little understand your Religion, as to go
about to prove that contentment, or a patient abiding the Will of Heaven
concerning us is our Duty. And a very little of Discourse will show you how
contrary resisting of supreme Powers is to all that. For,

Put the case that we be under all the Ills, Hardships, and Calamities that can
be supposed, nay, and more and greater than can be supposed, from our
Governors, is it not still the Great Ruler of the World that has appointed us
this state, and if we Contrive and Endeavor to free our selves from it by
force of Arms, what is it but violent and desperate resisting the Ordinance of
God, concerning our selves? It Is Rebellion against the Great Monarch of the
Universe, and declining that service he enjoins us. What is it but a wicked
Resolve to break the Mighty Course of his Counsels? or at best but a fruitless
Attempt to free our selves by our own force from that condition of life, which
not so much his Vicegerent, as he himself has disposed to us? It Is telling the
World, and God Almighty to his face, we will not be as he would have us. It Is a
Gyant-like War, and no less than an endeavor to fling his Providence out of
the Earth, which is next door to the pulling him out of Heaven.

That Contentment then and Resignation of ourselves to the Conduct of Divine
Providence is a necessary part of practical Religion is, allowed me, and I need
say no more to prove how well resisting of Sovereign Powers agree with that.

Seventhly, And to conclude this whole matter, I have to prove, that Obedience
and Subjection to Magistrates is a necessary part of Christian Religion, the
example of Jesus and his Apostles, and of the Martyrs and Confessors of old.

The Doctrine of the Messiah I have accounted for before, and now I super-add,
that he did further explain and enforce that by his example. How willingly he
yielded himself to those that accompanied the Traitor that delivered him! How
meekly he behaved himself when before their Judicatures! How evidently he
declared (when he told Pilate, My Kingdom is not of this World) that nothing of
that Power he then managed himself, and had delegated it to others to do it
after him, should ever Interfere with, or tend to lessen the Authority that was
derived to him from Caesar, or that of any other public Magistrate to the end
of the World! How calmly he received the Sentence of Death, the most Unjust
that ever was Pronounced! How patiently he resigned himself to the Execution,
the most Barbarous that ever was Perpetrated!

And this sure was not through any deficiency of Power in him to have delivered
himself, or confounded those that so maliciously treated him; for though there
have been found that have impudently enough Blasphemed the patience of Martyrs
and Confessors, with this false and malicious suggestion, yet here I hope they
will be silent.

Neither can they sure be so Atheistical as to pretend this Example of the meek
Lamb of God, inimitable; and that all the reason of his submission was the
fulfilling of the Scriptures, and the capacitating himself for that great Work
of Expiation, and Attoning Divine Displeasure, if they do but remember, that we
are commanded by the Spirit of Jesus, speaking in one of his Apostles, Heb. 12.
2, ^, To look unto Jesus, the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy
that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame -- And to
consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest
we should be wearied and faint in our minds.

And moreover when we consider all the Glorious Patterns of an Illustrious
Patience, set before us by men of like Passions with our selves, the Holy
Martyrs of Ancient times, who amidst all the severities of an enraged Power,
Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38. They had Trials of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea,
moreover of Bonds, and Imprisonments; they were stoned, they were sawn asunder,
were tempted, i. e. to Apostatize, by flatteries and promises, which the
Apostle justly reckons among the severest of their sufferings; were slain with
the sword, they wandered about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented; of whom the World was not worthy, and yet took all this
joyfully, never tumultuously resisted the Powers that thus cruelly and
unreasonably persecuted them, and if it had been only for want of Power, Why
did the Inspired Penman of this Epistle, attribute it to and commend it as an
effect of their Faith and Hope? I say, when we consider all these Examples, we
may, I think, believe that the force of them would have passed into a Law, if
there had been none in explicit terms Recorded in the Christian Institutes;
but when the Laws are plainly delivered, and backed by these Examples, none but
a Prodigious Impiety would go about to baffle this Glorious Principle of our
Religion, which at once gives us the opportunity of Publishing to the World the
Highest Testimonies of our true and unfeigned Love to God, even of suffering
for his sake, which is indeed the Complement and fulfilling of all that God has
enjoined us as the Conditions of our Eternal Happiness, and also is the great
recommendation of it to all the Powers upon Earth.

Having in these particulars fully asserted, and I hope to your satisfactions,
the Doctrine of Loyalty and Submission to Kings and Rulers, as a Fundamental
Portion of our Religion. I pass now to the second part of my Discourse, which I
shall briefly touch, viz.

II. That all the Ministers of the Evangelick Dispensation are strictly obliged
by it, to exhort their Hearers to the careful and conscionable Practice of this
part of their Religion as their just and necessary Duty.

This is evident alone from this Apostolical Injunction to him whom St. Paul
had placed in the next Degree of Authority to himself, and he speaks it as a
thing that they all, both Preachers and Hearers knew and understood, and so it
needed only to put them in mind to be subject; and it is plain enough without
this particular Command, that we that are Preachers of the Gospel, being bound
to declare the whole Counsel of God, that we might escape the Penalties that
justly belong to those, that handle the Word of God deceitfully, and that we
might be clear from the Blood of all men, could never with safety to ourselves,
silently permit men to be mistaken in, or ignorant of so necessary a part of
their Christian Duty.

But this particular Command to us, was super-added with a particular respect
to the Heretics that then were, and such as should afterward arise, Preaching
another Doctrine, and also to give still more public security to all Powers in
every place where the Gospel came, that the Religion established by it, was so
far from making any Invasion upon their Rights, that it did oblige all its
Followers, upon stricter grounds than any other Institution in the World, to be
Obedient to their Authority.

And because perhaps there are some here that have heard another Doctrine
taught from this very place, I will therefore Appeal to themselves, whether it
does not much better become a Minister of the Gospel of Peace, in speeding his
Commission from the God and Prince of Peace, to Preach this Doctrine of Peace,
Meekness and Obedience to Magistrates, than to hear them not only vary from,
but act quite contrary to their Instructions, in thundering out the furious and
extravagant noises, of Curse you Meroz -- And of fighting the Lords Battles. In
Elijah's Vision, 1 Kings 19. 11, The Lord was not in the Earthquake, nor in
the Fire, nor in the strong Wind that rent the Rocks, but in the still small
Voice; God was not here, when Drums were beaten, and Trumpets sounded from the
Pulpit, but we may believe him here, and expect his blessing upon us here, when
we cheerfully hearken to his Ministers, that come unto us Preaching Peace by
Jesus Christ.

I am persuaded there are none here but are satisfied of the mischief of all
such Principles as tend to Rebellion. And therefore am under no fear of
displeasing any of you by this necessary freedom.

I have nothing now to detain me from finishing this Discourse, but only to
report the force of all that I have offered you by it in the following
Inferences.

And, First, It appears from this whole Discourse what sort of men those are,
that make Religion a pretext for Rebellion: When yet it does altogether, and
upon unalterable foundations condemn it, and by all its Powers fortify Princes
in their Governments over their Subjects. And has made a better provision for
the true performance of all Allegiance and Homage to Princes, than any other
Religion has offered or can ever furnish the World withal.

For Christianity has Adopted the Dnties of Subjects to their Sovereigns, as
also those of all other Relations among men, and made them part of itself; and
has charged all that Profess it, upon the same Penalties, which are the threats
of an endless misery in a future state, with which it establishes all its other
Doctrines, and which no other Religion in the World can justly awe the minds of
its Followers with, to see to the Pious and Sincere performance of all the
Duties they owe one to another, and to those above them, in the several
capacities they are considered in, in the World.

So that Loyalty to our Prince stands upon the same bottom in our Religion,
with Piety to God; nay, God Almighty has declared he will never accept any
pretended Worship to himself, from such as are unfaithful in the Duties of
their Relations to men. For our hands must be lifted up in Prayer to God
without wrath, 1 Timothy 2. 8. And if we have any prejudice, or discontented,
malicious or furious thoughts, the sources of all Rebellion, against any man,
much more if they be against God's Vicegerent on Earth, we must not come near
his Altar, and if we do, it is upon our utmost peril, for we have reason to
expect nothing but a Curse.

How wretchedly wicked then are those, that Preface their Rebellions with that
Glorious Name, that condemns them to Hell, and how wilfully blind must they be
that believe them?

For can we think that the Devils Instruments will ever help to maintain God's
Kingdom; or that that Religion can be protected by Impiety and Disorder, whose
Principles Proclaim the strictest Holiness and most entire Peace? Is Divine
Power so weak that it must call in the Foreign supplies of the Kingdom of
Darkness to maintain its own Gospel? Or shall any of us be so gulled, as to
take part with, or wish well to those, that pretend indeed the safety of our
Religion, but in good earnest design only the gratifying of their own Ambitious
and Discontented Humors, though it be in the ruin of all that should be dear
to us? No! Let us oppose to all the false Colors with which they would Honest
their wicked Actions; That they that do evil that good may come, their
damnation is just

Secondly, This Gospel Doctrine of submission to Princes, proves to us, that a
Rebel to his King and Sovereign, can never be a good Christian toward God.
Sedition is one of the fruits of the flesh, and lodges where the Spirit of
Jesus enters not. What fellowship has Light with Darkness, Christ with Belial,
or Religion with Rebellion? It Is the evil and foul Spirit that foments such a
temper, as this comes from, in the minds of men to disturb and ruin Goodness
and Piety under the name of Protecting it. For most certainly he that nourishes
Hatred or Cruelty, Rancour or Revenge in his heart against man, but especially
against his Sovereign, never felt, to be sure, never complied with, the motions
of the Soft and Charitable, Humble and Holy Spirit of Jesus. He that despises
his Duty to man can never value his Obligations to God; for so one of the Holy
and Infallible Writers has proved by undeniable Argument, as well as determined
by unerring Authority, 1 John 4. 20, That he who loves not his Brother whom he
has seen, i. e. He that does not with Charity and Sincerity, carefully perform
all the Duties required of him (For Love is the fulfilling of the Law) to his
Brother, i. e. to his Superiors, Inferiors, of Equals, whom he has seen, i. e.
with whom he is conversant in the World, and to whom he is bound by so many
sensible Obligations, which are most like to prevail upon men; How can he Love?
i. e. be Dutiful and Obedient to, God whom he has not seen; with whom he is not
conversant or acquainted?

And the whole force of the Argument is this. That he that is not lead by the
motives of his Interest for this World, and the opportunities of constant
conversation, and experience of the benefits of it, to do his Duty to man, will
never be influenced by the motives of another World, which address only Faith
and Reason, and to sense appear at a great distance, and to have but little or
no force to move him, to be truly Obedient to God, a Being, that he never said
his eyes upon, and has but very small and imperfect notices of.

And so, that I may apply it to my present scope, it is evident, that he that
has seen and conversed with his Prince, and beheld his Glory and Power, and
those emanations of Mercy and Justice that flow from his Throne, and has had
the opportunities of sharing in the Honors and Advantages that attend such as
are near it, and yet has so little sense of all, as to be a Traitor to him,
must needs have less Reason and Faith, in which only the force of Religious
Obligation do consist, and so must unavoidably be false to his Religion and his
God, whom he never saw, and whose Glory and Majesty fall not within his
consideration.

Thirdly, I gather hence, that Preaching of Loyalty to our King is Soul-saving
Doctrine, for not to say that Rebellion is as damnable a sin as Witchcraft, and
stubbornness as Idolatry: That Sedition does as certainly lead to Hell, as any
other of the Works of the Flesh that are ranked with it, Gal. 5. I thus make it
appear that Disloyal and Traiterous Practices are one of the shortest cuts to
an Eternal Misery. For,

It will be allowed me that Traitors seldom live long, they are those bloody
and deceitful men that shall not live out half their days, Psalm. 55. 23. They
do rarely escape the hands of Justice, and when they are in them, it is not fit
they should long be there to occasion any further Convulsions in the Body
Politic; now when a vicious and a bad life toward God ends in a Rebellion
against his Prince, and the Traitor is blasted in his Designs, and the Law has
seized him, and within a few days he must conclude his miserable life in a more
miserable death: Must we not all acknowledge, that it is mercy miraculous in the
proper sense of that word, that shall receive a few Prayers in lieu of the
Obedience of a whole Life, and that shall consign him to a happy Eternity that
perseveres in his sin 'till he comes to dye for it.

Since then resisting of Government does so apparently hazard our eternal
safety, I must certainly appear to you to serve the Interests of your
Immortalities, when I persuade and exhort you to avoid that, which does so
greatly endanger them; and this is what you have been taught to call
Soul-saving Doctrine.

Lastly, I have opportunity here to present you, as I do, with a most hearty
and persuasive Address, that might induce you from the consideration of your
Religion, to resolve upon a firm, steady and unstained Loyalty to his Majesty
that now is, Our Lawful and Undoubted Sovereign, whom God long preserve; that
we may none of us so much as seem to wish well to those, that are doing what in
them lies to hurry us into the most miserable Anarchy and Confusion.

Consider how contrary to the Religion we all Profess such Accursed Practices
are, and let us by all means avoid the encouraging any such Designing and
Restless Heads, as can never so much as pretend to protect our Religion, 'till
they have first violated it, in the most necessary parts of it. Never say to
them, God speed; lest if we partake with them in their Sins, God give us to
partake with them in their Plagues. But amidst all the Tragical noises with
which evil men would Alarm our fears to desperate Actions, let us be persuaded
to calm our minds, with the remembrance of the watchful and wise Conduct of
Divine Providence, which superintends all affairs below, and peculiarly those
of his Church; let us not forget the experiences of Divine care for our
Religion, which has been gloriously discovered for it in all the necessities it
has been in, Psalm. 22. 4, 5. Let us abide upon the Gracious, and Repeated
Promise of as Just a Prince as ever swayed the Scepter over us: But then let us
be faithful to the Government, that that may not be uneasy to us.

And that we may be the more engaged to practice what I exhort to, consider we
all, that Hereby we shall create to ourselves strong and sure titles to the
Divine Protection; for God did never for sake or forget those that in Piety and
Charity, submission to his own Appointments, and Obedience to his Deputies in
the World, and perseverance in well-doing, have committed their causes to him.
Hereby we endear ourselves to our Prince, who will always value Loyal and
Obedient Subjects, and Protect that Religion that teaches men to be so. Hereby
we add a Luster to our Profession, while we walk worthy of that Holy Name that
is named upon us. And render that and ourselves truly Honorable to all
Mankind, and especially to those that Govern us. And let us never forget, That
amending our lives, and living strictly according to the rules of our Religion,
is the best and only way to Protect that, and ourselves in the peaceable
enjoyment of it.

To Conclude, and to give you a short but full direction, how you may
accomplish all these blessed and happy purposes, I exhort you, in the Name of
God, that you go on heartily to espouse, and steadily to persevere in the
Communion of the Church of England; to revere her Governors, to value her
Teachers, and to practice her Doctrines. By so doing you will be sure to tread
aright, and be out of danger of being beguiled, by any false pretenses or
insinuations into any actions that may become hurtful to yourselves, or your
Religion. Here you will find to be taught unspotted Piety toward God, firm
Loyalty to our Prince, hearty and extensive Charity to one another; and if we
do, and persevere in doing these things, we shall never fall. But amidst all
the Changes and Uncertainties of an uneasy World, shall be supplied with the
fresh assistances of God's Holy Spirit, proper to our states, and so guided by
the particular care of his wakeful Providence, that we shall at the last attain
the accomplishment of all our Desires, and the reward of all our Labors, in
portions of an endless and unconceivable Bliss:

Which God of his Infinite Mercy Grant to us All, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, to whom with the Father, and the Eternal Comforter, be Glory and Honor
and Praise, Now and Ever. Amen.
FINIS.

