THE Baptist not Babylonish, OR THE QUAKERS TONGUE no Slander. Being a brief
Reply To a Foolish and Scandalous Pamphlet called the Babylonish Baptist.

Written by G.W. a Quaker-Teacher.

Wherein his Malice, Insolence, and Ignorance is discovered and detected. And a
Book lately Published, Entitled, Light from the Sun of Righteousness, is
vindicated from those pretended Contradictions, and groundless Cavils made
against it.

H. G.

Job 6.25. How forcible are right words! but what does your arguing reprove? 2 Timothy 3.8. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist
the Truth: Men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith. London,
Printed in the year, 1672. and to be sold by F. Smith, at the Elephant and
Castle near the Royal Exchange.

The Preface.
Christian Reader:
THere is, as the wise man says, no end of making many Books; and thou may
('it is probable) conclude that to undertake in and about Controversies of
Religion of this nature is a fruitless and wearisom work, especially to have to
do with those captious People called Quakers. Truly were not the Glory of God,
the Fundamentals of Christianity, and the everlasting well-being of the Souls
of Men and Women of such high concernment, I should not have set Pen to Paper
upon this account, nor in the least have troubled my self in opposing the vile
and evil Doctrine of these foolish contradicting and confused People I am
forced to have to do with at this time. If thou have seen that little Book I
lately published, entitled, Light from the Sun of Righteousness; thou may
clearly perceive, what weighty Grounds and Arguments stirred me up to undertake
that matter; and though thou may suppose that works of this kind do but tend
to the feeding of that lying and deluding Spirit which is in these deceived
People, yet have we some good ground to judge that God has blessed some former
undertakings of this nature, to the great benefit and advantage of some poor
Souls; and let none blame us for standing up in the defense of Christ and the
Gospel, when the Foundation of true Religion and Godliness is thus struck at.
But to be short, this I can say and testify in the presence of the great God
(in opposition to what G. W. does suggest) that I have not the least enmity nor
hatred in my heart against the Persons of any of these People called Quakers,
nor are we offended or troubled at their present Liberty, (as he seems to
charge us) though we cannot deny but their Principles and unsound Doctrines
tend to the wounding and grieving of our Souls, because we see daily, more and
more, the dangerous and damnable nature thereof.

And now as touching that foolish and ridiculous Pamphlet put forth by G. W.
wherein he labors to make the World believe that little else is contained in
that Book (before mentioned) save self-Contradictions, I have been stirred up
to offer these few lines by way of Answer: wherein you have First, those things
he calls Contradictions set down verbatim; and Secondly, some Reflections upon
his absurd Animadversions on the same, and I shall leave the unprejudiced
Reader to judge between us, and the issue to the Almighty.

Farewell.
A brief Reply To a foolish and scandalous Pamphlet, called the Babylonish
Baptist.
IT may not be amiss, in the first place to inform thee (whosoever thou art)
concerning the Method G. W. has taken in his Answer to the aforesaid Book,
which is only a Collection of several things (in a confused and ridiculous
manner) therein contained, which he says are contradictory to each other; with
some Animadversions upon them, which in Order I have set down exactly after his
own fashion, as follows.

H. G. Says (viz.) I utterly deny that this Light which all men have from the
glorious Creator, is a saving Light, page 8.

H. G. In Contradiction says, I really believe that the Lord Jesus as the
Eternal Word, has given Light, or enlightened all Men and Women that come into
the world, p. 8.

G. W. his Animadversion. The Light, or Life of the Eternal Word, which is the
Light of Men, John 1.4. is Spiritual and Divine, as is that Word, and therefore
saving, etc.

Reply. It seems to me, as if this Man had lost his common Reason. Can he make
any rational person believe, that these two places he mentions first of all,
are contradictory to each other: Because I deny that the Light which is in all
Men is a saving Light, and yet say in the second place, I really believe all
have a Light in them from Christ considered as Creator, does this contradict
the former? this cannot be a Contradiction, unless he can prove there is no
Light proceedings from the Eternal Word as Creator, but what is saying. What
though it be granted that the Light which all men that come into the World are
lighted with, flows from the Eternal Word, and so is Spiritual, must it needs
therefore be a saving Light? Was not the Law given forth on Mount Sinai, a
Light of, or which did come from the Eternal Word? And does not Paul say, That
the Law is Spiritual, Romans 7.14? and yet does he not call it a Ministration of
Death, 2 Cor. 3.7? and that it killed? and does he not, in Gal. 3.21. clearly
show that it could not give life? And in other places, that there was no
Justification by it? But I shall leave this to another time, and pass to the
next thing you call a Contradiction, viz.

H. G. The great darkness of these men who cry up Light and Power within, this
wile of Satan and cheat of Antichrist, p. 31.

H. G. Contra. The Lord Jesus, as the Eternal Word, inlighteneth all men. This
Light is the substance of the Law, The Candle of the Lord. It does convince
sin, page 9. If Heathens followed it they would shine in just living. The work
of Faith with power I do maintain that is required and must be wrought with
power in the heart, page 15, 16.

G.W. his Animad. What horrible blasphemy is it then to term our crying up the
Light and Power of Christ within, the Wile of Satan, and Cheat of Antichrist,
and how plainly hereby refuted! etc.

Reply. This is the second thing you call a contradiction. I shall examine
these places, that so your Lies and Ignorance may be manifested. I say, the
darkness of these men who cry up Light and Power within is great; and I did say
in page 31. I should make appear this Wile of Satan and Cheat of Antichrist
(that is to say) The evil Doctrine and Principles of yours concerning the Light
within, as it immediately follows, and is declared in the same page of the
said Book: And do I contradict this in affirming there is a Light in all men
called the Candle of the Lord, and in owning the inward work of Faith with
power upon the heart, etc? Because you seem so dark of apprehension, I shall
show you your dishonesty and willful mistake, and what little reason you have
to cry down this for horrible blasphemy. (George) I did no where say, That it
is great Darkness, and a wile of Satan, and cheat of Antichrist, to own a Light
in every man, etc. For if so, thou might have had ground to have charged me
with a Contradiction. -- But your great Darkness, and that which I call a wile
of Satan, and cheat of Antichrist, consists in your affirming that of this
Light which is utterly false, and contrary to the Doctrine which is according
to Godliness, mentioned in the same 31 page. Do not you say, That this Light
which is in every man that comes into the World is God, is Christ, is the Holy
Spirit, or the Blessed Comforter, and a Saving Light, and that it will convince
a man of every Sin and Transgression, and lead into all Truth, and cleanse from
all Sin, and eternally save those who walk up to it faithfully? In this appears
your great darkness, and herein you are beguiled and cheated by the Devil, to
the invalidating of the meritorious Death and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus
Christ; as if there were no need or his Blood to be poured forth, nor of his
Intercession; nay, do you not hereby clearly deny his Humane Nature, or his
real outward Existence at his Father's right hand in Heaven above? For, if he
be naught else but Light and Spirit within, that of necessity follows: -- But I
shall proceed to that you call another of my Contradictions, viz.

H. G. Observes from John 16.7. That the Spirit, or blessed Comforter cannot be
the Savior, Page 46.

H. G. Contra. Till the coming of his Spirit and Grace with power in my heart
for the binding of the strong man Satan, and killing my Corruptions, my Soul
was not brought out of the horrible pit, page 16. having wrought this glorious
work of Regeneration, page 17.

G. W. His Animadversions. Then its the Spirit and power of Christ that effects
and works Salvation through the work of Regeneration, Titus 3.5. Which is not
merely by Christ's outward Sufferings, though we cannot believe that Satan is
bound in this man while he is in Satan's work, blaspheming Christ's light within,
and belying us.

Reply. What sober Christian man can find any contradiction here against H. G?
Is not G.W. the Liar and false Accuser? I say the Spirit, or blessed Comforter
cannot be the Savior, or Mediator, and yet I own the work and office of the
Comforter, and the work of Grace with power upon the heart; And is there any
absurdity in this? Is this in the least inconsistent and contradictory to it
self? Did I any where deny the effectual workings of the Holy Spirit, which in
a wonderful nature works Faith in the hearts of the Regenerate, whereby he is
enabled to apply the virtue of Christ's Blood and Merits to his own Soul? And
art thou not able to distinguish between the Giver and the Gift, between the
Fountain and the Stream? Does not Christ say that he would send the Comforter,
and that the Spirit of Truth should proceed from the Father and the Son? Are
there nor three that bear record in Heaven? Answer plainly; Did the true
Savior die on the Cross or not? I affirm once again, That neither the
Comforter, viz. the Holy Spirit, nor the Deity of our Lord Jesus, distinct from
his Manhood or Humane Nature, could be the Savior and Mediator which died on
the Cross, or was crucified between the two Thieves. But again it appears thou
distinguishest not between the Meritorious cause of man's Salvation, and the
Instrumental; the killing of the Sacrifice, and the sprinkling of the Blood;
the price paid for the Captive, and the application of it; the work and the
office of the Lord Jesus, our alone Savior, who died to atone, make peace, and
appease the wrath of God, so to redeem us; and the work and office of the
Spirit which does sanctify and renew us: but do ignorantly seem to affirm,
that such distinctions are lies, and contradictions. But I must proceed.

H. G. The Ordinance of the Lords Supper you call Bread and Wine, Page 19.

H.G. Contrad. The Sign -- The Shadow (speaking of these Ordinances) the
substance being Christ, Page 53, 54.

G. W. his Animadversion. Your pretended Lords Supper then is no more than
Bread and Wine, the Sign, the Shadow; and therefore their continuation of no
necessity in the true Church, which has received Christ the Substance, etc.

Reply. The Ordinance of the Lords Supper, which Quakers reproachfully and
contradictingly, (as I have showed in Page 53.) do call Bread and Wine; does
remain in full force, and the practice of it to be kept up in the same manner
as Christ, the night before he was betrayed, instituted it, and the Primitive
Saints received it, Acts 2.42. and Chap. 20.7, 11. 1 Cor. 11.23, etc. I have
clearly proved in the said Book, page 19, 20, 21. to which I refer the Reader;
and the stress of my Arguments, thou may see, this man has no ways weakened,
nor said any thing to, but would (if he knew how) make Persons believe I
contradict my self afterward in calling it a Sign, and speaking of sitting
down under Christ's shadow; and in calling the Ordinance of breaking Bread and
drinking of Wine a Sign, is no contradiction: For does it not signify the
breaking of Christ's Body, and the pouring forth of his Blood, and clearly, as
a Sign, hold forth his Sufferings, and show forth his Death until he come?
which was one end of his instituting of it; and has it not been called by many
faithful men (long before his airy Notions were Midwiv'd into the world by the
Spirit of Antichrist) an outward Sign of an inward spiritual Grace? he took the
Bread and blessed it, and said, This is my Body, (which the godly Martyrs
sealed with their blood) to be a figurative speech, or that which was to show
forth his Body broken for us, etc. It Is no marvel, Reader, these men cavil
against this Ordinance, and deny it, who plainly deny him to be the Christ who
is signified thereby, as hereafter will appear more fully. And again, I would
know of this man where he reads of any thing called the Lord's Supper, but this
which we contend for? and I do affirm that this (and all other Ordinances of
Christ) is Spiritual, and Faith to be exercised by all that receive it.
Moreover, let none conclude (whatsoever this man imagines) because the Shadows
and Services of the Mosaical Law ended when Christ the substance nailed them to
his Cross, that therefore Gospel Ordinances did then cease likewise: for the
Ordinance of Water Baptism was given forth by Christ after his Resurrection,
Mat. 28.20. And this of the Lord's Supper, I have in that same Book showed,
Paul received of Christ some time after his Ascension, 1 Cor. 11.23. But to
pass this, and come to the next thing he cavils against, viz.

H.G. The end of this Ordinance does remain notwithstanding the pourings forth
of the Spirit, and therefore the Ordinance must needs remain, which is to
confirm our Faith in the true Savior, and to keep up our love to him, p. 21.

G. W's Answer. What kind of Faith and Love are these of theirs which are
confirmed and kept up by Bread and Wine, and what Idolatry and diversion from
the Spirit does their Doctrine tend to herein, surely the Holy Spirit can best
supply the said end, Gal. 5.22.

Reply. We love him because he first loved us, and gave himself for us: and
this Ordinance is to be done in remembrance of him, and so tends to increase
our love to him, and our Faith in him; and this is to be done also (as I have
showed page 21.) to show forth his Death until he comes, and therefore the end
remains, notwithstanding what you have said, unless you can prove Christ is
come the second time without sin unto Salvation: Do you suppose there is no
need of this Ordinance because the Spirit can best supply the said end? and is
this Idolatry, and diversion from the Spirit? is it Idolatry to worship God
according to his own Appointments and Institutions, and a diversion from the
Spirit to be obedient to those Com^ands given forth by the Spirit, and by our
Lord Jesus Christ? and what a piece of impudence and arrogance is here? will
you take upon you to instruct the Almighty? Is not Jesus Christ the only wise
God? and did not he upon the consideration of the aforesaid ends, institute and
give forth this Gospel-Ordinance, and dare thou say, the Spirit can best
supply those ends without making use of the means God in his Word does direct
unto, and make us believe (if you could) that to obey Christ's Ordinances is
Idolatry? The usefulness and sufficiency of the Spirit in fulfilling of its
work and office, does not disannul Christ's Precepts, or make his blessed
Appointments of none effect, or needless things; ought not we to conclude, that
whatsoever means Jehovah has prescribed and enjoined for the effecting and
accomplishing of such and such ends by himself propounded, do best tend to the
supplying the said ends respectively.

H. G. again is very fierce and rash for their Water-Baptisme, or plunging
People in Water, where he says, Whosoever brings any other Gospel let him be
accursed. --

Hereby he has cursed all the People of God and sincere-minded, both
Protestants and all others in the world, who oppose and come not under the
Baptists Dipping or Plunging people in Water: Lord forgive him, he is very
uncharitable herein, for our parts we cannot believe their Baptism to be either
the Baptism of Christ, or Gospel, or of necessity, and available to Salvation.

Reply. Thou have further in this manifested thy imperfection and false
Antichristian Spirit: Have thou no more care nor conscience, that thou go
about thus to reproach and belie the innocent? Have I in Page 24. or any where
else, affirmed that Baptism, or Plunging Men and Women in Water, is the Gospel?
Or can any such Conclusion or Consequence arise from what I have said, which
thou do affirm; viz. As to curse all the people of God and sincere-minded
Protestants, and all others in the world, who oppose or come not under the
Baptist's dipping? etc. or, have I said it is of necessity to Salvation? Others
have read that Book as well as G. W. and they cannot find any thing in the
least of that nature in it. And because this is a false charge and cursed
slander, I shall repeat the occasion of (...) mentioning these words of Paul,
Whosoever brings any other Gospel let him be accursed: from whence this man
does infer those unnatural Consequences. Thou may see that in Page 24. of the
said little Book, I having an occasion there to treat of Christ's Commission,
Matt. 28. and of the Baptism there given forth by the Lord Jesus, thou may
find these words, viz. Now the Baptism here commanded must needs remain to be
practiced to the end of the World, because whatsoever was there given forth by
Christ, is given forth as he is King and Mediator of the new Covenant, and as
part of his last Will and Testament; and his last Will and Testament stands in
full force and virtue to the end of the World unalterable, and whosoever brings
any other Gospel, let him be accursed: Is there any Ground from hence for him to
affirm that which he does of me. All that are accursed, by the authority and
natural consequence, or tendency of my mentioning those expressions of the
Apostle, are only those who bring another Gospel besides that which was given
forth by Christ, as he is King and Mediator of the New Covenant, or is
contained in his last Will ^^d Testament; and I doubt not but all
sincere-minded Protestants are of my persuasion touching this matter, though we
may differ about the form and subjects of Baptism; and though we plead for
Bapt^sm as it was dispensed and administered in the Primitive time, yet false it
is and a slander to say, that we make it essential and of absolute necessity to
Salvation, though we do believe it to be essential to Church Communion.

H. G. Denies the true Savior to be the Light and Power: I affirm (says he)
that Jesus Christ is a man consisting of flesh and bone, p. 30, 31. Humane, p.
33. Finite, weak, subject to Passion as we are, p. 94. The inward power is not
the Christ distinct from the Human nature, the true Christ consisting of a body
of Flesh and Bone, p. 31-34.

H. G. Contrad. John declared plainly, That Christ was before him, being from
everlasting he was before Abraham, the Son of God by eternal Generation, truly
God, David 's Lord, p. 35. The Lord Jesus the Eternal word. p. 8. The Emanuel,
p. 32. Christ is the Son of the living God, p. 33.

G.W. His Animad. Therefore it is un-Scriptural and absurd to assert, That
Jesus Christ consists of a Humane body of Flesh and Bone, seeing he is before
all things, and by him all things consist, etc.

Reply. Reader, I do entreat thee observe how he has abused me in his
collecting in such a confused manner of those several Places, Words, and
Sentences out of my little Book, which he would fain make earnings of; he
regards not the occasion of my speaking upon these several accounts, nor yet
the Texts they allude to, taking here a bit and there a scrap in a ridiculous
manner: It Is an easy thing to take his way and example to set the Scriptures
in contradiction one against another, as some profane Atheists have presumed
to do. What is said Page 94. concerning Christ being weak, subject to Passion
and Sufferings etc. is spoken in respect of what he was touching his Humane
Nature, when He was upon the Earth, before his Resurrection and glorious
Ascension into Heaven above: But to leave that, I hope now ( Reader) thou may
see what judgment and persuasion this man is of, and the blindness of his evil
mind. Does he not evidently declare to the world, that it is a contradiction,
and absurd to assert that Jesus Christ is God and Man, subsisting in two real
distinct Natures, being David's Root and David's Offspring because I said he is
man, and that the Divinity distinct and apart from the Humanity is not the
Christ, and yet also said he is God Everlasting, and the Son of God by an
Eternal Generation? He says it is a Contradiction and absurd. The Lord deliver
these poor Nations from such horrible Heresies, Delusions, and vile Impostures.

H.G. The Principles of the Quakers concerning the Light within, the impurity
and vileness of which Principles I may further make appear, p. 48.

H. G. Contrad. The Word considered as Creator, is the true Light which
lights every man that comes into the world, p. 48.

G. W. his Animad. It is no less than Blasphemy to charge this Principle (to
wit, the Light of the Eternal Word, the Creator) with Vileness and Impurity.

Reply. Doubtless the Light in this man is almost quite gone out, for else he
might see that what he here minds with unchristian reflections, is not in the
least any contradiction. The Quakers Doctrine and Principles concerning the
Light within, is impure and vile, and the same I do still affirm; and yet
assert, That the Word considered as Creator, is the true Light which lights
every man that comes into the world; and is this any contradiction? Friend, do
not mistake your self, I do not charge the Light of the Eternal Word, or the
Light in every man, with Vileness and Impurity; I acknowledge the Light which
is in all, and do esteem it, and have a regard to it in its place, and do say
it witnesses for God, and serves for the end and purpose (when obeyed) for
which it was given unto man: yet that which you Quakers speak of it, is
abominable, and to be detested by all good Christians: It was never bestowed
upon man to be made an Idol of, and set up in the place of God himself: It is
Blasphemy to say it is the Divine Essence; it is a vile and wicked thing to say
it is the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, the great Prophet God promised to
raise up; it is a vile Error to say it is the Holy Spirit, or blessed
Comforter; for that, Christ says, the World could not receive: and abominable
it is to say 'twill cleanse from all sin, and Eternally save those that obey
it, which many of you affirm; and herein your Principle of the Light appears
vile and impure.

G. H. God forbid that I should ever own their Principle of the Light in all,
that does so clearly tend to the razing out the grand Fundamentals of the
Gospel.

G. H. Contrad. Praises and Halelujah to God for ever, who has given us that
Witness in our selves, of which thou speak, which Witness (his Sister spoke
of) was the Light which reproves for sin, to own and believe in the Light, that
enlighteneth every man that comes into the World.

G. W. his Animad. See what a sad pass these men are proven to, and what kind
of Prayers they offer to God, against his own Light, or Witness within; and how
contrary to the Gospel Spirit and Light they are.

Reply. G. W. should have perused the Letter I wrote that Book in Answer to,
before he returned any thing by way of Answer to me: for he belyes both Me and
my Sister in what he says here; for the Witness she spoke of in her Letter, is
not that he affirms in his Pamphlet, viz. The Light which reproves for sin,
which is in every one that comes into the World; though I confess she bids me
believe in the Light that reproves for sin, which lights every one that
comes into the World, as page 8. and 29. But contrariwise she mentioned upon
this occasion, the very express words of the Apostle John, 1 John 5.10. He that
believes, has the Witness in himself; and that Witness through Grace I in my
measure do experience; not that I believe in that Light (which every man that
comes into the World is enlightened with) for Life and Salvation, for that is
an insufficient Savior, and such a Belief will fail, that is not the object,
author, and finisher of my Faith; but it is the Lord Jesus Christ, who by one
Offering has perfected for ever all those that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. And
thus you may see that all those Contradictions, Lies, and Absurdities that G.
W. charges H. G. with, are returned upon his own head, by which you may
perceive that all the stir this man makes, is but like smoke and darkness,
which the beams of true Light from the Sun of Righteousness does vanquish and
expel.

Reader, G. W is pleased to say page 6. that there are more absurdities and
false accusations against them in that Book, called Light from the Sun of
Righteousness, and does also proceed to instance in one or two, viz. in saying
they deny the Man Christ and the Resurrection. I cannot but admire at the
insolency of these Men, who though they are found daily in the sight of all
persons denying that Man to be the Christ who was born of the Virgin, and was
crucified on the Cross, yet would fain have men to believe they are falsely
accused: But that this is a true charge, I suppose these very lines may serve
to inform thee; For if it be absurd to say, Christ does consist of a Humane
body, of Flesh and Bone, or is Man; or to say the Deity, Divine nature, or
Godhead was not the Christ considered distinct and apart from the Humane
nature; must it not needs follow from hence, they deny the Man Christ Jesus?
Does he not positively assert, that it is a contradiction to affirm the Lord
Jesus Christ is God and Man? Does he not deny his humane Nature, and the
glorious Hypostatical Union? If this comes further to be controverted, we shall
be able (God assisting) to make it appear yet more plainly. Have not some of
them said, That Christ was never seen with an outward eye, nor heard with an
outward ear; and that they cannot call the bodily Garment the Christ, but that
which dwelt in the Body. See a Book styled, Some Principles of the Elect people
of God called Quakers, Page 116. And now, Reader, I hope thou will find that
what this man has yet said in Answer to my little Book, has been just
nothing; for that he cannot prove it mere contradiction, confusion, and
darkness, as with the tongue of Infamy he is pleased to call it. And I appeal
to thee, Do not the Quakers appear to all Men to be Babylonish rather than H.G.
and other Baptists, which he does reproachfully call so? G. W. says, he has
writ a full Answer unto the said Book. Thou may perceive by this what a
bundle of confusion the rest will prove, for I never saw yet any distinct solid
Answer given by him to any Book which has come out against them. The Lord
deliver Christ's poor Lambs from being preyed upon and devoured by ravening
Wolves, Matt. 7.15. and grant them Repentance, who have not sinned the
unpardonable Sin.

Farewell.
POSTSCRIPT.
ANd since G. W. would make us believe, that the Quakers own the man Christ,
and the Resurrection of the body: I shall only ask him a few Questions,
desiring a direct, distinct, and plain Answer to them, and conclude.

First, Was he the Christ, and true Saviviour, that was born of the Virgin;
yea, or nay?

Secondly, If you say he was, I Query, whether that same Christ, be in the
heart of every Man and Woman?

Thirdly, Whether he that you own to be the Christ and true Savior, was put to
death, or crucified on the Cross?

Fourthly, Whether you believe there is any other Christ, than what is in the
heart of Man, yea, or nay?

Fifthly, If that Body that was nailed to the Cross, was but as a Garment which
the true Christ did wear, or as a House in which he did dwell, why may not any
other Man, in whose flesh Christ is manifested and does dwell, be called the
Christ, as well as Jesus of Nazareth?

Sixthly, If you own the Man-Christ, why do you affirm it is a contradiction to
say, he is God of the Substance of the Father, and yet truly Man, made like
unto us in all things, Sin only excepted? for either he must be mere Man, or
mere God, else it cannot be any Contradiction; and if you say he is mere Man,
then you seem to side with those Jews that accused our Savior for blasphemy,
in that being a Man, he made himself God, John 10.33. and if you say he is mere
God, does it not then clearly follow, you deny the Man-Christ?

Seventhly, I Query, whether you own any other Resurrection, than what (you
say) you experience within?

Eighthly, Whether you believe that that Body of flesh and bone which is laid
in then Grave (respecting the matter or substance of it) shall by the mighty
power of God b^ raised from the dead at the last day?

Ninthy, Whether that Man (whosoever he be) does not deny the Resurrection of
the dead, who does deny the same IT which is sown, (and shall rise) mentioned,
1 Cor. 15.38. to intend the same Body (respecting the matter or substance of
it) which was buried and laid in the Grave? Answer plainly, without
Equivocation.

FINIS.

