THE Case of Mr. John Griffith Minister of the Gospel, and now Prisoner in
Newgate.
Being a true and Impartial Account of what he spoke at the Sessions House in
the Old Bailey, on the 18th day of this instant April, 1683. before the
Lord-Chief-Justice Saunders, and three Judges more, the Lord Mayor, Recorder,
and several Aldermen of the City of London.
ON the day and year abovesaid, about four in the Afternoon, Mr. Bampfield, and
my self were sent for by the Court, and soon after we came we were both brought
to the inward Bar.

Mr. Bampfield was first required to take the Oath of Allegiance, it being
again tendered him according to the Statute in the third of King James.

After some discourse between the Judges and the Recorder, had with Mr.
Bampfield, he refusing to swear, they made an end for that time with him. The
Clerk of the Peace I took him to be, said unto me, Take off your Glove; I asked
him, What to do? he answered, To lay your hand on the Book, which Book he had
in his hand, and held it out unto me.

I then spoke with a loud voice, and said, My Lord, I hope you will give me the
Liberty to speak for my self in my own defense; one of the Judges replied, That
my friend (meaning Mr. Bampfield) had spoke for me, or to that effect. I said
again that I desired to speak for my self, for I had other things to offer as
my reasons why I could not take that Oath. Having Liberty granted, as I took it
from their silence, I with an audible voice said unto them, I am in the
Scripture commanded when I take an Oath, To swear in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness, unto which the Church of England does agree; it is one Article
of their Faith, That he that takes an Oath, being required of the Magistrate,
ought to swear, so he do it in Truth, in Righteousness, and in Judgment. (See
Article 39. of the Church of England.)

Now for me to swear, as my duty is according to the Scripture, and as the
Church of England directs, I cannot, should I take this Oath, because I cannot
know, but must be ignorant of, what I bind my Soul to perform, and then it is
impossible I should swear in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness.

I cannot know, but must be ignorant, both of what hereafter by Law I may be
required to do, and also to whom I swear to be obedient; for it is not possible
I should foresee what Laws may hereafter be made; and I do not only bind my
Soul to obey the King that now is, but his Heirs and Successors also; and I
know not what his Successor may be, for ought I know he may be a Popish
Succesfor, or a Papist, and I cannot swear to obey Laws not yet in being, nor
to be obedient to a Popish Successor; therefore I cannot take the Oath of
Allegiance.

Upon which words there was a Hum in the Court which being ceased after a
little pause, one of the Judges made this short reply, I (says he) does the
stick lie there?

I then went on, and said, I cannot conform to the Church of England; should I
take this Oath, I swear to Conform, for I am bound by an Oath to obey all the
Kings Laws, as much those Laws which respect the Worship of God, as those
relating to Civil Government, and then I am sworn to hear Common prayer once a
month, (here one of the Judges said, So you are) and to Receive the Sacrament
with the Church of England as often as the Law requires, yea and to Conform to
all the Rites and Ceremonies of the said Church; to this it was answered, (So
you are) and not to frequent Private Meetings any more, for there are Laws that
forbid it; it was again answered, So you are.

Therefore I cannot take this Oath.

I then prayed the Judges to give me all their opinions, whether it were as I
had said or not, they answered with one consent, as one man, That it was as I
had said, viz. That I did in taking the Oath, swear to obey all the Kings Laws
without exception. Then I returned them thanks, that they were pleased to give
me their opinion and judgment in the Case, and withal added these words, I am
well satisfied and settled in my Religion, and the more confirmed by what you
have said; and if it be so, do with me what you please, come life, come death,
the Lord assisting me, I will never take the Oath of Allegiance.

Then I desired to speak a few Words more, which being not denied, I said Be it
known unto you, that I do not refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance, in any
dislike I have of any thing contained therein, against the Authority of the
Pope, or the Sea of Rome, but do in all points therein with you agree; and
further I do declare, that I believe the Pope has no Power, nor Authority over
the Kings Person, nor his Government, no, nor over the meanest Subject in his
Kingdom; and do yet further declare, That I believe in my Conscience, Popery to
be Idolatrous, Damnable, and Devilish.

I was then had back again to the Press-yard, where I remain the Lords
Prisoner, and am ready further to bear my Testimony for him, against
Antichrist, the Pope, and See of Rome, and for his holy Word, the Purity of
the Gospel, and the Ordinances thereof, against Popish Darkness, filthy
Idolatries, Fornications Blasphemies, and Abominations, and all Traditions of
men, as one made willing through the free mercy and rich Grace of God, my
heavenly Father, to forsake all for Christ, (who has loved me, and given
himself for me) not counting my life dear to my self, so I may finish my Course
with Joy, and the Ministry I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the
Gospel of the Grace of God.

Thus have I given an Account of what I spoke, and was said to me, to the very
best of my memory, though it may be not word for word, yet for substance of
what was spoke, it is true.

JOHN GRIFFITH

Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths
Mat. 5.23.
London, Printed by George Larkin for the Author. 168^


