THE Late CENSORS Deservedly Censured; And their Spurious Litter of Libels
AGAINST Dr. GREENFIELD, and Others, justly exposed to Contempt: By the
following Answer to all, but especially the Last, Entitled, A Reply to the
Reasons against the Censors of the College of Physicians, etc.

Humbly offered to the Perusal Of Dr. THOMAS BURWELL, Dr. RICHARD TORLES, Dr.
WILLIAM DAWS, Dr. THOMAS GILL, The late Censors.

And to the expiring Censure of Dr CHARLES GOODAL.

By Lysiponius Celer M. D. L.

Si mihi pergit, quae volt, dicere; ea, quae non volt, audiet. Ter. Andr.
LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by B. Billingsley at the
Printing Press under the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, School.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER, To whom it may Concern.
MY Intention, is not to expose Physic, but those who have done it: They are
indeed of the Faculty, and I am sorry for it. The Twelve tho Select, yet had
One Traitor among them; and is it strange that a greater Number should contain
a less Proportion of Unworthy? Whoever reproacheth an Art for the Crime of an
Artist, condemns his own; for none is Exempt: He that charge me with another
Fault, is as guilty as my self of the Fact, and justly of the Slander. But if I
must suffer in my Art, whilst publicly opposing the Censors Violence; it is by
Ends, not true Judgment must be the Occasion. They have acted ill; what is that
to the Faculty or College? Suppose Four of it had jointly been Felons, must all
the rest be Thieves? They have indeed exposed the College, but originally by
Passion; they persist in their Injustice, supported by Pride: But some do the
same with an Intent to destroy it. They have evidenced their Spite against
one, show their Teeth at some few: But others strike at All, whether in or
against their Interest. What mean else those Libels publicly dispersed to the
disgrace of the Faculty? The Authors ridicule Physicians; a pretty Way to
secure themselves from Contempt: They are extremely just to themselves, whilst
injust to the Art they pretend to, and as qualified for Wit and Railery, as the
late Censors were for their Office. It Is mere Baregarding Stuff, like that of
the pretended great defender of an Art he near learned, tho ever teaching it. I
am sorry to see so great a Body buckle to one whose only endeavor is, by
indirect means to make himself Great, when justly he cannot. This knight Errant
in Physic, defends he knows not what; attacks he cannot tell whom; and hates
all but his Dulcigna, his sweet imaginary Greatness; has nothing of his own,
but what no One would claim: But this Plagiary Jackdaw may e're long be Plumed
by a Leaden Dr. it is wings clipped, and it is self exposed to the Contempt of
Boys; because it pretends to soar with the Eagles: There are notwithstanding,
and will be still honest Physicians of the College, in spite of all foreign
Oppositions, or intestine Broils. All Bodies, by the Instigation of some few
Boutefeus, may be guilty of Mismanagement; none are exempt from Fault: Pray
allow us but to be equally Obnoxious with the rest of Mankind. All then I
desire is, That there may be a difference put between the Innocent and Guilty,
as I have endeavored it in my Tract; which whether it will please you with the
Preface I know not: All will neither be pleasing to, nor understood by All: But
take it as you please to understand it: I shall soon be out of Pain; either by
slighting both Criticisms and Resentment, or by a speedy Answer.

September 26, School. Lysiponius Celer.

THE Late CENSORS Deservedly Censured, etc.
THE worthy Late Censors, after so many fruitless Attempts, to Exempt
themselves from the Justice of the Law; being baffled in all their
Applications, either to His Majesty, the Right Honorable the Lords, or other
inferior Courts and Persons; and finding that the more they stir, the more
they are bemir'd and stink: Have now at last, as their utmost Effort, bethought
themselves of the late Expedient of Popularity.

In Order hereunto, to support their tottering Credit and Cause, they oblige
the World with a single Sheet for three Pence; Entitled it as if addressed to
the highest Court of Justice: And being frustrated in all their Appeals, make
it now to the Mob, make them their Judges and Peers.

They take no Notice of their own Remarks upon the Prosecutors Reasons, nor of
his Reply; being ashamed of the One, and justly afraid of the other.

For that Reply, as it fully answers all their idle Pretenses, has been
satisfactory to the Lords and Commons; so cannot be answered, containing only
Matters of Fact, backed with irrefragable Reasons, and shrewd Circumstances;
confirmed by Oaths of Credible Persons: Which last, is the highest Argument of
Truth in any, but such, who to palliate their evident Injustice, have still,
this their only Recourse, to that Crambe biscocta, their Oaths and Consciences,
in Opposition to the Laws and Justice of the Nation.

Furthermore, being fully convinced, that no One of the Late Censors could
endite even so silly a Paper as I am about to Answer, for reasons best known to
them that know them; I was at last forced to conclude, that it must be the
Product of a Noddle ever tipsy with Good-Ale, and Brains still crowing by the
seminal Influence of some hundreds of Eggs devoured Anno Vertente, which unless
checked by Cortex and Opium, had e're now grown fledged: Especially if you
consider the Style, so like that of the public betrayer of the State, Maxims
and Secrets of the College, and to use his own Words so inimical to Truth and
Sincerity, more then (in his own great Sense) unprepared Cantharides can be to
the Body.

Yet retaining some Respect to their seeming Gravity and qualifying Sadness,
though now out of the Santo Officio, not coopt up in the Inquisition Chamber,
but breathing the free Air as yet; I waited and sought in the public Papers a
required Recantation: This three Penny Sheet, as well as the two Penny State of
Physic, Meriting at least an equivocating Denial. But seeing now they own it,
and their sour Temper cannot be altered, and continues nettled at good usage;
they must be crushed to make them inoffensive, seeing they Sting when tenderly
handled.

And though that Paper deleterious to it self does, like other Poisons, carry
it is own Antidote with it, answering it self by it is own Nonsense,
Contradictions and Falsehood, to any unbiassed Reader that has been informed of
this Affair; yet for the sake of those that are distant from Town, and out of
the reach of their Heptamiliary Quondam Power, I thought to foul my Fingers,
anatomize it exactly, and expose it (as it justly deserves) in the Public
Theater of England, to the View and Scorn of all.

But finding, though without any accurate Search, That the principal consistent
Parts are, 1. Contradiction. 2. Falsehood. 3. Ignorance. 4. Ill Manners. 5. Like
Conduct. Yet all so complicated, as to make but One entire Gordian Knot of
Nonsense; it needs not be dissected now I think on it, it merits not so great a
Hand: But seeing it is roundly covered with a limber Conscience, blown up with
Bombast, and got amongst the Mob, let it e'ne be kicked about, till it be
deservedly lost.

The 1st. of the Reasons they pretend to Answer is the following Reason;

First, Because the said Censors did not only take upon them an Office of Trust
and Judicial Authority, wherein the Liberty and Property of the Subject is
highly concerned without qualifying themselves, but also executed the same with
utmost Violence against an innocent Person, as may more plainly appear in their
Proceedings against Dr. John Greenfield, a Member of the said College, who
having been accused by a vexatious Woman of ill Practice several Years before
was twice acquitted by preceding Censors: But these Gentlemen proud of their
Authority, and having no regard to the Justice and Judgment of their
Predecessors, and in Contempt of two consecutive Acts of Grace from the King
and Parliament, did, notwithstanding, fine the abovesaid Dr. Greenfield for
that imaginary Crime, without suffering the said Doctor to clear himself by
Witnesses; and having signed a Warrant and appointed an Officer of their own
Creation, did commit him to Newgate without Bail or Main-prize, and there
detained him till the first Day of the ensuing Term, when and where the
Honorable the Judges of the King's Bench convinced them of their illegal
Proceedings and discharged the said Dr. Greenfield in open Court.

To this they reply, that it is a Malicious Charge, drawn up and published
against the Censors of the College of Physicians [who] took no Authority upon
themselves, but what is vested in them by two Acts of Parliament, etc. The
present Censors having qualifyed themselves, and the rest, since the including
Act of Grace acting inoffensively; the present cannot, the former need not fear
a Prosecution. The Prosecutors Charge is solely against the late, named in the
Reasons and Title of this Tract; which Charge as it is true, cannot be
Malicious, and not against any Censors, but those that were so, now only
Censorious, with that indeleble Character I hope: But if their biennial Power,
be perpetuated in their Conceit, and once a Censor must e're be so; let them
e'ne be still the Kings of Branford, let them imagine the Power of the two Acts
to be vested in them, appropriated to their Persons, and inseparable from their
Quality; whilst they are deservedly out of that Place, Power and Trust they
have so notoriously abused: But Morta la Bestia, morto lo Veleno; let them
rattle with their Tails, their Fang-teeth are out. Yet though their Anthority
be gone, their Sense continues the same. They boast of a great Power vested by
Law; but no Trust at all; deny the taking of an Office upon them, but own they
are chosen into, and accept of the Place; think themselves warranted by two
Acts of Parliament in the executing of a Power, in Contempt of Four others: I
mean the Two of Grace, and both the qualifying Acts. But they must be taught,
that the Law requires a Series of uninterrupted Justice. You err not knowing
the Law, for whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one Point,
he is guilty of all, etc. Is it Law that gives you leave to Imprison? The same
commands you to qualify. The same Justice that relieves the Oppressed, ought to
punish the Guilty; and though you boast the Law cannot reach you, the
Legislators may. Ponite inflatos tumidosque vultus; quicquid a vob is Minor
extimescit, Major hoc idem Dominus minatur.

Next they allege, that the Censors are solemnly Sworn, not to consent to
admit any Person into the College, but such, whom without favor, or affection,
they shall judge to be duly qualified, both for Learning and Morals, That they
will approve no Person nor Medicine for Reward, Favor or Entreaty, but will in
all things discharge the Duty faithfully, as God shall help them.

A solemn Oath is a sacred Tie and Motive to Justice; but where this is
wanting, that always aggravates the Crime, can never justify the Action.
Finding then, that a gentle Rebuke in general Terms will not avail, viz. that
of the former Reply, That their Oath was not binding to act illegally, and
where it does so, the Constitution is faulty; a severer Lash must stop this
full mouthed Cry upon a wrong Scent. Dr. Greenfields Learning and Morals were
approved when he entered the College, he was balletted for as well as any of
you, admitted upon as good Terms as any, has the same Diploma, Privileges,
and Authority to Practice: This was done to your Hands by more impartial
Judges; and so far the recital of your Oath is insignificant. But seeing it is
not this, pray tell us what Oath it was that bound you, to reassume the
Cognizance of an Affair twice determined before, by the same Authority; to
commit the Innocent, when you were disabled by two Acts of Parliament to act so
by a Criminal; to declare that a Poison when given by Dr. Greenfield with its
due Corrector, which must be a harmless Medicine, because given by two of you
Censors without an Antidote; to refuse the admitting of Witnesses, which were
afterward satisfactory to a superior Court; to deny the Trial of his
Corrector upon other Animals; to exact the utmost Farthing the Law allowed you;
to fine and imprison too, a Collegiate, in an unpresidented Manner; to send him
to Newgate for the first Offense (as in your great Wisdoms you thought) when
choice of Prisons of less Scandal might serve, to be deaf when entreated not to
do it. 'T was of you Dr. Burwel he begged it, upon your immediate return from
the House of God, the House of Prayer. Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites, etc. This last it was, first caused my Blood to boil, now sowers
my Temper, Irarumque omnes effundit Habenas; and made me almost forget to ask
you, whether you did Swear too not to qualify your selves? I believe if you
can give your selves leave to re-examine this Affair sedately, you will find it
the Result of Passion, Envy, Ambition and By-ends. Passion in Dr. T -- e upon a
former Peak: Ambition in the Bencher-fellows to curb and oppress the more
Serviceable and Active by Arbitrary Laws; Envy for want of Practice and
Success: By-ends shall be Secret as yet. It Is so Dr. G -- ll, though you should
exert to the utmost your now single Capacity, register the Contrary, and
silence me with your Ratio prima and ultima: I do not mean the thundering Mawl
against a Protest at the College Board; but your customary Nonononono, with a
Jove-like disgust, and a Conclusive-shake of the Nodle in a Demiquaver. Expect
then the just Reward of your Pains, but no Favor at all; unless your
Adversaries be prevailed upon by Entreaty; for they must discharge their Duty
faithfully, and help your selves as you can.

Next you multiply your Power by a Piecemeal Recital. I Will please you for
once, and allow it as great in it self, as it has been enormous in the
Execution, Cuidam illic seritun and metitur, it is a noli me tangere at present:
But be pleased to remind, that almost the whole of it is in the quoted Charter,
it is only confirmed by the annexed and subsequent Acts; and why are the due
Qualifications omitted, to which that Power is annexed. Let us examine you a
little, though not now at the Censors board. Were you Profound, Sad, Discreet,
well versed in Learning and deeply skilled in Physic: You Will say perhaps, these
Epithets, are requisite in Persons to be admitted into that Society, not in the
Censors that govern the same, according to the express Words of the Law. The
Fact I shall not dispute; but certainly they are to be chosen out of such, and
continue the same. The 1 st. indeed may be allowed; for your Sense is out of
the reach of, disproportionate to, and incommensurate with that of the rest of
Mankind. Sad you are in the present acceptance of the Word, your Actions show
you such, and the present fear of a due Reward, does and will make you no
other. But now in sober Sadness, what is become of the Third? Were you Discreet
in not qualifying your selves, if it were but only to prevent the Charges of an
assuredly wrong Prosecution, since your piece meal Loyalty was such, that the
Omission of it you count but a Peccadillo. The present Censors got here the
Start of you, and triumph over your Ignorance. It was no doubt the greatest
Discretion imaginable, to Commit a Brother for Mala Praxis, yea very great Mala
Praxis as the Judicious Go -- le expressed it at the Board, the giving of
Poison I mean, when some of your selves were guilty of the same; Guilty I say,
in your own Consciences, because you condemned it in another; though he be
Innocent, having proved himself so in the Superior Court: But this is not all,
had this Affair remained within the College and Newgate Walls, and not been
exposed by you so often in the Public Courts, enforced by repeated Libels,
spread amongst the Mob, persisted in to the utmost in Opposition to the Sense
of Mankind, and Contempt of definitive Justice; it might have been pardoned.
Humanum est errare, in Errore persistere Diabolicum. But again to push it more
home, though in milder Terms, you will say he was Fined and Imprisoned, for not
duly executing the Practice of Physic; but who was it Gentlemen? A Graduate
Doctor, your fellow Collegiate, unquestionable when admitted, and continued so
for many Years, till it pleased you to have it otherwise. Reflect upon it, I
pray, as the rest of Mankind to my knowledge does now: What Physician shall we
trust, when neither his being of the College does warrant his Skill, nor his
continued Practice approve his Judgment in Administering? Whom shall we except,
when all are liable to the same Mistakes? This does not only affect you, but
the whole Faculty of Physic, however diffused, divided or distinguished in
this Famous City, and through the Universe. Would the least Mechanic Society
have acted so publicly against a single Member, if his exposing tended to the
Disrepute of all the Rest: For tho the Character of an honest Physician be in
it self real, where is there a Fence against Suspicion; though groundless when
started, it is Flight and Pitch is uncertain; and you only can be Exempt when at
the Board, and that only in your own Conceit, not decisive Judgment. Dat
Veniam Corvis, vexat Censura Columbas.

Your great Discretion has ruined one Part of your Imaginary Power, by your
Parties countenancing, and you mainly promoting that turbulent Woman's Suit
against the Doctor. Pray startle not at what you know as well as my self, I
shall prove it to others anon. You have opened the Eyes of the Mob, and the
Floodgates of the Law against you. Can the President be secure in his Place,
or the Censors by their boasted Power, from being either arraigned at the Bar
as Malefactors, or Sued at the King's Bench as Unskilful; and that at the
Choice of the Multitude? A pretended Mistake, or an unforeseen Accident upon a
single Dose of Physic, exposes a Physicians Person, Reputation and Estate, to
the Discretion of others avowedly Ignorant, of what you have made them Judges.
We know what you told your Council, when dissuaded from this Pernicious Course
by the Example of all other Societies. It must be done, else the College would
be undone. Peribo si non faxo, si faxo vapulavero.

Your Power is too Great, not to be managed but by Persons thoroughly versed in
the Law: Yet you will stretch it beyond it is due Bounds, and expose it by your
Actions to be canvassed by those, who are justly Jealous of it. You will not
submit to the Decision of the Four Chiefs; but what think you of Royal
Visitation? Are you Exempt from that too? May not a Quo Warranto be just and
necessary in this Reign, whatever it has been in the Former? Your Party
promoted it under the Late, and will you not submit to it under the Present.
Tute hoc tibi intrivisti, tibimet hoc exedendum est.

But lastly, seeing this Enormous Power, does so widely incompass all the
Jurisdictions of the greatest City in Europe; it was hoped your Ambition would
have soared no higher. No, your Discretion drives some of you to Hartford, to
worry the Ingenious Coatsworth; your Designs round the Circuits (as you were
told) to hang Physic out of the Way: Had not the clacking Capit-alian Goo --,
that Crepitante Ciconia Rostro, prevented by its Noise the intended Mischief,
discovered the Towering G -- ls; and the Jury disbeliev'd the Depositions, that
Gentlemen might have rotted in Prison, without Bail or Main-prize till the next
Assizes, to serve your Turn; that you might Alleviate one Crime, by committing
another.

I have done as well as your selves with your Discretion, your Learning and
deep Skill in Physic, will not seem much greater when thoroughly canvassed, as
it shall be in some Measure in its proper Place.

You excuse your omitting of being Qualified, because this Neglect did not
proceed from any Error of [your] Will. This being occasioned partly by the
Practice of the former Censors, who never qualified themselves for that
Employment; and partly by Advice of your Council (three of the Great Practicers
of this Age) who were of Opinion that the Censors were not comprehended in the
said Act, it being no Place of Profit, or Crust, nor by Commission immediately
from the King, nor such as concerned the Public Government, but did only
relate to a due Regulation of the Practice of Physic in London and seven
Miles, which by the Laws of the Kingdom is Entrusted in [your] Hands, [you]
being the most proper Judges of the same.

If it was not an Error of the Will, it was a filthy one of the Judgment; But
why not of the Will, when you would not hearken to the grave Advice of the
Learned Bernard: Who told you the danger of the contrary, and spurred you on to
your Duty, by his own Example. No, you thought to shelter your selves amidst
the Multitude, by a Power paramount, as you deemed to the rest of the Law.
There is but two Setts of you that are Obnoxious, the rest safe by the
including Act of Grace; but does a multitude of Offenders lessen the Crime, it
may prompt Mercy to spare the less Guilty. The most Turbulent in a Sedition,
the Ringleaders of a Faction, are always justly punished; though the seduced Mob
may be spared, because they were so; and in a Rebellious Regiment, where One
and All seem equally Guilty, Decimation is not only Just, but Merciful. Will
you make the World believe, that either that True Oracle of the Law Sr. Cr.
Levinz, or the Judicious and Popular Sr. Barth, or the Equitable Sr. Thomas,
would ever induce you to run the hazard of so severe a Lash of the Law, when as
you say, you were already qualified by piecemeal; so not Conscience, but an
unaccountable Capriccio could hinder the Total. Why was not their Advice
produced when demanded before the Attorney General? No, you did here, as in Gr
-- ds Commitment, and would fain mend your selves, as you endeavored to do the
Warrant ex post Facto. Post est occasio Calva.

Your Profit indeed as worthily managed, together with the College Stock, but
small; but upon Examination of Persons to be admitted Certain. The Perquisits
sometimes very great. Surely your boastingly Great Power requires the like
Trust in the Persons Entrusted therewith. Your Great Sense owns the Verb, not
the Noun, the full meaning of the Word, but not the Word it self. Should a
Common-councilman argue, that he was chosen for, and represents only a private
Precinct; would that Exempt him from a due Qualification? But your Power is
more extensive then Health and Sickness. The Collegiate Physicians, and all
other Practitioners, Apothecaries, Naval and Resident Surgeons, and Druggists
are under your immediate Inspection, pray cast them up and tell us how many
Thousand they are.

This Law would be a very pretty Barrier here, against the universally
incroaching Popery; when Persons so vastly Entrusted, if they will not, need
not qualify themselves; or pick and chose when, how far, and what Part of
that Law they are pleased to satisfy. Pray read but the Preamble to your
Original Charter, and you will find, that your Power being so extensive, your
Capacity, Care and Skill ought to have been proportionate. His Majesty indeed
has not been pleased to take any Notice of you as to Favor, but has already
in Displeasure, and it is hoped he will curtail your Ambition, and clipp the
Wings of your towering Pride: but how much and whatever you have, is originally
derived from, and confirmed by his Royal Predecessors. Judges you were, but how
Proper, your Actions have already, the Law has and will determine it.

Next you deny, that you executed your Office with the utmost Violence, against
an Innocent Person, and Member of the College; call this and the former Charges
against [you] notorious Untruths; are surprised how the Author durst Print and
Publish them, and impudently deliver them to the most high and celebrated Court
of Judicature in this Kingdom; the Doctor having been proved Guilty of Ill
Practice in a very high Degree, before the President and Censors.

I answer that you are doubly Guilty of what you deny here; because the Doctor
was doubly Innocent 1st, in the Eye of the Law, Rectus in any Curia by the Act
of Grace, tho he had been never so Guilty before: 2ly, as to Matter of Fact,
having proved himself so in the open Court. Therefore the Author durst Print
and Publish this and the former Charges against you, durst deliver it to the
Right Honorable the Lords and Commons, dares Publish it again and prove it at
any time; as he would have then, if you durst have Challenged him, or dare to
do it still. As for Impudence e'ne let that be shared amongst those, who openly
dare in the Face of the World to Challenge the Judgment of my Lord Chief
Justice, and the Honestly of the Jury, who sound upon Oath the Doctor not to be
Guilty of Ill Practice to any Degree. They acquitted him of what you condemned
him, yet both were equally Sworn to do Right; it is not now a mere Error in you,
you persist in your Judgment and condemn him still. Who, I pray, is now Guilty
of what I dare not name. You may go on in your Defiance, but never prosper long
in Opposition to Justice: She has indeed Leaden Heels, especially when clogged
by you, and hindered in her Course, but you may at last (as you deserve) feel
her Iron Hands.

Next you own the Doctor a Member of the College of Physicians (having a
License granted him to Practice Physic) but then his admission was granted on
these Conditions, Quam diu se been gesserit, and statuta Collegii observaverit;
and Solutiones debitas praestiterit. All which Conditions he has notoriously
Violated, having proved a very factious, turbulent and disobedient Member to
that Honorable Society, etc.

The Doctor is indeed a Member of the College; his Diploma is his License, and
yours is no more, because all one with his: His Admission the same as, his
Behavior better then yours in the Eye of the World, because adjudg'd so by
Law. But seeing you persist in abusing both Words and Persons, I must inform
you, That a Licenciat in any Faculty, is as great in other Countries, as a
simple Fellow looks little in this. If he has violated any Conditions, you
were notoriously Imprudent, in not charging him with the True, but condemn him
for an Imaginary Crime. Out with it Gentlemen, General Words will not do in
Law, Deceit is generally couched under them. Well then, is it Ill Practice? He
is cleared of that; it is not in him, but in you toward him. Is It want of
Respect, in not submitting to you at the Censors board, and acknowledging his
Crime? He beggs your Pardon for that, and thinks your Demand insolent,
especially in the present Conjuncture. Is It because he will not furnish you
with Money, to defend your Injustice toward him? He thinks he is not bound in
Justice to do it; especially you having been so remiss of Late, in levying that
Imposition upon him and his Fellow Licenciates. Pray take Example by the
Prosecutor, and be as Industrious in settling the special Verdict in Dr.
Peaches Case, as the Prosecutor has been in that against one of you. You are
at a Stand; and so is Dr. Greenfield with the rest, not knowing whether they
have not paid too much in their Wrong already; and whether a Repetundarum does
not lie against you? I mean a small Bill in Equity, for illegal Exactions and
undue Expenses. Recrimination is no Purgation in you. Have you your selves
performed the Conditions requisite in Just Censors? The Doctor and Prosecutor
believes not, and make bold to tell you still, notwithstanding your late
Rhodomontados, and that almost in your own Latin, Quod vos non been gesseritis,
nec statuta Regni observaveritis, solutiones utrique debit as praestabitis. I
hope you may understand this Latin in time, tho the Licenciats cannot yours.

A Ternary of Epithets brings up the Rear of this Clause. Dr. Greenfield is
Turbulent, Factious and Disobedient. Not the first, even when repeatedly
troubled to no Purpose: Factious he cannot be, because he joins with the greater
and better Part of the College, against the Ambition and Impositions of the
Contrary. Nor Disobedient, because submissive even to an unjust Sentence. You
on the contrary, are Honest, Just and Impartial. Honest, for committing him in
Opposition to Law. Just, but not to him certainly, nor your selves neither.
Impartial, in exposing your selves, the College and the whole Faculty, to
Derision, needless Suits and Contempt: this I suppose, is not your Judgment at
present, but will be so, and is to those of a better.

You say farther, that the Doctor unjustly complains of his Treatment, the same
being (as he says) executed with the utmost Violence; that it is so far from
Truth, that on the contrary he was treated with all the Fairness and Kindness
which any Member of that, or any other Corporation, could expect or reasonably
desire, as will appear by the following Account of true Matter of Fact.

Dr. Greenfield does and may justly Complain of your Violence; but here you
mistake the Person, it is the Prosecutors Charge against you, and if you come
off o'nt no better else where, then by your Excuses here, you may be as kindly
treated as the Doctor, and kinder too, because a Prison of less Scandal may
serve. You were not used in the Public Court, as the Doctor in yours; you were
fairly heard, and the Prosecutor chose your own Friends to be Evidence against
you. There remains now but a fair Retaliation of Kindness, and that with an
advantageous Compliment if you please to accept it, in Token of Gratitude. May
you be doubly repaid. But if your great Kindness cannot be refused, and those
lately incorporated amongst your kind selves, are doubly bound to accept it,
whenever you please to offer it; I Would e'ne advise them rather to give you a good
piece of Plate for a Conge, then be over loaded by your Graces.

If the Matter of Fact be drawn out of the lasting Records of Dr. G -- ll; I
must crave leave to tell him, that he is out in both his Capacities: viz. In
relating the Matter as Register; and condemning the Doctor for the Fact as
Censor; his naturally precipitate Haste hurried him on to Puni^nd', without
Examinand'; and now to relate the Affair without Recognoscend'.

You say, the first Year upon Accusation of the Husband, etc. the Doctor was
out of Town, and so not heard in his own Defense. The second Year the Complaint
being renewed, was condemned unanimously by the Four Censors, but not Fined or
Committed, because one of the Censors, contrary to his Duty, refused to sign
the Warrant. The third Year, he was unanimously found Guily again, but was not
committed, because one of the Censors was called out of Town, and another
obliged to keep his Chamber with a tedious Fit of the Gout. The fourth Year,
upon a fresh Complaint, he was found Guilty of Ill Practice, and Fined and
Committed without Bail, or Main-prize to Newgate, etc.

The Account as here stated, is both Improbable and highly Mysterious. 1st,
That the Fact being Committed in 1692, the Affair should not be determined till
the 6th Year after in 1697. 2ly, That the Woman notwithstanding her continual
Torments should not seek for a Re dress in almost two Years. 3ly, That her
Friends should complain but once a Year. 4ly, That this weighty Affair, should
have but one Day in a Year allowed toward it Decision. 5ly, That when the
Doctor was dismissed (as was Sworn in Court by Doctor Collins) the Reason
should be, because one of the Censors, tho he Condemned him according to his
Oath, yet refused to Punish him contrary to his Duty. 6ly, That upon another
Arraignment and Condemnation, the Doctor should escape unpunishd, because One of
the Censors was called out of Town (that very Minute ^ suppose, and must be
Absent the whole remainder of the Year) so hastily, that he could not set his
Hand to the Warrant; and another at the same time luckily taken with the Gout
in his Toe, so that he was not able to stir his Fingers, so much as to set his
Mark. The Doctor was indeed, after so many Jeopardies, condemned to purpose at
last, by Men regardless of Magna Charta, and outstripping the Inquisition it
self; but I hope they will be convinced, that either a Gout, or an Absence for
a whole Year, had been less prejudicial to the Affairs and Persons then, etc. I
shall forbear to unriddle these Mysteries, till Mr. Bolton's Book against Dr.
Greenfield comes out, under the auspicious Conduct and Influence of Dr.
Goodale; and at present give you only some Hints. It was about this time Mr.
Clunn was a trotting about with his pretended Patients, in order to turn the
Tedious and Expensive Illicita, into a speedily Gainful Mala Praxis; the
Committy was then settling; the Censors modelling; new Laws forging, Oaths and
Bonds imposing: In short, Parturiebant Montes; and Dr. Greenfield was thought
as yet not so Great an Offender, till he refused to be shopt in the Repository,
and protested against the Laws imposed: Then, a'd Terrorem, he was made an
Example, others very Eminent were to follow his Fate.

But suppose the six Sets of Censors had unanimously Condemned him for that
Fact, he was afterward honorably Acquitted of, upon a full Hearing by a
superior Court: let the World Judge; whether the Dishonor of so Foul an Act,
should not solely and wholly have belonged to those his Partial, Ignorant and
Prejudiced Judges, who, by that Means and in such Numbers, had exposed
themselves, and the whole Faculty, to the Contempt of the Universe.

You own further your Ignorance of the Doctors being comprehended in the Kings
General Pardon, [your] Lawyers having never hinted any such thing to [you],
neither did the Doctor plead any Acts of Grace when summoned before [you], etc.

Bless me what kind of Judges are these, that plead their Ignorance of the Law,
as an Excuse of their acting against it! This was not a single, private,
absolete Act, but an Universal one repeatedly passed in Parliament, since the
pretended Fact was committed. It Is very strange you should be Ignorant of
obvious Laws, when so curiously Nice in the Terms, as to be able to
distinguish, between four Men who are the Censors, and four Censors who are the
Men, in the Specicial Verdict. But if all of the four Censors, and those of the
more numerous Committee, continued invincibly Ignorant of what was known to the
very Mob: I wonder it should escape the Studious Observations of the Industrious
Go -- le, who, Propria Voluntate and mero Motu suis, without any Pension from
the State, has been Epitomizing all the News Papers. You do both injustly, and
in vain Charge the Learned in the Law, with such a gross Ignorance. Advice not
asked cannot be given, and if given, is to no purpose when never taken: Had you
not so much as a Hint of this, when you opposed violently the Doctors
Discharge. Pray ask Pardon of your Council for so signal an Affront; and be
pleased to remember that you are a Court, before which Pardons are required to
be pleaded.

Reason Second, These Censors not being satisfied with the designed Ruin of
this Doctor and Family, proceeded to effect it (according to the opinion of
most People) by stirring up and assisting the aforesaid turbulent Woman to
bring an Action of 2000 Pounds against the said Doctor, which was carried on to
an Expense far above the Ability of the Woman, and backed it by Libels
published in their Name. But upon Trial before the Right Honorable the Lord
Chief Justice Holt, the said Doctor was honorably acquitted, and his Practice
vindicated, allowed of an commended by a great Number of the most eminent
Physicians of the said College, it plainly appearing that Ignorance, not
Judgment, was the cause of that Censure, and Envy for want of Success by the
same Medicine they condemned the said Doctor for, it being proved in Court that
some of them had made use of it before.

This Second Charge (you say) is highly unjust [you] having been no further
concerned, then as Witnesses Subpaena'd. And as to the publishing Libels in
[your] Names, it is so notoriously false, that you only vindicated your Honor
and Justice against an Impudent and Scandalous Advertisement, published to
defame [you].

I must now rake up this shameful Affair, being forced to it by your no better
Denial. This Woman (one of the looser Gang of Pedlars, that offer good
Pennyworths of Muslin, under pretense of a Seamans Covert Baron and Long Reach)
lay Perdu for about six Years, to regain her forty Shillings; and seeing her
yearly Applications to consecutive Censors, were not prevalent to cause the
Doctor to refund, what he but too dearly earned; though she found her Partisans
baffled, and the Doctor discharged by the Judges; yet thought (forsooth) to
jump into an Estate, by such a favorable Opportunity, and commenced a Suit of
2000 l. against the Doctor, but unluckily it was some time after he had brought
his, in the like Sum against the Censors, for false Imprisonment. This was a
plain design to quash both the Actions, there being no Overplus to be contended
about in either: But the Doctor thought it Unreasonable; she goes on and puts
him to the Expense of 50 l. by dilatory Courses; Summons the Censors to give
Evidence in what they had Condemned before on her behalf, influenceth their
numerous Party, (more then ever were seen in any Court) to defend her Cause
tooth and nail, and at last upon the Verdict against her, pays the Costs as
soon as demanded. Do you think all the World is at Blindmansbuff; and every one
you see at Ecco lo Cieco, and your selves under Covert cause winking? No, Dr.
Burwells menial Servant, that poor addicated Officer of yours John Cole, has
related the Fact to an Eminent Physician, a little before his own Death: That
by an express Command of your Attorney, he waited on Mr. Ambrose, and conducted
him to that Woman's House, in order to commence that Suit. All the World has
reason to believe you were the Principals, she only Accessory. The Doctor still
reserves a Cardinal Evidence in Petto, till his numerous Scruples, about a
Maintenance of a Suit, Champeatie, and Common Barretrie, are fully satisfied.
Now I shall readily grant you, that the Advertisement you speak of, was
Impudent and Scandalous, and lying as to Matter of Fact; but I must acquaint
the World, that neither the Doctor, nor any of his Friends I am sure, had any
Hand in it. The Author was a Professor but no Doctor; a noisy Pamphletier; that
spark of flashy Nonsense; your worthy Antagonist, and fit Match for
Controversy: You may easily know him, whether he Speaks or Writes, Prays or
Rail's it is all one. Piscis a Capite foetet.

But you were in Torment, pray any Tooth good Barber; drowning in Spite,
caught at Grass, any Ansa, any thing to pull in poor Greenfield. You published
a Scandalous Answer, to a Scandalous Advertisment; whereby you doubly abuse the
Innocent: For you might as easily have traced the Author of this, as he the
Messenger to the Press of yours. I must tell you for once; the Doctor is so
confident of the Justice of his Cause, that notwithstanding your numerous
Libels, he has writ nothing as yet but his Book in Latin. The Reasons and
Remarks, you dare not attack, are the Prosecutors; who has hitherto exposed
you but moderately, notwithstanding your Injustice be the very Basis of his
Informations; he could do it no otherwise, then by vindicating the Doctor: As
by Justice he was, and in Justice he ought to be. Rumpantur ut Ilia Codris.

You had indeed some show of a Pretense to answer, but no Cause to revile a
declared Innocent. But pray did you not Libel him previously to all this, while
he lay at your Mercy, your Prisoner in Newgate, both for the pretended Crime
and the imposed Fine. Was not that enough? But you must immediately give the
World an Account, that he was committed to Newgate for Ill Practices, in the
Plural, without specifying for What. None but those that were acquainted with
your Constitution and Injustice, could imagine it less then Felony: Debt it
could not be because of that Expression: Nor for the Fine; that was never
demanded. You remember no doubt Dr. Burwell, when you were not named, and
scarcely affronted by the Learned Loss; what horrid Labor you were in for a
Year, before you could be delivered of a Female Child at one Throw, by the
Midwifery of a Letter; your Voluminous Book you mean, in Answer to six Lines
that touched you: Be pleased to look in your Epistle Dedicatory, and amidst the
broody Metaphors and teeming Allegories, you will find these Words. Yea and
although in the Case of a particular Person, Physicians may differ in their
Opinion, and perhaps each think he has all the Reason on his side, yet it is
very Base for either of these to begin to print the Case, and Condemn the
other, were he never so Guilty. And why so? Certainly because it exposes the
Faculty, as well as the Person. But though you were in the wrong, you both
condemned and printed first with a Witness: Every time you have published, may
be deemed the First; because the Doctor has not answered you as yet. Your
being a Judge or Censor will not do: Neither Oath, nor Discretion, bound you to
Print any thing. I hope you were a Physician then; and if so, I leave you to
think of the Adjective you use. (...) you are.

Now we will go on to the Matter of Fact, as by you related. The Doctor brought
the said Woman thirty six Grains of Cantharides, to be taken to Cure an Ulcer
of the Bladder, whereof she took thirty Grains in 12 Hours, upon which ensued,
First, great Pains and Torments with bloody Urine; and then voyding of several
Quarts of perfect Blood, with Skins and Flesh That shecontinued twenty two
Weeks in great Torment, etc.

The Truth of this, as it was declared and proved in Court, when the Doctor
cast this Woman, or the Censors rather; is the following, viz. Upon the Doctors
extraordinary Success in curing Ulcers in the Bladder, by the Cantharides
(which is a Distemper hitherto accounted incurable), he was recommended by some
of his former Patients to this Person, and found her troubled with it, and a
Scyrrhus in the Vagina Uteri and Cancerous Piles withal; he sends her eighteen
of the Pills, with their Corrector Camphire separately; but with positive
Orders not to take them but in his Presence, in order to give more or less, as
the Case upon particular Signs should require: She impatient of Delays, takes
some of them in his Absence, and without the Corrector, upon which some Pains
and bloody Water ensued; but no more then what is but too usual, upon the bare
applying of a Blister. The Doctor being sent for in haste, chides her, but
takes off the Pains and bloody Water immediately; sends her into the Country,
and attends almost daily upon her, for his forty Shillings. Not one ill Word
against the Doctor all this while, all the Clamor was against Mrs. Salloway
the Midwife; who cleared her self from injuring the Person, by Doctors
Coatsworth and Gibson called in, they finding then Cancerous Piles were the
Cause of her Pains, for the Ulcer was gone. This Clamor being obviated, the
Doctor was thought on about two Years after, at the Instigation of one of the
Censors, whom the Doctor had exasperated, as he easily will be. The Doctor
being cleared; the Woman musters up her tattered Crew to Swear that horrid
Nonsense, produces the Affidavits; the Censors Condemn him upon them; the
Court of Kings Bench upon impartial hearing Acquits him of the Fact.

This being so, you are egregiously out both as to Fact, and the Nature of the
Thing, 1st, That above thirty Grains of corrected Cantharides, have been given
by the Doctor with Success, both before and since his Commitment, was fully
proved in Court. 2ly, Notwithstanding what the Woman's Evidence Swore, it
appeared as plain, by their contradiction, and the time of taking, that she
took less then fifteen Pills. 3ly, It was evident by the Doctors constant
Practice in attending, that it was against his Order she took any, it was at
her Peril she did it, and ought to have fared worse. 4ly, Those that know the
Symptoms upon the giving of Cantharides, will tell you, that 1st. there ensues
a plentiful discharge of Urine, then a desire to make Water with a less
quantity of it; next, Strangury; lastly, bloody Water with Pains; but Perfect
Blood never: Experience and Famous Authors declare this expressly: I will not
now Name them, but may e're long. By the Flesh they mean (I suppose) the
Sphincter Vesicae, Nymphae, Clitoris, and the Labia Pudendi perhaps: by the
Skins the bits either of the Vagina or the Bladder it self, torn off in pieces
by these Venomous Animals, destructive to Life, inimical to Nature, Muliebris
they must mean. Egregious Anatomists, worthy ever to remain in the Theater, for
the perpetual improvement of that Art: Especially if you consider their Nice
Observations, as to the Number of the Quarts of Blood: Several they say. An
indefinite Quantity will bleed an Elephant to Death; and tho this Woman had
nine Lives like a Catt, and each of them sustained by a proportionate and
distinct Quantity of Blood, that Number must have destroyed her at last: But
she is still alive, and the better for the Doctor, as was proved in Court. It Is
a Cancerous Humor that attends her, and the Doctor beggs you his Seniors, to
take some pity upon her, and Cure her of this, as he did of the Ulcer, and
he will refund the forty Shillings: It Is worth your Pains Gentlemen, half an
Examination Fee, a whole Angel a piece. But this Several is set down to impose
upon All, being as wide as ones Fancy, and as uncertain, as your Judgment of
Things: It must then be restrained, and it moderately reaching from Four to the
Teens, we'll take the middle Number, and reduce it to Eight: Nay I Will bate you
two, and conclude it six by the Affidavit, as reported from you; which is about
fifteen Pounds of Blood, if you consider the difference of Troy and
Avoirdupoize, with that of the specific Gravity of the Blood, as distinct from
Water; the first being bulk for bulk heavier then the last. Perfect Blood you
say, that is the Red Mass, without the Mixture of the Serum, which is the
transparent and fluid Substance, wherein the other, or wherewith if you please,
is naturally carried, and diluted in the Vessels: This distinct from the bloody
Water, and the preceding plentiful Urine, was measured like Size, I suppose, to
find the Account. Now it having been agreed amongst the Anatomists, that the
Quantity of Blood in Men, is from sixteen to twenty four Pounds Troy, by which
Blood they mean, the red Substance and the Serum together, as they both
circulate in the Vessels; and the Proportion of the One to the other being
almost Equal; this Woman must have lost, and that in twelve Hours time, at
least thirty Pounds of Blood; if you consider the bloody Water too: Which must
be six Pounds more then any one could have; and yet she was better the next day
then before, and alive to this.

That Perfect Blood, as they call it, must be here distinct from the Serum, I
will prove by the following Arguments.

First, This Perfect Blood, came after the bloody Urine, consequently distinct;
it must be taken from the bottom of the former, and is the coagulated Red Mass:
For the rest was Urine, tho bloody besure.

Secondly, This monstrous Excretion of Blood, being originally caused by a
Diuretic, must first cause a plentiful evacuation of Urine; which is nothing
but the Serum having past the Kidneys; next bloody Urine, that is the Red Mass
broke by, and diluted in the Serum: Now if you mind the Gradation, the Third,
that is the Perfect Blood, must be the Red Mass subsiding, fluid when excreted,
but coagulating after and settling to the bottom, and so measured; or else
where is there a distinction between the Second and Third.

Thirdly, If it were not so, the just Proportion between the Red Mass and the
Serum, could not be known; and so not Sworn to: Especially if you consider the
Tagg-ragg and Bobtail, that made the Observation for you, and the Deposition
too.

Fourthly, This Poison, as you call it, working by separating the Parts of the
Blood, and not by coagulating the whole Fluid; the Serum separated, upon
Erosion of the Blood Vessels, imbibed as much Blood as it could retain; which
is the bloody Urine; the Residue that subsided, must be wholly devoy'd of it,
which is the Perfect Blood; fifteen Pounds in all of the Red Mass; which, with
thirteen Pounds of Serum, requisite to dilute it in the Vessels, makes twenty
eight: And ten to one, four more of both, our of the bloody Urine; makes thirty
two, Quod probandum erat. Yet this Heroic Virago fainted not at all, after so
enormous a loss of Blood.

Lastly, The same Witness that Swore to the Affidavit, deposed likewise in
Court, that that Blood was as sweet as a Rose; now if it had been mixed with the
Serum, after this had once passed the Kidneys, or the Bladder, it would
certainly have got a far different Scent, of kin to the Boutan Royal Snush,
and overflowing with the neighboring Perfumes.

But whatsoever Anatomists have said on this Subject, was merely conjectural:
comparative Anatomy, first (that I know of as to this Affair) instituted by Mr.
Boil, detects a great deal less Quantity of Blood in Men. He tried the
Experiment upon Sheep and other Animals, took the exact weight of the Blood
issuing, and of the Animal, which compared with that of Man, by a Synonymous
Rule, he found the Proportion to be but sixteen Pounds at most in any. You may
try it upon Goats, as my Friend has done, for the sake of the Experiment and
the Blood it self; and upon all imaginable Allowances, you will find this
Assertion true. Consequently then, this Woman by your veracious Account, voided
as much more of Blood, as she could have in her, besides what must of necessity
have circulated in the Vessels, and the habit of her Body, to sustain her Life.

Had you but considered the Menstrua; how careful Nature is in the Evacuation
of that, though superfluous Blood; how gradually she does it, in small quantities
and several days; tho then of no use to the Body, because it was intended for
another: What a small Excess is called Flooding, and accompanied with Fainting;
and a little greater endangers Life: Or but minded, what loss of Blood is Fatal
in Haemorrhagies, even discontinued for some Days: Or seen Executions by
Beheading: You would never have imposed upon the World such Nonsense. You
considered as much, the horrid Torments you talk of: Nature was then upon the
Rack, as you make us believe; which of it self, when her Flesh and Skins came
away by Bits, was more then enough to have destroyed this miserable Creature.
What will not an Exorbitant Spite do? When fired by Passion, in an
inconsiderate Subject. Any Body, any Thing, must be believed against
Greenfield; any Reproach true, if cast upon him. Quicquid in eum jecer is,
Pomum erit.

Be pleased to accept of these few Hints, for I design not to enlarge further
as yet. The Author I dare not Name, least he should prove to be one only
Licensed: An insignificant Wretch, proper quo ad hoc (what he is now about) fit
only to be despised, his offers disdained, and himself (poor Soul) expelled. As
to the Flesh and Skins, pretended to be voided withal; I cannot persuade my
self to expose you for it, as you justly deserve: I ll let it alone, till
further provoked by the Masterpiece of Dr. Goodal 's Creation.

To prove your Assertions, you boast of five Affidavits: You may have as many
Scores, if you please, and keep them for your private Use. The same Witnesses
that attested these, were examined upon Oath in Court; and either retracted
what they had Sworn before, by not alleging what you here assert; or were not
believed in what they there deposed: They were not then before you, but before
a just Judge and an honest Jury; who minded as well the Credibility of the
Witness, as the Possibility of the Thing it self: Or else, how could there have
been a point blank contrary Determination of this Affair? They cleared the
Doctor of the self same Fact you condemned him for, yet heard the same
Witnesses against him: But they had no Party to quell; no wild Designs to carry
on; no Person to hate; no Passion to satisfy, but that for Truth and Justice:
And they were upon their Oaths too, as well as your Worships; they talked not
indeed so much of, but acted according to them: But why was there so great a
Difference in the Sentence pronounced? I Will tell you. An Oath may be, and is
too often, only a loose Covert for By-ends, as the Party is biased by Interest
or Passion; as well as a fixed Tie to Truth, in Persons immoveably Just.

Next you seem to deny, that the Doctor was honorably acquitted, etc. by
replying. That it is true, that four Junior Physicians of the College, who
never arrived to the Honor or Dignity of Presidents, Elects or Censors, and
professed Malcontents to the said College, did endeavor to justify the Ill
Practice, by extenuating and excusing it; though none of them durst own, that
they had ever prescribed the Dose given by Dr. Groenvelt; neither could they
deny the Fatal Effects, which had frequently attended the Use of that bold and
unhappy Remedy, which by the most Eminent Authors has been ranked amongst
Poisons.

These four Junior Physicians, whom you worthy Seniors despise, need no other
Praise, but only to be named, viz. Sr. R. Blackmore. The Learned Dr. Bernard,
(...) (deceased when 70), Dr. Gibbons, and Dr. Coatsworth. The first solemnly
knighted for his Merit, and made Physician in ordinary to His Majesty; two to
Public Hospitals; the other universally known and applauded for his Learning
and Practice, together with the Rest. They indeed want Leisure and Ill Nature,
to execute the Office of such Censors; have not Ambition enough to become the
Heads of a Party, of the College they deserve; and their daily Practice
requires not a second Examination, to make them Elects. Professed Malcontents
they are, yet not to the College, but at your Parties Proceedings; and for that
Reason still continue honest. Pray, which of you would not quit all his
Pretenses, to those vast Honors and Dignities, to become but as one of them.
All the good I can wish you, is but to arrive to seemingly the same Repute, to
support your daily declining State: But to them (the three surviving Juniors) a
gradual progress in their real Worth, that the College may boast of more then a
single Hippocrates.

They were really smart Youths in quoting of Authors; their Depositions tight
as to Matter of Fact; their Instances pithy; their Observations becoming gray
Hairs: The Court was astonished at their Learning and Experience, and became
regardless, of the merely Negative and Opinionative Depositions, of their
Seniors and Superiors, either as to present Imaginary, or Antiquated Honors.
There was a sly Youth besides that prompted the Council, and laughed at your
Management; and many Juniors that did, and were ready, to attest the Truth, in
Vindicating the Doctor; each of them as Eminent really, as you in Opinion. But
you forgot the Eminent Apothecaries, Able Surgeons, Skillfull Midwives, and a
Cloud of Credible Witnesses, attesting the extraordinary Success of the Doctor
in Ulcers of the Bladder, by that decried Medicine and Dose; which the Doctor
more conversant, and generally applied to, in Cases of that Nature, kept as a
beneficial Secret, till ravished by you, in order to abuse him and it; yet he
expects still a Reward for the Discovery, even from your selves. The fatal
Effects, were no other then those but too usual upon Perl Cordials. A bold
Remedy may be good and requisite in desperate Cases; and this was not Unhappy
to any but you, for condemning, what you knew not the Nature and Use of.

Some remedies indeed have been ranked amongst Poisons; but it is either the
Excess of Quantity, or some incorrected Quality, makes them reputed so: Mind
the one, and mend the other, and what was Noxious before, becomes benificial.
Thus Sublimate is One; but being corrected by One of the Ingredients, that made
it first a Poison, becomes Innoxious; and is safely and daily administered even
to Infants. Ratsbane corrected, has been used internally with Success, in
desperate Cases, by Muller, Bonetus and Willis. Cortex was formerly thought
such, and given at first but to Grains, with great Caution, and only by some:
Till the Nature and Benefit of it, being duly observed by All, increased the
Dose of it almost to Ounces. Who doubts but Opium is a Poison? Yet daily used,
in vast Doses for pleasure, in the East; and here in most Cases, even to
Excess. Hellebore, Elaterium, Coloquintida, Lapis Lazuli and other violent
Purgatives, are no better without the former Precaution; yet safely given by a
skillful Hand. An expert Physician, that really knows the Medicine and
Distemper, is the sole Judge of the Dose; not to be abridg'd by mere Strangers
to the Remedy and Intention. My Instances, moftly either of natural Products,
or slightly Artificial, have been adapted to your Capacities; not daring to
have a recourse to Chemistry, and tell you, how various and instantaneous
Alterations and Corrections of Things, are thereby produced; least I should be
reviled, for knowing something of so Benificial an Art; though only with intent
to prevent its being hurtful. (...).

Besides, we must not immediately Pronounce that a Poison, what either some
single, or a consecutive Series of Authors, declared to be so: We shall find
both Ancients and Moderns much mistaken herein. To the former Quicksilver is
such: Yet found now otherwise in it self; and its preparations, useful in
Common, and a Refuge in desperate Cases. Within this Century, and our Memory
almost, the Famous Doctors of that Faculty in Paris, banished Antimony as Venom
from Physic, and those that used it, from the City Practice; threatened to
Prosecute Dr. Monginot (though chief Physician to the King) the Learned
Quercetan and Mayerne: But had the Honesty, when better informed, to retract
that Judgment by a solemn Decree, and reinthrone that Triumphant Mineral.

You say further, Cantharides have been declared to be Venomous Animals,
destructive to Life, inimical to Nature, for the most part deadly, etc. most
l^thiferous Poisons and acute Venoms. Pray what is become of your Mother Tongue
and Wit? What do you mean by Venomous Animals? Is there any other, but what
show themselves to be such whilst alive? Deleterious either by Tooth, Sting,
or Touch: By the first, as the Vipers, etc. Sting as the Scorpion, Centopies,
the poisonous Raja and Cat-Fish: Tooth and mediate Touch, as a Mad Dog: Mediate
and immediate as the Torpedo: But a Spanish-Fly is as Venomous as its kind, or
a Flea; scarce so much as a Gnat; far short of a Breeze: Its acute Venom lies
not in a sharp Tooth or Sting; but in a slight Touch, with a blunt Probascis. I
have heard of Poisonous Plants, and Virulent Simples I am acquainted with: But
can you not distinguish between Animalia Venenata and Talia Venena; though Use
has allowed a greater Latitude to the Latin expression, then to the Venomous
English. I appeal to all Mankind, what is meant by a Venomous Creature; that
Expression denoting such a Quality, in a living Agent: When the Life is gone,
they cease to be Venomous, and often to be Poisons; being used either for
Physic or Food; as the Vipers, Raja and Catfish: If you henceforward pretend to
so much as an English Summons; pray next Time, you make Use of this Word
Venomous, learn to understand it and to spell it better: Else you will but
expose your selves whilst endeavoring to impose upon the Vulgar; and in
describing of a Fly, use the Bombast, Rattleheaded Epithets of a Snake.

These Flies, whatever you say, have neither a burning, nor a corroding
Quality, when in a skillful Hand, with a due Corrector: Deadly no more then
they were to this Person. However you being touched a little by the Authority
of Hippocrates, who recommends them twice, are pleased to allow, these
Lethiferous Poisons and Acute Venoms, etc. to be used in very Desperate and
Chronic Cases: But to what Purpose I cannot Imagine; u^less it be to ease the
Patient of his Pains, by sending him packing; as you insinuate Hippocrates's
Potions served both the Patients, to-whom they were most unhappily prescribed,
not exceeding five or six Grains at most. I do not now wonder that Greenfield
was, when Hippocrates must be lashed by such like Animals, for favoring this
Remedy. You talk indeed of powerful Antidotes, but mention not any: There are
none in the Author, unless it be Wine to allay the Burning; but that of
Pliny-lest out, viz. the Heads and Tails to correct the Acrimony of the rest of
the Body of these Flies: I will however unriddle this Affair, for the sake of
others. The Ancients used them in smaller Doses, for want of a due Corrector;
but now one is found, they are given in a Greater, with greater Success; and
used at present but in Chronic and desperate Cases: Pray is not an Ulcer in the
Bladder such? How often has it is Cure been attempted in vain, for several
Years, by all imaginable Ways? but now, by this Method to be cured, in less
then a Week: Either you must allow this Distemper to be such, and so talk to no
purpose: Or if you deny it to be Chronic, etc. you know not the Case, and think
it Acute, because causing sharp Pains.

You need not fright the Doctor, with Tragical Stories, of their mortiferous
and deadly Effects; they shall be examined, whenever produced: only be pleased
to take Notice, That if all those Remedies, that have been Mortiferous, either
by Accident, designed Malice, or unskillful Advice and Mistakes, must be set
aside, because then Noxious; you must never prescribe either Opium, Mercury,
the Cortex or Steel; nay clear the Shop of most of the Rest; and whoop for your
Tools and Practice withal: Unless Hevelius has discovered some Medicinal
Simples in the Moon; which when fetched for you by Go -- les Ganza's, will
serve but sometime; being as liable to be misused, as any we have. I believe
these few Notes, on your longest and most virulent Paragraph, will prove a
Preliminary, short but full Answer to Mr. B -- on; let his intended Book be
never so Voluminous, and his Quotations Numerous: The young Gentleman knowing
not as yet, that Authority in Physic, is always subject to Reason and
Experience; I am afraid his Tract will come out in Un^time.

As to your boasted of Partisan Cyprianus, we know the Man, his Trade and
Education; can produce authentic Letters, as to his Behavior: Lithotomist he
is, and a Competitor to his much Senior, the Expert and Successful, Greenfield
(who since his barbarous Treatment, has cut of and extracted the Stone, from
seventeen Persons of both Sexes, from five to fifty six Years of Age, and but
one of them did miscarry; who by the Opinion of the Physicians present at his
Dissection, could not have lived though he had not been cut). Cyprianus indeed
was the most violent, in his Depositions against him; tho both were of the same
Country, and Strangers in this: The reason you may judge of. How Eminent an
Anat^mist he is, will appear in the Sequel: But his Professorship, you speak
of, like Meleagers Life, not being inherent, dwindled away with the Life of a
kind co-habiting Refugie: His Lectures expired as soon as the Man; and his
Honor laid in the Dust, before the Corpse of his Friend. However by his last
Lecture in the open Court, I have learned, that Spanish Flises work contrary
Effects in different Countries: Here, as appears by the five Affidavits, they
render the Blood (like the bite of a Haemorrhous) flowing out by Gallons: In
Holland (upon his Credit) like that of an Asp, they coagulate it by Pailfulls:
Here, internally given, affect no inward Parts, but only the Urinary-Ducts and
Receptacles; though conveyed into the Blood, and carried by it to all others:
There, they miserably excoriate and ulcerate the Throat, Stomach and Guts. Had
these venomous Creatures, been the Censors Flies, and not stifled luckily in a
Pailful of Blood (which he Swore he took out of the Bladder), They had
doubtless torn' in Pieces, and perhaps devoured her Skins and Flesh; as the
Cacciatori are served by the Vipers in Campagna di Roma. But now we talk of
such Animals, I must tell Mr. Professor, by way of return, one of my
Observations, viz. That the Venom of an Asp, lying close by the Tongue; is
naturally, as to the Creatures Jaunt, bounded by a River: Lucan, id Nili
metitur Arenis: But we have made it boundless, by wafting it over the Ocean.
Aspida fecimus Merces, Pelagoque petimus.

Wherefore it most plainly appears, that it was not a wise and considerate
Judgment, but Envy and Malicious Suggestions, which occasioned that unjust and
illegal Censure against Dr. Groenvelt; nor will Learned Censors, either
Censure, what they do not know; or Condemn, what they themselves make use of;
nor are they solemnly Sworn, to decry that as Poisonous, which has been
evidently proved before the World, to be highly Beneficial to the Kings
Subjects. It had looked far better in my poor Opinion, for you to have done,
what you Charge the Doctors Evidence untruly withal; viz. to have extenuated
your Crime, and not vindicated your Practice, in opposition to the Law, and the
determination of the Court of King's Bench.

As to your old Women's Stories you talk of, the most Fabulous we have heard and
laughed at in Court, for no other Fatality attending; then the usual One, upon
the best of Remedies, in a dying Person: But if you please to trump them up
again, the Doctor will either F -- t at your Thunder, by despising your Tales:
Or if you expose the Faculty too much by the Rehearsal; you must expect the
same as to your Persons and Skill: Lex Talionis will bear him out if attacked;
though not you the Aggressors. Instances he may have without any Trouble; for
you know how great a Body you have disobliged. You may then spare your Brains
and Shoe-leather, skipp no more over the Ditches in Southwark; least you fall
into what you designed for another. Be therefore advised, either to submit
patiently to the Doctor and Prosecutor; or fairly to the Law.

The Charge against Dr. Burwell and Torlesse, for administering unprepared
Cantharides, though you deny it, is notoriously True; being fully Sworn to, by
Mr. Daire, Speers and Boucher, known honest Apothecaries: The Bills were then,
and are ready still to be, produced in any Court. You were absent, you say,
when this was alleged; yet Subpaena'd as Witnesses, by the Plaintiff, and
concerned as such; yea, and otherwise too, as has been fully proved. You were
really unkind to the Woman, in not appearing; to your selves, in not
vindicating your Honor. Doubtless your Presence would have over-awed the
Court; undone the Fact and asserted the Common Cause. You may still be present,
and Swear in your own Cause, as Evidence for the King: Do but indict Mr. Speers
of Perjury (with the rest to make the shorter Work) as you have threatened; and
the Matter of Fact will appear in its proper Colors: The Number of the Bills
is increased, and there is but such an Opportunity wanting to produce them, and
show the World, how just you were in condemning the Doctor for the same Fact,
you your selves were so notoriously Guilty of; but with this remarkable
Difference, that tho the Doctor knew the Cantharides not to be a Poison, yet
was careful to correct their Acrimony: You have declared them an Acute Venom;
but administered them without any Caution (so much as to your selves),
particular Diet, or Antidote; unless it be that of Pliny, and Diuretics, as in
one of the Bills, to increase their Force, Malignity and Venom, as you call it;
which appearing fully, by the Bills themselves and the Latin directions, and
solemnly attested, in a Public Court: Pray be not so lavish of your Tenders of
Oaths, for fear of the worst: At least give us some satisfaction first, how far
your Negative Depositions, as to Fact, and that in your own Cause, can be
valid, against a Positive Oath of sober and credible Witnesses, who have and
will assert directly the Contrary of what you pretend to.

Reason Third, The said Censors having thus notoriously acted like Ill Men,
Informations, by order of the King's Bench, were brought severally against them
(in Obedience to and Encouragement by the Law) for not having qualified
themselves, for a Place of such high Trust and judicial Authority; but by the
great Endeavors of the said Censors to evade them, the Suit has proved very
Expensive, the said Censors applying themselves to His Majesty, by way of
Petition, for a Noli Prosequi; but His Majesty being informed of the Case, out
of a tender Regard to Justice and the Laws, was pleased to deny them.

Reason Fourth, Dr. Burwell, one of the said Censors, being Tried the si^ting
after the last Term, upon the Information aforesaid, a special Verdict was
obtained against him; and the rest of the said Censors having joined Issue, are
to be Tried the next Term.

Here you are displeased with the Prosecutors asserting, That you have acted
notoriously like Ill Men. But if a notorious Injustice, backed by a Barbarous
Treatment of a Brother; persisted in to the last, with the utmost Aggravations,
of privately Aspersing, and publicly Calumniating, of an innocent Person,
highly injured by your selves before; and that in Contempt, of the Law, the
Decision of the Jury, the Advice of Friends, and the Sense of Mankind, merits
such a Denomination; be pleased now to accept, not the Similitude only, but the
Thing it self. It was then your Injustice, not the Prosecutors Malice, that
occasioned the Informations. You have indeed endeavored to evade them, upon as
vain Pretenses, as you make Use of here, and Sued, You say, for a Noli
Prosequi, being informed by your Council; that you were not within the Act: But
you know, That His Majesty, upon true Information of the Matter of Fact, was
pleased to deny it: From which it does plainly appear, that the Prosecution was
neither Malicious, nor Unreasonable: For you were left to the Law, by his
Majesty's Consent to, and express Approbation of, so just a Prosecution: And
you have experienced, by your repeated fruitless Attempts, that the Right
Honorable the Lords are of the same Mind.

The Verdict against Dr. Burwell, was brought in Special: But it was the
Prosecutors designed Favor, to you not deferving any, that the least Obnoxious
Person was pitched upon amongst you, to give you all time and scope of
Repentance: To that End, he ordered his Council, not to oppose the Special
Verdict, when desired: Furthermore, I am fully satisfied, if it had been any of
the other Three, the Jury would have brought him in Guilty, for Reasons you may
learn in time. Notwithstanding all this, you have reviled the Prosecutor for
being so tender, slighted his Favors, and continue to do so.

You express your selves wisely, That the Matter is to be argued by (not
before) the Judges; but in your Wisdom, know not how this Case will be then
determined: Yet, by an unaccountable Stubbornness, hazard your Ruin, in a Case
supposed by your selves to be doubtful: You stop your Ears to the Advice of
Friends, and the Counsel of those, who not only guess at, but know your Danger;
slight all Proposals; laugh at those, who in Pity would gladly have been your
Mediators. Three of you indeed may think your selves Secure, and hope for an
Accommodation timely enough, though Burwell be ruined; but you are not safe, though
he should escape; your Pleadings must be different, your Case worse, your
Defense as to any Point Insignificant: But if the Old Gentleman should persist
in, and fall a Martyr to his Obstinacy, you must not, you cannot, in Reason and
Justice expect any other Fate; as you were his Accomplices, more Active,
Designing and Spightful; you must expect at least the same, deserve a worse
Usage. Go on in your Defiance; the Prosecutor has hitherto, and I believe,
will not Fail to meet you One by One, wherever you are pleased to carry the
Suit: But my Advice to the Former (if he thinks fit to take it) is to desert
you, that would expose him singly, to the lash of the Law, and agree with his
kinder Adversary, whilst in the Way with him, least, etc. Mat. 5. 25.

I shall now take another Book in Hand, to prove that Dr. Greenfield also ought
to be considered: I mean that of Alius Medicus, alias Dr. Bu^well, against Mr.
Less. I should not have advised Dr. Burwell at all, but that I really pity
him, being made by Nature more Innocent then the Rest, as his Book does fully
declare it. He says, in the 93 Page, That Good Name is better then Life,
especially if Livelihood goes away with it. But what Regard had he to that of
Dr. Greenfield, or what Compassion for his Family? The Doctor was trapann'd by
a feigned Message and Name, into a Coffee-house he constantly used, to be
hurried to NEWGATE, from amidst his Friends, Patients and numerous
Acquaintance; was followed from thence to his House, there taken from the
Embraces of his Wife and Children, from under the Nose of his Father in Law,
the Reverend Dr. Meriton: He was committed the same Day he had cut a Child of
the Stone, by Persons regardless, of the Life of One Innocent, as well as the
Prayers of another, Dr. Greenfield I mean; that a Prison of less Scandal, or
the Lodge of the College, might serve, till he could make his Application to
the other Censors; that to Dr. Burwell proving in vain. His Commitment was
instantly published in the Post-Boy, NEWGATE named, his Crime not specified,
but declared in General* for Ill Practices, with a Notorious Falsehood, for
refusing to pay his Fine, which was never demanded, nor intended to be the only
Satisfaction, for that Imaginary Crime; as appears by the Censors Warrant and
Defense. The Authors adds in the same Page, Good Name is like a Venice Glass,
etc. if once cracked though soadred or plaistred, yet is despised, undervalued,
and in a Manner good for Nothing. Yet he will not suffer the Doctor so much as
to endeavor it; but, by repeated public Aspersions. Essays (though I hope in
Vain) to shiver it in Pieces. He adds further, It is like Virginity in Women,
it enhanceth their Price, etc. In Days of yore, Women were bought for Wives,
now only for Whores: But seeing he has ravished this Metaphoric Girl, and
endeavors to violate her still; he will be kindly used, if he only pays
really, and suffers not otherwise for the Fact: And if the first Assault merits
a round Sum; the repeated Violations, as they enhance the Crime, must likewise
the Price. He goes on and tells us, That private Slander is a Sort of Civil
Gunpowder, that blows up whole Families at once. Surely Public is uncivil, it
does it much more: And seeing it might have famished the Doctor, his Wife and
Children, deserves their Curses against him (the Cause of it) as well as their
Cries, These are that Authors Words, not mine, and I firmly believe, a^ not the
Doctors, nor his Families wishes; whatever the Author deserves.

I shall now conclude with some few Questions to, and Remarks upon, about half
a Score of that Restless Party, Active to no Purpose. You pretend to advance
the Grandeur of Physic, by exposing that Faculty; show your selves Impartial,
by punishing your own Members; without any Regard to your own, or the Colleges
Honor: For who can rely upon a Physician, if his Admission amongst you, does
not warrant his Skill and Honesty to boot. You pretend to attack your Enemies
abroad, by creating more within your own Bowels, out of those who are best
able to preserve and defend you. You are over Head and Ears in Debt, yet
lavishly waste the small Residue of your Stock in fruitless Attempts, and as
needful Suits. In order to retrieve this, you talk of uniting your Body; yet
perfist in affronting the most Eminent of the FELLOWS, and the whole BODY of
those you call LICENTIATS. Pray where is your Conduct in all these Particulars?
You asperse the Latter publicly and privately, as insufficient for Practice;
yet they really are, and esteemed by all, equal to the best of you. Pray who
will ensure your Skill, when you your selves decry that of your Equals? You
defame them, as fit only, quoad hoc, to practice only in some particular Cases:
Yet the College has given them as Ample a Diploma, as any you have, to
practice in All. Pray what means this Abuse? I had almost challenged your
Honesty. You will scarcely alallow them any Privileges; yet the College has
granted them the Use and Benefit (Vsum Fructum) of all, either granted, or to
be granted hereafter to it self. Pray where is your Justice? You suffer them
not to have the Privilege even of transgressing Slaves, to speak for
themselves (I mean) though standing before your Worships, and in all humility,
desiring to be heard. Pray what do you make of them? You Affront your own
Universities by re-examining, and sometimes rejecting those, whom they have
approved of, and honored with the Decree of a Doctor: Besides, you Vilify the
foreign Academiae. Pray where is and was your Breeding? You fly from Post to
Pillar, from Charter to the Act; now fix here, now there; as you think, this or
that will best bear you out, in your jarring Intentions. Pray where is your
Foundation? You reject the four Chiefs from being so much as Arbiters of your
Differences, or Judges of the Bylaws you make. Pray where is your Discretion?
You challenge the Justice of the Jury, slight the Advice of my Lord Chief
Justice. Pray where is your Manners and Wisdom? You impose Laws, Oaths, Bonds,
Fines, Obligations, upon freeborn (not your) Subjects, without being their
Representatives, their Consent, or Authority. Pray keep, leavy and pay them
your selves; if you please, and what you will or can. It is your boundless
Ambition, and conceited Greatness, that is the Cause of all the Mischiefs that
attend the College and Faculty. It was indeed otherwise, when such low,
wandering and retrograde Orbs, were chek'd and kept under, by the Presence of
those Immortal Lights, whose Glory is eternally fixed. I mean, Wharton,
Glisson, Willis, Ent Scarburgh, Lower, etc. Fuistis Troes, fuit Ilium and
ingens Gloria Dardan^ae. I had almost forgot the ONLY LICENSED Sydenham.
Audisne haec Amphiarae sub Terris abdite? Nay, Dr. Go -- -- le, can you bear to
hear your self talk, and your great Patron and Benefactor reviled with the same
Breath? But now what calls it self a College, must seek for its Renown amidst
the adverse Party, and shelter it self amongst the Malcontents: It had only
Goddards dropps for the Influence, the Spirit of Elliots Bones for the Support
of that Government; till of late it got a YOUNG Man for its Defense. Yet when
at the Board, every one of you is a Menecrates, each of you thinks himself a
Jove; to be adored, by those called Licenciates, with Capp and Knee, in a
Profound Silence. But you found of late, that those your Equals, will no longer
bear such like Indignities. You must show your selves first to be Men, by
reflex Thoughts on your past Actions: Till then, I shall take Leave of your
Excellencies (as Philip accosted your haughty Predecessor aforesaid) and that
you may hence(...)d (...), I wish you sincerely, Mente (...). Ingenuas
didicisse fideliter Ar(...)ollit Mores, rec sinit esse Feros.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PReface, P. 2. L. 8. R. Beargarden, l. 9. r. never, p. 2. l. 2. dele even, ^
30. (...) constit^^nt, ^. 2. l. 28. r. ever, p. 4. l. 14. r. their, p. 5. l. 4.
r. sours, p. 7. l. 13. r. of ^, p. 12. l. 2^. r, their, p. 13. l. 7. r.
obsol^te.


