LIGHT From the SUN of Righteousness, Discovering and Expelling Darkness. OR,
The Doctrine, and some of the corrupt Principles of the People called Quakers,
briefly and plainly laid open and refuted.

Containing a Reply to an Answer of a Letter written formerly by the Author to
his own Natural Sister, dwelling in the Island of Barbados.

Published for common benefit, but more especially for the good of poor, weak,
wavering Christians, to help and recover them out of the snare of Satan.

By H. G.

Luke 22. 32. When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

2 Pet. 1. 19. We have a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that
ye take heed, etc.

Isa. 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no sight in them.

Printed in the Year, 1672.

Light from the SUN of Righteousness, discovering and expelling Darkness.
My Dear Sister!
YOurs I have received dated the 22 of the 9th Month 1671, which contains an
Answer to a Letter of mine bearing date the 21 of the 8th Month 1670; which was
written in tender love and affection to your precious Soul, in which I was
moved to forwarn and caution you concerning the evil and Soul-undoing
Principles of the People called Quakers, to whose pernicious Doctrine I had
some doubts and jealousies you were ready too much to hearken and incline unto.
And by this Answer of yours, I perceive you are now exceedingly drove away by
the stream of their Delusions, and have sucked in the Venom of their poisonous
Doctrine, which is no small grief and trouble to my Spirit, to think that you,
a near Relation of mine, and one (which sometime since) I had such good hopes
of, should (by the subtle Wiles of Satan) be in your Old Age so grievously
beguiled; it wounds my Soul, to think you should be so rooted and grounded in
their Principles, none being more repugnant to the Fundamentals of Religion,
and the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ. I am afraid that these Lines may come
too late, yet not knowing whether the Lord has, yea or no, utterly given you
up to blindness of mind, to believe lies, that so you should be damned for not
receiving the truth in the love of it, that you might be saved, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10,
11, 12. I have sent you these Lines as a further discharge of my Conscience,
and that I may be pure from your Blood in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
that it might not only be of profit (through the blessing of God) to you, but
also to others, whom God in mercy may please to recover out of the snare of the
Devil in the Island of Barbados, or elsewhere, to whom they may come. I have
been at the Charge of Printing them: And these may certify you, in the first
place, that I have diligently examined and seriously weighed the chief Heads,
or most material things contained in your Letter, and by comparing them with
the holy and blessed Scriptures of Truth, and weighing them in that most Sacred
Balance of the Sanctuary, I find them as light as vanity, being nothing else
save the aerie Notions of a poor deceived People, by whom your Soul is deluded,
and most sadly and grievously captivated; which, by the assistance of God, I
shall endeavor to make appear before I have done. And that I might distinctly
Answer your Lines, and refute you and others also that are of your judgment, I
shall begin with the beginning of your Letter, which is as follows.

Brother G.
I Did receive a Letter from thee, dated the 21 of the 8th Month, 1670. with
kind expressions of Love to me, both to my Soul and Body, as thou have there
expressed; which, in love to thy Soul, I now am willing to Answer; for a little
strength is administered to me, into the Everlasting Kingdom, since first I have
received the Truth.

First, As to thy Love, I do receive as from my Natural Brother, and I hope I
have not forgot natural affection: But as for thy Counsel to my Soul, I do
faithfully believe that I have chosen the good part which shall never be taken
from me; I bless and praise the Lord, I know a Teacher near me that shall never
be hid in a Corner: Thou say, though distance of place, and Age drawing on
upon us both, yet that we may meet together in the Resurrection of the Just. As
for the Resurrection of the Just, I am risen again with Christ, yea, the Just
one is risen in me, Glory to his Name for ever: Oh! what manner of love is
this, etc?

Thou say, There was a time that thou had hopes that I should become a
Convert of Christ. Truly, Brother, to be a Convert of Christ, the way thou
approvest of, would do me no good at all, for there is nothing of the Cross of
Christ in it, and I see it vanity, for there are just men to whom it happens
according to the work of the wicked, Eccles. 8. 14. therefore the Wise man's
Counsel is, be not over righteous, 7. 16. I do not say the keeping the Commands
of Christ is vanity, but to strain the Commandments of Christ, to a form of
Worship, which is not according to the Spirit, to Bread, Wine, and Water, which
was to be held in practice but till Christ came, and Christ is come the second
time, of which coming no mention is made of Bread, Wine, nor Water.


Answ. Before I shall repeat more of thy Letter, I shall make some Reply to
this first part: I shall pass by several expressions which serve for little
else than to demonstrate the corruption of your judgment. And in the first
place, I shall call into question your confidence about your choosing the
better part. Sister, How dare you conclude you have chosen the good part with
Mary, whilst you refuse to hear the teaching of the true Savior? Mary gave ear
to what her Lord and Master declared and taught, she sat at his feet and heard
his word: it was not only the Teacher or Light within she gave ear to, but also
to the Doctrine and Counsel of the Man Christ Jesus without, whose Disciple and
Scholar you must come to be, and follow his Counsel and Doctrine, as it is
contained in the holy Scripture; and till which time never flatter your self so
as to conclude you have chose the good part.

Secondly, as touching your knowledge of the Teacher that is near you, or the
Light within, which the Quakers say is in every Man and Woman that comes into
the World. You are mistaken, and have not a right knowledge of that Teacher,
and this I shall evidently make appear: for this (alas!) is your grand mistake;
you speak of this Light more than is true, or does agree with that Doctrine
that is according to Godliness. You exalt it above the holy Scriptures; nay,
you, and others of your judgment, make a God and a Christ of it. You bid me in
one place of your Letter own this Light, which reproves for sin, and believe in
it, and it will certainly take away my sins; and therefore you caution me, not
to open my mouth at any time against the true Light which lightneth every man
that comes into the world: O my Sister, how does it grieve me to think how
blind and deceived thou art, to believe that the Light which is in all men,
even in the natural hearts of Heathens and Infidels, is the true Christ and
Savior of the World, and that there is not another, nor need of another; and
that men ought to hearken to it, as that which does not only reprove for sin
and so condemn, but is also able of it self to cleanse from sin, save, and
redeem them who walk up to it, without respect to the glorious Redemption
purchased by another (viz.) Jesus of Nazareth. Now how false this is, may
appear to thee by what follows: for though I do not deny, but really believe,
and always did, that the Lord Jesus, as the Eternal Word and Creator of the
World, has given Light, or enlightneth all Men and Women that come into the
World: yet do I utterly deny, that this Light which all men have from the
glorious Creator, is the true Savior, or is a saving Light, and the alone and
only Teacher, which thou seem to affirm. The Light which is in the hearts of
all men, Paul shows clearly, is but the substance of the Law of the first
Covenant. God has given man a Spirit, or formed a Spirit in him, Zach. 12. 1.
which is called the Candle of the Lord, by the means of which Law, Candle, or
Conscience in Man, and help of the visible Creation, mankind may come to
understand there is a God, and it will teach them also their Duty, in some
respects, as he is their Creator, and they his Creatures; and convince them of
diverse sins, and teach them to do unto all men as they themselves would be done
unto. If Heathens and wicked men do mind and follow the light of this Candle,
or the Teachings of their own Conscience, they would (notwithstanding they are
void of the saving knowledge of the true Savior) shine forth in the Principles
of Morality, or just living between man and man, as I do judge many of the
Quakers do, civil honesty being the greatest glory of the best of those of that
Religion (if I may call it so). Now you, with others, judge, because that this
Light does convince of sin, and shows man his evil thoughts, it will also
cleanse and take away his sins, and eternally save his Soul; it being a Light
flowing from Christ, you judge it cannot be weak nor insufficient in any
respects whatsoever. Which is (my Sister) your great ignorance: Did you instead
of harkening to these Seducers, with care and diligence search the Scriptures,
you would find, that that holy Law which God gave to Israel, which was written
and ingraved in two Tables of Stone, was a Light and precious Law flowing from
God, and a more glorious Ministration than this which is in every man: or else
what advantage had the Jews above the Gentiles? Romans 3. 1, 2. That Law (dear
Sister) was a Light of Christ, and did convince of Sin more clearly than the
Light does which is in every man; yet the Apostle shows plainly, Gal. 2. it
would not give life, nor take away sin; For what the Law could not do, (says
the Apostle Romans 8. 3.) in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sent his own
Son, etc. This Doctrine of yours concerning the Light within, brings in again,
and seems plainly to establish the Covenant of Works, Do this, and live: be
obedient to the Law or Light in the heart, and thou shall be saved.

This agrees with the expressions of one of your Teachers, and he no mean one
neither; speaking of Romans 2. 13. Not the Hearers of the Law are just before
God, but the Doers of the Law shall be justified: From whence (says See Pen's
Sandy Foundation shaken. Page 26.
he) how unanswerably may I observe, that unless we become doers of that Law
which Christ came not to destroy, but as our Example to fulfill, we can never be
justified before God; nor let any fancy, that Christ has so fulfilled it for
them, as to exclude their Obedience from being requisite to their acceptance,
but only as their Pattern. We do not say, Christ fulfilled the Law so as to
exclude our obedience, yet was his Obedience and Suffering Meritorious, and
more than a Pattern or Exemplary. Does not this Doctrine of yours, make void
the Righteousness which is of Faith, which speaks on this wise; Believe, and
thou shall be saved? By the deeds of the Law shall no Flesh be justified. The
Law and Light in all, which is one in substance, gives man the knowledge of his
sins, it convances him that he is a sinner, but leaves him, like the Priest and
Levite, in his blood and wounds, without any help or healing, until the Lord
Jesus, that good Samaritan, takes compassion on him: for we are justified
freely by God's Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.
24. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness (mark) for the Remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God, verse. 25. We grant and believe, that holiness
and obedience is required, and they are the effects and fruits of saving Faith,
but it is not our obedience nor holiness which does redeem us, or is the
meritorious, efficient, and procuring cause of our Salvation and acceptance
with God, muchless our obedience to the Law or Light in our Consciences, as
those of your mind affirm. Oh! take heed therefore, and beware of that
poisonous Doctrine, the tenor of which clearly holds forth, That Jesus Christ
our Savior and Mediator died in vain: For, I pray, consider, If by works of
Righteousness done in our own persons, by walking up to the Law or Light
within, we may be led out of all sin, cleansed from it, and eternally saved;
what need was there then of the Man Christ Jesus to fulfill the Righteousness of
the Law, and to shed his precious Blood to atone and make peace, and appease
the wrath of God for us? May I not say with Paul, Gal. 2. 21. If Righteousness
came by the Law, Christ is dead in vain? The Jews, as I showed you before, had
the advantage of the Gentiles every way, Romans 3, 1, 2. they had more light than
the Heathen Gentiles had, having the Oracles of God committed to them, yet it
left them in their sins, and under Wrath and the Curse; that Law, nor the Light
which is in every man that comes into the World, cannot give life: For if
there had been a Law given which could have given life, verily Righteousness
should have been by the Law, Gal. 3. 21. Therefore all such, whether Jews or
Gentiles, who seek for Righteousness and Acceptance with God through their
Obedience, either to the Law without, or Law or Light within; they are like to
fall short of it, because they seek it not by Faith; they stumble at that
stumbling stone (viz.) the Lord Jesus Christ, and thereby miss of that glorious
Redemption once purchased for us by the Sacrifice of the Cross. Do not let any
so grievously beguile thee, as to cause thee to conclude, That the Sacrifice of
our blessed Savior's Crucified Body, once offered to bear the Sins of many,
was but only as a pattern, or figure, of things which must be wrought again,
and done over in us, and so conclude that this Light and Teacher within (which
you say you know) is the true Christ, and that there is not another, and that
thou must, by the Power and Means of it, attain to the same degree of Holiness
and Perfection which was in our blessed Mediator, and so by that inherent
Holiness alone, wrought in thee, place thy hope and confidence, fixing thy
Faith on a mysterious Sacrifice and Offering within, and not having a
dependency on that glorious Sacrifice of Christ's Crucified Body without, which
was once offered to take away sin, Heb. 9. 26. By which one Offering he has
perfected for ever those that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. The Atonement is
already made, Redemption, Reconciliation, and Justification has been fully
completed and finished in and by our Lord Jesus for us once for all: The Lord
has laid on him the iniquities of us all, Isa. 53. 6. He was made sin for us
that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor.
5. 21. The Debt is paid, and Satisfaction made, yet I fear, notwithstanding the
Teacher which is so near thee, of which thou speak, thou still remainest in
Prison and Darkness, not knowing the way out of thy captivated state, which is
by the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant: How does Ignorance and Unbelief, as
chains and fetters, bind many in Satan's kingdom, notwithstanding the glorious
Freedom purchased by the Lord Jesus? The Price may be laid down for the
Captive, and yet the Prisoner remain bound; the work of Faith, with power, I
have cause to doubt you are yet a stranger to; though you speak of very high
Seize, your judgment is corrupt, notwithstanding your confidence, as
further may appear.

Thou say, That to be a Convert, in the way I do approve of, will do thee no
good at all, for there is nothing of the Cross of Christ in it, and thou
say, thou see it vanity.

Now to convince you of your great mistake, and to make appear that I am
acquainted with the power of true Conversion, and that it is the same that
Christ approves of: Consider, that I do own and approve of that Conversion that
is taught by Christ and his Apostles in the holy Scriptures; that a man must
Repent, that true Repentance is a through change of the mind, and that it
consists in these three things: A clear sight and sense of sin, and of the
woeful state and condition of lost and fallen Man, upon the account of
transgression. And Secondly, Godly sorrow, contrition, and brokenness of heart
in the true sense of the heavy weight and burden of it. And Thirdly, an utter
abhorrence, turning away from, and forsaking of it. And also, I do hold and
maintain, that Faith is required, and must be wrought with power in the hearts
of the Penitent, whereby the Creature turns to Christ, and applies the virtue
of his Merits, Blood, and Righteousness to his own Soul; and hereby the Soul is
translated out of daakness into light, and so comes to experience the
in-dwelling of Christ's Spirit in his heart, by which he comes to hate that
which formerly he loved, and loves that which once he hated: for
notwithstanding I do plead for the imputed Righteousness of Christ, Faith and
Interest in the Satisfaction and Atonement made (once, and not again to be
made) by his blood, yet do I also plead for spiritual Conformity to him, both
in his Death and Resurrection; and that a man must die to sin, and rise to
newness of life: For, though Christ paid the Debt, and laid down a Price which
the Father accepted of, yet till the coming of his Spirit and Grace with power
into my heart, for the binding of the strong man Satan, and killing of my
Corruptions, my Soul was not brought out of the horrible Pit. This blessed
Change I, through the Grace of God in my measure, do experience; and this is
the conversion I approve of, by the power and means of which I am laid at
Christ's feet, wholly exalting Him and Free Grace, who did not only work
Salvation for me, but has helped me to apply it; having wrought this glorious
work of Regeneration in me, by which I am made willing to follow and obey him
as my King and Sovereign. And this is not to be less or more Righteous than
what God accepts and approves of, and it is my trouble and grief thou do
not. Is here nothing of the Cross of Christ appearing to you? and is this
vanity? Surely you would otherwise conclude, were not your Light Darkness.

But to proceed, Thou tellest me thou do not say the keeping of the
Commandments of Christ is vanity, God forbid; but to strain the Commandments of
Christ to a form of Worship, which is not according to the Spirit, to Bread,
Wine, and Water, which was to be held in practice but till Christ come, and
Christ is come the second time, etc.

Answ. I shall answer thee in this. And first, if you mean and conclude we
strain the Commands of Christ, so to the Ordinances of the Lord's Supper and
Baptism, that we own no other Ordinances and Commands, you falsely accuse us;
for those things you mention which Christ requires, we also own, (namely) Love
your Enemies, bless them that curse you, and pray for them that persecute you,
etc. We plead (dear Sister) for universal Obedience: these things ought to be
done, and the other ought not to be left undone. But again, who of us go about
to strain the Commands of God to a form of Worship which is not according to
the Spirit? that form of Worship or Doctrine that the Apostle commended the
Saints for obeying, Romans 6. and abiding in, was not contrary, but according to
the Spirit of God, if you own the Holy Scriptures to be indicted by the Spirit,
of which Form of Doctrine those Ordinances were part, which you hint at, as
these Scriptures prove: Acts 2. 38, 41, 42. Acts 10. 47. Romans 6. 3, 4. Heb. 6.
1, 2. And if it be contrary to the Spirit you are led by, to own those Commands
of Christ which the Primitive Saints did own, and were commended for holding as
they were delivered; you have cause to conclude the Spirit you are led by is
not the Spirit of God, for God's Spirit does not guide contrary to the Word and
Doctrine of his Son, Joh. 16. 13, 14. To the Law and Testimony; if they speak
not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 20.

But why dare you say, That the practice of Bread, Wine, and Water, was to be
held no longer than till Christ came? By his coming, you intend his coming in
Spirit.

That this is false, and contrary to holy Scripture, I shall evidently make
appear:

And first, I shall begin with the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, which you
call Bread and Wine; and that the practice of this continues and remains in
full force and virtue to the end of the World, or until the Second coming or
Appearance of Christ in Person; and that he is not so come the second time, I
shall also prove to thee before I have done. That the practice of breaking
Bread, and drinking Wine, in remembrance of Christ's Death, remains after the
coming of Christ in Spirit, I prove by these Arguments following:

First, Because the Apostle Paul did receive this from our Savior, as a
glorious Appointment and Institution of the Lord Jesus, a considerable time
after the coming of Christ in Spirit. The Promise of the Comforter, or Christ's
coming in Spirit was performed, and fulfilled to the Sainrs, some days after
his Ascension, as may be seen in the second of the Acts; and it was some time
after this, before Paul was converted unto Christ: For Paul, after the coming
of the Spirit, according to the Promise of the Father and our Lord Jesus,
remained in darkness, and was a Persecutor of the Saints; and yet see, I
beseech ye, what he affirms to the Church of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11. 23.
For I received of the Lord that which I also delivered unto you, that the Lord
Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took Bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken
for you; this do in remembrance of me: and after the same manner also he took
the Cup, etc.

Now if Paul received this after that coming of Christ, which you speak of, as
an Institution and Divine Appointment of the Lord Jesus, as it appears plainly
he did, then that which you affirm, is utterly false and to be rejected. But,

Secondly, The Apostle did not only receive this from Christ after the coming
of Christ in Spirit, but also did deliver it (as Christ's Appointment) to the
Saints: That which I received of the Lord (says he) I also delivered unto yon.

Thirdly, I argue further, That this Ordinance does remain in force, and the
practice of it to be held up after the coming of Christ in Spirit: because the
Primitive Saints did abide in the practice of it after the pouring forth of the
Spirit, according to Christ's Promise, as appears Acts 2. 42. They continued in
the Apostles Doctrine, in breaking of Bread, and Prayer: compare this with Acts
20. 7, 11. also 1 Cor. 11. 20. to the end.

Fourthly, Consider, The end of this Ordinance does remain notwithstanding the
pourings forth of the Spirit, and therefore the Ordinance must needs remain,
which is to confirm our Faith in the true Savior, and to keep up our Love to
him, who gave his Body to be broken, and his Blood to be shed for our sakes.
This is to be done, to show forth his Death until he come. And these things
considered which has been said, it is plain it cannot intend his Spiritual
Coming, or the giving forth the holy Spirit the Comforter according to his
promise. And that he is not come the Second time without sin to Salvation, as
you seem to affirm, does appear,

First, Because his coming that day shall be visible, Every eye shall see him,
Rev. 1. 7.

Secondly, Because his feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives,
Zech. 14. 4. and he shall come in the same manner as he went up to Heaven,
Acts. 1. 11.

Thirdly, Because the Saints which had the highest seize of the Spirit,
or to whom Christ was Spiritually come, as gloriously as ever he came to any of
the Saints, did, notwithstanding that, still expect, look and wait for his
coming from Heaven. See 1 Cor. 1. verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. I thank my God always on
your behalf, for the Grace of God which is given to you by Jesus Christ, tht in
every thing ye are enriched by him in all utterance, and all knowledge; even as
the Testimony of Christ was confirmed in you: (mark that) So that ye come
behind in no gift, waiting for his Son from Heaven. If Christ was not
spiritually come to these, who was he come to? and yet they waited for his
coming. The Saints, at Thessalonica, are said to turn from Idols, to serve the
true God, and to wait for his Son from Heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9, 10. and unto
those that look for him (says the Apostle) He shall appear the Second time
without sin unto Salvation, Heb. 9. 28. The beloved Apostle, who enjoyed so
much of the Spiritual Presence of Christ, yet desired and looked for his
coming. Which clearly shows that his Second coming is another manner of coming
than that which you speak of; for when he comes, he comes with all his Saints
and holy Angels with him: and when he comes, the Graves shall be opened, and
the Dead shall be raised, yea, the dead Bodies of Men and Women, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
16. You say, that you are risen from the dead already, and Christ is come the
Second time; but be assured of this, you will find another Resurrection,
Coming, and Judgment ere long than this. I could wish it were so indeed, that
thou had part in the true work of Regeneration, that so, in that day, thou
might have part in the first Resurrection: for the dead in Christ shall rise
first, 1 Thessalonians. 4. which cannot intend any other save the dead bodies of the
Saints who are fallen asleep, or gone to the dust.

But because I have somewhat to say in the Vindication of Baptism, which you
call Water, I shall proceed to that; for as you, and other Quakers, deny the
continuance of the Lord's Supper; so also you affirm, that the practice of
Water Baptism, was to continue but till Christ came in Spirit. Now how false
this is, may appear;

First, from the Commission, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. where Christ gave forth this
blessed Ordinance; All Power is given to me in Heaven and Earth: Go therefore,
teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all things that I have
commanded yon; and lo, I am with you always to the end of the world. Now that
the Baptism here spoken of, is that of Water, is evident, because the Disciples
are commanded or enjoined to be the Administraters or Dispensers of it. To
baptize with the holy Spirit, is the alone Work, Prerogative, and Office of
Jesus Christ, and it never was in the power of any Apostle or Disciple of
Christ to do it; though the Spirit was given many times as the answer of their
Prayers; their Supplications to God for to give it, plainly shows it was not in
their power of the Apostles to give it.

Secondly, That Baptism which is here intended, which our Lord commanded his
Apostles to baptize with, was the Baptism which after his Ascension they did
baptize with, and that it is evident was Water: Can any man forbid Water (says
Peter, Acts 10. 47.) that these should not be baptized, etc. it is said, They
went both down into the Water, both Philip and the Eunuch, Acts 8. 38. Now the
Baptism, here commanded, must needs remain to be practiced to the end of the
World: Because, whatsoever is here given forth by Christ, is given forth as he
is King and Mediator of the New Covenant, and as part of his last Will and
Testament, and his last Will and Testament stands in full force and virtue to
the end of the World unalterable; and, whosoever brings any other Gospel, let
him be accursed.

Thirdly, Because it is the mind of Christ, that whatsoever he Commanded them,
should be taught successively to the Nations. And his Spiritual Presence being
promised unto the end of the World, to all those that did keep and observe
whatsoever he there commanded them, plainly proves, that the practice of all
those Ordinances were to be kept up to the end of the World.

But again, To prove that the practice of Water Baptism does remain in full
force and virtue after the coming of Christ in Spirit, I need not go further to
make it appear than the second of the Acts. Christ made good the Promise of the
Comforter, or his coming to his Disciples in Spirit, as you may see in the
beginning of that Chapter, by the help and power of which Spirit, Peter
preached to those Jews that had put Christ to death: and many of them being
pricked in their hearts, cried out, What shall we do? Then said Peter, verse.
38. Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, and
you shall receive the gift of the holy Spirit. And verse. 41. it is said, Those
that gladly received the Word, were baptized: and the same day there were added
unto them about three thousand Souls. This (observe) was after that coming of
Christ, which you speak of. Do you think that the Apostle Peter, in the Name
and Authority of Christ Jesus, would have commanded so many persons to be
baptized, if he had understood Water Baptism ceased at the pourings forth of
the Spirit, or the practice of it was to remain no longer? Besides, was not the
Eunuch baptized in Water after the coming of Christ in Spirit? Acts 8. 41, 42.
and many in the City of Samaria? and was not Paul baptized by Ananias, Acts 9.
and Cornelius, and those with him, after the coming of Christ in Spirit; with
many others that I might mention? and yet you, very ignorantly affirm, That the
practice of it was to remain no longer than till Christ so came, as aforesaid.

I might now come to Answer another Objection, that some of your judgment bring
against this Appointment of Christ, and then come to examine the remaining part
of your Letter, it is grounded from Paul's words, 1 Cor. 1. 14. I thank God I
baptized none of you save Crispus and Gaius.

Observe by the way, That though this is brought as an Objection against
Baptism, yet the Objector does thereby confess the Baptism here intended is
that of Water; and then, by your own confession, Paul baptized after the coming
of the Comforter, or Christ in Spirit. But you say, he thanks God he baptized
no more. Indeed too many by them, if the practice of it were out of doors
before. But to return you an Answer, take his next words for it, he gives you
the reason why he thanked God he baptized no more; it is not because the
practice then was not in force, but lest any should say he baptized in his own
Name: many amongst them were grown so carnal, as to slight, or else to idolize
their Teachers, and ready to accuse the Ministers of Christ with
unfaithfulness, as if they did that in their own Names, which they did in the
Name and Authority of Christ Jesus; and this was the cause of his speaking
those words.

But it is objected, That he does affirm Christ sent him not to Baptize, but to
Preach the Gospel.

Answ. Paul does not intend, by his so speaking, that he had no Authority from
Christ to baptize, but rather to show that his chief work was to Preach the
Gospel. He gives us to understand, that to baptize was not the alone and chief
business he was sent to do, but his great work was to Preach the Gospel. This
word not is not always used as an absolute Negative, for then Christ utterly
forbids all outward labor, Joh. 6. 27. where he commands them, Not to labor
for the meat which perishes, etc. and by the same Argument we may conclude
also, that Adam was not at all deceived, because Paul says expressly, 1 Timothy 2.
14. Adam was not deceived, but the Woman. It is clear, the Apostle means Adam
was not first deceived. I might give diverse instances of the like kind, but
this shall at present suffice as to the Answer of this Objection.

I shall now come to examine the next part of your Letter, these are your very
words, (being a Repetition, and Reply to some part of that which I formerly
wrote unto you.)

Thou speak of the Body of Christ after he was risen again, and say, That
after that he spoke with his Disciples and gave them Commandments, that then he
Ascended, with the same Body, into Heaven: which words are not agreeable to the
Scripture. Brother, be not too wise in thy own conceit, for it is no where
said. That flesh and blood is Christ: but Jesus Christ came in the flesh, Flesh
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50. But one, in a
certain place, says, That he first descended into the lower parts of the
Earth, and he that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all
heavens, that he might fill all things, Ephesians. 4. 9, 10. Beware at any time
thou opens thy mouth against the true Light, that lightneth every man which
comes into the World; for it is the pure Principle which is owned by the
scorned People called Quakers, and ought to be owned by thee also: Oh Brother!
come out of your beggarly Elements, and turn to the Light which reproves for
sin, and believe in it, and it will certainly take away thy sin; Surely he is
come, yea, he is come, felt, heard, and understood, etc.

Answ. What I formerly wrote unto you concerning Christ, and of his appearing
to his Disciples after he rose again from the dead, and that he ascended with
the same body into Heaven, is expressly according to the words of the holy
Scriptures; And for being wise in my own conceit, I have otherwise learned
Christ; and the wisdom I have, it is from above; and I dare not be wise above
what is written. But why do thou deny the flesh, or body of Christ? Oh! that
ever my Sister should yield so far to Satan, and Delusion, as to affirm, That
that Body of flesh and bone, that was born of the Virgin, and nailed to the
Cross, is no where said to be the Christ! but that the Christ was in him in
that body of flesh that was crucified: It is evident that you deny the Man
Christ Jesus, or he to be the Christ that was hanged on the tree, or put to
death between two Thieves. For if the Light, or Power, in that Person, be the
only Christ of God, distinct and apart from the body that was crucified on the
Cross; then it follows plainly, and may appear to any, that your chief
Doctrine leads you to deny that ever the Christ of God and true Savior died;
for the Light, Power, or Godhead, whereof you speak, could not be so crucified
and nailed to the Cross. And if that Man (to wit) Jesus of Nazareth, was upon
no other account called the Christ, but merely and alone, because the true
Christ was in him: Why may not any other man, in whose flesh or body Christ is
manifested and does dwell, be called the Christ as well as he who was born of
the blessed Virgin? Alas, poor Soul, thou did never learn this Doctrine, of
Christ, nor from the holy Scriptures. Thou seem to be one of G. Whitehead's
Scholars, and H. W. The latter does affirm, That Christ was never seen with any
outward or bodily eye. Bear with me if I am large in my Answer to you
concerning this thing, for my Soul is wounded in the thoughts of what you here
write, to see you plainly deny the true Savior: it would rejoice my heart, if
God should have so much mercy for you, as to recover your feet out of this evil
snare. I bless God for the Grace which has been given unto me in Christ
through the Gospel, which has not only enlightened my Soul into the saving
knowledge of a crucified Jesus, and glorious Light of the New Covenant, but
has also discovered, with much clearness unto me, the great darkness of these
men who cry up Light and Power within. And I shall endeavor to make appear the
Nature of this Wile of Satan, and Cheat of Antichrist, by God's assistance: You
do imagine that I am overwise, or wise in my own conceit, because I affirm,
That Jesus Christ is a Man, consisting of flesh and bone, and that he ascended
with the same body he had after he rose again from the dead. Whether this be
according to the Scriptures, or the Doctrine of yours, let it now be proved.
That inward Principle of Light and Power that was in that Person which was
crucified, or the Light which is in every man that comes into the World, is
the true Christ, Savior, and Mediator, you and other Quakers do affirm; which
I utterly deny, yet nevertheless I would have none to suppose in the least,
that I do deny the glorious Deity or Godhead of our Lord Jesus Christ; For,
though the inward Power or Godhead I assert, is not the Christ, considered
distinct and apart from the Manhood or Humane Nature; yet do I, according to
the holy Scripture, from my heart believe that Jesus Christ is truly God,
Eternal God, being from everlasting with the Father, and the express image of
his Person, Heb. 1. Of the Son, he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and
ever, Heb. 1. 8. The Word was in the beginning with God, and was God: And
though he is verily God, yet also is he truly Man. The Word was made Flesh, and
dwelt amongst us; and this Emanuel, or God with us, God in the Nature of Man,
is the Christ; he was in the form of a Servant, a man approved of God, Acts 2.
22. A man of sorrows, Isa. 53. 3. and yet thought it no robbery to be equal
with God, Phil. 2. 6. being David's Root, and David's Offspring. And this is
that Glorious Mystery of God manifest in Flesh; not God manifest in the flesh
of every man and woman, but God manifest in the flesh of our Mediator, in that
particular body of Christ prepared for him by the Father; or God-man, in a
wonderful mysterious union; God and Man, in an admirable manner, united
together in one Person, that so he might thereby reconcile God and Man, the
offended Creator, and the offending Creature, and remove the Enmity upon the
account of transgression. And since I perceive your darkness so great, upon
this account, that you conclude the Godhead, Divine Nature, of the glorious
Light and Power that was in him (viz.) Jesus of Nazareth, that was born of the
Virgin, distinct from his body or Humane Nature, is the Christ.

To refute you, pray observe what the Angel speaks unto the Virgin, Thou shall
Conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call his Name JESUS; He shall be great, and
shall be called the Son of the Highest. Mary conceived the true Christ in her
Womb, and laid him in Swaddling Clothes, Luke 2. 6, 7. Moreover, the Angel
testified unto the Shepherds, That that very Child, which Mary brought forth,
was the Christ; Unto you is born this day (observe it) in the City of David, a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Also our Saviors words to the Woman of
Samaria, one would think might convince you concerning this matter: She was
ignorant of the true Christ; I know the Messiah shall come, says she, and when
he comes he will tell us all things, Joh. 4. 25. Jesus says unto her, I that
speak unto thee, am He. He did not say, the Light which is within me, is he,
(viz.) the Christ and true Messiah, but I that speak unto thee. The Apostle
Peter's Testimony agrees with this, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God.
He that was the very Son of God was also the Son of Man. He took not on him
(says the Author to the Hebrews) the nature of Angels, but he took on him the
Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. Moreover, after our Lord Jesus rose from the dead,
and appeared to his Disciples, they being in a maze (supposing they had seen a
Spirit) he said unto them, Behold my hands, and my feet: it is I my self,
handle me and see: a Spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have: and
when he had so said, he showed them his hands and his feet. If this Person, who
showed his Disciples his hands and feet, was not the true Christ, or if he
really were not a man consisting of a Body of flesh and bone, what will you
make of his Expressions.

But again, Does not the words of John Baptist very clearly refute you? The
people asked, whether he was the Christ or no? He Answered them. He was not:
But he told them, That he which sent him to baptize with Water, the same said
unto me, Upon whomsoever thou shall see the Spirit descend and remaining upon,
that is HE. John did not say, the Light that is in every man which comes into
the World, is the Christ; neither does he affirm that the Holy Spirit was He
that came down upon him in the likeness of a Dove: but that Man he does
testify and positively declare to be the Christ and Lamb of God, even him that
the Holy Spirit came down and remained upon. The word Christ does signify one
anointed, and therefore how absurd is it for you to say, the Spirit or the
Anointing is the Christ, and not that blessed Man whom the Father gave down the
Spirit, or the Anointing, in such a wonderful manner upon.

But whereas it is objected, That John testified that Christ was before him
(namely before John) and therefore he must needs intend the Light and Power
that was in that Person.

I Answer, That John declared plainly that Christ was before him, and yet does
also affirm that he comes after him: I say and bear record this is the Son of
God, even he (says he) that comes after me, yet is preferred before me, for
he was before me. And so he was before Abraham; which proves that which is
denied by many, (viz.) That he is the Son of God by an Eternal Generation, and
as truly God as he is Man, and so is as he himself witnesses, the Root and
Offspring of David, as I showed you before; he is David's Lord, and yet David's
Son.

He was before John, being indeed from Everlasting, respecting his Deity; but
not so, respecting his Humanity. Upon this account many stumble at Christ now,
as they did in former times.

I grant, Sister, what that one speaks, in a certain place, That He that
descended is the same that ascended, the self same He, that ascended on high
far above all Heavens, did first descend in his blessed Deity.

And yet notwithstanding that Branch which sprang from the Stem of Jesse, that
was born in the Town of Bethelem, is the alone Christ of God; there is such a
glorious Unity between the Divine and Humane Nature. Sister, I cannot but take
notice what an apt Scholar you are, you have got your lesson readily as if you
had been brought up at the feet of some of the Chieftains of the Preachers of,
and to the Light in all men; it is evident you deny the Man-Christ, or that Man
to be Christ, viz. Jesus of Nazareth, because it is said, Christ came in the
flesh; that is indeed an Argument the greatest of your Preachers urge.

Now further to Answer you in this, consider, Though it is said, Christ came in
the flesh, that word cannot prove what you would have it do, it is said, God
sent forth his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3. and he the Word,
or Christ, was found in fashion as a Man; Can this be said of the Light or
Power that was in him, or that is in us? Moreover, Christ was made (the
Scripture says) like unto us in all things, Sin only excepted: and it behoved
him in all things so to be, Heb. 2. 17. Can this be said of the Light within?
Besides, does not the Scripture say, That Christ died for our sins, that Christ
was Crucified on the Cross? Does not the Scripture say, Christ was three days
and three nights in the heart of the Earth? Does not Paul say, That Christ died
for our sins? 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4, 5, etc. That he was buried, and that he rose
again, and that he was seen of Cephas, then of the Twelve, and that he was seen
of five hundred Brethren at once? Do you think, Sister, this was the Light or
Power that was in that Person? Did that die, was that the Christ which was
crucified, and that was buried in the new Sepulcher? Come (said the Angels to
the Woman) and see the place where the Lord was laid. Was it the Light within
that was laid there, or was it Jesus of Nazareth, that was born of Mary?

But again, Do the Prophets bear witness to the Light within to be the Christ,
or the Apostles of the Lamb? See what Peter says, Acts 2. 32. This Jesus has
God raised up, whereof we are all witnesses. This Jesus! which Jesus? he tells
you, Jesus of Nazareth, a Man approved of God, verse. 22. Whom they by wicked
hands crucified and slew: ye have killed the Prince of Life (said he) whom God
has raised up from the dead, whereof we are witnesses. Therefore, let all the
house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made the same Jesus (mark) whom
ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ: not the Light within, but he is the
Lord and Christ: compare this with Acts 10. 39. which are also the Apostle
Peter's words, And we are Witnesses of all things which he did. You may see who
this was if you mind the verse before, it was Jesus of Nazareth whom Ged
anointed with the holy Spirit. Not the Light and Spirit within, but that
blessed Man that was anointed with the Spirit, or Oil of Gladness above his
fellows: We are (says he) witnesses of all things which he did, both in the
Land of the Jews and Jerusalem: whom they took and hanged on a tree, whom God
raised up the third day, and showed him openly, not to all the People, but unto
witnesses, chosen before of God, even to us who did eat and drink with him
after he rose from the dead, Acts 10. 39, 40, 41.

Now is not that which I formerly wrote unto thee, agreeing with, and according
to the holy Scriptures? I told thee that Christ was seen of his Disciples and
spoke with them after he rose from the dead, and that he (viz.) Jesus of
Nazareth, that man that was approved of God, that consisted of flesh and bones,
after he rose from the dead, was the true Savior: and have I not brought from
the holy Scriptures, witness enough to prove it? You have heard who the
Apostles did bear their witness of, who they did declare and testify was the
Christ of God; and if you mind but the 43 verse. of the same 10th of the Acts,
you may see what was the Testimony of all the Prophets; but fearing you mind
Quakers Books more than the Bible, I shall mention these words to you also,
Acts 10. verse. 43. And to him gave all the Prophets witness (even unto him that
did eat and drink with his Disciples after he rose from the dead) that through
his Name, whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins.

Object. I meet with one objection which some bring against what I have said,
viz. They affirm, That he that was crucified on the Cross, and buried in the
Sepulcher, could not be the Christ and Savior, because that body was called
the body of Jesus, when Joseph of Arimathea begged it of Pilat.

Answ. I do admire at the weakness and ignorance of these Objectors: for do not
the Scriptures speak so, or after the same manner, of the Bodies of Men after
they were dead? See 1 Chronicles. 10. 11, 12. And when all Jabesh Gilead heard all
that the Philistines had done to Saul, verse. 12. they arose, all the valiant
men, and took away the body of Saul, and the bodies of his Sons, and brought
them to Jabesh, and buried their bones under the Oak, etc. What they speak of
Christ, they may as well affirm concerning Saul and his Sons, the case is the
same: Saul was not flesh they may as well conclude, but something which did
dwell in that body, that the men of Jabesh Gilead buried under an Oak after his
overthrow, because that body is not called Saul, but the body of Saul. The same
we also read concerning Moses, as may be seen, Jude verse. 9. Michael the
Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he disputed about the body of Moses,
durst not bring a railing accusation against him, etc. That Moses was a man
consisting of flesh and bone they may deny by the same Argument, or say
assuredly that that body was not him, because it is called his body, as so to
affirm and speak concerning our Lord Jesus. It Is not said, (says one of your
Teachers) that Joseph of Arimathea begged the Jesus of Jesus, but the body of
See G. Whitehead's Book, called, The Light of Christ within, p. 62.
Jesus: As if it must needs have been so said if that Man called Jesus had been
the Christ. What Nonsense would this man have writ, if he had penned the story
concerning the body of Saul? he must have writ the men of Jabesh took up the
Saul of Saul. And what a strange Epitaph would this man write upon a Grave, or
Tombstone; he cannot write, by this Argument, Here lies the body of Thomas, or
William, etc. but rather thus, Here lies the Thomas of Thomas. And by this, all
persons may see how ridiculous these men render themselves, while they scrape
up such silly Arguments to deny and oppose the Truth.

But to proceed. You tell me, That flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom
of God, and so from those words of the Apostle conclude, That our Savior is
not ascended with the same body into Heaven above, which he took in the Womb of
the Virgin.

Answ. I understand (to my trouble) that many poor Souls, in these last and
evil days are carried away, so far, by the Spirit of D^^sion, that they do deny
the Resurrection the dead; and this place of Scripture (...) you mention, I
find is commonly made use of as a proof and confirmation of this their evil
opinion: but how exceedingly you, and others, do wrest the words of the
Apostle, in 1 Cor. 15. I might abundantly make appear. It seems strange to me,
that you should father such a Principle upon the Apostle Paul, who does so
clearly in the Spirit and Power of Christ Jesus, in that very Chapter oppose,
and utterly detect it; and sharply reproves those that did deny the
Resurrection of the dead in his days. If there be no resurrection of the dead,
(says he, verse. 13.) then is not Christ risen; and if Christ be not risen,
then is our Preaching vain; yea, and we are found false witnesses of God,
because we have testified of God, that he raised up Christ: whom he raised not
up, if the dead rise not. For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ risen,
verse. 16. And if Christ be not raised, your Faith is vain, and ye are yet in
your sins, viz. Then they also that are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished,
verse. 18. Observe these expressions well, and let all such tremble who are
found this day opposing and denying this glorious Truth and great Fundamental
of the Gospel. Remember the words of our blessed Savior himself, Joh. 5. 28,
29. Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming, in which all that are in the
Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: they that have done good, to
the Resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of
condemnation. This cannot intend a rising out of the grave of sin; because
rising in that sense, spiritually from the dead, our Lord spoke of that before
in the same Chapter, ver. 25. and he plainly holds forth this rising, verse. 28.
to be quite another thing to that he speaks of, v. 25. And there are none that
hear Christ's voice, and are raised spiritually from the dead in that respect,
that do rise to condemnation. The Lord Jesus alludes to the same Resurrection
which Daniel speaks of, Dan. 12. 2. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the
Earth, shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt. Thy dead men shall live (says the Prophet, Isa. 26. 19.) with my
dead body shall they arise. Abundance of clear proofs I might further urge for
the clearing up of this Truth, but I shall proceed, and indeed should not have
mentioned these Scriptures, but that I find you questioning, if not utterly
denying the Resurrection of the body.

You mention Paul's expression, 1 Cor. 15. flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God.

To Answer you in this, much I need not speak: for it is evident to any, unless
such who are woefully blinded, that by flesh and blood the Apostle does intend
corruption, or corruptible flesh and blood; and therefore he testifies that
those who are alive at the coming of Jesus Christ, shall be changed in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye: For, says he, this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortallity: he will change our vile
bodies, and fashion them like unto his glorious body, Phil. 3. 21.

But let not any conclude, because the Apostle does affirm our bodies shall be
changed, that therefore the same body, respecting the matter, substance, or
essence of it, shall not be raised; for Paul asserts, that the same [it] which
is sown in corruption, that very same [it] rises in incorruption; and every
seed shall have its own body. If the same body which is buried in the Grave,
(respecting the matter) rise not, then the dead rise not: All the change is,
touching the state, qualities, or condition of the body; the corruption and
imperfection, and all manner of deformity shall be done away, and it shall rise
more glorious than it was before.

To help your understanding a little further, consider that true convertion is
called a change, the Soul of every regenerate godly Man and Woman is changed;
yet it it is not a change of the essence of the Soul, but only of its evil
qualities, etc. Observe a saying of Job, Job 19. 25, etc. I know that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth: And
though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God;
whom I shall see for my self, and my eyes shall behold, and not another,
although my reins be consumed in me. That same body that has sinned with the
Soul, shall be punished with the Soul; and the same body that has suffered
shame and reproach for Christ, shall Reign with Christ. For we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in his body, according to that which he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2
Cor. 5. 10.

But to leave this, and proceed to prove that which is also denied (viz.) That
Jesus Christ is ascended up into Heaven with the same body he had after he rose
from the dead: consider these Scriptures, Luke 24. 45, 46. He opened their
understandings that they might understand the Scriptures, and said unto them,
Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the
dead, etc. verse. 50, 51. And he led them as far as Bethany, and he lift up his
hands and blessed them; and it came to pass, whilst he blessed them, he was
departed from them, and was carried up into Heaven. The same He that suffered
on the Cross, and arose from the dead, and appeared to his Disciples, and
showed them his hands and his feet, was carried up into Heaven. This He cannot
intend the Spirit or Power that was in him, because that was not, neither could
it be put to death; neither can the Heaven here spoke of, intend the hearts of
his Disciples, as it is by some imagined, because it is said when he ascended,
he was departed from them: It is expedient for you, says our dear Lord, that I
go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I
depart, I will send him, Joh. 16. 7. Observe from hence by the way, that the
Spirit, or blessed Comforter (which the Saints alone do receive) cannot be the
Savior and Mediator; the one is the giver, and the other is the gift; the one
is present, when the other is absent.

But further, To prove our Lord Jesus is ascended into Heaven, and has an
absolute real outward existence in glory above at the Father's right hand; see
Acts. 1. 9, 10, 11. Moreover, when the Lord Jesus appeared to Paul at the time
of his convertion, saying, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? Saul replied,
Who art thou, Lord? The Answer is, I am Jesus of Nazareth. It Is evident this
was after the Ascension of our Savior. May we not conclude all such to be
liars that do affirm, and testify, That the true Jesus is only Light and
Spirit within, and has no outward glorified being, or existence in the Kingdom
of his Father, or glory above? I am (said he) Jesus of Nazareth: he is the same
he was. Jesus of Nazareth we know was that holy and blessed Man that was born
of the Virgin: This Man (says the Author to the Hebrews) after he had offered
one Sacrifice for Sin, for ever sat down on the right hand of God, Heb. 10.
12. If Jesus Christ continues a Man for ever, then he has a body of flesh and
bone for ever; unless it can be proved, That Man can exist and have a being
without flesh and bone; which, I suppose, all will conclude is impossible. See
Heb. 7. 24. But this man, because he continues for ever, has an unchangeable
Priesthood. And Heb. 9. 24. Christ is not entered into the holy place made with
hands, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us:
And verse. 28. And unto them, that look for him, shall he appear the second time
without sin unto Salvation. He that shall come will come, and will not tarry,
Romans 10. 37. Even so, Come, Lord Jesus, Come quickly, Rev. 22. 20.

In the next place, You bid me beware lest at any time I open my mouth agaiust
the trite Light, which lights every man that comes into the World, for it is
the pure Principle that is owned by the scorned, called Quakers, and ought to
be owned by me also.

Answ. The Word, considered as Creator, by whom all things were made, is the
true Light which lights every man that comes into the World: and God forbid
that ever I should open my mouth against him: But He, the Word, considered as
made Flesh, or the true Emanuel, I am sure you have too much opened your mouth
against. I do understand the Principle of the Quakers, concerning the Light
within, very well; the impurity and vileness of which Principle, I have
briefly, and may yet further make appear.

They do affirm, The Light which is in every man is Christ, and that it is a
Saving Light.

There is a great difference between the Effence, or body of the Sun, and its
Beams: for though the created Sun, by its Rays and glorious Beams, does give
Light to all, save those who are blind, yet is not the Essence or body of the
Sun in them. So, and in like manner, though the Word considered as aforesaid,
be the true Light which lights every man that comes into the World, yet is
he not essentially in their hearts. You must learn better to distinguish
between an essence and an influence; or the body and beam of Light which
flows from the body: for want of a right distinction upon this account, the
understanding of the weak is confounded. Now I do own; and readily grant, That
every man that comes into the World, is lighted by the Word, or glorious
Creator, as I have showed, yet is it not a saving Light, or a light flowing
from the Word, considered as Mediator, because it does not teach, or reveal
unto Heathens, (who have no other help or Light but that) any thing of a
crucified Savior. And the Apostle clearly shows That the Mystery of the
Gospel was hid from the Gentiles, until the fullness of time came that Christ
suffered, and the Gospel was published: But again, Unbelievers and Worldly-men,
cannot receive the Spirit of Jesus Christ, which is the Comforter: our Lord
Jesus himself does assert it, Joh. 14. 17. he does not dwell in the hearts of
Reprobates. The Apostle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 13. 5. shows evidently, if
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, see Romans 8. 9.
And that there be many who are not his, or such who belong not to Christ, I
think none will deny.

But again, as touching the Principle of the Quakers concerning the Light
within: they do not only say it is a Light of Christ, but that this Light which
is in all, is the Christ, as I could make appear from their own mouths and
Pens, not only an operation of his Spirit, but really he (viz.) the Operator,
Savior and Redeemer; and that it will not only teach and reveal unto man
(without the help and teachings of the holy Scriptures) the Lord Jesus Christ,
who, once on the Cross, died and was Crucified, to atone and make peace, and
appease the wrath of God for poor Sinners; but that this Light within is the
Savior and Redeemer, which in his People does spiritually atone, make peace,
and satisfy the Justice of God; and that we are redeemed, cleansed from all
sin, justified and reconciled to God by the operation of this Light, or Christ
within; Not only that it is a cause, but the alone only chief and procuring
cause, without having respect to the Sacrifice of Christ's crucified Body which
was nailed to the Cross, and that Christ in the outward in his death and
sufferings was but only a Pattern or Example of that which must be wrought over
again in us: though some of them, I do confess, have been pleased to say, That
Christ's death and suffering without upon the Cross, was more than a Pattern or
Exemplar, for they say he did put an end thereby to the Types and Shadows of
the Ceremonial Law, etc. but not that he reconciled us thereby, and satisfied
the Justice of God, and that through his Righteousness and Merits imputed unto
us in believing, we stand acquitted, and shall be saved; but contrariwise it is
affirmed, That every one that comes to be justified, must come to witness the
same inherent holiness and perfection that was in our Lord Jesus Christ, and in
that perfect Obedience of theirs, by following the teachings of the Light of
their own Consciences, or Christ within, they place their hope, faith, and
dependence: and thus they seem not to be beholding to the Man Christ Jesus, nor
need his intercession, who poured forth his blood without the gate of
Jerusalem, to wash and cleanse our Souls, as the virtue thereof is applied by
Faith unto our Consciences: for, where the Scripture speaks of God being
reconciled unto us, and of our Salvation and remission of sins, it is plainly
held forth being done already for us by Christ's death and suffering without,
and as being done and completed by that one Offering of his; though I confess,
as I have told thee, we receive not the benefit of it, till by the help of the
Spirit we are made able to apply it to our Souls, which application of Christ's
blood does work that change in the Soul, which I have mentioned already to you
about Conversion. That this is according to the Doctrine of the holy Apostles;
see these Scriptures, Romans 3. 24, 25, 26, 27. Acts 4. 12. Romans 5. 10. For when
we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, 2 Cor. 5.
18. Heb. 10. 14. Heb. 9. 14. and verse. 25, 26, 28. Now how contrary this
Doctrine is to the principles of those People called Quakers, may appear to
you, were you not too much given up to blindness: And God forbid, that ever I
should own their Principle of the Light in all, that does so clearly tend to
the razing out the grand Fundamentals of the Gospel.

You bid me, Come out of my beggarly Elements, and turn to the Light within,
and believe in it, and 'twill certainly take away my sins.

Answ. Dare you call Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and Obedience to him who
has wrought Redemption and Salvation for me, and revealed this by his Word and
Spirit, and worked it in me, beggarly Elements? Shall those holy Appointments
of Jesus Christ (namely) Baptism and the Supper of our Lord, be denied by thee,
and condemned as beggarly Elements? Was not our Lord Jesus himself baptized in
Wa^er, notwithstanding he had so much of the holy Spirit in him? and was not
Paul and Cornelius (though they had the Spirit in such a wonderful manner)
baptized in Water? And did not all the Primitive Saints walk in that Order and
Communion that is, owned by me and my Brethren of the baptized Churches? And
were not the Saints commended for owning and holding the Ordinances as they
were once delivered unto them, and would you have me leave the footsteps of the
Flock, to walk in your by-path? God forbid.

Those Ordinances that you call beggarly Elements, have been made rich, sweet,
and glorious Appointments and Ordinances to my Soul. Indeed it is no marvel if
you deny the Sign who do deny him who is thereby signified; you denying the
Substance (viz.) a crucified Christ, I see you are naturally led to deny that
which does so clearly shadow him forth: but under his shadow I have (with the
Spouse) sat down, and his fruit is; and has been, sweet unto my taste; And
therefore do I write unto you, that you might have fellowship with us: for in
some measure we can say, through Grace, our fellowship is with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ. Praises and Halilujah to God for ever, who has
given us that witness in our selves, of which thou speak, that we can
experience the Power of Christ's Spirit risen in us for our Sanctification and
Renovation, as well as Christ was raised from the dead for our Justification.
Thou boastest of the kernel, as if thou had found it without the shell: be
not mistaken, the Power and the Form, the Sign, and that which is thereby
signified, God has joined together. I grant a Person may find the Shell, and
have no kernel in it; have a form of Godliness, but deny the Power: but rare is
it to find the kernel without the shell: If they are ashamed of all they have
done (says the Lord) show them the form of my house, Ezekiel. 43. 11. The Lord
added to the Church daily such as should be saved, Acts 2. 47. and they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking
of Bread, and in Prayers, verse. 42.

But lest I should be too large: I shall hasten to the rest of your Letter, in
which you repeat some of my words, which were in that former Letter I wrote
unto you, which are as follows:

Thou say, Sure I am, that those Persons who deny the Man Christ Jesus, to
have wrought Salvation for them, have no Salvation at all; and if they repent
not of their evil, shall one day be set amongst the Goats, and not amongst the
Sheep of Christ. That is very true, Brother, but art not thou one of them that
deny the Man Christ Jesus, whom John saw clothed with a garment down to the
feet, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle, etc. by the same Spirit the
pure in heart see God; for Christ is the true God and everlasting Life; but to
know Christ after the Flesh, which thou and multitudes aim at. The Apostle
says, Though I have known Christ after the flesh, yet from henceforth I know
him so no more. Indeed those that cry up carnal things for Ordinances may stand
amongst the Goats.

Answ. It Is true, I did say that such who deny the Man Christ Jesus, to have
wrought Salvation for them, have no Salvation at all; and is it any more than
the Apostle Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. Those false Prophets who privily
bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them (he does
affirm) do bring upon themselves swift destruction, etc. I charge none in
particular; and would to God there were none in England guilty herein; but why
do you conclude or think that I do deny the Man Christ Jesus, that John saw,
who was clothed in garments down to his feet? etc. I do believe that he which
St. John saw in that Vision, was the Lord Jesus, yea, the Man Christ Jesus; and
I do not deny, but have labored to prove that he is the true God, and yet
truly Man. This Man (says the Author to the Hebrews) because he continues for
ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, Heb. 7. 24. And then again in the tenth
Chapter, But this Man after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever,
sat down on the right hand of God, Heb. 10. 12. Had he not been Man, how could
he have died? For, observe, Rev. 1. 18. I am he that lives and was dead, and
behold I am alive for evermore, etc. The self same He, that visionally did
appear to John, once was dead; but so it cannot be said of the Light or Power
that was in him, and therefore here you are again at a loss.

But you bring Paul's words, 2 Cor. 5. 16. as an Objection against what we
affirm concerning Jesus Christ, Though I have known Christ after the flesh, yet
from henceforth know I him so no more. Do you suppose that the Apostle means
by these words and expressions, that he once knew Christ a Man confist^ng of
flesh and bone, but now he knew him so no more, and that now he was not a Man,
but only a Spirit and Light within? -- Sister, you are a very bad expounder of
the Scriptures, if this be it that you would have; for observe, with care, what
the Apostle in the former part of the same verse does assert, he speaks the
very same of Man that he speaks of Christ, Wherefore henceforth we know no man
after the flesh; yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now we
henceforth know him so no more. Do you suppose the Apostle knew no man to
consist of flesh and bone? For, as he, and other Saints, did not know Christ
after the flesh, so they knew no Man after the flesh; therefore it is evident
you wrest the words of the Apostle. And because I perceive you, and others
also, are found abusing this Text, and missing the true sense, and main drift
and intention of the Apostle therein, I shall endeavor to help your
understandings, in opening and explaining this place of holy Scripture, which
so many stumble at; And in the first place, it may not be amiss if you observe
what the Apostle in Romans 3. 1, 2. and in other places, does declare of the
great advantages Israel, after the flesh, had over the Gentiles; and yet also
shows us, That they of themselves were no better than others, but that both
Jews and Gentiles were all under sin; and here in this 2 Cor. 5. he shows us
that all were dead, and those Christ died for, that they which henceforth live,
might not live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, and rose
again: and manifest and clear it is by the holy Scriptures, That the Lord Jesus
was given for the Salvation of the Gentiles as well as the Jews, though for a
time there was a limitation as to the Ministration of the Gospel respecting the
Gentiles, Matthew. 10. 6. yet since the death of Christ the Partition Wall being
broken down, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. The Apostle does make appear, that the
Gentile-Believers were in as good a condition, and in the like capacity with
the Jews, Gal. 6. 15. and therefore does affirm, That henceforth he knew no man
after the flesh; that is, he esteems those of the Circumcision, and those of
the Uncircumcision alike in Christ Jesus.

Now the word know or to know has various acceptations; but here, I
understand, it does hold forth to esteem, regard, allow, or to approve of by
way of preference; and so the word is taken, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Romans 7. 15. Psalm.
1. 6. and 31. 7. 1 Cor. 8. 3. And as God's knowledge of us does imply his
approbation, 2 Timothy 1. 19. So his not knowing the wicked does hold forth his
rejection of them, Matthew. 7. 23. and chap. 25. 12. Job. 9. 21. Know I no man
after the flesh, by after the flesh is meant the Seed of Abraham, by natural
generation who seemed to have a confidence in the flesh, and boasted they had
Abraham for their Father, concluding (it is like) from thence, that God also
was their Father, not understanding that the Children of the flesh were not
counted for the Seed, Gal. 3. 29. -- Henceforth, that is, since the death of
Christ, as in the verses going before; and from thence it is, that he grounds
this Argument, wherefore hencefore know we no man after the flesh, God made a
difference before, as Acts 10. 11. and 11, 2, 3. and Acts 15. 9. but now it is
otherwise.

Again, he also makes an instance of Christ himself, who came of that same
stock and lineage, Romans 9. 5. that henceforth he knew Christ no more with that
difference and distinction, he having by his death completed the work he came
to do, he had put an end to that former dispensation, Old things are done away,
and all things are become new: If the Lord please to open your eyes, you may
see this to be the mind of the Spirit, and intention of the Apostle, and not
that which you would infer from thence.

As touching what you speak concerning carnal Ordinances, you speak you know
not what, you call that carnal and outward, which Christ and Saints call
Spiritual; you have cause to blush and be ashamed for calling any of the holy
Ordinances and Appointments of Christ, low and carnal things. I have spoken of
the Spiritualness of them already, and therefore shall proceed to the next
thing, you speak of, Smiting of my fellow Servant, take heed lest you your self
should therein be guilty. I would not smite such whom Christ smites not; and
my purpose is to heal such whom Satan has smitten and wounded.

You ask me, Whether I am one of the Gazers that look for Christ's Personal
Reign, you say the eyes of all such are blind, for Christ is come.

Answ. Some of those Gazers and Waiters was Paul, Peter, and John; yea, all the
Primitive Saints: for though Christ was come in Spirit to them, as gloriously
as he is come to any now, yet they waited (as I have already proved) for
Christ's coming from Heaven; do you think they were all blind?

I shall proceed to that which remains of your Letter: these are your words,
(viz.)

Thou say, Christ's Sheep hear his voice and follow him, and have respect to
all his Commands. These are the sayings of Christ; but I question, whether ever
any Baptist did hear his voice, or did follow him: be not offended, for does
not the Scripture say, That he that names the Name of Christ must depart from
iniquity: than he indeed that calls upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved,
and how shall they call upon Christ the Light within, of whom they have not
believed; and how shall they believe on him, Christ the Word, near in their
hearts, of whom they have not heard; and how shall they hear without a true
Preacher to turn them to the Light within, and how shall they Preach, except
they are sent to turn people from darkness to Light: and surely, Brother, that
Prophet which Moses said, God would raise up whom we should hear in all things,
he preaches in our hearts, and we hear his voice and follow him.

Answ. These are the words of your Letter, and I shall Answer you; but first of
all I cannot but take notice, what a sad judging and censorious Spirit you are
of: I thought, Sister, you durst not have spoken after this manner; do you
think that none of the Baptists did ever hear Christ's voice and follow him,
surely you may conclude, that some of them did; for the Primitive Saints were
baptized in Water, and so might as well be called Baptist's as any now; and yet
they, I do suppose, you think did hear Christ's voice and follow him: but do
you judge, that none of the Baptists now do depart from iniquity, doubtless you
may have ground to conclude, That some of them are as holy Men and Women as any
are amongst you, though they do not look to be justified by their own inherent
holiness: We do not believe it is possible to attain to such a degree of
perfection as to be as pure from sin as our Lord Jesus Christ was, we see there
is need to pray as our Lord has taught, Forgive us our trespasses, and that we
have need of Christ's Intercession for us, it wounds and grieves us, because we
are attended with such a body of sin and death, we find a continual need of a
supply of Grace, we find, when we would do good, evil is present with us; if
you have no evil thoughts, nor no need to pray, Forgive us our sins; nor of
Christ's Intercession, that you have all strength and no weakness, all light
and no darkness; that you are perfect, not only in part, but also in the
highest degree, and know as you are known, having no defect in your
understandings; if these things be so, you do excel any of the Baptists, but I
fear there are evil thoughts, weaknesses, and defects in the best of you; and
if so, you must go to the perfect righteousness of another (viz.) the Lord
Jesus Christ of necessity, or else you are undone for ever, notwithstanding all
your holiness, which you, above others, make your boast of.

You speak of calling on the Name of the Lord. I know not what such should call
upon the Name of the Lord for, that are so perfect, as some Quakers say they
are: if they have need of any thing, if they are not taken up into the fruition
of God, they are short of that glorious estate of perfection, of which they
speak.

But again, you say, How shall they call upon him on whom they have not
believed? and how shall they believe on him, Christ the Word near in their
hearts, whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a true
Teacher to turn them to the Light within? Sister, you make strange reading of
the Scripture, there are no such sayings in all the Book of God. I observe one
thing, and that is this, you conclude that the very work of a true Preacher is
to exhort people to turn to the Light within. I shall, in the first place, make
this appear to the contrary, and do affirm, That none of the true
Gospel-Preachers did ever teach such a Doctrine as this is, which you speak of,
and which the Quakers preach (namely) bid the People turn to the Light within.
I have carefully examined the Scriptures upon this account, and I find David
charging, and counselling his Son Solomon to walk in the ways of God, and to
keep his Statutes and Commandments, as they were written in the Law of Moses, 1
Kings 2. 3. and in Psalm. 119. 9. it is written, Wherewith shall a young man
cleanse his way? the Answer and direction is, by taking heed thereto, according
to thy Word: It Is not said, by turning to the Light within: Now are you clean
(says Christ) through the Word which I have spoken to you. Christ directs his
Spouse to go forth by the footsteps of the Flock, not to look to the Light
within, Cant. 1. 8. but to go forth and tread in the same steps that the Saints
and faithful Children of God walked in, in former times. The Prophet Jeremiah
also does not Preach the Doctrine which Quakers do, turn to the Light within,
but bids them, Stand in the Ways, and ask for the old Paths which is the good
Way, and walk therein, Jer. 6. 16. and they shall find rest for their Souls.
Moreover, Isaiah that Evangelical Prophet, and glorious Preacher of God's mind
and counsel to the Children of Men, when he came to understand, that the People
would seek to Deceivers, and lying Spirits, though they might cry up Light and
Power never so much to be in them, he straitway sends us To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no
light in them, Isa. 8. 20. he does not direct to the Light within, but to the
Law and Testimony. Also the Prophet Malachi commands and counsels the People to
remember the Law of Moses commanded him in Horeb, Mal. 4. 4.

But again, when all the People flocked to John Baptist, who was a great and
glorious Preacher, yea, chosen and sent of God, if ever any were; and when they
cried out, What shall we do? he did not command them to turn to the Light
within: but contrariwise, pointed to Christ without him, whom the Spirit
descended and did rest upon.

You say, How shall they believe without a true Preacher, to turn them to the
Light within?

Now, Sister, you may see, that none of those true Preachers did preach any
such Doctrine. But to go on, let us see whether Christ or his Apostles, which
he chose and sent forth as the great Ministers and Ambassadors of the Gospel,
did ever give such counsel unto men, or publish such a Doctrine to the world,
viz. Turn to the Light within. Pray observe the Answer to the young man that
came running to him, asking him, What he must do to inherit eternal life?
Christ sent him presently to the Scripture, to see what he read there, and bad
him, Sell that which he had, and give it to the poor, and follow him, and he
should have treasure in Heaven: and not one word of turning to the Light
within. Also the Lord Jesus Christ does not bid the Jews look within, but
search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39.

But to proceed, Let us see what counsel the Apostle Peter gave to those Jews
that were pricked in their hearts, Acts 2. 37. who cried out, What shall we do?
he does not exhort them to mind the Light which was in their Consciences, and
turn to that, and believe in that: but, said he, Repent and be baptized every
one of you for the remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift of the
Holy Ghost, etc.

I shall only mention one passage more upon this account, and that is
concerning the Preaching of Paul and Silas to the trembling Jailer, who thought
the Prisoners had been fled: Sirs (said he) What must I do to be saved? Acts
16. 30. they forthwith direct him what he should do, but not to turn to the
Light within, but to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ; that was the Doctrine
these true Ministers and Servants of God preached to this poor Jailer, and
those that were in his house; the way to be saved, is not to do this and thou
shall live, or be obedient to the Law or Light in thy heart, but believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ, roll thy Soul upon him, apply the virtue of his Blood and
Merits, and obtain, through precious Faith, his perfect and complete
Righteousness, and thou shall be saved.

And thus you may clearly perceive, That these Preachers of, and to the Light
in all, do publish to the World such a Doctrine, and give such counsel and
directions to poor Sinners, that never was preached by the Prophets, John
Baptist, Christ, nor his Apostles; That God in Man has placed a Light, or
given a Guide within, to lead all men to eternal life, and that alone men are
to turn to, and look to that for Life and Salvation, and that no other means,
rule or guide man does need, or ought to have respect unto, or look after.

Object. To this I know some of your judgment have replied, That the drift and
tendency of all the Teachings and Directions of the holy Men of God, Christ and
the Apostles, was to turn People from Darkness to the Light, to the knowledge
of God, and Christ, which is Spiritual, and therefore within: For, What may be
known of God is manifest within, Romans 1. And Paul said, God who commanded the
Light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, etc. 2 Cor. 4.

Answ. To this we Answer, First, by Concession. Who does deny that holy Men did
in all their preaching, endeavor to turn men an^ women from darkness to the
light, to leave their sins, to turn from all their wicked abominations, and
unfruitful works of darkness, and to turn to God and Christ, and to embrace the
Gospel? But was this God, Christ and Gospel, hid in their hearts? or, do those
Scriptures hold forth, that the Apostles did send them thither to find the will
and mind of God? did they bid them look within? for therein the Controversy
does consist: Because those, who are truly converted, have the Spirit of Christ
in them, and so come to see and behold the shining forth of the glorious Light
of the Gospel in their hearts, does it follow, that that Light was hid in them
before, or that the saving Light of Christ is in the hearts of carnal and
unconverted men? or because it is said they turned to the Light; do you suppose
it must needs intend and signify the Light within which you speak of? I know
not why you should so conclude, unless there was no other Light to turn unto,
but what is in the heart of Men. Alas! before God sent the Gospel and commanded
the Light to shine into their hearts, they were in darkness, and without God in
the World.

But whereas it is objected, Romans 1. What may be known of God, is manifest in
Men. The Apostle speaks there, of the knowledge of God as Creator; and what is
required by God, according to the Law of the first Covenant; what may be known
of God upon this account, is mamifest in them by the visible things of the
Creation and Light of their Consciences, or Law, which God has implanted in
their hearts: Who having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, showing (says
he) the works of the Law written in their hearts, etc. and thus men who are in
the night of Darkness, of Heathenism and Unbelief, void utterly of the saving
knowledge of the Gospel, and of a crucified Jesus, may have the Law or Light of
the Moon to guide their paths, by which they are taught their Duty to God in
Morals, but understand nothing of that glorious Mystery of the Gospel, of God's
intent and eternal purpose in saving poor lost Man by the blood of Jesus
Christ, which by the Sun, or glorious Ministration of the Gospel is revealed to
us. For I ask you, or any amongst you, this Question; Whether that whatsoever
may be known of our Lord Jesus Christ, or of a crucified Jesus that died
without the Gates of Jerusalem, is taught unto Heathens and Infidels (that
never heard the sound of the Gospel) by the Light within of which you speak?
which if not, then whatsoever may be known of God in Christ is not manifested
in them. And this I further do affirm, That there is none amongst you, nor in
the World, that can make appear, that ever any Heathen, Ethiopian, or Infidel,
in any remote parts, that never heard the Scripture, nor any man speak of it to
him, that had no extraordinary Miracles, or Revelation, that ever did attain
merely by that Light within, which all men have, to the knowledge of one Jesus
of Nazareth, that was Crucified without the gates of Jerusalem; where lived
that Heathen, Moor, or Infidel? I say, that merely by the help and guidance of
that Light within, which came to find out so much as the Name or historical
knowledge of a crucified Jesus.

I have heard what some persons have affirmed, viz. That they should have known
all that they now know of Jesus Christ, and what he did and suffered, if the
Scripture never had been written: how to believe them I know not. But I shall
only ask this one Question of such, and shall pass on: viz. What things and
other Signs were those which Jesus did that are not written? See Joh. 20. 30.
and Chap. 21. 25. If you say you know not, or it is not revealed to you; So in
like manner, I say, you would have been as ignorant of all those things
concerning Christ and his Sufferings which are written, if you never had had
the knowledge of the holy Scripture, notwithstanding the Light within.

In the next place you say, Assuredly that Prophet which Moses said God would
raise up, whom we must hear in all things; he preaches in our hearts, and we
know his voice and follow him.

Answ. Christ may speak by his Spirit, I do grant, in the heart of a Saint, as
well as he does by the written Word, yet never contrary to it: but I do deny,
That the Light which is in all men, is that great Prophet, which Moses said,
God would raise up, as you seem to imagine: Because it is expressly said by
Moses, That the Prophet which God would raise up, should be raised up of their
Brethren, and also like (says he) unto me, Acts 3. 22. Now, how can this be
said of the Light in all? Is that one of our Brethren? Or, is that like unto
Moses? The Lord Jesus was made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted.
Man had sinned, and therefore Jesus Christ, in Man's Nature, came forth to at
one and make peace, and to satisfy the Justice of his Father. The Chastisement
of our Peace was upon him, and through his Scripes we are healed, Isa. 53.

You ask me, What I am the better, with others, for approaching into the Water?
who has required these things at our hands? for the things that are seen are
carnal, etc. And then you say, That those who have the Spirit of Christ, do not
bend to carnal Washing, but come to the answer of a good Conscience, and to the
heavenly Manna.

Answ. Could you not ask, What the Primitive Saints were the better? None of
Christ's Ordinances are in vain: and much spiritual benefit many can experience
thereby; And we know, and are assured, that the Lord has required it at our
hands: And may you not call outward Preaching, and outward Hearing, carnal
things, as well as so to call Baptism and the Supper of our Lord? And why my
Sister should say, That they that have the Spirit of Christ do not bend to such
Ordinances, I know not, since the Saints who had the Spirit in former times, did
bend to them: And that you should call them by such reproachful Names, is a
grief to me. Your slighting and despising the Precepts and Gospel-Institutions
of Jesus Christ, may one day prove your Soul-wound and burden. What I mentioned
concerning Cornelius his bending and submitting unto Water Baptism,
notwithstanding his high attainment of the Spirit, you have not in the least
weak nor laid down any thing that is like a^ Answer.

And now, as concerning the remaining part of your Letter; Some things are but
Tautologies, repeating the same thing. You tell me, That Christ is come, and
positively say and testify, That you look not for another: which has already
been refuted, and your ignorance, with the rest of those of your persuasion,
made manifest.

But to draw toward a Conclusion, I do, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, entreat
you to examine and prove these Lines by the writings of the holy Men of God,
Who spoke as they were moved by the Holy Spirit, and ponder so the paths of
your feet that all your ways may be established; and see if you have not
refused and forsaken the good way of the Lord, opposing that Doctrine which is
according to Godliness; take heed lest you are irrecoverably carried away with
a new and strange Doctrine, by the slight of men and crastiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive: I (as touching my self) do know on whom I have
believed; And do not think I shall lay down my head in sorrow, (as you are
pleased to signify) if I procced in the way I am in; for though I am outwardly
decaying, and the time of my departure is at hand, yet am I, through the Grace
of God, in some good measure assured, That when the earthly house of this
Tabernacle is dissolved, I have a building of God, a house not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2. I may say with holy Job, Behold my
witness is in Heaven, and my record is on high, Job 16. 19. I do know that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; and
though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God:
whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes behold, and not for another, though
my reins be consumed in me, Job. 19. 25, 26, 27. And that God who fed me all my
life long unto this day, and has refreshed my Soul with the dews from above,
and given me a place in his house, will take continual care of me, and cause my
Soul to bring forth fruit in old Age, and be my God and my guide eveu until
death.

And whatsoever you may suppose of the Way and Doctrine in which my Soul is
(through the Grace of God) established, and remains unmovable: Yet, unto all
my faithful Brethren, I have this to say, and testify (with the Apostle) That
this is the true Grace of God in which you stand; and there is no other Gospel
nor Doctrine of Christ to be received, nor no other burden laid upon you by
Christ, but what you have already: hold fast until he comes; Be you faithful
unto death, and you shall receive the crown of life.

And all I have further to say to you, my dear Sister, is, only in tender love
to exhort you to Repent, and turn to the Lord Jesus Christ, and give glory to
him, before your feet stumble upon the dark Mountains; and while you look for
Light, he turn it into the shadow of Death, and make it gross darkness. God
waits long before he utterly gives up a People, or a particular Soul, to
believe lies, to be snared, and fall so as never to rise any more.

If you refuse to hear me, I can but mourn and weep in secret for you; and
however I may be judged and censured by any, I shall, in what I have done, have
peace. This being all at present, I shall leave it to the blessing of God, and
remain,

Your Affectionate Brother, H. G.

POSTSCRIPT.
Christian Reader,
THE perilousness of these last days are very great, and the danger of them
appears every day more and more; those evil times which our Lord Jesus did
foretell should come (in which false Christ's and false Prophets should arise
and deceive many) we are brought forth in. The Devil knows his time is short,
and therefore is in great rage, Rev. 12. laying about him (as I may say) with
both hands; those Souls which he cannot destroy by fleshly and carnal
filthiness, and cursed debauchery, (which never abounded more in the World than
it does now) he labors to ruin and spoil eternally by erroneous Opinions,
blasphemous and damnable Heresies. And this let me add further, That the sins
against the first Table, are as heinous and as abominable in the sight of God
(if not more) than those against the Second; which may appear by that speedy,
swist, and severe execution of wrath and divine vengeance upon those under the
former dispensation, who were upon that account disobedient and transgressors,
Levit. 10. 1, 2. Numb. 15. 36. Numb. 16. 32, 35, 40. 1 Samuel 6. 19. 2 Samuel 6. 6,
7. And of all Heresies, none are more dangerous and pernicious than those which
tend to the razing and destroying the foundation of Religion and Godliness; and
therefore it is said by the Prophet, If the foundations be destroyed, what can
the righteous do? Psalm. 11. 3. Now the foundation upon which the true Christian
does alone and wholly build, is the Lord Jesus Christ. JEHOVAH has laid in
Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone; a precious cornerstone, Isa.
28. 16. For other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. yet how is this stone in these days (as well as he was
in former times) set at naught, and dissallowed by many, who take upon them to
be builders, some wholly do disown him; others in a mysterious manner lay him
aside; for, notwithstanding their fair pretenses of making him their pattern,
yet the foundation upon which they build is quite another thing: And a third
sort there be who build upon him but in part, and few they are by whom Jesus
Christ is alone exalted, etc.

It is the great grief and trouble of my Soul, to see what new and strange
Opinions are daily hatched and fomented by the Spirit of Error and Delusion
concerning Jesus Christ. Some deny his glorious Godhead, Deity, or Divine
Nature; Others, though they do assert that Jesus Christ is the most high God,
yet will they not grant that Jesus of Nazareth, that man who was born of the
Virgin, is the Christ and very God, but rather (as thou may perceive by this
precedent discourse) they absolutely assirm that that inward Light, Power, or
Godhead, distinct and apart from the Human Nature or Body that was prepared for
him, was the Christ; that is to say, the Spirit or the Anointing, and not HE
who was therewith anointed. And what is this less than to deny the Lord who
laid down his life, and was crucified to make peace, and reconcile us to the
Father, etc.

Notwithstanding, somewhat has already been spoken to refute this strange
Doctrine, yet I am stirred up to add this after-word, hoping it may prove,
through the blessing of the Almighty, for a further confirmation of the weak in
the truth of the Gospel. That which I intend to do, is, to prove and more
clearly make appear, that Jesus Christ is truly Man, but more especially to
show that he (viz. Jesus of Nazareth) is the most high God.

First, That he is a Man, consider and weigh well these Scriptures that give to
him that Appellation. The Prophet Isaiah calls him a Man of sorrows, Isa. 53.
3. The Apostle Peter calls him a man approved of God, see Acts 2. 22. Ye men of
Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by
Miracles and Wonders, etc. John the Baptist called him a Man, Joh. 1. 30. This
is he of whom I said, after me comes a MAN, etc. The Apostle Paul calls him a
Man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men,
the MAN Christ Jesus: And the Author to the Hebrews, in several places, calls
him, a Man: see Heb. 7. 24. and 10. 12. But this Man after he had offered one
Sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God.

Secondly; as he is called a Man, so it is evident and plainly affirmed in
Scripture that he was made flesh, Joh. 1. 14. or did assume our Nature;
Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same, Heb. 2. 14. compare this with verse. 16.
For verily, he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the
seed of Abraham. Moreover, the Apostles says, Romans 1. 3. That he (viz. Jesus
Christ) was made of the seed of David according to the flesh. And Gal. 4. 4.
the same Apostle affirms, That God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, etc.
and from hence he is called the Son of David, and the Offspring of David, etc.
But to proceed;

Thirdly, The Scriptures says, He was made like unto us in all things, sin
only excepted: he had the very form, shape, and fashion of a man, Phil. 2. 8.
That he was born of the Virgin, and laid in swaddling clothes, and that he grew
in stature or bigness (as others do) Luke 2. 52. That he was subject to hunger
(and cold) Matthew. 4. 2. and that some times he was found to mourn and weep, and
at another time to rejoice, and also that of some things he was ignorant, and
that he was exposed to temptation, Matthew. 4. 1. Heb. 2. 18. and also unto the
rage and fury of wicked men; that he was put to death, his side, the Scripture
says, was pierced, and that out of it came water and blood; that his feet and
hands were nailed to the Cross, and that he was buried, or laid in a new
Sepulcher, and that he rose from the dead, Now it is clear and undeniable, that
all these things could not be said of him, were he not in very deed a man as we
are, etc.

The next thing that I am to do, is to show and make appear unto you from the
holy Scripture, That this very man, viz. Jesus of Nazareth, though he is truly
man, yet also he is the most high and eternal God, and that the Humane and
Divine Nature make but one Christ, there being such a glorious, wonderful, and
mysterious Union of the two Natures in one Person. And for the proof of this,
observe the Answer of the Apostle Peter to the question our Savior put forth,
Matthew. 16. 13. Whom do men say, that I, the Son of man, am? To which Peter
answered, verse. 16. Thou art CHRIST, the Son of the living God. This Answer our
Lord approved of, and therefore said, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona; for
flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
heaven. And again, at another time, when Jesus asked his Disciples, whether
they also would go away? Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go?
thou have the words of eternal life; and we believe and are sure that thou art
THAT CHRIST the Son of the living GOD. And to this agrees the saying and
Testimony of the Angel to Mary, Luke 2. 36. The holy Spirit shall come upon
thee, and the power of the Highest shall over shadow thee; therefore also that
holy Thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. It may
not be amiss also, if I mention the words of Nathaniel, Joh. 1. 4, 9. Nathaniel
answered and said, Rabbi, Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel.

And that I may further make this appear, that Jesus of Nazareth is truly God,
yea, the most high God, as is the Father, and of the same substance and
essence, though distinguished from the Father, as touching his personal
subsistence: I shall lay down these following Arguments, taken from the holy
Scriptures.

First: Because he has that very name or application given unto him, See Heb.
1. 8. But unto the Son, he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever:
compared with Acts 20. where the Apostle charge the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus, to take heed unto themselves, and to all the Flock, over which the
holy Spirit had made them Overseers, to seed the Church of God, which HE
(observe) has purchased with his own blood, verse. 28. Now all men know, that
he who gave himself for the Church, to purchase the Church, and to cleanse and
wash the Church, was Jesus Christ.

Object. But here it may be some will object and say, That this same name or
appellation has been given unto men, as we read concerning Moses, Exodus 7. 1.
And the Lord said unto Moses, See, I have made thee a God unto Pharaoh, etc.
And so the Scriptures elsewhere speak of the Rulers as Gods; I said ye are
Gods, but ye shall die like Men.

Answ. 1. I do grant the name God has been given to men upon the account of
what those Scriptures speak; yet was that name or title never given to any man
on earth, as it is given unto Jesus Christ; for he is not only called God, but
also the Mighty God. See Isa. 9. 6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son
is given, and the Government shall be upon his shoulders, and his name shall be
called, Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty GOD, the Everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace. And as he is here called the Mighty God, so the Apostle John
calls him the True God, 1 Job. 5. 20. And we know (says he) that the Son of
God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we may know him that is
true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the
true God, and eternal life. And as he is called by this Apostle the true God,
so Jude calls him the only Wise God, Jude 25. Yea, and the Apostle Paul calls
him, Romans 9. 5. God blessed for ever; see and observe his expressions, Whose
are the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Chrict came, who is GOD
blessed for ever. Amen. Now where is any man, save Jesus of Nazareth, only
called the Mighty God, the True God, the only Wise God, and God blessed for
ever? And how dares any man (these Scriptures being considered) deny the
glorious Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ? But,

2. He that made the World, must needs be Eternal God: for none could do that
but God alone. It Is ridiculous and most absurd to think the Creature could make
it self before it self was. God, upon the account of his infinite Power and
Wisdom in creating the the World, expostulateth and reasons with his People,
glorying (if I may so say) in the greatness of his Power, and Majesty, and
unwordable Essence, proving that way his dreadful Godhead, Isa. 40. and all the
Gods of the Nations to be but Idols. And now that Jesus Christ made and created
the World, see the first of John, verse 1. In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God, verse. 3. All things were made by
him, etc. Now compare this with the 14th verse, And the Word was made Flesh,
and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory as the glory of the only begotten
of the Father, full of grace and truth: Read the next verse, and you may see
that this was he that John bear witness of, to be the true Christ. But again,
read Col. 2. 16. For by him (says Paul) were all things created that are in
heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible. If you would know who
this is, you may see, if you please to mind, verse. 14. it is he, who has
purchased remission of sins for us through his blood; and 18 verse, It Is he who
is the head of the body, the Church, who is the beginning, the first born from
the dead, etc. compare this with Heb. 2. 10. And thou Lord in the beginning
have laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy
hands. That he speaks of the Son, it is evident, see the whole Chapter; the main
drift of the Author, is to set forth the glorious Deity and Godhead of Jesus
Christ. But I must hasten to the next Argument, and that is this;

3. He that upholdeth all things that are made, must needs be God: but that
Jesus Christ does uphold and preserve all the whole Creation, see Heb. 1 3. Who
being the brightness of his Glory and the express image of his Person, and
upholding (observe) all things by the word of his Power, when he had by him.
self purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on High. This
agrees with Col. 1. 17. And he is before all things, and by him all things
consist.

4. He that knows all things, before it comes to pass, must be God; such
knowledge is too wonderful for us, Psalm. 139. In several places of Scripture
you may see how the Almighty does prove his glorious Being and Godhead by his
Omnisciency, Job 38. 1, 2, 4, 5, 19, 20, 33, 39. Psalm. 4. 10. Job 36. 4, 5, 6,
etc. And that our Lord Jesus Christ knows all things, see John 21. 17. they
are the words of Simon Peter; And he said unto him, Lord, THOU KNOW all
things, thou Know that I love thee. Moreover, it is said, Joh. 2. 24, 25.
That Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he Knew all men: And
needed not that any should Testify of Man, for he knew what was in man. And in
another place it is said, That Jesus Knew from the beginning who they were that
believed not, and who should betray him, Joh. 6. 64. What more clearly tends to
prove his blessed Deity, than his Omnisciency.

5. I shall yet add another Argument further to evince this glorious truth
(which does hang or depend upon the precedent Reason) viz. He that searches
the heart, must of necessity be acknowledged and owned to be the Almighty and
Etenal God: for who knows the heart save that infinite Majesty that formed
the Spirit of Man that is in him. The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, says the Prophet, Jer. 17. 9. who can know it? I, the
LORD, search the heart, and try the reins, verse. 10. As if the Lord should say,
There is none, save my self, knows, or can know it. And now that the Lord
Jesus Christ who died for our sins, does search the heart and the reins, he
himself does assert it, Rev. 2. 23. I will kill her Children with death
(speaking of the woman Jezebel) and all the Churches shall know that I am HE
which searches the reins and the heart, and I will give unto every one of you
according as his works shall be etc.

6. He that is the first and the last, must needs be the Everlasting God: for
from this very ground and consideration, the Lord does argue or reason with his
People, to show and make appear there is no other God besides himself, Isa. 44.
6. I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God: compared
with Chap. 48. 12. Hearken unto me, O Jacob, and Israel my called: I am he, I
am the first and I am the last, etc. And that the famous said of the Lord Jesus
Christ, read Rev. 2. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending,
which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. Also verse. 17. And
when I saw him (says John) I fell at his feet, and he laid his right hand upon
me, saying, (pray observe it) I am the first, and the last. But may be some
will say, Who is this? Was this Jesus of Nazareth that was crucified? for that
you are to prove, etc. Read the very next words, and you may see who it is, I
am HE that lives and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore. Let such
fear and be troubled (when they read this and such like Scriptures) who deny
the God head of the Lord Jesus, or do affirm that Person, or Man, was not the
Christ and Son of the Highest (who was slain upon the Cross) for, what does
more clearly prove the mavelous and mysterious Union of the Humane and the
Divine Nature in one Person, than these Scriptures and Arguments which have
been mentioned.

7. I argue again yet further; he is the most high God, unto whom spiritual
Worship, or Divine Adoration does appertain or belong: and that this belongs
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, see Matthew. 8. 2. and chap. 28. 17. Luke 24. 52.
Joh. 9. 38. Nay further, it is said, Heb. 1. 6. And again, when he brings in
his first begotten into the World, he says, And let all the Angels of God
Worship him. At the Name of JESUS, says the Apostle Phil. 2. 10. every knee
shall bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth and things under the earth;
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is LORD, to the glory of
God the Father.

8. He who has power to forgive sins, or to pardon all iniquity (which may be
forgiven unto men) is God: but that Jesus Christ has such power is evident,
Matthew. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said, Wherefore
think ye evil in your hearts? verse. 4. For whether is easier to say, Thy sins
are forgiven thee, or to say, Arise and walk? verse. 5. But that ye may know the
Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins, etc. compare this with Mark 2.
5, 6, 7. Luke 5. 21.

9. He to whom the Saints ought to pray, is the most High God; but that the
Saints do and ought to pray and call on the name of the Lord Jesus, it is very
clear, Acts 9. 14. Romans 10. 9, 10, 11, 12. 1 Cor. 1. 2.

10. He that has power to give the holy Spirit, and the saving Graces thereof,
is God: but that Jesus Christ has power to baptize with the Spirit, or to give
the holy Spirit, and all the heavenly Gifts and Graces thereof, See these
Scriptures, Matthew. 3. 11. Mark 1. 4. Ephesians. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11.

11. He that was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, and whom the Scriptures call God's fellow, must needs be the Eternal God:
now that this is said of Jesus Christ, is evident, Phil. 2. 6, 7. Zech. 13. 7.

12. But yet once again; He who had power to lay down his life, and also to
raise it up again, must needs be God: but that Jesus Christ does so affirm, see
Joh. 2. 19. Joh. 10. 18.

13. He who is the Object, Author, and Finisher of the true Believers Faith, is
God Eternal, blessed for ever, Amen: but that Jesus Christ is the Object,
Author, and Finisher of the Believers Faith; see Joh. 14. 1. Ye believe in God,
believe also in me, Joh. 9. 35. Heb. 12. 2.

14. He who can by his own Name, proper Power and Authority, give power unto
others to become the Sons of God, must needs be God himself: but that Christ
does, and can do this, is evident, Joh. 1. 11. He came unto his own, and his
own received him not: but as many as received him, to them gave HE power to
become the Sons of God, even to them which believe in his Name, verse. 12. He
does Adopt, Regenerate, or make others the Children of God by the effectual
workings of His blessed Spirit in their hearts, by which they are interested
into all the Privileges, Promises, and Blessings of the Covenant of Grace,
which none can do, save God alone.

I might urge many other Scriptures and Arguments for the further proof and
confirmation of this glorious Truth, viz. He is our life, Col. 3. 4. See Deuteronomy.
30. 20. Moreover, he is said to be present always with his People, and
dwells in their hearts by his Spirit, etc. It was by and through his Name,
that all those mighty Miracles were wrought, he confirmed his Doctrine by Signs
and Wonders, by virtue of his own Power he raises and quickens whomsoever he
will: (he as it appears to me) lay claim to that glorious Title or Name by
which God made known himself unto his People of old, Exodus 3. 14. I am that I
am, this is my Name (says JEHOVAH) and this is my Memorial to all Generations,
verse. 15. And much after the same manner does our Lord Jesus speak, Joh. 8. 58.
Before Abraham was, I am: As much as if he had said, I have my being from none,
but have it of and from my self, and am from Eternity; according to that
saying, Prove. 8. I was set up from everlasting, or from the beginning, or ever
the earth was; when there was no depths, I was brought forth, verse. 23. etc.
Again, He is the Almighty, the Omnipotent, and the blessed and only Potentate,
Revel. 1. 8. 1 Timothy 6. 16.

Finally, He was owned and acknowledged of all to be no less than the Son of
God. The Father from Heaven does testify that he was his only begotten Son, in
whom he was well pleased. He is declared to be the Son of God by the holy
Spirit, Romans 1. And, The Angels positively affirm the same concerning him: yea
and the holy Apostles, I have showed you, have born witness to the same truth:
Nay, those who had a hand in putting of him to death, when they saw the
Earthquake, and the vail of the Temple was rent, they feared greatly and said,
Truly this man was the Son of GOD. Nay (6.) I might add further, The Devil
himself is forced to acknowledge this thing; See Mark 5. 7. And cried out with
a loud voice, and said, What have I to do with thee Jesus, thou Son of the most
High, etc.

And now from all that has been said, it may appear to the weakest capacity,
That Jesus of Nazareth, who was born of the Virgin, was in very deed a MAN, and
did partake of the same flesh and blood WHICH THE CHILDREN partake of; That he
was made of a Woman, and of the Seed of David according to the flesh, being
really man, finite, weak, subject to passion, and sufferings, as we are, and in
all things made like unto his brethren, sin only excepted: and yet also the
very eternal God, and omnipotent Creator; of the same essence or substance with
the Father and the holy Spirit; and that he had a personal existence or
subsistence before he did assume our Nature: and that He, the Word, or second
Person of the glorious Trinity, as so considered, viz. respecting subsistence,
was incarnate; that the Divine and Humane Nature being in a mysterious and
wonderful manner united together, is that same one Lord Jesus Christ, perfect
God, and perfect Man, in one Person, subsisting in two real distinct Natures;
each Nature retaining, notwithstanding this glorious Union, its own natural
Propertties and Attributes.

I might now come to Answer and remove those Objections that are brought
against what I have said concerning this glorious Truth; but because I have
been larger already than indeed I intended or thought I should have been (when
first I entered upon this work) I must forbear and leave the Objections to some
other season. And now (Reader) if thou have received any spiritual benefit,
from what has thus occasionally been written, by a poor worm, weakling, and
nothing Creature, see thou do not forget to return the praise to JEHOVAH, who
alone deserves it, and labor for soundness in judgment and stability, lest
thou also be carried away with these diverse, new, and strange Doctrines.
Remember the Apostles counsel, Heb. 13. 9. The times, you see, are difficult
and perilous; and ye knowing these things before, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. Beware,
lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
Steadfastness; but grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: To him be glory both now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

