Pax Vobis: OR, GOSPEL AND LIBERTY: Against Ancient and Modern PAPISTS.

By a Preacher of the Word.

The fifth Edition, Corrected and amended.

Stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not
entangl'd again with the Yoke of Bondage, (Popery.) Gal. c. 5. v. 1. Printed,
Anno Dom. 1687.

The PREFACE to the CHILDREN of the REFORMATION.
BE not concerned to know whose hand it is which holds the Link, but follow the
light it gives: Reach your hand to receive this Treatise, which marks the
shore, where the Ark of our Reformation, shattered by a deluge of troubles, may
rest; which is a Holy liberty to all and each Person to believe or not believe,
act or not act as he pleases, with a safe Conscience, according to the
Principles of our Reformation. We generally lament the convulsions which shake
our Church and State, through the diversity of Opinions, professed by our
several Congregations; some Remedies have been applied to bring us to Peace and
Conformity; but all have proved ineffectual; some of our Doctors judge nothing
can cure our disease, but a General Council or Supreme Authority, to whose
Sentence we should all submit; but this, besides that it is Popish, to grant
any human Power for to oblige our Consciences against our judgments in matters
of Religion, is but an imaginary Remedy for a real Evil: For, it is not in the
Reformation as in Popery; in this there is a supreme Authority for to convene
the Pastors of diverse Kingdoms to a general Council, in our Reformation there
is none; Popery believes it is Councils and Popes infallible; and therefore they
cannot but acquiesce, because an infallible Sentence leaves no doubt of the
Truth; but in the Reformation, all Councils and human Authority are fallible;
and consequently their Decisions may be doubted of, and we are never certain of
the Truth.

Others judge, the Remedy of our disease can be no other, but Pills of
Persecution penal Laws, Acts of Parliament, Ordinances of Synods, forcing Men
to Conformity; but this has proved not only destructive to the peace of the
Church but has shockt the very foundation of our Reformation: for if we must
believe under severe penalties what the State and Ecclesiastical Authority will
have us believe; then Scripture must be no more our Rule of Faith, but the
State and Church; which tells me what I must believe; and we must be deprived
of the right and power of Interpreting Scripture and believing it in the sense
we think to be true; and yet our whole Reformation is cemented and was first
raised upon this Holy Liberty; that every one should read Scripture, interpret
it; and believe whatever he thought was the true sense of it; without any
compulsion or constraint for to believe either Church* State, University, or
Doctors, if we did not judge by Scripture his Doctrine was true.

If Prudence had as great a share in our Conduct, as Passion, we should
regulate our future by the effects of our past actions; and if we will cast an
eye back to the transactions of later Years, we shall find this compulsion of
Men's Consciences has produced but confusion in our Church, and fatal
disturbances in our State; contrariwise, never did our Reformation enjoy more
peace, shined with more luster, and held its course with more happiness, than
when none was molested for his Profession, but every one had liberty to believe
and teach, what Dectrine and Sense each one thought to be the most conformable
to Scripture. Consider the infancy of the Reformation, when God raised Luther
to repair the ruins of the Church; how of a sudden it spread it self in
Germany, France, Holland, Poland, Scotland, and England, and by what means? Was
it not by taking away all constraint of Men's Consciences (used then only in the
Popish Church,) our blessed Reformers taking to themselves and giving to others
a Holy Liberty for to teach and believe whatever they judged to be the Doctrine
and true Sense of Scripture, tho it should be against the received opinion of
the Councils, Church, Universities and Doctors? Look into the Reign of Edward
the VI. then did our Reformation flourish in England; and was miraculously
propagated by the Liberty of Martin, Bucer, Cranmer, Ochinus, Peter Martyr, and
others in teaching Calvinism, Lutheranism, Zuinglianism, by Scripture as every
one understood it: Descend to the Reign of Queen Mary, then the light of the
Gospel was ecclipsed, because the flock was again Popishly compelled to
believe, not what they judged by Scripture to be true; but what the Pope and
Church judged was such: Come down a step lower to Queen Elizabeth's time, then
the flock recovering that Holy Liberty for to believe what each one thought was
the Doctrine of Scripture, the Reformation gained ground; our several
Congregations lived peaceably; for tho Protestancy was established the Religion
of the Land, others were not oppressed; nor their Liberty constrained by
compulsions: Step down a degree lower to King James his time; the Reformation
held its course as prosperously as in Queen Elisabeth's time, because Men's
Consciences were not oppressed; all Reformed Brethren had full Liberty to
believe as they pleased; the Protestancy was the Religion of the King: Look
down a stop lower to King Charles the first's Reign; his Majesty carried with a
Godly Zeal of restraining the diversity of Opinions, begot by the Liberty
enjoyed in his Predecessors times, would by new Laws and Ordinances force the
flock to an Uniformity of Doctrine; but our zealous Brethren the Presbyterians,
impatient of any constraint in affairs of Religion, and pleading for the
Evangelical Liberty of our Reformation, for to believe nothing, nor use any
Rites or Ceremonies, but as each one judged by Scripture to be convenient; they
covenanted against his Majesty and Bishops; and the Storm grew to that height,
that both Church and State were drowned almost in the Blood of our Reformed
Brethren: lastly, look upon our Realm as it is at present, the symptoms of
disatisfactions which you may read and hear in Coffee-Houses, in public and
private Conversations; the sparkles of Jealousies, which appear in our Land;
the Cabals against our Government; the animosity of divided Parties; the murmur
and complaints of all; what is all this but the smoke of that hidden fire of
Zeal, wherewith Protestants would force Presbyterians by penal Laws, to Profess
their Tenets, Presbyterians exclaim against Protestancy as against Popery;
Quakers judge both to be limbs of Satan; Anabaptists look on all three, as
Children of Perdition; and no Congregation would give Liberty for to Profess
any Tenets but its own; in so much that if you consider all well, each of our
Congregations, are as severe Tyrants over our judgments and Consciences, as
Popery was, and our Reformation comes to be in effect but an exchange of one
Italian Pope, for many English ones: For as in Popery, we must submit our
Judgments to the Pope and Church of Rome, or be esteemed putrid rotten Members,
and be shut out of Heavens Gates; and suffer Inquisitions, Persecutions,
Excommunications, and what not, so among us, you must believe Scripture as
Interpreted by the Church of England, or you are condemned by them, you must
believe Scripture as Interpreted by the Presbyterians, or you are accursed by
them you must believe as Anabaptists do, or you are damned by them; and not one
Congregation among us, but would Root all the others out of the World, if it
could; and we do not fear that danger whereof St. Paul, Gal. 5.15. warns us, If
we bite and devour one another, let us take heed, we be not consumed one of
another; giving us likewise a wholesome advice in the same place, how to prevent
this Evil; Stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, and be
not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage: The World did groan under this
heavy Yoke in Popery; wherein our Rule of Faith, was Scripture as Interpreted
by the Pope and Church: Scripture was kept from the hand of the flock: No man
permitted to give or believe any Interpretation or Sense of it, but what the
Pope, Church, and Fathers did approve: Our Reason, our Judgments, our
Consciences were Slaves under this Yoke, until that God raised our glorious and
blessed Reformers Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Beza and others: who took a Holy
Liberty, and gave us all Liberty for to Read and Interpret Scripture: to
believe no Doctrine, but what we judged to be true Scripture: To believe any
Sense of it, which we judged to be true, tho contrary to all the World: They
took for their Rule of Faith Scripture, and nothing else but Scripture, as each
one of them understood it; this same Rule of Faith they left to us, and a Holy
Freedom and Liberty of our Judgments and Consciences, that any man of sound
Judgment may hold and believe whatever Sense of it, he thinks to be true.

This therefore is the scope and end of my following Treatise; that, whereas
our Rule of Faith, as I will prove by the unanimous Consent of our whole
reformed Church, is Scripture or Gods Written Word, as interpreted by each
Person of sound Judgment; that whereas by the Principles of our Reformation, no
Man is to be constrained to believe any Doctrine against his Judgment and
Conscience: (otherwise why were not we left in Popery) it is impious,
tyrannical, and quite against the Spirit of the Reformation, to force us by
Acts of Parliament, Decrees of Synods, Invectives, and Persecutions of
indiscreet Brethren, to embrace this or that Religion; that every one ought to
be permitted to believe what he pleases; if you think Bigamy to be the Doctrine
of Scripture: If you think by Scripture there is one Nature, and four Persons
in God; if you think Transubstantiation to be true; if you judge by God's Words
there is neither Purgatory nor Hell; finally whatever you think to be the true
Sense of Scripture, you are bound as a true Reformed Child, to believe it; that
it is quite against the Spirit of Reformation to Censure, oppose or blame the
Doctrine or Tenets of any Congregation, or of any Doctor of the Reformed
Church; because that any Doctrine professed by any Christian-Congregation,
whatever (the Popish excepted) or that ever was delivered by any Man of good
Judgment of the Reformation, since the beginning of it, until this Day, is as
truly and really the Doctrine of the Reformation, as the Figurative Presence or
Kings Supremacy is. Consequently Protestants are deservedly to be checked for
Persecuting Quakers; Quakers, for murmuring against Presbyterians: these for
their invectives against Anabaptists and Socinians: All are very good; and you
may lawfully, according to the Principles of our Reformation, believe them, or
deny them.

This Evangelical Liberty of believing any thing, which we judge to be the Sense
of Scripture, though all the rest of the World should Judge it to be a
Blasphemy, is the most distinctive sign of the Reformation from Popery: for
Papists are the Children of Agar the Slave; they live in Bondage and Constraint
to believe any Doctrine, which the Pope and Church proposes to them; and if a
Learned Man, or University should judge it to be contrary to Scripture, he must
submit his Judgment to that of the Pope, or be condemned as an Heretic: In our
Reformation we are the Children of Sarah the free; our Rule of Faith is
Scripture as each Person of sound Judgment in the Church understands; if we do
not like the Doctrine of the Pope, Church or Council, we may gainsay them all,
and hold our own Sense of Scripture: We enjoy the Prerogative of Rational
Creatures we are lead by our own Reason, which God has given us for our
Conduct, and are not like Beasts, constrained to follow that of others. We
follow the Rule given us by S. Paul, Romans 14. He who Eats, let him not despise
him who does not Eat; and who does not Eat, let him not despise him who does
Eat; for God has received him: That Is to say, he who believes, let him not
check him who does not believe, as he does: And he who does not Believe, let
him not blame him who does believe: But let each one believe, or not belive as
he thinks best in the Lord: This holy Liberty and freedom is the Spirit of God,
for, where the Spirit of God is, there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3. Says the great
Apostle: The Lord inspire to our Parliament, that now sits upon a perfect and
new settlement of Government and Religion, to follow the Footsteps of our first
renowned Reformers: To enact that there may be no other Rule of Faith, but that
which we received from our Reformers, and which is laid down for us in the 39,
Articles of the Church of England: That is, Scripture, as each one best
understands it, without regarding the Judgment, Sense, or interpretation of any
but the pure Word of God, as we understand it: And to enact Penal Laws against
any so bold and uncharitable as to censure or blame the Tenets of any
Congregation, be it Lutheranism, Presbytery, Arianism, Judaism, or Paganism: Or
any Doctrine whatever, that any Man of sound Judgment thinks in his Conscience
to be the Sense and Doctrine of Scripture.

Three things make me hope, that this Treatise will be welcome to the well
inclined and pious Reader of our Reformed Church: First, that there is not one
Author quoted in this Book, but our own Doctors, Learned and Godly Children of
the Reformation; and this I observe, that my Reader may know there is not a jot
of any Doctrine here but what is of the Reformati^n; and also advertise our
Writers and Schoolmen, how much they discredit our Reformed Church, by making
so much use of Popish Doctors and Books in their Writings; as if we had not
great and learned Men of our own; if we look into our Bishops and Ministers
Libraries, we shall meet with Books either of confessedly Papists, or strongly
suspected of Popery; and you shall hardly meet in any of them, the works of
Luther, Calvin, Beza, or any of our own Authors, if you do not meet some
Comedies, or Romances: If you read our modern Writers, you shall find their
Books to be stuffed with Arguments stolen from Strapleton, Peron, Bellarmin, and
other Popish Doctors, whereas they ought to take their Doctrine from Luther,
Calvin, and our other first Reformers, Apostles raised by Gods Heavenly Spirit:
Oracles by whose Mouths and Pens he delivered the pure and Orthodox Doctrine of
the Gospel; Heavenly Fountains, from which we ought to drink the Doctrine of
the Reformation: Therefore, I have made a particular Study, for the Comfort of
my Reader, not to profane this Treatise with any quotation of any Popish
Writers, none but our own Doctors.

Secondly my Reader will be pleased with this Treatise, because I do not oblige
him to believe the Contents of it: if he mislikes any Doctrine couched in this
Book, let him not believe it; what I pretend is, to maintain his Liberty for to
believe, or not believe what he pleases, and that none can say black is his
Eye, for believing whatever he judges to be the Sense of Scripture; let all
others think of it what they will; for our Rule of Faith, as I will prove,
being Scripture as each Person understands it, who can be so bold as to check
you for teaching and believing what you understand Scripture to say? some
Doctrines there are in this Book delivered by Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Beza,
and others; which our Church of England, and some others do call Blasphemies,
and scandalous Tenets; and their irreverence and arrogance it run so far, as to
condemn those Blessed Men, for teaching such Tenets, and say, that they swerved
from the Truth; and had their frailties, insomuch, that many of us are ashamed
to own those great Men to have been our Reformers and Leaders: This is an
impiety altogether insupportable, it cannot be suffered with Patience, that
such Apostolical Men, who were undeniably our first Masters of the Reformation,
should be so vilified and abused: Therefore I do prove, that there is no
Doctrine delivered by them, but is to be esteemed and called the Doctrine of
the Reformation: And can be according to the Principles of the Reformed Church,
believed and taught by any Reformed Child: For what is our Rule of Faith in the
Reformation, but Scripture, as each Person of sound Judgment understands it?
Consequently what is the Doctrine of the Reformation, but what any Person of
sound Judgment understands to be of Scripture? Whatever Doctrine therefore
Luther, Calvin, or others judged to be of Scripture, How can you deny it to be
the Doctrine of the Reformation, or blame them for teaching and believing it?
If you do not like; The most, you can in Justice do, is not to believe it: But
you cannot justly say it is not the Doctrine of the Reformation, because it is
Scripture as understood by Persons of good Judgment: Nor can you in Justice
blame them, or any other for believing it, if they like it: For must not we
believe, what we judge in our Consciences to be the Doctrine of Scripture?

Lastly, my Reader will be pleased with the sincerity and plain dealing of this
Treatise: As much as we are all offended by the dissimulation and double
dealing of our Modern Writers, whose aim and scope in the Books they give out,
seem to be nothing else but to say somewhat, whereby they may be thought to be
no Papists, and nothing is less found in their Writings, than the pure and
Orthodox Doctrine of the Reformation: And what is to be bemoaned, that you will
hardly see in the Houses or Hands of the Flock the Works of Luther, Calvin, or
our other first Reformers, they are hid from us, to keep us in ignorance of the
true Reformed Doctrine, and we see but Bramhall, Tillotson, Tailor,
Stillingfleet, Thorndike, and such others, whose Doctrine is neither Popery,
nor of the Reformation, but a new compound of both; they do so mangle the
Questions controverted with their Scholastical subtilities and distinctions, as
if they were ashamed to own openly our Tenets, and did endeavor to get the
Opinion of moderate sober Men with the Papists, by drawing as near as their
Interest can permit them to their Doctrine. Ask them if we be obliged to
believe the Doctrine and Sense of Scripture, delivered by a general Council;
Our first Reformers resolved roundly that we are not: Nay Luther says expressly
we are bound to gainsay, and work against the Decrees of any Council: But our
modern Doctors answer with a pretty Distinction, There Is a a civil obligation,
quoth one, but no Obligation in Conscience. There Is an obligation in
Conscience, says another, provided you do not believe they are infallible: You
may believe they are infallible objectively or terminatively, says another, but
not subjectively: They are infallible in Fundamental Points, says another, but
not in inferior Truths. Another will come yet, and say they are absolutely
infallible in all Articles, and thus by little and little the Papists gain
Ground against us, and the luster of our Reformation is clouded by the
Cowardliness, or Insincerity, or Hypocrisy of our modern Teachers. 1 Kings 18.
How long halt ye between two Opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him: But if
Baal, then follow him. Luther, Calvin, Beza, and our other first Reformers were
raised by God to teach us the purity of the Gospel: Let us not be ashamed to
follow their Doctrine: To speak, Preach, and Believe as they did: Therefore, I
do propose the Doctrine in this Treatise in its native Colors, that if you
like it, you may believe it, and if any be so bold as to say, you believe false
or scandalous Doctrine, you must answer; It Is the Doctrine of the Reformation,
because it is Scripture as understood by Persons of Judgment, and the greatest
Oracles we had: And if you do not like it, you may deny it, but beware never to
blame or check any other for believing it: This is the Holy Liberty of the
GOSPEL and of our Primitive REFORMATION.

First DIALOGUE.
ISMAEL. I have read your Preface and Principles, and methinks you drive to
establish a new Religion; for that unlimited Liberty, which you assert for to
believe or not believe, whatever we please with a safe Conscience, is not
allowed by any of our Reformed Congregations; and it were to be wished, you
should rather stick to some one of the Congregations now Established, than to
erect a new one, for we have but too many already.


Isaac. The Lord forbid I should think or speak otherwise than as becomes a
true Child of the Reformation: If you will oblige me to believe Scripture as
interpreted by the Lutheran Church (the like I say of any other Congregation)
and deny the Tenets of all others, what difference betwixt me and a Papist in
the Election of my Religion? For the Papists Religion must be no other, but
Scripture as Interpreted by the Pope and Councils; my Religion must be
Scripture as interpreted by the Lutheran Church, and no other; my Judgment and
Conscience therefore is as much constrained as that of the Papist and our
Separation from Popery will come to be but an Exchange of one Slavery for
another; in that, our Judgments and Counsciences were Slaves to the Pope and
Councils; in this, we are Slaves to the Lutheran Church: We became a
Reformation by shaking off the Yoke of Popery from our Judgments, and leaving
them free for to believe Scripture as with the assistance of Gods Spirit, each
one best understands it; and if we will continue a Reformation, we must not
submit again our Judgments to any other, but retain that blessed Liberty we
recovered for to believe the Tenets of any Congregation. I confess this Liberty
is not allowed by any one particular Congregation, as you observe; out you must
also grant me, That it is allowed and taken by the whole Body of the
Reformation, for in this whole Body, as it comprehends Protestants, Lutherans,
Presbyterians, etc. One Congregation believes what the other denies, and in any
of them a Man may live with a safe Conscience (which you will not deny;)
therefore any Man has full Liberty for to believe or deny with a safe
Conscience the Tenets of any Congregation: Hence it follows, (and to my Grief I
speak it,) that no particular Congregation, be it of England, France or
Germany, has the true Spirit of the Reformation, in doting so much upon their
particular Tenets, as to think they cannot be as well denied, as believed; and
in looking upon them with so passionate Eyes, as to censure check and force
others to believe them: You shall see by this discourse, that the true Spirit
of the Reformation is not in any one particular Congregation separately taken
from the rest; for each particular Congregation constrains as much as it can,
all People to believe its own Tenets: Protestancy would have us all to be
Protestants, and would root Lutherans out of the World as well as Popery;
Lutherans would, if they could, draw all to their own Net; Presbytery esteems
it self to be the best of all, and would crush Protestancy if it could: This
then is the Spirit of each particular Congregation, a limiting, confining
Spirit to some particular Tenets, with an exclusion of all others; but look on
the whole Body of our Reformation, as it includes all Reformed Congregations
distinct from Popery; there is a Holy extension of Spirit and Liberty for to be
either Lutherans, Presbyterians, Protestants, and any thing but Popery; and
whatever any Congregation may say of another, but all unanimously agree that
the Spirit of the Lord is in the whole Body of the Reformation; since therefore
that in this whole Body, there is a Latitude and Liberty for to Profess diverse
and opposite Tenets, and that each Tenet is believed by one, and denied by
others; we must grant that this Holy Liberty for to believe or deny any Tenets
we please, is the true Spirit of our Holy Reformation.

It Is not therefore to be wished, as you do, that I should stick to any one
particular Congregation or Tenet; for such a restriction is mere Popery; and
your bemoaning the multiplicity of our Congregation, is profane and Popish: No,
it is a blessing of the Lord upon our Reformation, for which we shall never
sufficiently thank him, that we see it divided into so many Godly branches. In
the House of my Father, said Christ, there are many mansions, John 14.2.


Ismael. By your discourse you seem to allow that we may with a safe Conscience
change Religions as often as we please, and be to day a Protestant, to morrow a
Lutheran, next day a Presbyterian, and so run over all.


Isaac. I know you will be startled at my answer, For I am not Ignorant that
all men apprehended it to be absurd to change and run over so many Religions;
but truth must be declared, though it may seem a scandal to the Jews, and a
folly to the Gentiles: Its therefore the Doctrine of the Reformation that we
may with a safe Conscience be to day Protestants, to morrow Lutherans; in
France Hugonots, in Hungary Antitrinitarians, in Poland Socinians; and in
London of any Religion but Popery.


Ismael. For shame you foully impose upon the Reformation; there is not any
Congregation that teaches such a scandalous and absurd Doctrine.


Isaac. By your favor, I love the Reformation as the Apple of my Eye, and will
never yield to any in my Zeal for its Honor and Doctrine; I am so far from
imposing upon it, that I will evidence your error in denying this to be its
Doctrine; and it will appear that whoever will deny it to be very lawful to
change Religions as time and occasion requires, must renounce the best and
Fundamental Principles of our Reformation, and must impiously condemn the
practice of our first Reformers.


Ismael. How will you make it out that this Doctrine is grounded upon the the
Fundamental Principles of our Reformation; whereas there is not one
Congregation of ours, but abhors it?


Isaac. Sir, you may well perceive by the tenor of my discourse, that I am
Piously and Charitably jealous with each particular Congregation, and that my
drift is to show that each of them, none excepted, swerves from and
transgresses against the true Spirit and solid Principles of the Reformation,
as will further appear in this discourse.

It Is uncontestedly true that the Rule of Faith of the Reformation is
Scripture, as the humble of Heart, assisted with the Spirit of the Lord,
understand it; for Lutherans will never admit their Rule of Faith to be
Scripture, as Interpreted by the Church of England, but as Interpreted by
themselves; nor will England admit Scripture to be the Rule of Faith, as it is
Interpreted by the Presbyterians, but as Interpreted by the Church of England:
so that the Doctrine of each Congregation is but Scripture, as interpreted by
them, and whereas all these Congregations jointly compose the whole Body of the
Reformation, and each Congregation is truly a member of the Reformation the
Doctrine of the Reformation comes to be Scripture, as each Congregation, and
Person of sound Judgment in the Reformation, (says the Church of England in her
39 Articles) Interprets it. This being an uncontrouled truth, what Man of ever
so sound Judgment, but may Read to day Scripture, as Interpreted by the
Lutheran Church, and Judge in his Conscience that Interpretation and Doctrine
to be true; consequently he may with a safe Conscience Profess that Religion:
Soon after he may meet Calvin's Books, and charmed with the admirable strength
of his reasons and glosses upon Scripture, he may Judge in his Conscience, he
is to be preferred before Luther, and so may lawfully forsake Lutheranism for
Calvinism; then again he hits upon Scripture as Interpreted by the Church of
England, whose Doctrine ravishes him with that decency of Ceremonies, that
Majesty of her Liturgy, that Harmony of her Hierarchy, he is convinced it is
better than Calvinism, and embraces it: Then again, he reads the Works of
Arius, and convinced by the energy of his Arguments and Texts of Scripture
produced by him, may alter his Judgment, and become an Arian* Wherein can you
say does this Man transgres^against the Doctrine or Principles of the
Reformation? Does he forsake the Reformation, because he forsakes Lutherism for
Calvinism? No sure; for Calvinism is as much of the Reformation as the other:
Is not Protestancy as much the Doctrine of the Reformation as Presbytery? though
he changes therefore one for the other, he still holds the Doctrine of the
Reformation: Is not the Doctrine of the Reformation Scripture, not as
Protestants only or Presbyterians only interpret it, but as any Congregation,
or Man of sound Judgment holds it? It is therefore evident that according to
the Doctrine and Principles of the Reformation, he may with a safe Conscience
change Religions, and be to day of one, to morrow of another, until he runs all
over. Point me out any Congregation (the obstinate Papists excepted,) who will
dare say, I cannot live with a safe Conscience in any other Congregation but in
it self; all other Congregations will laughed at it; Why then may not I lawfully
forsake any Congregation, and pass to another? And be in England a Protestant,
in Germany a Lutheran, in Hungary an Antitrinitarian or Socinian.


Ismael. It Is against the grain of Man's reason to believe that we can with a
safe Conscience change Religions, as you say; If you be a Protestant, and you
Judge it to be the true Religion, you are bound to stick to it, and never to
change it.


Isaac. If I did discourse with a Papist, I would not wonder he should say it is
against the grain of Man's reason to believe it lawful; but I admire that a
Child of the Reformation, be he of what Congregation he will, should be so
Ignorant of his Principles, as to say a Man cannot change Religions when he
pleases: Nor do I undertake to prove against the Papist, that this is lawful
but I undertake to prove it lawful against any Reformed Child, or force him to
deny the Principles of the Reformation. Is it against reason that a Man may
read to day Scripture, and the Lutherans Interpretation upon it, and like it
very well; and that he should in this case embrace that Religion? Is it against
the grain of Man's reason that this same Man should next Year afterward hit
upon Calvin's Works upon Scripture, and after better consideration, think his
Doctrine to surpass that of Luther; and could not he then (being obliged to
choose the best,) forsake Lutheranism and stick to Calvinism? And is it against
Man's reason that he in following Years may meet other Books of Arians,
Socinians, etc. and do the like? Have not we many examples of this in our best
and most renowned Reformers? Did not Ochinus that great light (says B. Bale) in
whose presence England was happy, reading Scripture, Judge the Reforformation
to be better than Popery, and of a Capuchin Friar became a Reformed, after some
Years reading Scripture, he Judged Judaism to be better than the Reformation,
and became a Jew: Did not Martin Bucer, one of our first Reformers of England,
and Composers of our Liturgy, reading Scripture judge Lutheranism to be better
than Popery, and of a Dominican Friar, became a Lutheran? Soon after reading
Scripture, he judged Zuinglianism to be better than Lutheranism, and became a
Zuinglian; not long after he became a Lutheran again as he Confesses Epist. ad
Noremb. and in Comment. in Jo. 6. and 16. Matt. Theol. Calvin. l. 2. fol. 70.
and forsook Lutheranism the second time, and returned again to Zuinglianism,
as Sklusser says, (b) Did not Cranmer one of our first Reformers also of
England, and Composers of the 39. Articles, a Wise and religious Man profess
Popery in Henry the VIII's time, and Compose a Book in defense of Real
Presence; then in Edward the VI's time upon better Consideration he professed
Zuinglianism, and writ a Book against Real Presence; then again in Queen Mary's
Reign being Sentenced to Death, he declared for Popery, but seeing his
Recantation would not preserve his Life, he renounced Popery and died a
Zuinglian. I could tire your Patience in reading, and Mind in relating the
number of our Prime and most renowned, as well first Reformers. as Learned
Doctors, who without any scruple, changed several times their Religions: nor in
the Principles of our Reformation ought they to be blamed: For whereas our Rule
of Faith is Scripture as with the assistance of Gods Spirit we understand it,
who doubts but we may to day Judge sincerely Luther's sense of it to be true,
to morrow we may read with more attention and Judge Arius his sense to be true;
next day that of Calvin, and so of the rest: I do not think but that we have in
England many Abettors of this Doctrine: Alas! how many Bishops, Deans and rich
Parsons do we know, and have we known who were zealous Presbyterians, and
declared Enemies of Protestancy in our Gracious Sovereign's Exile; and no
sooner was he restored, and had Bishoprics and Ecclesiastical Dignities to be
given, but they became stiff Protestants.

Observe the difference betwixt the Papists and us, if of a Papist you become
of any other Congregation, the Popish Church Excommunicates you, thou art looked
upon as an Heretic, and Apostate; a strayed Sheep; they will not admit you to
their Communion, or Liturgy; nay, could they well avoid you, they would never
admit you to their Company; and why? Because they are fondly persuaded their
own is the only true Religion, and all others to be Synagogues of Satan; and if
any of us will become a Papist, he must first abjure his former Profession: But
if of a Protestant, you should become a Presbyterian, a Lutheran, Quaker, or of
any other of our Societies, you are never looked upon to be a jot the worse for
it; we are not a whit scandalized at such changes, which we daily see; and it
is an unspeakable Blessing, with what Accord, Unity and Charity, you may see at
our Liturgy and Communion, the Protestant, Presbyterian, Anabaptist, Socinian
and Hugonot, all praising the Lord in one Congregation in our Church, none bid
out of the Church, none Excommunicated, no previous abjuration required of
their former Tenets; and there is nothing more frequent among us than to go to
the Protestant Liturgy in the Morning, in the Evening to the Prebyterian,
especially if our Interest or Convenience requires it: Can there be a more
convincing Proof that we esteem it all alike what Religion and Tenets we
profess? Let a Lutheran go to France; Alas! He will never stick to go to the
Hugonots meeting and Service; let a Protestant go to Germany, he will go as
cheerfully to the Lutheran Church, as in England to the Protestant: Let a
Hugonot or Presbyterian go to Hungary, or Poland, he is welcome to the
Antitrinitarians, and Socinians; and when any of them returns home he will be
as before.


Ismael. But can you prove this Doctrine by the Testimony of any of our Synods?
Did any teach that we may with a safe Conscience change our Religion as you say?


Isaac. Yes, I can: The Synod of Charenton in France, held about the Year 1634
expressly says, That for your Salvation it is all alike whether you be a
Calvinist, Lutheran, or of any other Congregation of the Reformed; because,
says this venerable Synod, they all agree in Fundamental Points, and the
Lutherans have nothing of Superstition or Idolatry in their manner of Divine
Worship. Change then as often as you list; be a Lutheran, be a Presbyterian, be
an Anabaptist; by the mouth of this Synod you are assured you will never miss to
hit right. And I pray, can any Synod of our times have more Authority in point
of Doctrine then Luther our first Reformer, a man extraordinarily raised by
God, (says the Synod of Charenton,) and replenisht with his Spirit for to
repair the ruins of his Church? He teaches In parva Confess. Germ. fol. 55. and
in Colloq. fol. 110.
the Elevation of the Sacrament is Idolatry, yet he did practice it, and
commanded it should be practiced in the Church of Wittemberg to spite the Devil
Carolstadius: Giving you to understand that for just reasons, you may teach now
one Religion, now another. Zuinglius also, whose virtue and learning is known
to the World, says, To. 2. fol. 202.
That God inspired him to Preach what Doctrine was suitable to the times; which
as it often changes, you may often change your Doctrine: And consider you if it
be not therefore that Christ our Lord says his Yoke is easy, and his burden is
light, (that is Religion) because we can withdraw our Necks from it, as time
and just reasons requires.


Ismael. Could you give me any Synod of the Church of England which delivers
this Doctrine, you would go near hand to convince me; for, that some particular
Doctors should have taught or practiced it, does not prove it to be the
Doctrine of the Reformation.


Isaac. And what a greater Authority has a Synod of England, for to prove a
Doctrine to be of the Reformation, than a Synod of France which I have produced?
Or than Luther and Zuinglius our first Reformers, inspired by God, to teach us
the purity of the Gospel? Was it not from Luther and Zuinglius, that England
received the Doctrine of the Reformation? And if England be so bold as to say
they erred in this, what assurance can we have, but that they erred in the
rest? But since nothing will please you but a Synod of England, you shall have
not one, but many. Can there be any Synod in England of so great Authority as
our wise and prudent Parliaments? Read our Chronicles and you will find, that in
a few Years time, they changed and established different Religions by public
Acts of Parliament: In Henry the VIII 's Reign they voted for Popery, and made
Acts and Statutes against the Reformation; In Edward the VI 's time they
banished Popery and voted for Zuinglianism; In Queen Mary's they pulled down
this, and set up Popery again; In Queen Elizabeth's, they decryed this, and set
up not Zuinglianism, but Protestancy; in the midst of her Reign, they polisht
this, and added some new perfections to it; In King James and succeeding Kings
times Protestancy is of a different stamp from that of Queen Elizabeth's: Hear
Dove in his Exhort. to the English Recusants, An. 1603. Page 31. Henry the 8.
had his Liturgy which was very good: Edward the 6. condemned it, and brought in
another composed by Peter Martyr and Bucer: In Elizabeth 's time, that was
condemned, and another approved; and in the middle of her Reign, her Liturgy
was also misliked, and a new one introduced; we are so wanton that nothing will
content us but Novelties.


Ismael. Dove does not commend this Doctrine, for he calls that frequent
exchange of Religion Wantonness, and Love of Novelty.


Isaac. It Is no great matter what he says of it; my drift is but to convince
you that this is the Doctrine, and practice of the best Member of our
Reformation; even of England, and if you be convinced it is the Doctrine of the
Reformation, You cannot deny but that it is good Doctrine. If Dove calls it
Wantonness, S. Paul, Ephesians. 4.22. Coloss. 3.9. and Romans 6.6. Commends it, and
exhorts us to put off the old Man with its deeds, (that is Popery with its
Ceremonies,) and put on the new Man, (that is the Reformation) where there is
neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, or
Scythian, Bound or Free, but Christ is all, and in all: That Is to say; where
there is no distinction of Protestants or Presbyterians, Socinians, or Arians;
it is all one which Religion you profess.


Ismael. But is there no Tenet of Religion which we are all indispensably
obliged to hold?


Isaac. Yes there is, and no more but one: We are bound to have Faith in Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, and the Savior of the World. This is the substance of
Christian Religion; be an Arian, be a Presbyterian a Socinian or what you
please, be also plunged to your ears in Wickedness of Life, and Manners, so you
have Faith in Jesus Christ, Son of God, and Redeemer of the World, and live in
Charity, you will be a Member of the true Church, and be saved. Do not imagine
this is any new Doctrine invented by me; search the vulgar sort of our Reformed
Brethren, you shall get thousands of this Opinion in our Realm; search the
Books of our Learned Doctors, you shall find it in them also. Doctor Morton, in
his much applauded Book, dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, for which he deserved a
Bishopric, The Kingdom of Isra. page 9.
says: The Arian Church is to be esteemed a true Church, because they hold the
true substance of Christian Religion, which is Faith in Jesus Christ, Son of
God, and Redeemer of the World: And again in the same place. Sect. 4. whose
Title, is, Heretics are Members of the Church, he says, Whosoever believes in
Jesus Christ, though by Wickedness of Life, or Heresy in Doctrine, they should
err in Doctrine, they are still true Members of the Church. Therefore our
learned Acts and mon. page 36. lib. 3. c. 5.
Fox, Catal. estium. page 976. and 978.
Doctor Field, and Illiricus, say the Greek Church, notwithstanding their error
in denying the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, are holy Members of
the true Church, because they have Faith in Jesus Christ.


Ismael. Sure you will not say this Doctrine is of the Reformation or can be
safely believed?


Isaac. I do admire how you can doubt of it, and that it may be believed: For
what is the Doctrine of the Reformation but as we have said in our Principles,
Scripture as Interpreted by any Man of sound Judgment in the Church? And were
not Doctor Morton, Fox, Field, and Illiricus, Men of sound Judgment, eminent
Learning and Godliness? If therefore this be Scripture as Interpreted by them,
how can you deny it to be the Doctrine of the Reformation?


Ismael. And what Jesus Christ are we obliged to believe in? For Jesus Christ,
as believed by the Arians, Socinians, Luther and Calvin, is far different from
Jesus Christ, as commonly believed by the Protestants, and Popish Church; we
believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God, of one and the same substance and
nature with the Father; they believe in a Jesus Christ Son of God, but of a
distinct and different nature and substance of the Father.


Isaac. Pish! That Is but a Nicety; believe what you please, and what you
understand by Scripture to be true, and have Charity.


Ismael. I confess you have puzzled, but yet not wholly convinced me; were I but
persuaded that what you have discoursed, is truly the Doctrine of the
Reformation, I would cheerfully embrace it, and I will be better informed by
your self, but not tire your Patience: We will meet again and pursue our
Discourse upon this Subject.


Second Dialogue.
ISMAEL. Reflecting in my Sollitude upon your last Discourse, I find it
bottomed upon a false Principle, for you suppose that whatever Doctrine is of
Luther, Calvin, or any of your Learned Doctors, Synods, Parliaments, or
Congregations, is the Doctrine of the Reformation, and may without any more
proof or scruple, be believed by any Reformed Child; who but sees this is
ridiculous, to fasten the Doctrine and absurd Opinions of each particular
Doctor, or Congregation upon the whole Body? This is the uncharitable and
unreasonable Art of the Papists who keep a great Coil, with some exorbitant
Opinions of Luther and Calvin, and would persuade their Proselites, they are
the Tenets of the Reformation; whereas the Reformation disclaims those Opinions
as much as the Pope does: And they do not poor People observe how many absurd
and scandalous Doctrines we meet in their Casuists and Divines, which when we
reproach them with, they answer, It Is not the Doctrine of their Church, but of
some particular Doctors; as if we might not with as much Justice as they,
answer the same.


Isaac. Your Reflection is good, and my discourse will fall to the ground, if I
do not prove that Principle, which will be no hard task: Let us imagine we are
here a full Synod of Protestants, Presbyterians, Hugonots, Lutherans,
Antitrinitarians, Anabaptists, Quakers, and of all and each of our
Congregations; our Reformation is not any of these Congregations, with an
exclusion of the rest, but all of them jointly; for whatsoever Congregation
would say it self alone is the Reformation, and no other, would be hissed at by
the rest; and justly, because that our Reformation imports two points
essentially. First, a Profession of Christianity, according to the Rule of the
Word of God, and a Detestation or Abjuration of Popish Errors; and none of
these Congregations but does both.


Ismael. I know some of these, Pharisee-like, despise others, and look upon
them not as Reformed, but as putrid Members; but the Lord forbid I should be so
void of Charity; I see no just challenge any can have to the Title of
Reformation, which all have not.


Isaac. Let us ask this Synod by what Rule of Faith does the Reformation walk?
What must a Man believe for to be a true Reformed? Protestants will say, that
Scripture and Apostolical Tradition; but Protestants say of Papists and
Presbytarians and Anabaptists say of Protestants, that many humane Inventions
are obtruded upon us as Apostolical Traditions: that we have no way, to discern
the one from the other, and consequently Tradition, as being an unknown thing
unto us, cannot be our Rule; others will say, that Scripture, and the
indubitable Consequences out of it, is our Rule, all will grant this; but then
enters the Controversy, if the Consequences of Lutherans be such, and if the
Consequences of Presbyterians be indubitable out of Scripture, and each
Congregation will say, that their peculiar Tenets are indubitable Consequences
out of Scripture, and the rest must allow it to be true, or deny such a
Congregation to be of the Reformation; Others will say that Scripture, and the
four first general Councils with the Apostles, and Athanasius's Creed are our
Rule of Faith; but most of the Assembly will no more admit the four first, than
the subsequent Councils, nor Athanasius's Creed, more than that of Trent, nor
will the Quakers, Socinians, and others value the Apostles Creed.

But there is none of all the Assembly, who will not admit Scripture, that is
the pure written Word of God, to be a sacred and full Rule of Faith, because
it is replenished with divine Light, and all heavenly instruction necessary for
our Salvation: And such as add, as a part of our Rule of Faith, the Apostles or
Athanasius's Creed, or the four first general Councils, they will confess that
all they contain, is expressed in Gods written Word, and are but a plainer, or
more distinct expression or declaration of the Contents of Scripture.


Ismael. Truly I must grant you this, that I have been often present at several
discourses of Protestants with Papists, and never could I hear a Protestant
make Councils, Tradition, or any thing else, the Test of their Discourse, but
only Scripture; not but that I could hear them say and pretend in their
Discourses, that Apostolical Tradition, and the four first Councils were for
them against Popery; but still their main strength and ultimate refuge was
Scripture; for whenever they harp upon that string of Tradition and Councels,
the Papists are visibly too hard for them and then they run to Scripture, than
which there is no plus ultra. I have been also often at several discourses
betwixt Protestant, Presbyterians, and our Brethren of other Congregations, I
have observed that the Protestant, for to defend his Liturgy, Rights and
Ceremonies of the Church of England, and her Episcopacy against the others
could never defend himself by Scripture alone, and placed his main Strength
against them in Tradition, Primitive Councils, and ancient Fathers, all which
the other rejected and reproached the Protestant with Popery, for making use of
that Weapon; that if they would stick to those Principles as their Rule of
Faith, they must admit many Tenets of Popery, which they disavow, that nothing
but Scripture is a sufficient Warrant and Rule of Faith: And I find by all I
could ever well understand, that is the General apprehension, and belief of all
the Reformation, that Scripture abundantly contains all we are obliged to
believe; and is our sole and only Rule of Faith; and that our recourse to
Tradition, Councils, Fathers, etc. are but shifts of some of our Doctors, who
being Non-plust in their particular Engagements, and Sophistries, patch the
incoherency of their discourses with these rags of Popery.


Isaac. I commend your Ingenuity, but not that heat which transports you to
check our Doctors, for their Glosses and particular Doctrines upon Scripture,
which, as the Manna relished of all sorts of Victuals, which the Eater fancied,
admits several senses according to the different Spirits, and measure of light
that God gives to the Reader, and it is undoubtedly the Spirit of the
Reformation to follow what sense of it he likes best, and not to check others
following this or that as they please: Lutherans, Protestants, Presbyterians,
etc. have all for their Rule of Faith, Scripture, which each of them Interprets
in a different Sense; Luther for the Real, [ Protestants for the Figurative]
Presence; Protestants for Episcopacy; Presbyterians against it, and so of
others: And though each esteems his own sense to be the best, yet none is so bold
as to say that others may not be saved in their own Sense of it, or deny them
to be true Children of the Reformation; nay, that Venerable Synod of Charenton,
as I quoted above, has declared, that the Lutherans, though opposite to them in
their chief Tenets, are their beloved Brethren, and have nothing Idolatrous or
Superstitious in their manner of Divine Worship: The fundamental reason of all
this is, that our Rule of Faith, is but Scripture, as each Person of sound
Judgment understands it.


Ismael. I grant all your Discourse as to this particular; for it is certain,
Lutherans will not admit Scripture as Interpreted by Pretestants, but as
Interpreted by themselves; and so of each other Congregation.


Isaac. If you admit our Rule is Scripture, as each understands it; then you
must grant that our Doctrine of the Reformation, is whatever Doctrine each
Person of sound Judgment understands to be of Scripture; and from this, it
appears plainly that my Principle whereat you boggl'd is true; That whatever
Doctrine is professed by any of our Congregations, Synods, Parliaments,
Doctors, or particular Doctor of our Reformation is to be truly reputed and
esteemed the Doctrine of our Reformation; which Principle being true, my
discourse of Yesterday is undeniable, That you may change Religion as often as
you please, and remain still a true Reformed Child.


Ismael. But you have said, that not only the Doctrine of each Congregation and
Synod, is the Doctrine of the Reformation: but also whatever any one particular
Doctor teaches, and this seems to be very absurd.


Isaac. It Is not so absurd, as it is true; I Will prove by the Principles of our
Reformed Church, by the testimonies of our most learned and best Doctors and
Reformers, and by reason and experience, that the Doctrine of any particular
Doctor among us, has as much right to be called and esteemed the Doctrine of
the Reformation, as Protestancy, Presbytery, or Lutheranism, for what is
Lutheranism, but the Judgment of Luther a particular Doctor against the whole
Church of Rome? What is Calvanism, but what Calvin a particular Doctor judged
to be the sense of Scripture against that same Church? What is Quakerism, but
honest Naylor's Godly and Pious Sentiments upon Scripture? It Is undeniably the
Principle of our Reformed Church, that our Rule of Faith is scripture as
Interpreted, not only by Synods or Congregations, but by any Person of sound
judgment in the Church. No Congregation or Synod is to us a Rule of Faith,
because all are ^llible; but Gods written Word, as each one understands it; and
if we do not like the sense of it delivered by any Council, Synod, or
Congregation, we may safely deny it. Therefore our great Calvin, L. 4. Instit.
c. 9.
says, and proves with great Energy of Scripture and Reason, that we are not
obliged to the Decisions and Doctrine of any Council, Synod, or Congregation,
if after having examined Scripture, we do find their Interpretation and Sense
of it, is conformable to the Word of God. Let Synods and Congregations say what
they will, if any particular Doctor thinks his own private Sense of it to be
better, he may stick to it against them all, and be a good true Child of the
Reformation; as Arminius in Holland did withstand the Synods of Dordrecht and
Delfe; as Luther and Calvin did against Rome. I will be free, says our
unparalled Proto-Apostle Luther, To. 1. E. lit Jen. Resolut.
I will not submit my self to the Authority of Councils, Church, Doctors,
Universities, or Fathers, but will teach and preach whatever I think to be
true. Did ever any Apostle speak with more Courage? And the blessed Man acted
with no less; he knew full well the whole stream of Antiquity, Doctors, Fathers
and Councils were against him, as he confesses himself, and did not care a rush
for them all: Lay aside, says he, call Arms of Orthodox Antiquity, of Schools
of Divinity, Authority of Fathers, Councils, Popes, and Consent of Ages; we
receive nothing but Scripture; but so that we must have the Authority of
Interpreting it.

Nor was it only Luther and Calvin spoke thus, but all our first blessed
Reformers; and why? because our Rule of Faith is Scripture, not as interpreted
by the Church of England, (France will not admit it,) nor as interpreted by the
Quakers, (the Anabaptists, and Independants will not hear it) nor as
interpreted by Luther, (Calvin rejects it) nor as interpreted by Calvin,
(Thorndike and Bramhall will not yield to it,) nor will Stillingfleet stand to
their Interpretation; nor others to that of Stillingfleet. Finally our Rule of
Faith is Scripture, not as interpreted by any, but as each Congregation, Synod,
particular Doctor, or Man of sound Judgment Interprets it, and consequently
whatever Doctrine any man of sound Judgment judges to be of Scripture, is to be
esteemed the Doctrine of the Reformation; and you may safely believe it, if you
like it, and remain still as truly a Reformed Child, as the proudest Protestant
of England.


Ismael. Can you prove that our Rule of Faith is Scripture, as any particular
Doctor or Person of sound Judgment understands it?


Isaac. Behold how convincingly: first we have heard Luther, quoted but now,
say, We receive nothing but Scripture, but so as that we must have the
Authority for to Interpret it: Hear him again; In Colloq. mensal. fol. 118.
The Governors and Pastors have Power to teach, but the Sheep must give their
Judgment, whether they propose the Voice of Christ, or of Strangers. And again,
To. 2. Wittem. fol. 374, 375.
Christ has taken from the Bishops, Councils, and Pastors, the right of judging
of Doctrine; and given it to all Christians in General; and the Rule is
Scripture as each one will think fit to interpret it. And consequently to this,
we have heard him say above, I will be free and will not submit to Doctors,
Councils or Pastors but will teach whatever I think to be true. Barlow, In
Defens. Art. Reliq. Protest. Page 199.
The Apostles have given to each particular, the Right and Power of
Interpreting, and Judging by his inward Spirit what is true; it is needless
that either Man, or Angel, Pope, or Council, should instruct you, the Spirit
working in the Heart and Scripture are to each particular Person most assured
Interpreters. Blison, Bishop of Winchester, says the same, In his true differ.
par. 2. page 353.
The People must be Discerners and Judges of what is Taught. Our Religion has
no other Rule of Faith (says our French Reformation by the Mouth of Du Moulin,
Bouclier de la Foy.
Drelincourt, and the Holy Synod of Charenton, but the written Word of God, as
interpreted by us. Lastly, says the Church of England. We have no other Rule of
Faith, but Scripture as each Person of sound Judgment in the Church understands
it, and what is proved by it: And again in the Catholic Doctrine of the Church
of England, Page 103. Which is but an Exposition of 39 Articles. Our Rule of
Faith is but Scripture, as each Person of sound Judgment in the Church
understands it: Authority is given to the Church, and to each Person of sound
Judgment in it, to judge in Controversies of Faith, and this is not the the
private Judgment of our Church, but also of our Brethren of Foreign Countries.


Ismael. I confess, not only these, but many other Doctors abet your discourse,
and the General Vogue of our Reformation, is for Scripture as each one
understands it; but alas! You see well, that we can never settle any Religion,
or Church, by such a Rule of Faith.


Isaac. You can never settle any but this, That every Man may without let or
hinderance, believe what be pleases; And why should not this be a good
Religion? If Scripture as each one understands it be not our Rule of Faith; if
we must be constrained to believe Scripture not as we understand it, but as it
is understood by this or that Congregation; what difference betwixt us and
Papists? They must believe Scripture as Interpreted by the Pope and Councils;
have ever so much light from God, be ever so wise and witty, you must depose
your own Judgment, and submit to that of the Pope, Council, and Popish Church:
To this pass we are come also; we must believe the Kings Supremacy, Episcopacy,
Figurative Presence, tho perhaps we do not Judge by Scripture it to be true
Doctrine; we are constrained by Penal Laws, and and Acts of Parliament to
believe them, as Papists by their Inquisition; and why? Because the Church of
England understands by Scripture, it is true; and if you reply you do not
Interpret Scripture so, you will not be heard; you must submit and believe
against your Judgment; and what is this but plain Popish Tyranny over Men's
Consciences? Did Luther and Calvin forsake the Pope and Councils, for to submit
their Judgments to any other? No, but to follow Scripture as each one of them
understood it: And though Luther was a Man raised by God, and replenished with
his Spirit to repair the ruins of the Church, yet Calvin did no more submit to
him, than Luther did to the Pope; nor did Zuinglius submit to Calvin, but
followed his own sense of Scripture, nor did Oeclampadius submit to Zuinglius;
but every one searched the Scripture, believed and taught what they thought to
be true and thus we became a Reformation of Popery; If therefore we will
continue a Reformation, and walk by the Spirit of our blessed Reformers; we
must not be constrained to believe any Man's sense of Scripture. We must believe
whatever we think to be true, and have no other Rule of Faith but Scripture, as
each one understands it.


Ismael. And what then? What do you infer from this discourse?


Isaac. This consequence, that whereas no true Child of the Reformation, be he
of what Congregation he will, can justly deny our Rule of Faith to be
Scripture, as any person of sound Judgment Interprets it; it follows
unavoidably that the Doctrine of the Reformation is, Whatever any person of
Judgment Interprets to be the true sense of Scripture, and whatever Luther,
Calvin, Beza, or any other of sound judgment in the Reformation, since its
first rise until this day, taught to be the true sense of Scripture, is to be
called and esteemed the Doctrine of the Reformation, though to this or that
Congregation, it may seem to be wicked and scandalous Doctrine.

And now let me answer to an Objection you made against this Principle in our
entrance to this discourse: You objected that many Popish Doctors and Casuists,
delivered scandalous and base Doctrines, which the Papists will not admit to be
the Doctrine of their Church, though delivered by popish Doctors; and thence you
pretended, that the particular sentiments of private Doctors of the Reformation
are not to be called the Doctrine of our Church. But be pleased to observe the
difference betwixt Popery and our Reformation the Rule of, Faith in Popery is
Scripture, as Interpreted by the Pope and Council, or their Church; they will
admit no other; consequently no Doctrine is to be called Popery, but what is
Judged by the Pope and his Church, or Council, to be the sense of Scripture;
and if any Doctor or University holds any sense contrary to theirs, it is to be
called the Doctrine of that particular person and not the Doctrine of the popish
Church, because their Rule of Faith is not Scripture, as Interpreted by their
Pope and Council. But whereas our Rule of Faith in the Reformation is
Scripture, as each person of sound judgment Interprets it; whatever Doctrine, or
Sense, is said by any Man to be of Scripture, is justly to be called the
Doctrine of the Reformation: For example, Melancthon, a Man of sound Judgmen,
great Learning, and of an upright Conscience, Taught Bigamy to be the Doctrine
of Scripture; Beza Taught the Lords Supper might be administered a in any kind
of Victuals, as well as in Bread and Wine: Calvin Taught that Christ despaired
on the Cross, and suffered the pains of Hell after his Death: Why then, let all
the Bishops and Universities of England condemn this Doctrine; let all the
Synods of France and Germany decry it, the Doctrine will be still of the
Reformation, because it is Scripture as Interpreted by Men of sound Judgment.


Ismael. The heat of your discourse has tired you, and my memory is
sufficiently laden with what you have said; let me digest it in my private
retirement and we will meet again.


Isaac. Content, carry with you these three points which I have proved
convincingly; First, our Rule of Faith is Scripture, not as Interpreted by this
or that, but by any Man of sound Judgment; Secondly, it follows hence that the
Doctrine of the Reformation must be, and ought to be called whatever any Man of
sound Judgment says is the sense of Scripture: Thirdly, it follows we may
change Religions as often as we please.


Third Dialogue.
ISMAEL. I remember well the summary of your last discourse given me in three
points, and I find the second to be absurd and repugnant to reason: you will
never persuade it, though you pleaded for it with great energy; what if a silly
Woman, Cobbler, or other Tradesmen, read Scripture, and give their sense of it,
that, forsooth, must be called the Doctrine of the Reformation? And it shall be
lawful for them to believe it, against the Doctrine of the whole Church.


Isaac. Do not limit Gods infinite goodness, by measuring his mercies toward
his Creatures with your narrow apprehensions: Take notice, he says, he has
chosen the weak and contemptible of the World for to confound the strong ones:
Matt. 12.
I confess unto you Father, that you have hid these things from the Wise and
Prudent, and have revealed them to the little ones. And there he choose poor
simple Fishermen to his Apostles: I know it is the practice of Papists, and from
them your Church of England borrows it, to despise the Ministry of Women,
Tradesmen, and Illiterate people, in Preaching, Teaching, and Interpreting
Scripture; but St. Paul tells us, 2 Timothy 2.
The Word of God is not bound; That Is to say, is not entailed on the learned,
rich, or great ones; the Jo. 4.
Wind blows where it lists: Our Bishops and Ministers would make a Monopoly
of the Word of God, and have themselves to be the only Retailers of it; for to
have some plausible Title for to enjoy great Rents, and shear the Flock. But we
have seen, as well among the Quakers, as in other Congregations, silly Women
and Tradesmen, replenished with Gods Spirit, Preach and Expound the great
Mysteries of our Religion with as much of good success and edification of the
Auditory, a^ any Penny-Book Man in England.


Ismael. It seems you approve the Ministry o^ Women and silly Tradesmen, for
Preaching and Teaching the Flock; and if so, you will overthrow our Hierarchy of
Bishops and Ministers.


Isaac. It matters not so much for you to know what I approve or condemn; but
to know what the Doctrine of the Reformation is; it is this; That none can
Teach, Preach, Administer Sacraments, or Exercise, Ecclesiastical Function, if
he be not in Holy Orders, Bishop, Minister, or Deacon; for the Church of
England Teache^ it, and you may believe it if you please. You may also deny it
and say, any Woman or Tradesman has as much Power for to preach and administer
the Sacraments, as the richest Bishop in England: This also is the Doctrine of
the Reformation as well as the former, because Quakers, Presbyterians,
Brownists, Anabaptists, etc. Believe and Teach it, and they are Men of as sound
Judgments, and as good Reformers as Protestants; nay, the most learned of our
Reformers, teach and commend the Power of Women for to exercise Spiritual
functions, and Administer the Sacraments: In lib. ad Corin. c 11.
Saumaise, Peter Martyr, and In Explan. Art. 17.
Zuinglius, expressly defend the Priesthood as well of Women as of Men: And To.
2. de minist. Eccles. instit. fol. 369. and lib. de Cap. Babyl. c. de Ordin.
and lib. de abroganda Missa.
Luther proves it efficaciously; The first office of a Priest says he, is to
Preach; this is common to all, even Women; the the second is to Baptize: which
is also common to Women; the third is to Consecrate their Bread and Wine, and
this also is common to all as well as to Men: and in the absence of a Priest, a
Woman may absolve from Sins as well as the Pope, because the Words of Christ,
Whatever ye shall untye on Earth, shall be untyed in Heaven, were said to all
Christians.

And when so eminent Men had not said it, reason and Scripture convinces it;
Reason, because that our Rule of Faith being Scripture as each Person of sound
Judgment understands it, many Women undoubtedly are of sound Judgment, and why
should not their interpretation of Scripture pass for the Doctrine of the
Reformation, as well as that of our Bishops and Ministers? Scripture, because
we read, the Samaritan Woman was the first who preached the Messiah to the City
of Samaria, and Christ commanded Mary Magdalen to go to Preach his Resurrection
to his Disciples; and we know by our Cronicles, that our glorious Queen
Elizabeth of blessed Memory, did not only govern the state, but was a great
Apostoless in Church affairs.


Ismael. To what purpose then, have we Bishops and Ministers, who enjoy so vast
revenues, if any Man or Woman can Preach and Administer the Sacraments as well
as they?


Isaac. You may believe, Bishops and Ministers are very needful for the Service
of the Church; for they being commonly learned witty Men, and having Wives,
they come to instruct their Wives so well, that the good Women come in a short
time to be as learned as their Husbands, and as nimble and quick in the
Ecclesiastical Ministeries, as they if they were permitted to exercise them; as
some Authors of Credit relate unto us, that a Gentleman of Constance, writ to
his Friend in a Village, (about three Leagues Distant from that City,) whose
Inhabitants were for the most part of our Lutheran Reformation; the good Pastor
exhorted his Flock to prepare for Easter Communion, that none should presume to
come to the Holy Table, but should first confess and receive absolution of his
sins: Easter Holy days being come, such a multitude flocked to confession, that
the Pastor could not satisfy the Devotion of so great a crowd; he called his
Wife to help him, for to hear Confessions, and give Absolutions, in which
Ministry the good Lady did Labor with great satisfaction of the Penitents;
but neither the Pastor, nor his virtuous Consort being able to dispatch so
great a multitude, he called his Maid Servant, who did work in the Holy
Ministry with as much expedition as her Master. But for all this, the Church
of Scotland, France, and all England (Protestants excepted,) will tell you that
Bishops and Ministers are not needful, nay that they are very prejudicious to
the Reformation and State; To the Reformation, because this Hierarchy with the
Bishops Court, Surplices, Corner Caps, and other Trumperies, puts the Flock in
mind of Popery, whereof it is a perfect Resemblance; and whilst the Papists see
our change from them, comes to be almost no more but to substitute new Priests
and Bishops in their own place for to manage more conscienciously the Rents and
Revenues which they profanely abused, and that those Rents and Revenues are
still in the Hands of an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, they live in Hopes of
recovering them some day, when our Bishops and Ministers will come to be as bad
Stewards of them as they were, and that the Flock will be weary of them and
call back the Ancient Possessors: It Is therefore perhaps the Emissaries of the
Pope do incessantly blow in our Ears, how ill our Ecclesiastical Revenues are
bestowed, for to maintain Wives and Children, Pomp and Vanity of Bishops and
Ministers, no less than in Popery. To the State, they seem to be prejudicious,
whereas any but a Bishop or Minister, would think, it would be more
advantageous to the Commonwealth, that the King should have those Revenues for
to maintain his Fleet and Army, and ease thereby the Subjects of Subsidies and
Taxes, than that a handful of Bishops and Ministers should have them? Specially
when others can Preach and Teach as well as they, for nothing, but the pleasure
of being heard.


Ismael. But do not you see it would be a Sacrilege, that the King should
deprive the Clergy of their Church Revenues?


Isaac. And do not you know, that almost all our Congregations do hold our
Clergy to be no true Clergy, but as mere Laymen as you or I? they admit no
Clergy or Episcopal Character, but Elders chosen by the Congregation. And if
they be no true Clergy, they have no right to the Church Revenues, and it is no
Sacrilege to deprive them of them. The Popish Clergy in Henry the VIII's time,
had visibly a greater right to them, than ours now have. For neither the King
himself nor any other did doubt of their Right; and now most of our
Congregations do absolutely deny any Right in our Clergy to those Rents,
because they are no Clergy. Ye^ none will be so bold, as to accuse Henry the
VIII of Sacrilege, for having taken the Church-living from them, for to put
them to better use. And why should we dare say, our King would commit any, for
depriving our Clergy of those Rents? Believe he can lawfully do it, or believe
he cannot, you will be still a good Child of the Reformation. Believe what you
please.


Ismael. This is a ticklish point, let us leave it to the consideration of our
wise and prudent Parliament, and be pleased to answer to my doubt. How can we
live in peace and tranquillity in Religion, if our Rule of Faith be Scripture as
each one understands it. I remember a discourse started in the House of Lords,
not many Years ago, by his Grace the Duke of Buckingham; he desired to know,
what it was to be a Protestant; wherein did Protestancy properly consist? The
Bishops, who were present looked one upon another, and whether they feared the
difficulty of the Question, or that for modesty's sake each expected to hear
another speak first, they stood silent for a while; at last the Ice was broken
by one, others followed, but hardly any two agreed; and all that the Duke could
gather out of their several answers, was, That our Rule of Faith, was Scripture
as each one understood it, and Protestancy nothing but Scripture, as
Interpreted by the Parliament and Church of England* Whereupon he concluded, We
have been these hundred Years very busy for to settle Religion, and for ought
I perceive, we are as unsettled n^w as at the beginning: And truly he had great
reason, for Religion and Faith is nothing else, but that sense of Scripture,
which each person of sound Judgment understands; and as it is impossible we
should all jump and agree in one sense and meaning of the Text, so it is
impossible we shall ever be settled and agree in Religion.


Isaac. The reason of our unsettlement hitherto, and at present, is the violent
efforts, what by Persecutions, Acts of Parliaments, and other Oppressions: what
by Invectives, Intrigues, and Cabals of the Church of Engand, to draw all to be
Protestants; of the Presbyterians, to make us deny Episcopacy; and of each
other Congregation to force us to their respective Tenets: And whilst this
constraint and severity is used against Men's Consciences, it is in vain to
expect peace or settlement in our Reformed Church: But let us follow the Rule
of Faith, let each one believe as in his Conscience he best understands
Scripture: let us all believe what we please, and be permitted so to do, and we
shall without doubt enjoy perfect Peace and Tranquillity: Believe you
Figurative Presence, if you will; let the Lutheran believe his Real Presence,
if he likes it, and let me believe no Presence at all, if I judge there is none?
why will not you permit me to follow that Rule of Faith, which the whole
Reformation, even the Church of England gives me in her 39 Articles, Scripture
as each person of sound Judgment understands it? To say, we can never have
settlement in Religion, whilst this arbitrary Interpretation of Scripture is
permitted, is to speak like a Papist: This the Pope and Papists said to our
first blessed Reformers, and the Popish Church says this day to us, That we
ought to submit our judgments to the Church and Councils; that we ought not to
believe what sense we think to be true, but what the Pope and Councils propose
unto us; and if Luther, and our other Reformers did not do ill in following
their own Sense and Interpretation of Scripture against all the World, why do
you blame me, or any other for following their example.


Ismael. When you speak of our Reformation and Congregations, I hear you reckon
the Arians, Socinians, and Antitrinitarians, among them; sure you do not
believe they, or such like ancient condemned Heretics, were of the
Reformation; for we Protestants do believe the Mystery of the Trinity against
them, and will never own them to be our Brethren.


Isaac. And do not you believe Episcopacy against the Presbyterians, some
Canonical Books against the Lutherans, Supremacy against the Quakers, and
Infants Baptism against the Anabaptists; and yet you own them as your Brethren
and Godly Congregations of the Reformation; or if you will deny them, they will
also scorn you, and say they are more of the Reformation than you are? and why
will you not own the Arians, etc. as your Brethren, though you believe the
Trinity against them? You say they are Old condemned Heretics; and does this
Language become a Child of the Reformed Church? By whom were they condemned?
Was it not by the Popish Church? which also condemns us, and says we are as
much Heretics as they; and as we ought not to be so called, and judge the Pope
and Councils Sentence against us, to be bold, uncharitable, and unjust; so we
must say of the Arians, Pelagians, and others condemned by them. You say
Protestants will never own them to be their Brethren; God forbid the Protestant
Church should be so uncharitable to their fellow Christians, and so unjust to
themselves. B. Morton, (as I cited in my first Dialogue,) as learned a Man as
the Church of England bred, says the Arian Church is a true Church, and will
say no less of the others: But what need we the Testimony of any, for what
reason so convincingly proves; They who walk by one and the same Rule of Faith,
are of one and the same Religion; therefore Lutherans, Protestants,
Presbyterians and Independants, do esteem themselves to be of the same Faith
and Religion, because they all have the same Rule, which is Scripture, as each
Congregation understands it: Also, notwithstanding the difference and variety
of Congregations in Popery, they hold all but one Faith, as they say; because
they have all but one Rule of their Belief, which is their infallible Pope and
Church: But it is evident that those which you call Ancient condemned Heretics,
have one and the same Rule of Faith with our Reformation; for ours is
Scripture, as each person of sound Judgment understands it, without any
obligation of holding the Sense of it delivered by Pope, Church, Councils, or
any other; therefore our first blessed Reformers did not care what Sense of it
the Church or Pope did hold, when they began to Preach the purity of the
Gospel, but each of them Interpreted it as he thought sit in the Lord, and so
purged the Church of many Errors: This is the very self same Rule of Faith,
which Arians, Pelagians, Nestorians, and others, peremptorily condemned by Rome
as Heretics, did follow and walk by: Each of them Read and Interpreted
Scripture, Preached and Believed what Sense of it they thought to be true, though
they knew it was against the Doctrine of the Church, looking on Scripture alone
as their Rule of Faith, without any regard of the Pope, Church, Councils or
Fathers: The Church of Rome, proud and impatient of any Opposition, condemned
them as Heretics for not submitting their Judgments to her; for taking
Scripture as they understood it, and not as the Church and Councils understood
it, for their R^^^ of Faith; and if this be a crime, we are as guilty as they;
we are equally ^ ocent or innocent; we are both Heretics, or none is; we are
therefore concerned in their Honor, and ought to defend the integrity of their
procedure against the common Enemy, which is the Pope. They were Reformers of
the Church in their times, as we are in ours; and whereas they have the same
Rule of Faith, so they have the same Religion with the Reformation.


Ismael. Then you will say, Arianism is the Doctrine of the Reformation, and we
may lawfully believe it.


Isaac. I say, God's Unity in Nature and Trinity in Persons, is the Doctrine of
the Reformation, because the Protestant, Lutheran, and Hugonot Church judge by
Scripture, it is true; and if you judge also by Scripture, it is the true
Doctrine, you may believe it: I say also, if you judge by Scripture, this
Mystery is not true, you may safely deny it acccording to the Principles of the
Reformation, and be still as good a Member of the Reformed Church, as they who
believe it; for whoever believes what he judges by Scripture to be true, is a
true Reformed: And, that the denial of the Trinity is as much the Doctrine of
the Reformation, as the belief of it; it appears not only because it was the
Doctrine of the Arians, who, as I proved, are truly of the Reformed Church; but
because it was taught by the greatest Lights of our Church: In Harm. in Matthew.
c. 26. verse. 64. and in admonad. Po^^. in Tract. Theolog. page 794.
Calvin says the Text. My Father is greater than I, must be understood of
Christ, not only as he is Man, but also as he is God. And that the Council of
Nice did abuse the Text: Comment. super Joan. c. 10.
My Father and I are one, for to prove the Unity of both in Nature; whereas it
only signifies their Unity by conformity of Wills. Again he says, Epist. 2. ad
Polon. in Tract. Theol. page 796. That Prayer, Holy Trinity, one God have mercy
of us, is brabarous, and does not please me. And adds, In Act. Seiueti page 87.
The Son has his own substance distinct from the Father. His Disciple l. con.
Cenebrat.
Danaeus, says, it is a foolish insipid Prayer: And our great Apostle Luther,
(who as Fox witnesses, was the Chariot and Conductor of Israel, and a Man
extraordinarily raised and replenished with Gods Spirit, to teach the purity of
the Gospel,) caused that Prayer to be blotted out of the Litanies, In Postil.
Major. in ennarat. Evang. Domin. Trinit.
That word Trinity, says he, sounds coldly; my Soul hates that word Humousion,
and the Arian did well in not admitting it. Lastly, Ochinus that great Oracle
of England, impugns this Mystery with a strong discourse: Lib. 2. Dial. 2.
We are not obliged to believe, says he, more than the Saints of the Ancient
Testament, otherwise our condition would be worse than theirs, but they were
not obliged to believe this Mystery, therefore we are not obliged. Examine, I
pray, the Works of these eminent Doctors, where I quote them; consider if they
be not, not only Men of sound judgment, but Men extraordinarily raised by God,
(says the Synod of Charenton;) the Chariots and Conductors of Israel, says Fox:
Men to be reverenced after Christ, says our Doctor ^owel, and Apostolical
Oracles sent to teach us the purity of the Gospel, and conclude, it is an
undeniable Verity, that this is the Doctrine of the Reformation, whereas it is
Scripture as Interpreted by such Men: Oh! But England, France, and Scotland,
believe this Mystery; well! And what then? That proves that the Mystery is also
the Doctrine of the Reformation, because whatever any Man of sound Judgment
thinks to be Scripture, it is the Doctrine; but is England or France alone the
whole Reformation? Are not Luther, Calvin, Danaeus, Ochinus as well of the
Reformation, and Men of as sound Judgment as they? Since therefore they
understand, by Scripture there is no Trinity, it is the Doctrine of the
Reformation also that there is none: Believe it or deny it, which you like best,
and you will be still of the Reformed Church.


Isaac. By the principle you run upon you say any may Blasphemy is the Doctrine
of the Reformation, for there is hardly any so execrable, but some Dr. of ours
has delivered and taught it.


Ismael. The Principle I run upon is this, Scripture as each person of sound
Judgment interprets it, is our Rule of Faith: Judge you, if that be not a good
Principle in our Reformed Church, whereas this is the Rule of Faith given us by
the 39 Articles, and generally by all our Doctors, as I proved in my first
Dialogue: this being our Rule of Faith and Reformed Doctrine, it is evident,
that whatever Doctrine is judged by any person of sound Judgment to be
contained in Scripture, is the Doctrine of our Reformation: some persons of
sound Judgment say the Real Presence is expressed by Scripture, this therefore
is the Doctrine of the Reformation; others say only Figurative Presence is
taught in Scripture, this also is the Doctrine of the Reformation; some,
understand by Scripture, there is a Mystery of the Blessed Trinity, this
therefore is the Doctrine of the Reformation: others understand there is no such
Mystery, this also is the Doctrine of the Reformation: so that whether you
believe or deny this or any other Tenet controverted, you will still hold the
Doctrine of the Reformation.


Ismael. Calvin Harm. in Evang. Mat. c. 26. verse. 39. and c. 27. verse. 46. and
lib. 2. Instit. c. 16. sect. 10. and 11.
says, Christ prayed unadvisedly, the Eve of his passion; that he uttered words
whereof he was afterward sorry: that in his passion he was so troubled of all
sides, that overwhelmed with desparation, he desisted from invoking God, which
was to renounce all hopes of Salvation: And says he, In Luke par. 2. hom. 65.
and in Joan. hom. 54.
if you object it is absurd and scandalous to affirm Christ despair I answer,
This desparation proceeded from him as he was man, not as he was God. And this
is not only the Doctrine of Calvin, but of Brentius, In March. c. 16.
Marlotus, Recogn. page 376.
Jacobus Minister (quoted by Bilson) and of Beza. Will you say this is the
Doctrine of the Reformation, or that we can without scruple believe it? Also
Calvin says, Lib. 2. Inst. c. 16. fact. 10. and seq.
That Christ's corporal death was not sufficient for to redeem us, but that
after having despaired on the Cross, he suffered the death of his Soul; that is
to say, that his Soul after his corporal death, suffered the pains of the
damned in Hell. And says he in the same place, they are but ignorant, doltish,
brutish, men, who will deny it. Luther also teaches the same Doctrine: To. 3
Wettemp. in sp. 16.
As he suffered with exceeding pains, the death of the body; so it seems he
suffered afterward the death of the Soul in Hell: Epinus In Ps. 16.
a learned Lutheran says, Christ descended into Hell for thee, and suffered not
only corporal death, but the death and fire of Hell. Mr. Fulk and Perkins avow
this is also the express Doctrine of Illiricus, Latimer and Lossius. Also
Luther In Confess. majori de Coena Dni.
most impiously affirms, that not the human Nature of Christ dyed for us, but
also his Divine Nature: see Luther's words quoted at large by Zuinglius, To. 2.
in respon. ad Confess. Luth. fol. 458.
and Hospinian; In Histor. Sacram. par. 2. fol. 75.
If you say such scandalous blasphemies may be safely believed, you will render
your Christianity suspected; and if you say, that they are the Doctrine of the
Reformation, or that they may be believed according to the Principles of the
Reformation, you will make the Reformation, and its Principles to be hated by
any good Christian.


Isaac. If I walk by the Rule of Faith of the Reformation, I Will prove my self a
true Reformed Child; and if I prove my self to be a Reformed Child, my
Christianity cannot be justly suspected. What Tenet have you related of all
those which you call blasphemies and scandals, but has been judged by those
eminent Doctors of our Reformation to be express Scripture, or conformable to
Scripture; and since our Rule of Faith is Scripture, as each person of sound
Judgment understands it, and since the Doctrine of our Reformation is but
whatever any such person of sound Judgment, judges to be expressed in, or
proved by Scripture, it is evident that all those Tenets are undeniably the
Doctrine of the Reformation: I say then, and will say, without any offense to
my Christianity, or blemish to our Reformed Church, that those Tenets are the
Doctrine of the Reformation and may be as safely believed by any Child of it, as
Figurative Presence, Supremacy, or Two Sacraments: and let not any Bigot
pretend to frighten me from this Doctrine by calling it Blasphemy and Impiety;
No, it is Scripture, as interpreted by our renowned Reformed Doctors, therefore
it is no Blasphemy: Let any man convince me, that our Rule of Faith must not be
Scripture, as each person of sound Judgment understands it; and he will
convince that this cannot be justly called the Doctrine of the Reformation; but
whilst that Principle and Rule of Faith stands unshaken, nothing that is taught
by any Person of Judgment to be the Doctrine of Scripture, but it is to be
called our Doctrine, and may be safely believed.

You say, that whoever has any Love for Christianity, will hate the Reformation
and its Principles, if they give Liberty for to believe such Blasphemies: But,
can any Mother be more indulgent to her Child, than the Reformation is to us?
such as think those Tenets to be Blasphemies, the Reformation gives them leave
not to believe them: and if any judges by Scripture, that they are not
Blasphemies, but pure Doctrine, as Luther, Calvin, and others did, they have
Liberty for to believe them. He who denies them, cannot in Charity check them
who believe them, nor can they who believe them, check those who deny them,
whereas each follow the Rule of Faith, and believe what they judge by Scripture
to be true. And if you or your Church of England cry out Blasphemy, Blasphemy,
against all that you judge to be false, why do not you cry Blasphemy against
Presbyterians, Lutherans, and other Congregations, from whom you dissent? And
what difference betwixt you and ^he Church of Rome? The folly of this is to
call Heresy and Blasphemy all that is not her own Doctrine! And all that your
Church of England mislikes, must be Fanaticism, Blaphemy, and Impiety? Must our
Rule of Faith be Scripture, as the Church of England understands it, and not
otherwise? Presbyterians, and Lutherans, will never allow it: If therefore our
Rule of Faith be Scripture, as each Person understands it; any Person of sound
Judgment in the Reformation, may without scruple believe what he understands to
be the Doctrine of Scripture.


Fourth DIALOGUE.
ISMAEL. You still insist upon that principle, that our Rule of Faith is
Scripture, as each person of sound judgment understands it, and from that
principle will follow many absurd consequences destructive of Piety and
Religion.


Isaac. That Principle is not invented by me, it is of our Holy Reformation; if
I did discourse with a Papist I would prove the principle to be true, and Gods
express Word; but since I discourse with a Reformed Child, I suppose, I need
not spend my time in proving it; This principle then, being an unquestionable
truth in our Reformation, no Reformed Child must be so irreverent and bold as
to say, that any Doctrine which clearly and unavoidably follows out of it, is
Blasphemous or Impious, for that would be to condemn our principle by which we
walk: Ex vero non sequitur nisi veram: From a true Principle nothing can follow
but true Doctrine. Can you deny but this was the Rule of Faith, and principle
of our first blessed Reformers, and of the Church of England, mentioned in her
39 Articles? If therefore they judged, and if any other judges by that Rule and
Principle, that those Tenets which you call Impious and Blasphemous, to be true
Doctrine, they cannot be blamed for believing them.


Ismael. I confess our first Reformers did speak so, but I say such Errors and
Impious Doctrines cannot without Irreverence be called the Doctrine of the
Reformation, and cannot without impiety be believed, because our Reformation at
present condemns and detests those Blasphemies, for we must grant that our
Reformation in its beginning was not in its full perfection of Doctrine, God
began it by Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, and others: Those great Men had their
frailties, they did overlash in some things, and what they said amiss, Gods
Heavenly Spirit inspired to the Church from time to time to correct it, and has
at length brought our Church to that purity of Doctrine, and fullness of
perfection which now it enjoys. Nothing is to be called now the Doctrine of the
Reformation, but what is now believed by our Congregations, and none of them
believes those execrable Tenets you related.


Isaac. You wrong the Reformation very much, in saying it had not its full
perfection in the beginning, it is rather to be thought, that that polishing and
refining of it in ensuing Years with new perfections, and correcting the first
draught of it by our first Reformers, has been a corruption of it with some
mixture of Popish Errors and Superstitions: For all Religious Congregations and
Pretenders to Piety, are at the first beginning in the height of their
perfection, and in Progress of Years they decline and decay from their
primitive Spirit into errors and corruption of manners: Religious Congregations
are not like Arts and Sciences, which by time and experience receive new
perfections; but like Chimnies, which grow daily blacker by continual smoke and
fire: Witness the Jewish Church and Law in its beginning, flourishing and holy,
but corrupted in progress of time, by Traditions of Men and Superstitions of
Pharisees: Witness also the Law of the Gospel in those happy times of the
Apostles, holy and pure, but corrupted after some Years by errors of Popery: If
we be to seek for the pure and Orthodox Doctrine of the Primitive Church, ought
not we to be said by the Apostles, Men raised extraordinarily by God, and
replenished with his Spirit to teach us the Gospel? And if we be to seek for
the Pure and Orthodox doctrine of the Reformation, ought not we to be swayed
rather by Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, Zuinglius, Beza, and our other first
Reformers, than by a few Ministers and Bishops of England, who though they be
Wise and Pious Men, yet they are not of that stamp as the others. And if our
present Congregations presume to correct them, and say they overlash'd in their
doctrine; will not the Papists say, if they have been such scandalous Masters,
and false Teachers, why did you receive their Reformation? And as they erred so
grossly in such prime Articles of Christianity, why do you fear and suspect they
have also erred in the rest? Secondly, the Papists will say, if as they
Reformed us, you Reform them, then you must expect and permit that others may
reform you, and forsake your Doctrine as you forsake theirs.


Ismael. I wish you could make out, that the Reformation was in its full.
Perfection in its beginning; had you read some Writers of ours, perhaps you
would judge otherwise; Dom. 1. Adventus, and liber. de Proph. Christi.
Musculus, ^ learned Lutheran, writes thus; Thus it is with ^s at Present, that
if any be desirous to see a great Rabble of Knaves, turbulent Spirits,
deceitful Persons, Cozeners, and Debauched Men, let him go to a City, where the
Gospel is purely Preached, and he shall find them by Multitudes; for it is more
manifest than the by light, that never were there more unbridled and ^nruly
People among the Turks and Infidels than the Professors of the Reformed Gospel.
In Postil. super Evangel. Dom. 1. Advent. and Dom. 26. post Trinit.
Luther himself says as much; The World grows daily worse and Men are now more
covetous, revengeful, and licentiius than they were in Popery. Mr. Stubs
Motives to good Works in the Epist. Dedic.
says, no less; After my Travels round about all England, I found the People in
most Parts proud, malicious, ambitious and careless of good Works. Mr. Richard
Gefery, in his Sermon at St. Paul's Cross, Printed Anno 1604. I may freely
speak what I have plainly seen that in Flanders never was there more
Drunkenness, in Italy more Wantonness, in Jury more Hypocrisy, Turkey more
Impiety, in Tartary more Iniquity, than is practiced generally in England, and
particularly in London. Certainly our Reformation at present deserves a better
Character; never did the Alehouses and Taverns complain more heavily of want
of Trading, which is a Proof of our Sobriety; the Churches which we see a
Building in London, is a good Testimony of Piety; and we are so far from any
smack of Hypocrisy, that you shall not see in all London the least appearance
of Virtue, so hiddenly it is kept from mortal Eyes, but what you may meet in our
honest Quakers.


Isaac. I confess our Congregations as now they are, are very good both in
Doctrine and Manners; but I say also, that the Doctrine and Manners of our
Reformation, at its first beginning was as pure, as Holy, and as true as now it
is, or ever it will be. Nay, supposing and granted, their Manners and Doctrine
were so corrupt as those Doctors mention; I say that amidst all those Vices,
their Life was as Holy, Innocent, Blameless and Pure as yours is now. And that
you may be convinced of this Truth, know that Calvin expressly teaches. Lib. 3.
Inst. c. 4. Sect. 28.
We believe the Sins of the Faithful, (he means of the Reformation) are but
venial Sins; not but that they deserve Death, but because there is no damnation
for the Children of Grace in as much as their Sins are not imputed to them; And
again Lib. 4. c. 7. Sect. 2.
he says, We can assure our selves, we can no more be damned for any Sins, then
Jesus Christ himself. Luther In locis commun. class. 5.27.
is of the same Opinion, As nothing but Faith does Justify us, so nothing but
incredulity is a Sin. Again, To. 2. Wittem. de capr. Babyl. fol. 74.
No Sin is so great that it can condemn a Man, such as are damned, are damned
only for their Incredulity Whitaker, De Eccl. cont. Bellarm conf. 2. quaest. 5.
No Sin can hurt a Men who has Faith. The same is taught by Wotton, Fulk,
Tindal, and Beza. It Is therefore the Doctrine of Scripture, as Interpreted by
these Persons of great and sound Judgment, that Incests, Murders,
Intemperance, or whatever else you call a Sin, (Incredulity excepted,) either
is no Sin at all, or but Venial Sins, which do no harm, nor cannot damn the
children of the Reformation; if therefore our Brethren lived in the beginning
of the Reformation, as those Authors relate, they lived according to Scripture,
as Interpreted to them by Men of sound Judgment, and this being our rule of
Faith and Manners, they did not ill, but very well in following it.


Ismael. They were men of the Reformation, it is true, who taught these Errors,
and dissolutition of Life and good Manners; insomuch, they swerved from the
Spirits Holiness and Purity of the Reformation, and must not be believed nor
commended. Look upon the Reformation as now it is, and you will not find any
such scandalous Doctrine, or Corruption of manners.


Isaac. They were not only Men of the Reformation, but the greatest Oracles of
it, which you will not match with any of our prese^^ Congregations, and it is
not pardonable in any Reformed Child to say, such Oracles, Extraordinarily
raised by God to teach the Purity of the Gospel, should have taught either
Errors in Doctrine, or dissolution of Manners. They taugh^ what in their
Consciences they understood by Scripture to be true; if you will not be so it
revent as to say, that they were Knaves, who spoke and taught against their
Consciences and Knowledge. Therefore they taught the Doctrine of the
Reformation, purely and truly* The Consequence is Evident: For what is the
Doctrine of the Reformation, but what wise, learned Men of sound Judgment think
and understand by Scripture to be true? Why is figurative Presence the Doctrine
of the Reformation though denied by Lutherans, (who are Reformed also,) but
because Wise, Learned Men Judge by Scripture as they understand it, it is the
true Doctrine? or can you give me any other Rule of Faith by which we may know
what Doctrine is of the Reformation, and what not, but Scripture as each person
of sound Judgment understands it? Or what Rule can you give for to know what is
good or evil to be done, but Scripture as understood by such Persons? If
therefore Luther, Calvin, and the other Doctors I quoted, Judge by Scripture
that Doctrine and manner of Life to be true and good, why may not we say it is
the Doctrine of the Reformation? If you or the Church of England or Scotland
Judge that Doctrine to be false, and that manner of Life to be a dissolution
and corruption of Manners: Why? you are Men of sound Judgment, you understand
Scripture so; that will be the Doctrine also of the Reformation, you may
believe it: But you must not deny that Luther and Calvin's Doctrine also is of
the Reformation, because they were Men of as sound Judgment as you.

You transgress hainously against Modesty, in saying those sacred Organs of God
swerved from the Spirit and Holiness of the Reformation; which having no other
Rule of Faith but Scripture, as each Person of sound Judgment understands it;
its Spirit and Holiness consists in framing our Life and Doctrine to that Rule,
as our blessed Reformers and Reformation in its beginning did, believing those
Tenets, which you call Errors and Blasphemy, and living that Life which you
call Dissolution and Corruption of Manners, because they judge by Scripture as
they understood it, that Doctrine and manner of Life was True, Innocent and
Good; and if you like it as they did, you may believe and live as they did, and
be a good Child of the Reformation: Consider I pray all the Works and Doctrine
of Luther, (the like I say of our other first Reformers) the three parts of his
Doctrine is against Popery, and they say all are Heresies and Blasphemies; the
rest is contrary to the Church of England, and she says, this is also Errors
and Blasphemy, so you conspire with the Papists, to destroy the credit of our
first and best Reformer and betwixt you both, you unplume him of all his
Feathers, and leave him not a bit of good Doctrine.

But I will stand to the Spirit, and Principles of the Reformation, and
Congregations, as now they are, since that you do so much boast of its Purity
and great Perfections; and I will prove that Doctrine and Manner of Life, may
be believed and followed Lawfully standing to its Principles: For if the Spirit
of the Reformation be at present among us, we must not be forced, as in Popery,
to believe against our proper Judgments, what others believe by Scripture to be
true and holy, but what each one thinks in his own Conscience to be such;
because even now at present, our Rule of Faith is Scripture as each Person of
sound Judgment understands it, and this is the same Rule which Luther and the
Reformation in it is beginning had: This Holy Liberty is the best Jewel, the
greatest Perfection, and most glorious Prerogative the Reformation has: If
therefore now at present any Man judges by Scripture that he can Marry ten
Wives at a time; that he can kill his own Son as Abraham intended; that he may
commit incest with his own Daughter, as Lot did; that there is no Sin but
Incredulity, as Luther believed; nor any Mystery of the Trinity of Persons in
one Nature, as Calvin believed, with what Justice can the Church of England say
a Man does not believe, and live as becomes a Reformed Child, or that his
Doctrine and Life is scandalous; whereas he lives and believes as he
understands by Scripture, he may or ought to do, which is the Rule of Faith of
the Reformation, even of the Church of England? The Church of England says, the
Lutheran Doctrine of the Real Presence is not the Doctrine of Scripture; that the
Presbyterian Doctrine against Episcopacy, is not the Doctrine of Scripture; that
the Anabaptist Doctrine against Infants Baptism, is not of Scripture; and yet
you permit them all to live in Peace; you Confess they are true Children of the
Reformation, though Dissenters from you; why? Because they follow Scripture as
they understand it, and this is our Rule of Faith? And why will not you say,
the Belief and Life of that other Man is also of the Reformation, though it may
seem absurd to you; since he believes and lives as he Judges by Scripture he
may? It follows therefore plainly, that this is the Doctrine of the Reformation.


Ismael. I confess our rule of Faith in the Reformation, is Scripture, as each
person of sound Judgment understands it: but you cannot doubt but that it is
needful to moderate and curb this Liberty, or it may run too far: for if every
Man be licenced to believe and teach every thing he fancies to be according to
Scripture; as there is no Doctrine so execrable but some ignorant Reader may
hit upon a Text, which ill understood, may seem to favor it; so there will be
none but may be believed, and called the Doctrine of the Reformation: for
example, Beza Epist. 2.2. and 25.
teaches, (and says it is also the Doctrine of Calvin, Sumaize and Geneve,) that
the Lords Supper may be Lawfully administered in any kind of Victuals as well as
in Bread and Wine, in Eggs, Flesh, Fish, etc. Where there is no Bread and Wine,
says he, we may duly celebrate, if instead of them we use what we usually Eat
and Drink. And again in the same place, If there be no water at hand, and that
Baptism cannot be with edification deferred I would Baptize in any other liquor.


Isaac. And why should not it be lawful to any Reformed to believe this,
whereas it is Scripture as interpreted by a Man of so sound a Judgment? but I do
not in any wise like that Opinion of yours, and of the Church of England, that
it is convenient to limit and curb Men's Judgments, lest they may run too far:
this is the policy of Rome, They will not permit an arbitrary Interpretation of
Scripture, alleging forsooth, for Inconveniency, the multitude of absurd
Doctrines which the World would swarm with, if such a liberty were allowed: No,
no, far be it from any true reformed Child to mislike or blame that all People
should interpret Scripture, and believe what they judge by it to be true: and
if what they judge to be true* should seem to you false and scandalous, do not
you believe it, but let them believe it, and they will be of the Reformation,
because they follow our rule of Faith.


Ismael. To. 5. Wittem. sermon. de Matrim. and in 1. ad Corin. 7
Luther Consil. Theol. par. 1 page 648. and 134.
Melancthon, In Epist. Pau ad Phil. and in 2. ad Tim. 3.
Musculus, lib 2. Dial. 21.
Ochinus, Lib de Repud. and Divort. page 223.
Beza, and others, teach the lawfulness of Bigamy or Multiplicity of Wives, and
prove it with the example of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and Ochinus expounding
the Text of St. Paul, It behooves a Bishop to be a Man of one Wife: The
Prohibition, says he, is not to be understood so, that a Bishop should have but
one Wife at a time, for certainly he may have many; but St. Paul's meaning is,
that he ought not to have too many Wives at a time, that is to say, ten or
twenty.


Isaac. And will you deny this to be the Doctrine of the Reformation, whereas
it is Scripture as interpreted by Men of so eminent and sound a Judgment?


Ismael. The Synod of Geneve, Canon. Generales Genuen. 1560.
and the Chap. 13. art 31.
Ecclesiastical Discipline of France, printed at Saumure, has decreed, that a
Wife whose Husband is a long time absent, may have him called by the public
Crier, and if within a competent time he does not appear, without any further
Enquiry, the Ministers may License her to marry any other; or marry her himself.


Isaac. I say all Women may practice this Doctrine without scruple or shame,
whereas it is Scripture, as interpreted by that thrice holy Synod; but let
Seamen beware how they undertake long Voyages, for fear their Wives may take
other Husbands in their Absence.


Ismael. Luther To. 5. Wittem. sermon. de Matrim.
teaches it is lawful to a Wife, if her Husband does not please her, to call her
Manservant, or her Neighbor; which Doctrine they say is come to the Ears of
our London Sisters; and he gives the like Liberty to the Hubands, if their
Wives be pettish and humoursom. If the Husband, says he, cannot correct the
humoursomness of his Wife, he may imagine she is Dead, and may marry another,
because it is not in the Power of a Man to live without a Woman, nor in hers to
live without a Man.


Isaac. This is Scripture as Interpreted by Luther, and consequently must not
be denied to be the Doctrine of the Reformation; nor can any of our Reformation
be justly punished or blamed for practicing it, if he judges by Scripture it be
true, (as Luther did) for this is out Rule of Faith. But Luther never gave this
Liberty, but upon condition, that the Husband or Wife should first make their
Complaint before a Magistrate, for to have a redress of their Injury and
discontent; but this condition seems too. Combersome to the Modesty of our
Sisters; they do not submit to it, but do themselves Justice without any
address to the Magistrate. I know also, that not only Luther, but To. 5.
Wittemb. sermon. de Matrim.
Bucer, In Scriptis Anglic. de Reg. Chr. l. 2. c. 26. and in Matthew. c. 19.
Melancthon, In Consil. Theol. par. 1. page 648. s. and 134.
Ochinus, Dial. 200. and 204. in Epist. S. Paul. ad Tim. 3.
Musculus and Calvin, l. 4. Inst. c. 19. sect. 37. Discip. Eccl. c. 13.
do teach that a Man who finds his Wife in Adultery may cast her off by
Divorce, and Marry another; and our French Synods have ordered this Doctrine to
be put in their Ecclesiastical Discipline, so that it is the Doctrine of
Scripture as interpreted by these Persons of sound Judgment, and consequently
of the Reformation: you may therefore believe and practice it; our Sisters,
particularly our Ministers Wives were much alarmed at this Doctrine, and say
it is a damnable Heresy; believe it as you please.


Ismael. Does not Luther say it is impossible a Sermon. de Murim.
young Man of 20 Years can live without a Woman; or a young Maid of 18 Years
without a Man; whereby all Parents may believe their Daughters of that Age are
defiled if not preferred in due time: sure you will not say, this is the
Doctrine of the Reformation.


Isaac. And who doubts but that it is the Reformed Doctrine: Scripture as
interpreted by so sound a Judgment; the contrary Doctrine is also of the
Reformation, and you may believe it, because our Glorious Queen Elizabeth dyed
a Virgin; and it is credibly reported some few fellows of Oxford and Cambridge
live continently.


Ismael. But what do you think of a Child Christened in Popery by a Monk or a
Friar, ought he to be Christened again in our Reformation? And what if a Popish
Priest, or Friar, did become of our Reformed Church, can he lawfully Marry,
whereas be made a Vow of Chastity?


Isaac. As to the first Query, it is the Doctrine of the Reformation, declared by
many French Synods, and recorded in their Ecclesiastical Discipline, that he
must be Christened again, because the first Baptism was Null: it is also the
Doctrine of the Reformation, declared by the Church of England, and many Synods
of France, that the first Baptism is sufficient and valid: believe which you
please. It Is also the Doctrine of the Reformation, that Infants Baptism is not
at all needful (nay nor Lawful say the Anabaptists) so says Calvin, Lib. 4.
Inst. c. 15. sect. 20. and 21.
Zuinglius, Beza, and many others; it is likewise the Doctrine of our 39 Articles
Act. 27.
, and our holy Synod of London Can. 29.
, that Infants baptism is lawful and needful. Believe which you like best; both
are of the Reformation.

As to the second Query, it is the Doctrine of the Reformation that Priests and
Friars are obliged to the vow of Chastity which they made in Popery, and cannot
Marry, this is the Doctrine of many of our Brethren, and particularly of Lib. 2.
Eccles. Polit. page 103.
Hooker, In Tim. c. 50.
Marloratus, Budellus and In defens. Hookeri art. 8.
Couel, who say the Papists vows of Poverty, Obedience and Chastity are
commendable and ought to be kept. You may also believe this is wicked Doctrine,
and that they may take Wives notwithstanding their vow of Chastity, as well as
Benefices notwithstanding their vow of Poverty: believe which you please, both
Doctrines are of the Reformation; but the best is to say they can Marry, for if
Marriage and Benefices were denied them, no Priest or Friar would ever embrace
our Reformed Doctrine: We know our great Zuinglius himself would not at all
preach the Gospel unto the Switzers, until that he presented a Petition for
himself and his Companions (all Priests and Friars) extant yet in his 1 Tom.
page 110. and obtained the contents of it, which was to have Wives. Nor can we
doubt this to be the best Doctrine, whereas Luther, Beza, and almost all our
Reformers, were Priests and Friars, and the first step they gave in the
Reformation was to Marry: the Papists and some weak Brethren were much
scandalized at Luther's Marriage, and Erasmus his Raillery upon it was much
solemnized; Luther yesterday a Monk, to day a Husband, and next day a Father,
because that honest Kate Boren, his virtuous Bride, was happily delivered of a
lovely Boy eight days after he Married her: But the Servant of God did not
regret the action, which proves that he Judged by Scripture it was very lawful.


Fifth DIALOGUE.
ISMAEL. You know I have been born and bred in our holy Reformation, and a
Church of England man; you tell me I may believe this or that, and whatever I
please, I would gladly settle once for ever, and resolve what I may, and ought
to believe, and not to be every day carried away with every wind of Doctrine:
let me, to that purpose propose unto you, and hear your resolution of some
doubts. What do you think, have not we a Church on earth established by Christ,
wherein we are to live and serve him, and believe her Doctrine?


Isaac. I will give you no other instruction nor answer but the pure Doctrine of
the Reformation, which when you have heard, you may determine as you like best,
what Religion to embrace; but know this, that after you have determined with
your self to believe this or that, you may with a very safe Conscience alter
that resolution next day after, and believe the quite contrary to what you
resolve to believe, if upon better consideration you think the contrary to be
true; this is the liberty of the Holy Reformation, as I proved in my first
Dialogue.

As to your present doubt I answer, it is the Doctrine of the Reformation, that
it was Jesus Christ the Son of God who established the Church, you may believe
it therefore: It Is also the Doctrine of the Reformation, that it was not Jesus
Christ the Son of God who established the Church: that this is the Doctrine of
our Reformation it is apparent, for it is Scripture as Interpreted by Ochinus a
man of sound Judgment, whom all Italy could not match, says Calvin; In whose
presence England was happy, and unhappy in his absence, says B. Bale: Ochinus
speaks thus, In Praefat. Dialog.
Considering how the Church was established by Christ and washed with his Blood;
and considering again how it was utterly overthrown by Papacy; I concluded that
he who established it, could not be Christ the Son of God, because he wanted
providence; and upon this reflection, he renounced Christ and became a Jew. And
no man can say but that he acted and behaved himself like a true Child of the
Reformation in so doing, for he followed Scripture as he understood it; and as
he was a true Reformed Child in forsaking Popery, because he understood by
Scripture, that the Reformation was better; so since he understood by reading
Scripture more, that Judaism was better than the Reformation, he acted like a
good Reformed, in choosing that which he understood by Scripture to be the best;
this is the Reformations Rule of Faith; do you, if you please, as he did, and
you will be as good a Reformed as he.

And if you choose to believe that there is a Church established on earth by
Christ, you must beware never to believe or persuade your self that we are
bound to believe her Doctrine, or live in her, if you do not judge by Scripture
that she teaches the Doctrine of Christ: This is the most essential point of
Popery, an obligation of submitting our judgments to the Church, and believing
her Doctrine without any more examining, and in this the Church of England is
much like the Popish Church, which by Acts of Parliaments and other severities
would oblige all men to believe her Doctrine, Rites and Ceremonies: No, God has
given us Scripture for our Rule of Faith, as we forsook the Popish Church,
because we discovered by Scripture her many Errors in Doctrine; so we are not
bound to believe the Doctrine of any other Church, but as we find by Scripture
her Doctrine is true. Do, and speak as Luther to 1. Edit. Jen. in Resolut. I
will be free, and will not submit to the Authority of Councils, Popes, Church
or University; to the contrary I will confidently teach whatever I Judge to be
true; whether it be Catholic Doctrine or Heretical; condemned or approved.


Ismael. Must I not believe that the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, delivered to his
Apostles and the Church is true Doctrine?


Isaac. The Reformation teaches, it is, and you may safely believe it: You may
as safely believe it is not, in the Principles of the Reformation; because it
teaches that Christ erred in Doctrine and Manners: Vere Pharisaei erant viri
valde boni, says Luther,; Sermon. de 50. Artic. in summa summarum.
and Christus minime debuit eos taxare: and Calvin says, In Harm. super Luc. c.
2.
it is a folly to think he was not ignorant in many things; lastly, David
Georgius Epitom. Cent. 16. par. 2.
(a Man of God and of a holy life says Osiander) writes, If the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles had been true and perfect, the Church which they
planted had continued, but now it is manifest that Antichrist has subverted it,
as it is manifest in Papacy: therefore it was false and imperfect. See these
words quoted in the History of David George, Printed by the Divines of Basil,
at Antwerp. Anno. 1568 both Doctrines are Scripture as interpreted by Men of
sound Judgment; a Child of the Reformation, may believe which he will.


Ismael. Is it not the Doctrine of the Reformation that the Apostles were
infallible in their Doctrine? much more must we believe that Jesus Christ was so.


Isaac. Yes it is; you may believe it: and it is also the Doctrine of the
Reformation that they were not infallible, neither in their written or
unwritten Doctrine, so many of our most renowned Doctors speak, and whatever any
Men of sound Judgment Judge to be true by Scripture, is the Doctrine of the
Reformation: Zuinglius, Tom. 2. cont. Catabapt. fol. 10,
one of the greatest Oracles of our Church says, It Is a great ignorance to
believe any infallible Authority in the Gospels or Epistles of the Apostles;
Beza, not inferior to Zuinglius, blotted out of St. John the History of the
Woman Adulteress, Judging it a fable; Clebitius Victoria verit. arg: 5*
affirms, that Luke's relation of Christ's passion is not true, because it does
not agree with that of Matthew and Mark, and more credit is to be to two, than
to one. In cap. 2. ad Gal.
Calvin says, Peter consented to, and added to the Schism of the Church, to the
overthrow of Christian liberty, and Christ's Grace. de Eccles. cont. Bellarm.
cont. 2. c. 4.
Whitaker says, It Is evident that after the Descent of the Holy Gospel, the
whole Church, even the Apostles, erred; and Peter erred in Doctrine and manners.
To. 5. Wettem. an. 1554. in Epist. ad Gal. c. 1.
Luther says Peter lived and taught extra Verbum Dei; and Brentius In Apol.
Cof. c. de Council.
his Disciple say, that Peter and Barnabas together with the Church of
Jerusalem erred after receiving the Holy Ghost. If our Rule of Faith be
Scripture as each person of sound Judgment understands it, undoubtedly this
must be the Doctrine of the Reformation, and may be believed by any Reformed,
since it is Scripture interpreted by such renowned men.


Ismael. This is most wicked Doctrine, I Will never believe it,


Isaac. If you think by Scripture it is wicked, do not: follow your Rule of
Faith, Scripture as you understand it; but if any other understands by
Scripture* (as those Authors did) that the Doctrine is good, give him leave to
believe it; he will but follow his Rule of Faith, Scripture as he understands it.


Ismael. I would gladly know which are the true Canonical Books of Scripture.


Isaac. The Reformation teaches, and you may believe with the Church of
England, that St. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, those of James and Jude: the
2. of St. Peter; the 2. and 3. of St. John, are true Canonical Scripture; the
Reformation also teaches they are not Canonical, because Lutherans deny them;
believe which you like best. But if you will live in peace, and out of all strife
with Protestants, Lutherans, and others, who dispute, if this or that be
Canonical Scripture; your readiest and speediest way will be, to say there is no
true Canonical Scripture; Scripture is no more to be regarded than other pious
Books: if you say this is not the Doctrine of the Reformation, read Hossias de
express Verbo Dei, and lib. de Har. where he relates this to be the Doctrine of
the Swinfeldians, as good Reformers as the best of us: they say, that we are
not to regard any Instruction from Man or Book, but Gods immediate inspiration,
which speaks secretly to our hearts; for which they allege those comfortable
words of the Prophet, I will hear what my Lord my God speaks in me: for say
they, the Book which we call Scripture, is a Creature, and we must not seek for
light and instruction from any Creature, but from God the Father of Lights.
This is Scripture as interpreted by Men of sound Judgment; any Child of the
Reformation may believe it.


Ismael. I thought to settle my mind in my choice of some Religion, and you go
the way to beat me from all, for if you renverse the Authority of Scripture,
what warrant shall we have for any Religion? God forbid the Reformation should
deny the true Canon, or the infallible truth of Scripture; and let all the
world say the contrary, I will constantly aver and believe it is Gods infallible
word.


Isaac. How can you say I beat you from all Religion, when I directly persuade
you to follow the Rule of Faith of our Reformation, Scripture as each person of
sound judgment understands it; let this be your Religion, if you will be a true
Reformed; whatever you judge in your conscience to be true, let the Church of
England, or France, or any other say and believe what they will, you are to
believe but what you judge by Scripture to be true; and this is the Religion of
the Reformation.


Ismael. I would gladly know, if it be lawful to chop or change the Text?


Isaac. It Is the Doctrine of the Reformation that you cannot, because God has
forbid to add to, or take away from his word: and therefore we condemn the
Papists for their Tradition, obtruded upon the Flock as the Word of God: It Is
also the Doctrine of the Reformation, and the practice of our best Reformers,
when the Text does not speak clear enough, that for to refute Popery and
establish our own Doctrine, we may add or diminish a word or two; which is not
to change the Word of God, but to make it speak more expressly: as when Luther
had a mind to prach Justification by Faith alone, finding the Text said but,
Man is justified by Faith, he added the word Alone and made the Text very clear
against Popery, which formerly was somewhat obscure: Zuinglius being to teach
the Figurative presence of Christ in the Sacrament, found the Text, This is my
Body, to be too pat against his Doctrine and instead of Is, put in This
signifies. The Church of England being to preach the Kings Spiritual
Supremacy, could not convince the obstinate Papist by the Original Text, which
said 1 Pet. 2. submit your selves unto every humane creature for the Lord's
sake, whether it be the King as excelling, or to, etc. But in King Edwards time
they altered one word, and made the Text thus, submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man, whether it be to the King, as being the chief head, and the
following impressions of the Bible, in the year 1557. and 79. say, To the King
as supreme. And so the true Doctrine is clearly convinced out of Scripture, as
also the lawfulness of Priests Marriage; for the Text before the Reformation
said 1 Cor. 9. have we not power to lead about a woman sister; and now our
Bibles say, have we not power to lead about a Wife being our Sister: hence it is
evident according to the Doctrine and practice of our Reformation, that when
you have a mind to establish a Doctrine which you judge to be true, you may
change the Text and make it speak to your sense and meaning, provided you judge
your sense to be true.


Ismael. What do you think of Justifying Faith? Does Faith alone justify us?


Isaac. It Is the Doctrine of the Reformation, that without charity it cannot,
because St. Paul says 1 Cor. 13. If I have Faith so as to move mountains, and
no Charity, I am nothing. It Is also the Doctrine of the Reformation, that it is
impious and wicked to say, Faith alone without Charity does not justify; this
is Scipture as interpreted by Luther a man of sound judgment: In cap. 2. ad
Gal. and sermon. Aug. Page 204.
Who say, quoth Luther, that Faith alone though perfect it be, cannot Justify
without Charity, say impiously and wicked, because Faith alone, without any
good works does justify. Believe which Doctrine you please, both are of the
Reformation.


Ismael. Luther was insolent in checking the Doctrine of St. Paul.


Isaac. Probably he did not reflect that it was the Doctrine of the Apostle,
and if you will have it to be a Check of St. Paul Luther In Epist. ad Gal. c.
1. and 2. and Tom. 5. Wittemb. an. 1554. fol. 29.
will answer for himself, Be it, says he, that the Church, Augustine or other
Doctors, also Peter and Paul, nay, and an Angel from Heaven should teach
otherwise than as I teach, yet my Doctrine is such, that it seteth forth Gods
Glory; I know I teach no Humane, but Divine Doctrine.

It Is the Doctrine of the Reformation, that Faith alone, without any good
Works, and notwithstanding all Sins you are Guilty of, does justify you: This
is Scripture, as Interpreted by Luther, who says, nothing can damn you but
Incredulity, as nothing but Faith can save you; of Whitaker, Wotton, Fulk, and
Beza, whose words I related in our precedent Dialogue which I believe you
remember, and I need not repeat.

It Is also the Doctrine of the Reformation, that good Works are meritorious of
Grace and Glory; Lib. 5. de Eccl. Polit. sect. 72.
Hooker and Harmonia confess. page 495. and 273.
say it is the Doctrine of Scripture; and what any person of sound Judgment
judges to be the Doctrine of Scripture, he may believe it, for this is our Rule
of Faith. It Is likewise the Doctrine generally of all our Church, that good
Works are not at all meritorious: Tindall (called by Fox Acts and Mon. page 514.
, a Man of God, and a constant Martyr) judges this to be so true, that in his
Treatise de Mammona iniquitatis, he says, Christ himself did not by all his
good Works merit the Glory: And though the Scripture says expressly he did, Calvin
Lib. 2. Inst. c. 17. sect. 6.
affirms, that it is a foolish curiosity to examine, and a rash proposition to
say Christ did Merit.

It Is the Doctrine of the Reformation, that though good Works be not meritorious,
nor have not the least Influence in our Justification or Salvation, yet they
are absolutely needful for both, in as much as that true Faith cannot be
without good Works, because they are the Marks and Signs of a living Faith, by
whch alone we are Saved; this is the Judgment of the Church of England
expressed in the 11 and 12 Articles of the 39, and of Melancthon in locis
Commun. de Bonis operibus, and you may believe it: You may also believe, and
it is the Doctrine of the Reformation, that good Works are so far from being
needful, that they are prejudicious and hurtful to our Salvation, and the best
way to be Saved, is to do no good Work at all; this is Scripture as Interpreted
by Illiricus, Flacius, Amsdorsius, quoted in Act. Colloq. Aldeburg. page 205.
and 299. and Luther In comment in cap. 2. ad Gal.
was so deeply persuaded of this truth, tho that Christ said, If thou will
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, keep the Commandment: Luther says, it is an
obstacle to our Salvation to keep them: Where it is said, quoth he, that Faith
in Christ does indeed justify us, but that it is necessary also to keep the
Commandments, there Christ is denied, and Faith abolished, because that which
is proper to Faith alone is attributed if the Commandments. And again, To. 1.
Proposit. 3.
says he, if Faith be accompanied with good Works, it is no true Faith; that it
may justify it must be alone without any good Works. This is Scripture as
interpreted by such eminent and sound Men; and consequently the Doctrine of the
Reformation; and who doubts but that any Doctrine of the Reformation may be
believed. Hence forward, when you hear the Preacher exhort you to good Works,
you may believe him if you please, and have a Mind to spend your Monys, because
he Preaches the Doctrine of the Reformation; or you may laugh at him, and
believe not a word he says, because he Preaches against the Doctrine of the
Reformation.


Ismael. These are dangerous and scandalous Tenets, destructive of Piety and
Christianity; and let Luther and those Authors you quoted, say what they
please, the Reformation, nor no honest Man will ever believe such abominable
Doctrine.


Isaac. I do not say that the Children of the Reformation are obliged to
believe them: They may believe as you do, that all are wicked Tenets: But if
Luther and the others cited, judge in their Conscience these Tenets to be the
Doctrine of Scriptures, and if Peter, John or James, like their Interpretation,
I say they may according to the Principles of our Reformation believe them, and
be as truly Reformed Children as you; for our Rule of Faith is Scripture, as
each Person of sound Judgment understands it; and in believing those Tenets,
because they judge them to be the Doctrine of Scripture they stick fast to, and
follow our Rule of Faith: Why is Figurative Presence and the Kings Supremacy,
the Doctrine of the Reformation, though denied by Papists, Lutherans, and
Presbyterians; but because the Protestants judge it is the Doctrine of Scripture:
If therefore those great Authors I quoted, and any other with them, judge those
Tenets to be the Doctrine of Scripture, they can be justly called the Doctrine
of the Reformation: Must Protestants be forced against their Judgments to deny
real Presence, and Supremacy, because Lutherans say it is wicked Doctrine. And
why must Luther, Illiricus, Flaccius, and others be forced to deny those
Tenets, though Protestants or Papists judge them to be damnable? Let each one
believe what he thinks to be the Doctrine of Scripture, and he will still be a
true Reformed Child.


Ismael Does not our Reformation teach that it is possible to all Men, assisted
with God's Grace, to keep the Commandments?


Isaac. This is the Doctrine of the Church of England, and consequently of the
Reformation: It Is also the Doctrine of the Reformation delivered out of
Scripture, as Interpreted by Luther, Calvin, Willet, and several others, that
it is impossible to any man assisted with what Grace soever to keep the
Commandments. None has ever yet, says our great Calvin, Lib. 2. Instit c. 7.5.
and God has decreed none shall ever keep the Commandments: Again, Harm. Evang.
in Luc. c. 10, verse 26.
The Law and Commandments were given us, to no other end, but that we should be
damned by them; inasmuch, that it is impossible for Us to do what they command.
The same Doctrine is taught by Luther, in several places of his Works, by
Willet In Synop. Papismi page 564.
and by our Brethren the Gomarists of Holland, and many of our French Synods.
Believe which you please both Doctrines are of the Reformation.

It Is also the Doctrine of Luther and Calvin, that God does not cast men into
Hell because their sins deserve it, nor save men because they merit it, but
merely because he will have it for He crowns those who have not deserved it;
says Luther, Lib. de servo. Arbit. cont. Erasm.
and he punishes those who have not deserved it; it is Gods Wrath and Severity
to damn the one, it is Gods Grace and Mercy to save the other. Calvin also, Lib.
3. Instit. c. 21. sect. 5. and 7. etc. 22. sect. 11. and cap. 13.1.
Men are damned for no other cause, but because God will have it so; he is the
cause and Author of their Damnation; their Damnation is decreed by God when
when they are in their Mothers Womb, because he will have it so; this is also
the belief of our Gomarists in Holland, of many French Churches, and of several
learned Calvinists; though the Church of England denies this Doctrine, none
will dare say it is not the Doctrine of the Reformation, because it is
Scripture as Interpreted by such eminent men of our Church.


Ismael. I will never believe such execrable Doctrines, nor will I ever be of
any Congregation which believes them.


Isaac. I do not advise you to believe them; but to give others leave to
believe them, if they think them to be the Doctrine of Scripture; as Luther,
Calvin, Willet, Gomarists, and others do: You must not, if you be a true
Reformed Child hinder any man from believing, nor be displeased with him for
believing what he Judges in his Conscience to be the Doctrine of Scripture, for
this is our Rule of Faith. Will not you be of the Congregation and Religion of
those, who follow Scripture as their Rule of Faith, and Believe what they Judge
in their Conscience to be the Doctrine of Scripture?


Ismael. Yes I will, and am of such a Congregation, for this is the Rule of
Faith of the Reformation.


Isaac. Why then, you must be of the same Congregation with the Gomarists,
Luther, Calvin, and the others, who believe those which you call execrable
Doctrines, because they follow Scripture as they understand; and believe those
Doctrines, because they Judge them to be of Scriture: You both follow the same
Rule, one goes one way, and the other another, and both are of the Reformation.
The Church of England understands by Scripture, that God is not the Author nor
cause of Sin, that he does not force us to Sin; who doubts but that this is
therefore the Doctrine of the Reformation? But Calvin, Brentius, Beza, and
several others understand by Scripture, That God is the cause and Author which
forces our Will to Sin; That Man, and the Devil, are but Gods Instruments to
commit it: That Murders, Incests, Blasphemies, etc. are the Works of God, that
he makes us commit them: And who doubts but this also is the Doctrine of the
Reformation, being Scripture as Interpreted, by such eminent and sound
Judgment? God, says Calvin, Lib. 2. Inst. c. 4. sect. 3. and lib. 1. c. 18.
sect. 2. and lib. 3. c. 23. sect 4. Lo. 1. de deprovid. c. 6. in Synops. page
563. In manifest. stratag. Papist.
directs, moves, inclines and forces the Will of Man to Sin; insomuch that the
power and efficacy of Working, is wholly in him; Man, nay, and Satan when he
impells us, being only Gods Instruments which he uses for to make us Sin.
Zuinglius, Willet, Beza, teach the same.


Sixth Dialogue.
ISMAEL. I am weary of hearing such horrid Blasphemies; my Heart trembles to
hear you say, that such abominable Tenets may be believed according to our Rule
of Faith and Principles of the Reformation: I beseech you let me hear no more
of such stuff: I conceive very well that Men's Judgments and Consciences are not
to be constrained to believe or deny, this or that Tenet, because the Pope, or
his Infallible, forsooth, Church, will have it so.


Isaac. And must they be constrained to deny or believe, because the fallible
Church of England or France will have it so?


Ismael. No, I do not say they must, have Patience, and hear me speak a while:
I say that Scripture must be our Rule of Faith, and not any Pope, or Church, or
Congregation; and that we are not to be forced by any to believe, but what we
understand to be true by Scripture; and that if we Judge by Scripture, any
Doctrine to be false, and contrary to Gods Word, we must not be forced to
believe it: But we must not abuse this Liberty; That we should have Liberty for
to believe or deny Supremacy, Figurative Presence, Communion in one or both
Kinds, and such other inferior Truths controverted among Christians; and that
each Congregation may in such Articles, believe as it understands by Scripture
to be true, may pass, and it is practiced in our Reformed Churches; But that we
should run so far, as to have Liberty by our Rule of Faith to believe or deny
the Fundamental and Chief Articles of Christianity, as the Trinity,
Incarnation, Divinity of Christ, amp;c. That Liberty ought not to be given: Our
Reformation very wisely and piously permits the Lutherans to believe one thing,
the Presbyterians another, the Protestants another, and so of the rest: And all
are true Reformed Children, because each of them believes as they Judge by
Scripture to be true: But the Reformation has never given, nor never will give
Liberty to interpret Scripture against the fundamental Article of Christianity:
We must be moderate, and keep our rambling Fancies within Compass, and if any
should judge and interpret Scripture in favor of any scandalous and abominable
Tenets against Christianity and good Manners, he must be checked and not
commended. This Moderation the Church of England uses, and will never permit to
the contrary.


Isaac. I perceive a great deal of Popish Blood to run in your Veins, and that
if you and your Church of England, were in Power at the beginning of our
Reformation, we should never have had a Luther, Calvin, Beza, or such other
noble and renowned Reformers. By what I gather from your discourse, I do not
see the breadth of an Inch's difference betwixt the Church of Rome, and you and
your Church of England, for the Church of Rome will not stick to grant, that
Gods Word alone is her Rule of Faith, but so that none must believe any sense
of it, but as she believes it, nor Interpret any Text, but receive her
Interpretation of it. The Church of England has Scripture for her Rule of
Faith, and gives us Liberty for to Interpret, Understand, and Believe some Text
of it, as each one thinks best; and so permits Presbyterians to deny
Episcopacy, Lutherans to deny Figurative Presence, etc. and confesses they are
all her Brethren of the Reformation, but she will give no Liberty at all for to
Interpret other Texts, but all must understand them as she does, or all must
Heretics and damned Men? No, that Text My Father, and I are one, must be
Interpreted to signify the Unity In Nature of the Father and Son, as the
Church of England believes, none must Interpret it otherwise: So that the
difference betwixt the Popish Church and that of England, is, the first gives
us no Liberty at all, the second gives us some Liberty, the first robs us of
all; the second but the one half. The Rule of Faith in Popery is Scripture as
Interpreted by the Pope and Councils; the Rule of Faith in England; as to some
Articles is Scripture as Interpreted by the Church of England; and as to other
Articles, Scripture as each person of sound Judgment understands it, And thus
Protestants are but half Papists, and half Reformed, and both these ingredients
will never make a good compound.

Let any unbiased and impartial Man Judge if the Church of England proceeds
justly in this: For if our Rule of Faith be Scripture, as each Person of sound
Judgment understands it, as she mentions in her 39. Articles; and as the whole
Reformation believes, if we are not to be constrained, to believe any Church,
Council, or Man's sense of Scripture, if we do not Judge by the Word of God it is
true, by what Authority, Rule or Reason, can the Church of England give me
Liberty to understand and believe some Texts as I please, and deny me Liberty
for to understand and believe others, as I Judge by Scripture they ought to be
understood? I pray observe well this Discourse; here are Luther, Calvin, Beza,
Zuinglius, and our other first Reformers; they Interpret some Texts against the
Doctrine of Rome, and others against the Doctrine of the Church of England.
They are praised for the first, and esteemed Apostolical Reformers, because
without any regard of what the Church of Rome said, they freely taught and
believed what they Judged by Scripture to be true; why must not they be praised
and esteemed true Reformers also, for not regarding what the Church of England
or any other says, but teach the impossibility of Gods Commandments, the
sufficiency of Faith alone, and all those other Tenets which you so much
mislike, since they Judge by Scripture that to be the true Doctrine? Are they
bound to submit their Judgments to the Church of England, more than to that of
Rome?


Ismael. But in those Tenets they do not only contradict the Church of England,
but all Christian Churches and Congregations; for all will say those are wicked
and scandalous. Doctrines.


Isaac. And if they Judge by Scripture that those Tenets are not such, but
found and good Doctrine, may not they believe them, though all the World and ten
Worlds did gainsay them? Is not Scripture our Rule of Faith, and are we to
regard what any Church or all Churches say, further than we find by Scripture
that they say well? But being these Tenets, which you call horrid Blasphemies
displease you, I Will change my discourse; and because I see you are Popishly
inclined, I will show you how by the Principles of our Reformation, you can be
as good a Papist as the Pope; one Principle, excepted, wherein you must dissent
from the Church of Rome, if you intend to remain a true Reformed Child.


Ismael. You promise too much, and more than I desire to know, I don't desire
to have any Communication with the Pope; I know by the Writings of our Authors
what kind of Beast he is.


Isaac. By your favor, you may believe the Popes are Worthy, Honest, and Godly
Men: many Doctors of our Reformation, and our Travelers to the Court of Rome
give this Testimony of them. You may also believe, that Popes and Cardinals are
Knaves and Atheists, who look on Scripture as a Romance, and deny the
Incarnation of Christ, for Calvin says 4. Inst. c. 7. Sect. 27.
so, and would never have said it, if it had not been true: But beware not to
speak so in Rome, or they will lodge you where Honest Tailor the Quaker was; nor
in Spain, or they will stop your Mouth with an Inquisition faggot.


Ismael. I care not what the Pope or Cardinals are; but I would gladly know,
what Religion and Congregation you are of, for whereas you are my immediate
Instructor, it behooves me to know what Religion you have.


Isaac. As to my Religion, I doubt not but that my Readers will be divided in
their Judgments of me; if a Papist reads me, he will swear I am an Atheist; but I
hope he will not pretend to be infallible as his Pope: if a Protestant, he will
say I am a Papist, and that my drift is to cast dirt upon his Church; the
honest Quaker will say, I am a profane man; others perhaps will say, I am of no
Religion, but a Despiser of all; and our Congregations are so uncharitable that
likely none will accept of me, because I say all Religions are very good: a sad
thing that a man must be hated for speaking well of his Neighbors, and that
each one must have all the World to be naught but himself: This then is my
Religion, To suffer Persecution for Justice and Truth; to render good for evil,
to bless those who curse me, and speak well of all Congregations, whilst they
speak all evil against me: reflect well upon what I discoursed hitherto, and
you will find, I am as great a Lover of the Reformation as they who may think
me it is Enemy: and read my following discourse, and you will find I love Popery
as well as the Reformation: The Spirit of God makes no exceptions of Persons.


Ismael. You promised to prove by the principles of the Reformation, that we
may believe all the Tenets of Popery, and remain still of the Reformation: how
can this be?


Isaac. You remember I excepted one Principle of Popery, wherein you must
necessarily dissent from them: and if you deny this one Principle, you may
believe all their other Tenets as well as the Pope, and be as good a Child of
the Reformation as Luther.


Ismael. What Principle is this, which you seem to make the only destinctive
sign of a Reformed, from a Papist?


Isaac. Listen a while: a Papist is not a Papist because he believes Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, Indulgences, and the rest of Popish Tenets, but because he
believes them upon the Testimony of the Pope and Church, because they assure
him they are revealed Truths: If a Papist did say, I believe these Tenets,
because I my self do judge by Scripture, that they are revealed, and not
because the Pope and Church say they are, he would be no Papist. The Papist
believes the Mystery of the Trinity, the Incarnation and Passion of Christ, the
Protestant believes the same Mysteries, yet the one is a Papist and no
Protestant, the other is a Protestant and no Papist. And why? because the
Papist believes them upon the Testimony of the Pope and Church; the Protestant
believes them upon the Testimony of Gods written Word. Believe then whatever
you please of Popery, provided you believe it; because you judge by Scripture
it is true, and not because the Pope or the Church says it; you will never be a
Papist but a perfect Reformed.


Ismael. If this discourse be solid, you may hedge in all the Articles of
Popery into our Reformation.


Isaac. If you peruse the works of our Reformed Doctors, you will hardly find any
Article of Popery, but has been judged by many, or some of our best Reformed
Doctors, to be the true Doctrine of Scripture; and whereas any Doctrine which
any Person of sound Judgment understands by Scripture to be the true, may be
justly called the Doctrine of the Reformation; it follows that hardly is there
any Article of Popery, for which we see so many persecutions against Subjects,
and such troubles in our Parliaments, but is truly the Doctrine of the
Reformation.


Ismael. Show me some Examples of this.


Isaac. The Veneration of Relics and Saints dead Bones, is generally believed
by us to be mere Popery and Superstition, therefore we made no store of Luther
and Calvin's Bones, tho we know them to be as great Saints as any in the Popish
Church: but Veneration of Relics and Saints Bones, is the Doctrine of our
Reformation; for whatever is set down and commended by our Common Prayer Book,
must be undoubtedly esteemed our Reformed Doctrine and Practice, and our
Common Prayer Book, aprinted since our Kings happy Restoration, in it is
Calendar sets down a day to the Translation of S. Edward King of Saxons Body in
the month of June, and dedicates another to the Translation of the Bodies of
St. Martin and Swithin, in the month of July.

The Veneration and use of the sign of the Cross, is flat Popery in the
Judgment of all our Congregations; yet any Reformed Child may laudably and
piously use it; whereas our Common Prayer Book in the Administration of
Baptism, Commands the Minister to use it, saying, We sign him with the sign of
the Cross, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed, to confess the
Faith of Christ crucified, and Manfully to fight under his Bannar against Sin,
the World and the Devil. And in our Calendar, printed since his Majesty's
Restoration, it is called the Holy Cross.

Our Congregations generally believe, it is Popery to keep Holy Days (except the
Sabbath day) and Saints days; to fast in Lent, Vigils commanded, Ember-days,
and Fridays; and all this is recommended to us in our Common-Payer Book, and
the Minister is commanded, in the Administration of the Lords Supper, to
publish the Holy Days of the week, and exhort us to Fast; and surely, he is not
commanded to teach, or exhort us to any thing, but to the Doctrine of the
Reformation: it is true, the Students of our Colleges of Oxford and Cambridge,
are much troubled with scruples in this point: these Pauperes de Lugduno, are
compelled to fast all Fridays throughout the year; and it is not hunger that
makes them complain, but tenderness of Conscience, because they fear it is
Popery.

It Is a Popish error, we say to believe that Penance, or our penal works of
Fasting, Almsdeeds, or corporal Austerities, can avail and help for the
remission of our sins, and satisfying Gods Justice: No, we say, penal works
serve for nothing, all is done by Repentance; that is to say, by sorrow of heart
for having offended God. This is the Doctrine of Danaeus, Willit, Junius and
Calvin, who says, Francis, Dominick, Bernard, Antony, and the rest of Popish
Monks and Friars, are in Hell for their Austerities and penal works for all
that, you may very well believe; and it is the Doctrine of the Reformation, that
Penance and penal works, do avail for the remission of our sin, and are very
profitable to the Soul; for, our Common Prayer Book in the Commination against
sinners, says thus, In the Primitive Church, there was a Godly Discipline, that
at the beginning of Lent, such as were notorious sinners, were put to open
Penance, and punished in this World, that their Souls may be saved in the day
of the Lord. And our Common Prayer Books wishes that this Discipline were
restored again; and surely it does not wish that Popery were restored;
therefore it is no Popery to say that Penance, or Penal works, do satisfy for
our sins in this World, and avail to save us in the other.


Ismael. I know many of our Congregation mislike much our Common Prayer Book,
for these Popish-Tenets; but what do you say of the grand errors of Popery?
can a man be a true Child of the Reformation, and yet believe the Popes
Supremacy? deny the Kings Supremacy; believe Transubstantiation and Communion
in one kind; are these Tenets the Doctrine of the Reformation, or consistent
with its principles?


Isaac. The Kings Supremacy is undoubtedly the Doctrine of the Reformation,
because it is judged by the Church of England to be of Scripture, yet not only
the Quakers, Presbyterians, Anabaptists, and other Congregations, judge it is
not of Scripture, but as erroneous a Tenet as that of the Popes Supremacy;
Calvin 6. Amos, says, They were unadvised people and Blasphemers, who raised
King Henry the VII. so far as to call him the head of the Church; but also that
no Civil Magistrate can be the head of any particular Church, is the Doctrine of
the Centuriators, cent. sept. page 11. of Cartwright, Viretus, Kemnitius, and
many others; who doubts then but that in the principles and Doctrine of the
Reformation, you may deny the Kings Supremacy, though the Church of England
believes it. The Popes Supremacy is the Doctrine of Popery, who doubts it? but
it is also the Doctrine of the Reformation, for many of our Eminent Doctors have
judged it to be the Doctrine of Scripture, as Whitgift In Defens. etc. page
373.70. and 395.
who cites Calvin and Musculus for this opinion; but it is needful we relate
some of their express words, I do not deny, says Luther, In Respons. tredecem.
Propos.
but the Bishop of Rome, is, has been, and ought to be first of all; I believe,
he is above all other Bishops, it is not lawful to deny his Supremacy:
Melancthon In Epist. ad Card. Belay Episc. Pariens.
says no less, that the Bishop of Rome is above all the Church, that it is his
office to govern, to Judge in controversies, to watch over the Priests, to keep
all Nations in conformity and unity of Doctrine: Somaisius, In Tract. Euchar.
ad. p. Sarmunm.
The Pope of Rome has been without controversy the first Metropolitan in
Italy, and not only in Italy, nor only in the West, but in all the World, the
other Metropolitans have been chief in their respective districts, but the Pope
of Rome has been Metropolitan and Primate, not only of some particular Diocese,
but of all, Grotius In Annot. super Novum Testam. cap. 10. Matthew. and sape
alibi.
has expressly the same Doctrine, and proves this Supremacy belongs to the Pope
de Jure Divino. I pray consider if these Doctors be not men of sound Judgment,
and of eminent learning and credit in our Reformation, and if our Doctrine be
Scripture as such men understand it, consider, I say, with what Justice can
this Doctrine be called Popery more than Reformed Doctrine.

As for Transubstantiation, it contains two difficulties; first, if the Body of
Christ be really in the Sacrament; and this real presence, the Lutherans defend
to be the Doctrine of Scripture, as well as the Papists, why then should it be
called Popish, more than Reformed Doctrine? The second is, if the substance of
Bread be in the Sacrament together with Christ's Body: Lutherans say it is,
Papists say it is not, but that there is a Transubstantiation, or change of the
whole substance of Bread, into the Body of Christ; but hear what Luther To. 1.
Edit. Jonah. l. de cap. Babyl.
says of this that we call Popish Doctrine; I give all Persons liberty to
believe in this point, what they please, without hazard of their Salvation,
either that the Bread is in the Sacrament of the Altar, or that it is not?
would Luther have given this liberty if Transubstantiation had not been the
Doctrine of the Reformation as well as any other? Calvin also and Beza Lib. de
caena Domini.
affirm, that Luthers Doctrine of the co-existence of Christ's. Body and the
Bread, is more absurd than the Popish Doctrine of the existence of the Body
alone; if therefore we be true Reformed, and safely believe the Doctrine of
Luther, which is the most absurd; much more will we be of the Reformation, by
believing that of the Papists which is less.

Communion in one kind, is the Doctrine of the Reformation, no less than
Communion in both; for besides that Luther says, Lib* de cap. Babyl. c. de
Euchar.
They Sin not Almonit. 2. ad. Westph. defens. Oxthod. fit.
against Christ who use one kind only, seeing Christ has not commanded to use
both; and again, Epist. ad Bahemos in declarat. Euch. and in sermon. de Euch.
though it were an excellent thing to use both kinds in the Sacrament; and
Christ has commanded nothing in this as necessary, yet it were better to follow
peace and unity, than to contest about the kinds, but also Melancthon In
Council. Theol. ad March. Elect. de usu utriusque speciei page 141.
who in the opinion of Luther surpasses all the Fathers of the Church, expressly
teaches the same Doctrine: and the Church of England Statute I. Edward VI.
command, That the Sacrament be commonly administr'd in both kinds, if necessity
does not require otherwise; mark, he says, but commonly, and that for some
necessity it may be received in one; lastly, the sufficiency of one kind in the
Sacrament, is plainly set down by our Reformed Church of France, in her
Ecclesiastical Discipline, printed at Saumur, Chap. 12. Art. 7. The Minister
must give the Bread in the Supper to them, who cannot drink the Cup, provided
it be not for contempt. And the reason is because there are many who cannot
endure the taste of Wine; wherefore it often happens among them, that some
persons, do take the Bread alone; and truly if some of our Ministers in
England, do not give better Wine than they are accustomed, who very
irreverently serve that Holy Table with naughty trash, it is much to be feared,
that our flock will also petition to be dispensed with in the Cup; because
there are some of so delicate Palats, that they cannot endure the taste of bad
Wine. Now, you may admire the injustice of the Papists in Condemning our
Reformed Doctrine and Doctors as Heretics, whereas those Tenets are believed by
many of us, as well as by them; and the groundless severity of our
Congregations in exclaiming against that Doctrine; it being the Doctrine of the
Reformation, whereas so many eminent men of our own, judge it to be of
Scripture.


Ismael. Whereas I see people persecuted by the Church of England for these
Tenets, I can hardly be persuaded they are the Doctrine of the Reformation: at
our next meeting we will pursue this discourse, the Bell rings for Morning
Prayers, A Dieu.


Seventh DIALOGUE.
ISAAC. You come from Church, as I guess by the Common Prayer Book I see in
your hand, I pray let me see the Calendar of it, if it be a la mode nouvelle,
which was made by the Church of England, since his Majesty's Restoration.


Ismael. Why? have you met any thing in it, which shocks you?


Isaac. Shock me? No Doctrine or practice of any Congregation, or man of sound
Judgment of our Church can shock me; you know, I plead for liberty to believe
and practice as each one judges by Scripture to be true and good. But I observe
in your Calendar, you have a day consecrated to St. Ann in the Month of July; I
would gladly know, what Ann this is, which the Church of England honors so
much?


Ismael. It Is Ann the Mother of the Virgin Mary.


Isaac. It Is possible? I thought it was Ann Bolein the Mother of our Virgin
Elizabeth: I am sure the Church of England, is more obliged to Her, than to the
other: but as you have put here the Mother of the Virgin Mary, why did not you
put in also Elizabeth Mother of the great Baptist; and the Angel Gabriel, as
well as Michael?


Ismael, I know not indeed.


Isaac. Nor do I know, if it be not, because that Elizabeth and Gabriel made
the Popish Ave Maria, as Scripture relates; but can you tell, as the Church of
England put in your Calendar, St. George, St. Andrew and St. David Patrons of
England, Scotland and Wales; why did not she put in St. Patrick Patron of
Ireland?


Ismael. I cannot tell, What may be the reason, think you?


Isaac. I know not, if it be not that he forfeited his place for his Purgatory;
for tho the others were as deep in Popery as he, (if we believe the Papists)
but the Parliament passed an Act of Indemnity for England, Scotland and Wales,
after the Kings return to his Kingdoms; and thereby the sin of Popery was
forgiven to their Patrons, and no Act of Indemnity was past for Ireland,
whereby Patrick is still guilty; if it be not, that the Seven Champions of
Christendom tell us St. Patrick was St. George his Footman, and it was not
thought good manners, to put him in the same rank with his Master.


Ismael. For shame, if not for pity, forbear. I cannot endure to fully Sacred
things with profane Ralleries; the Calendar is a holy institution of the
Church, and ought to be reverenced.


Isaac. And so is Episcopacy, Surplices, Bells, Organs, and Corner Caps; yet I
hope you will give Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Quakers, etc. leave to laugh at
them, and be still as good Children of the Reformation as you: if you esteem
them to be Sacred and Holy, reverence and honor them, I commend you for it, if
others Judge otherwise let them follow their humor; each one as he fancies,
says the Fellow kissing his Com; this is the holy Liberty of the Reformation,
Scripture as each one understands it.


Ismael. Let us return to our last discourse; how is it possible, that those
Tenets of Popery, ^ould be the Doctrine of the Reformation, where^^ we see the
Church of England so severely per^^ecute the Professors of them?


Isaac. Do you think a Doctrine is not of the Reformation, because it is denied
by the Church of England? or because she persecutes the Pro^essors of it? do
not they persecute all Non-confor^ists, as well as Popery? persecution is no
proof of a Doctrine to be bad; it is but the effect of a blind zeal armed with
power: for to know cer^ainly if a Doctrine be of the Reformation, you must try
it by our Test or Rule of Faith, which is the written Word of God, and whatever
any man of sound Judgment, of a sincere and humble heart judges to be contained
in Scripture, or ^n indubitable consequence out of it; that man, may believe
that Doctrine, let all others Judge of it as they list, and by so believing will
be a true Child of the Reformation; wherefore since that the Church of France,
that of England in Edward the VI 's time, Luther, Melancthon, Grotius, and the
other Authors I quoted, do Judge Transubstantiation, Popes Supremacy, and
Communion in one kind to be the Doctrine of Scripture; we must call it the
Doctrine of the Reformation; and if you judge as they did, you may believe the
Doctrine and be still of the Reformation, as well as they.


Ismael. Can you show me any other Tenet of Popery, which you can call the
Doctrine of the Reformation.


Isaac. Alas! you can hardly show me any Tenet of Popery, but what is it is
Doctrine; what Doctrine more Popish than that of Confession and Absolution from
sins? yet it is as truly the Doctrine of the Reformation, as figurative Presence:
for not only In Disput. Theol. page 301.
Lobechius, In Concilliat. loc. Scrip. loco. 191.
Altamerus, In locis Commun. To. 1. de Potest Eccl.
Sacerius, and In Apol. Conses. Aug. art. 13. and lib. page 234.
Melancthon says, it is a Sacrament: but the Church of England in our
Common Prayer Book, declares that Priests have not only the power of declaring
their sins to be forgiven to the Penitents, but also the power of forgiving
them; and sets down the form of Absolution, which the Minister is to use, Our
Lord Jesus Christ, who left power to the Church to absolve all sinners which
truly repent, of his mercy forgive thee and thine offenses; and I by his
Authority committed unto me, do absolve thee from all thy sins; The Minister of
the Diocese of of Lincoln in their Survey of the Book of Common Prayers, checked
this Doctrine as Popery and petitioned to have it blotted out; but could not
prevail; whereby we are given to understand, it is the Doctrine of the
Reformation.

It Is Popery, we say to call extreme Uuction, Confirmation, and Holy Order of
Priesthood, Sacraments: and who can justly deny all this to be the Doctrine of
the Re-formation? for Calvin In p. 5. Epist. Jac. v. 4.
says, I confess, the Disciples of Christ did use Ex^ream Unction as a
Sacrament; I am not, says he, of the opinion of those, who judge it was only a
Me^^cine for corporal diseases: Calvin Lib. 4. Inst. c. 14. sect. 5.
also, and with him our Common Prayer Book and all our Divines say, a Sacrament
is nothing else, but a Visible sign of the invisible Grace we receive by ^t;
and they say with In modest. Examine.
Pouel, In Eccl. Polit. l. 5. sect. 66.
Hooker and others, that this definition fits exactly Confirmation, wherefore
the Ministers of the Diocese of Lincoln checked the Common Prayer Book, for
giving the Definition of a Sacrament to Confirmation. In locis Commun. tit. de
Numero. Sacram.
Melancthon, In perpet. Regem. page 109.
Bilsom, In Eccl. Polit. lib. 5. sect. 77.
Hooker and Lib. 4. Inst. c. 29.
Calvin expressly teach, that the Order of Priesthood, is a Sacrament. And when
men of so eminent Judgment of our Reformation teach this to be the Doctrine of
Scripture, who doubts but that it is of the Reformation.


Ismael. By this, you destroy the Doctrine of the Reformation of two Sacraments
only.


Is. Destroy it? God forbid: Because the Church of England says, there are but
two Sacraments, I say it is the Doctrine of the Reformation, there are but two,
and because so many eminent Men judge by Scripture there are more, I say it is
the Doctrine of the Reformation there are more* that is to say six, Baptism,
Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction and Holy Order: and very
likely our Bishops and Ministers* for their Wives sake, will not stick to grant
that Matrimony also is a Sacrament.


Ismael. But can you say, that Prayers to Saints and Images, Prayer for the
dead, and Purgatory, are not mere Popery, and in no wise the the Doctrine of
Reformation?


Isaac. Without doubt, those Tenets are Popery but all the World knows, the
Lutherans use Images in their Churches and pray before them; and the Holy Synod
of Charenton has declared, as was said in our first Dialogue, that the
Lutherans have nothing of Superstition or Idolatry in their manner of Divine
Worship; this is also the Doctrine Epit. Colloq. Montisbel.
of Jacobus, Andreas, In Centaur. Exercit. Theol. page 270.
Brachmanus, Exampar. 4.
Kemnitius, Luther and Brentius quoted by Beza, In respond. ad acta Colloq.
Montisbel. par. 2. in Prefas.
and why should not a Doctrine, Judged by such eminent Men to be of Scripture,
be called the Doctrine of the Reformation? Prayers for the dead and Purgatory is
Popery confessedly; but alas! it is taught expressly by Vrbans, Regius, In locis
Commun. c. 18. and 19.
Bucer, Inscrip. Angl. page 450.
Zuinglius, To 1. in Eupian. A^t. 90. and Ar^. 60.
Melancthon, In Apolog. Confess Aug.
Luther, To 1. Wittem. in resol. de Indul. concl. 15. Epist. ad Spalat.
the Common Prayer Book in King Edward's time Printed 1549. and many others of
our Learned Doctors, and what can you call more properly the Doctrine of the
Reformation, than what such Men teach to be the Doctrine of Scripture? And
though our Brethren, Quakers, Anabaptists, Presbyterians and Protestants Judge
Prayers to Angels and Saints to be nothing else but Popery: yet our
Common Prayer Book has the same Collect or Prayer to Angels in St. Michael's
day, that the Popish Mass Book has, and desires that the Angels may succor and
defend us on earth; and Prayers to, and Intercession of Saints is taught by
Luther, y Bilneus and Latimer quoted by Fox, Acts and Mon. page 462. and 312.
and consequently it is the Doctrine of the Reformation.


Ismael. If all these Popish Articles may be safely believed by the
Reformation, and be the Doctrine of our Reformed Church, as well as of Popery;
what difference then betwixt us and Popery; or why are we called a Reformation
of Popery, or why did we separate from them?


Isaac. I have told you already, that our difference from Popery, is not,
because we must deny what they believe, for we believe as well as they the
Unity and Trinity of God, the Incarnation of his Son, etc. but in this, that
the Papists believe, because the Pope and Church says, this is true revealed
Doctrine, but we believe not because any Church, Pope, or Doctor says so, but
because we our selves judge by Scripture it is so; for if a Papist did say, I
do not believe this is a revealed Truth, because the Pope and Church says it
is, but because I find by Scripture it is; he would be no Papist; believe then
whatever Doctrine you will, either Popery, Judaism, Protestancy, Arianism, or
what else you please, provided you judge by Scripture it is true, and that you
believe it, not because this or that Church, Congregations or Doctors believe
it, but because your self judges it to be true, you will be a true Child of the
Reformation: And this is the reason why we are called a Reformation and why we
separated from them, because they would have us take for our Rule of Faith
Scripture as interpreted by them, and believe not what we judge to be the
Doctrine of Scripture, but what they judge; and this is also the Reason why
Presbyterians are jealous with the Church of England; why Anabaptis^s forsake
Presbyterians; why these are forsaken by Quakers, because each one would have
the World judge as they do, and persecute and trouble one another, which is
quite against the Spirit of the Reformation, for whereas our Rule of Faith is
no Church, Congregation, or Man, but Scripture as each one understands it; it
follows that by our principles every one must he permitted to believe whatever
he pleases, and by so doing, he will be a true Child of the Reformation.


Ismael. The Church of England, nor any of our Congregations, will never
believe any of those Popist Tenets.


Isaac. The time may come that they may believe them all, and be still as good
Reformers as now they are? For if the Pope and his Church should to morrow deny
and excommunicate those Tenets, which now they so steadfastly believe, (and I
hope they will some day,) then it would be a pious and virtuous action in all
Reformed Children, to believe them all, as much as now they deny them: And let
us pretend what other reasons we please, but it is very certain that the
strongest reason we can have to deny those Articles, is because the Pope and
his Church believes them, and consequently, if the Popish Church would but deny
them, we might and ought to believe them, you will think this a Paradox; but
listen to our Apostolical and Divine Luther: To. Germ. fol. 214.
If a general Council, says he, did permit Priests to Marry, it would be a
singular mark of Piety, and sign of Godliness, in that case to take
Concubines, rather than to Marry in conformity to the Decree of the Council, I
would in that case command Priests not to Marry under pain of damnation. And
again he says, De formula Missa and To. 3. Germ.
If the Council should Decree Communion in both kinds; in contempt of the
Council, I would take one only or none. See these words of Luther, quoted by
our learned Hospinian, In Histor. S^. part. 2. fol. 13.
and Jewel, In replis ad Hardingum.
and see it is not only my Doctrine but of great Luther, that in case the Pope
and Council deny all the Tenets they now believe; we may, and it will be a
pious godly action to believe them, and make as many Acts of Parliament for
them, as now we have against them. But what is the matter? Methinks you become
pale, something troubles you, speak, what is it?


Ismael. It Is the horror I conceive against your discourse, my countenance
cannot be in a calm, when my mind is in such a storm and confusion: pursue no
more, you said enough that I should curse the day I have ever seen you, or
heard that which you call Holy Liberty, which is but a prostitution of
Consciences a profanation of all that is sacred, and an open gap to all
impiety in Doctrine and Manners: But I hope the Lord has given me that profound
respect and attach to our Holy Reformation, that I shall not be beaten from it
by all your Engines, able to inspire a contempt and hatred of it to any weak
Brother, for who would live a moment in it, if such impious Tenets, such
scandalous and blasphemous Doctrines were of it, or were unavoidable sequels
out of its Principles: No, no the principles of the Reformed Church are sound
and Orthodox, and no Doctrine can follow from them, but what is pure and true.


Isaac. Let me tell you I have as tender a love for the Reformation as you: And
I will maintain the Holy Liberty I assert, cannot justly be called a
prostitution of Consciences; for, you dare not deny but this is an Orthodox and
sound principle, that our Rule of Faith is Scripture as each person of sound
Judgment understands it; that it is lawful for each person of sound Judgment to
read it, to give his Judgment of the true sense of it, and to believe and hold
that sense of it, which he thinks in his Conscience to be true; is there any
prostitution of Consciences in this Doctrine? Or is it not the Doctrine of our
Reformation?


Ismael. All this is true, the prostitution of Consciences lies not there, but
in the scandalous and blasphemous Tenets, which you pretend that follow out of
the Rule of Faith.


Isaac. But you wrong the Reformation in calling such Tenets blasphemies and
scandals: For since our Rule of Faith is Scripture, as each Person of sound
Judgment understands it; if this Rule of Faith be good and sound, if it be
Religious and Holy, any Doctrine that is conformable to this Rule, must be good,
sound, religious and holy; this being our Rule of Faith and Manners, it is
clearer than day light, that all and each other Tenet which I rehearsed in all
my former discourses, are conformable to our Rule of Faith; for our Rule is
Scripture as each Man of sound Judgment understands it. Our Doctrine therefore
must be, what any Person of sound Judgment understands to be the Doctrine of
Scripture: This is an evident sequel out of that Principle, and whereas there
is not one Tenet of all those which I rehearsed, whether they concern Doctrine
or Manners; but was Judged by the Doctors, which I cited for it, to be the
Doctrine of Scripture; it follows unavoidably, that there is not one Tenet of
them but is the Doctrine of the Reformation: Therefore you must be forced to
either of these two; either to say that our Rule of Faith, by which such
Doctrines are warranted, is naught, wicked and scandalous, and leads to a
prostitution of Consciences and Manners; or that all those Tenets, are good,
sound, pious, and no prostitution or corruption of our Consciences: For, pick
and choose out the Doctrine which you think to be the most wicked and scandalous
of all those I rehearsed; you cannot deny, but that it was taught by the Author
I quoted for it and Judged by him, to be the Doctrine of Scripture. And if no
Doctor hitherto had believed it, you or I, or some other Person of sound
Judgment, may Judge it to be the Doctrine of Scripture; Either of both, then
you must be constrained to grant. Or that the Doctrine of the Reformation, is
not what each person of sound Judgment understands to be the Doctrine and Sense
of Scripture, which is as much as to say, that our Rule of Faith must not be
Scripture as we understand it, but that we must believe against our own
Judgment and Conscience, what others say is the Doctrine and Sense of Scripture:
Or you must grant that all and each of those Tenets I rehearsed, is the Doctrine
of the Reformation, tho you, or this or that Man may Judge them to be
blasphemies and scandals.


Ismael. I confess our Rule of Faith in the Reformation is Scripture as each
person understands it; for all our reformed Churches, with the Church of
England, in her 39 Articles, do give us this Rule of Faith. I confess
consequently out of this Principle, that we must not believe what Doctrine or
Sense of Scripture others Judge to be true and Orthodox, if we do not our
selves Judge it to be such, for we must not be forced to believe, against our
Judgments: Lastly, I confess we may safely believe, whatsoever Doctrins we
seriously Judge to be the Doctrine of Scripture, but provided, that such a Tenet
or Doctrine be not plainly against Scripture, and be not plain and downright
impiety and blasphemy.


Isaac. And in case you, or the Church of England, Rome, France, or Germany,
Judge a Doctrine to be blasphemous and against Scripture, and Luther, or Calvin,
or I, or another, Judge it is good Doctrine and conformable to Scripture, to
which Judgment must I stand? Must I believe yours against my Conscience and
Knowledge? Or must not I believe my own? Is it not the Principle and Practice
of our Reformation, that I must believe what I judge in my Conscience to be
Scripture, and not what others judge, if they judge the Contrary? When Luther
began the Reformation, did not almost all Christians and the whole Church
believe Purgatory and Prayers to Saints to be the Doctrine of Scripture? And
did not he very commendably deny it against them all, because he judged by
Scripture it was not? Will a Presbyterian believe Episcopacy, because the
Church of England says it is the Doctrine of Scripture? No, but deny it because
himself judges it is not.


Ismael. It Is true, each one may Lawfully believe what himself judges to be the
Doctrine of Scripture, provided he be a Godly, well intentioned Man, humble and
meek in Spirit: provided secondly that what he understands to be the Sense and
Doctrine of Scripture, be not absurd and impious in the Judgment of all the
rest of the Faithful: For let a Man be ever so learned and Godly; if he gives
an Interpretation of Scripture which is denied by all the Church, he must not
be followed.


Isaac. Your first Proviso is very good, and I hope you will meet no Doctor of
all those I quoted for those Tenets, which you call Blasphemies, who was not a
learned, Godly, humble, and well intentioned Man, who will be so bold as to
deny it of Luther, Calvin, Beza Zuinglius, etc.? Your second Proviso is not
Just, and in it you overthrow the whole Reformation; and our Rule of Faith; for
this being as you granted; Scripture as each person of sound Judgment
understands it; whatever Interpretation or Sense any man of sound Judgment
understands to be of Scripture, he may safely and piously believe it, though all
the rest of the World should judge it to be impious and blasphemous, otherwise
our Rule of Faith, must not be Scripture as we understand it, but as it is
understood by others: And whereas no Tenet of all those I rehearsed, but was
judged to be the Sense and Doctrine of Scripture, by some of Those eminent
Doctors I quoted, it follows they might have safely believed them; and if you
or I Judge as they did, we may also believe as they did, and be still of the
Reformation.


Ismael. It Is wicked and pernicious to say any particular person may believe
his own private Sense and Interpretation of Scripture, if it be Judged by all
others to be naught; and therefore the Church of England prudently and wisely
puts a stop and Bridle to the extravagant and rambling imaginations of
particular persons; they must conform themselves, and believe but what the
Church Judges may be safely believed.


Isaac. Pray, Sir, since when is it commendable to constrain Men's Judgments to
believe, not what each one thinks best, but what the Church thinks may be
safely believed, was this Commendable in the beginning of our Reformation, when
our Blessed Reformers began to teach their private Judgments against the Church
then established? If it was, then the Church of Rome is to be commended, for
persecuting and excommunicating our first Reformers; and this was not, nor is
not commendable in the Church of Rome, why is it commendable in the Church of
England? This is a piece of Popery, whereof the Church of England is guilty,
and for which all our Congregations are jealous of her: Be it known to you, our
other Congregations, Lutherans, Calvinists, Anabaptists, etc. are as truly and
Godly Children of the Reformation as the Church of England; and they will not
submit to that Popish Tyranny, nor suffer any curb to their Judgments, but will
have our Rule of Faith to be but Scripture, and each one to understand, and
believe it, as he thinks best in the Lord.


Ismael. I confess other Congregations will admit no such Curb, nor Bridle to
their Judgments, but follow Scripture as they understand it; but the Church of
England has a reverent regard for the Sense and Interpretation of it given by
Primitive Ages, Fathers and Councils, and that we prefer before the private
Interpretations of particular Persons.


Isaac. And just so says the Popish Church to Luther and our blessed
Reformers, and if that had been well done, we should have had neither
Protestancy nor any other Reformation: But you confess at least, that the Rule
of Faith in all other Congregations, is but Scripture, as each person
understands it, and each person may consequently believe his own Sense of it,
and deny the Sense of any other if he does not like it: Then you must confess,
that in all other Congregations, except the Church of England, any Reformed
Child may believe any Sense and Doctrine which any person of sound Judgment
judges to be Scripture, if himself likes it, though all the rest of the World
may think it naught; and whereas you cannot deny, but that all and each doctor
quoted by me for those Tenets, which you call Blasphemies, were sound and able
Judgments; you must confess that it is a necessary Sequel out of their Rule of
Faith, that in all other Congregations they may piously and safely believe all
those Tenets, and be still true Children of the Reformation.


Ismael. I confess, if they speak coherently and stand to their Principles,
they may believe them safely; but as I hate those Blasphemous Tenets, Labbor
and detest also that Principle and Rule of Faith of other Congregations, from
which such Tenets are unavoidable Sequels.


Isaac. Good Ismael, you forget what you have hitherto all along avowed, and
you are quite astray from the Doctrine of the Reformation. You have often
granted me, that our Rule of Faith is Scripture, not as this or that
Congregation, Doctor, or Church, but as each person of sound Judgment
understands it; and now you tell me you hate and detest that Rule, because that
out of it, there follow strange and Blasphemous Tenets? You say, the Sense and
Interpretation of the primitive Ages, Church and Fathers must be preferred
before the Interpretation of any private person, or Congregation, and what
think you of our whole Reformation, and particularly of our 39 Articles of the
Church of England, which allow no other Rule of Faith, but Scripture as each
Person of sound Judgment understands it? What say you of Luther, Calvin, Beza,
and the rest of our first Reformers, who preferred their own private Sense and
Interpretation of Scripture, before that of the whole Church? What say you to
the Presbyterians, who prefer their own Sense and Interpretation of the Bible,
before that of the Church of England? What say you of all the Congregations of
the Reformed Church, each one of which, holds its Sense and Doctrine of
Scripture, different from all the rest? I grant, there ought to be a respect
for the Judgment and Interpretation of the Text, given by the Primitive Church
and Fathers; but if a Doctor, or Man of sound Judgment, replenisht with Gods
Spirit, reads Scripture with an humble Heart, and pure Intention, and Judges by
it, that Bigamy is lawful; that there is no Mystery of three Persons in one
Divine Nature; that Christ despaired on the Cross, etc. Tho these Doctrines be
quite against the Judgments of Fathers, Church, and Councils, he may believe
them, and be still a true Reformed Child, because he follows our Rule of Faith;
if he must deny these Articles, because others decry them; then he must go
against his own Judgment and Conscience, for to conform himself to them, and
his Rule of Faith must not be Scripture as each Man of sound Judgment
understands it; but as the primitive Ages, Church, and Councils understand it;
and this is Popery.


Ismael. Prithee, Friend Isaac, let us give over: All that your discourse drives
at, by what I can perceive, is either to beat me from the Reformation, by
showing me the absurdity of its Rule of Faith; or oblige me to believe
scandalous and blasphemous Tenets, necessary sequels out of that Rule: I am a
Child of the Reformation, and never will be otherwise.


Isaac. The Lord, who is the Searcher of Hearts knows, you mis-conster my
intentions: How can you say I intend to beat you from the Reformation? do not I
insist and persuade you to stick fast to its Rule of Faith, and acknowledge no
other but Scripture, as you understand it? How can you say, I oblige you to
believe false and scandalous Tenets? To the contrary, I advise you not to
believe them, if you judge by Scripture they are false and scandalous: What my
discourse drives at, that you should not censure, blame or call any Doctrine
blasphemous, scandalous, false, or heretical, (Popery excepted,) for, though
you Judge by Scripture it is not true; another will Judge it to be the true
Sense and Doctrine of the Text; and if he does, he may with a safe Conscience
believe it, and ought not to be blamed by you or any other for believing it; if
you do not like that Doctrine, do not believe it; but let the other believe as
he Judges by Scripture he may, and let every Tub stand on its own bottom.


Ismael. Once more I beseech you give over; I will not discourse any more with
you.


Isaac, Nay, Dear Ismael, I see you are troubled, and I will not leave you in
that perplexity: Be pleased to listen to three points I will propose unto you,
and you will not miss to find satisfaction in either of them.


Ismael. Let Us hear them.


Isaac. Will you believe Scripture, as it is Interpreted, and in that sense
which, the Church, Councils, and Fathers propound unto you?


Ismael. I will not be obliged to that, for I may Judge by Scripture that Sense
and Interpretation of it, to be false and erroneous, and I will not be obliged
to believe any thing against my Judgment and Conscience; that is Popery.


Isaac. That Is well, in so much you follow the footstepts of Luther, Calvin,
and our first Reformers, who would not believe what the Church believed in
their time, nor regarded what the Papists alleged out of the Councils and
Fathers against them, because they held themselves obliged to believe Scripture
as they understood it, and not as it was understood by others: Will you then
believe Scripture in that sense and interpretation which your self judges to be
true, though the Church, Councils, and all other Congregations judge it to be
false and erroneous, and give the like liberty to all others.


Ismael. That Is dangerous; for it would follow that any man might believe
without check or blame, the greatest blasphemies, imaginable, if he Judges them
to be the sense of the Text.


Isaac. Why then, since that the first does not please you, for fear of
constraining your Judgment Papist-like, and the second displeases you, for the
scope it gives for to believe any thing, or nothing; your best way is to lay
Scripture aside, whereas Christ has forgot, or neglected to appoint us some
assured means for to know what sense of it he would have us believe.


Ismael. And what Religion shall I profess if I lay Scripture aside?


Isaac. The same which you have by Scripture; that is to say, whatever you Judge
to be the true Worship of God: be sure to profess a reverence for Scripture and
seem to believe it is the Word of God, least you may scandalize weak Brethren;
pretend always that your sentiments are grounded upon the Text, but betwixt you
and God believe whatever you think to be true, worship God as you Judge he is
to be worshipped, and that's the way to live in peace: Do you think but that
those Noble Spirits which they call the Wits of England, have a good Religion?
In public they speak reverently of the Bible, but we know what they have, and
do declare in their private discourses, that it is but a Romance, or mere
fiction: Do you think but that there was a Religion in England before it saw
Gregory' Emissarys, Austin and his Monks? What need therefore of a Bible for to
have Religion? were not the Swinfeldians a religious Congregation, and of the
Reformation too, yet they cared not for Scripture, but grounded their belief
upon Gods inspiration and inward speech to the heart?


Ismael. If I were not well acquainted with you, and had not very convincing
proofs, and signal Testimonies of your Piety, solid Religiosity, and
Chistianity, I would Judge you by this last piece of your discourse, to be an
impious Atheist or Pagan: and I wonder that so good a Christian, as I know you
to be, should speak so irreverently of the Bible, and so much in commendation
of Paganism as you do: There was indeed a Religion in England before they knew
what Scripture was; but that Religion was Paganism, which Austin and his
Companions happily banished from our Land.


Isaac. Happily? do you call an exchange of Paganism for Popery (introduced by
Austin) a Happiness? is it nor generally believed in our Reformation, and most
strongly proved of late, by that incomparable Wit and Penman, Doctor
Stillingfleet, that Popery has as much of Idolatry as Paganism: our Land
therefore had in Paganism as good a Religion as it received by Austin in
Popery: Does not this our noble Champion, and most of the Scribes of the Church
of England teach, That Popery is a saving Religion, that we may be saved in the
Church of Rome? if Popery (notwithstanding it be Idolatry as they say) be a
saving Religion, how can they deny but that Paganism is also a saving Religion,
what need had our Forefathers therefore to abandon Paganism? why was it not
left in the Land?


Ismael. Whatever may be said of Popery, it cannot be denied, but that
Christianity is better than Paganism: the expulsion therefore of Paganism by
Austin, was a Happiness, because by it Christianity was introduced, and
established in our Kingdom.


Isaac. Alas, Ismael! if England had been as well informed of the merit of
Paganism, when first Christianity was preached, it had never exchanged the one
for the other.


Ismael. What, not Paganism,, which adored a Multitude of Gods, for
Christianity which adores but one? Not Paganism, which adored Jupiter, Saturn,
Venus, etc. who were Devils and Evil Spirits; or wicked Men, who caused
themselves to be adored, for Christianity, which adores the only true, immortal
and eternal Deity?


Isaac. You speak with the Vulgar sort, and believe, as you have been
instructed by your Ancestors: I confess, the Apostles, and Ancient Doctors of
Christianity do teach, that the Gods of the Gentiles were Devils or Evil
Spirits; I confess also, all the Christian World since the first preaching of
the Gospel, was so persuaded, grounded upon Scripture, which in several places
says, the Gods of the Gentiles were Devils, grounded upon the Doctrine of the
Apostles, and their Successors the Fathers of the Church, and the World being
persuaded by the Apostles, by the Doctors, Fathers, and Preachers of
Christianity, that the Gods which the Pagans adored were but Devils, which by
Soceries, and mavelous works deceived Mankind, and made themselves to be
adored as Gods, all men were ashamed to adore but Devils, forsook Paganism and
embraced Christianity. And all was but a mere Policy of Popery, to cast so much
dirt and calumny upon Paganism, and make its Gods but Devils for to introduce
and establish Christianity; Doctor Stillingfleet in his Charge of Idolatry
against the Church of Rome, page 40. and 41. says plainly, That the Pagans are
charged with more than they were guilty of; page 7. says that Jupiter adored by
the Pagans; was so far from being an Arch-devil, in the opinion of St. Paul,
that he was the true God, Blessed for evermore: that the Pagans adored but one
Supreme and Omnipotent God which they called Jupiter, and which they did
believe to be neither a Devil, nor a Man, but a true, and the first and
chiefest of the Gods; and that the rest of the Gods, which they adored, they
looked upon them as upon Inferior Deities, and gave them no other adoration,
but such as the Papists give to their Saints.

If therefore the Pagans adored the true God under the name of Jupiter, and the
other Gods but as inferior Deities, as the Papists do their Saints; was it not
unjustly done by the Ancient Fathers and Teachers of Christianity to have
imposed upon the World, and made us believe the Pagans adored but Devils and
Evil Spirits? Have not the Pagans Right and Justice on their side, for to plead
before our Wise and Religious Parliament, that Paganism may be restored, or at
least tolerated, and Jupiter, with the rest of the Gods may be adored, as
formerly they were? first because Paganism is no more Idolatry than Popery, as
Doctor Stillingfleet, Master Burnet, and other Reformed writers prove
convincingly; secondly, because that Paganism having been banished out of our
Land upon the false Information of our first Teachers, that it was an Adoration
of Devils, or Evil Spirits, and wicked debaucht men, who by counterfeited
Wonders, and Cheats, gained the peoples Adoration; since that Doctor
Stillingfleet, Mr. Burnet, and other Reformed Writers, will make it out, that
the Pagans adored no Devils, but One true, Omnipotent, supreme God, blessed for
evermore, which they called Jupiter, and the rest of the Gods as inferior
Deities, as Papists do their Saints, and will prove that the Pagans were
charged by the first D. Doctors of Christianity, and by all our Ancestors, with
more than they were guilty of, why should not Paganism be restored again to the
Land, and heard to speak for its self, and Dr. Stillingfleet and his zealous
companions be licensed to plead for them, and for holy Jupiter, so foully
misrepresented by Antiquity, as to be believed an Arch-Devil, whom Dr.
Stillingfleet will prove to have been, a true God blessed for ever more?


Ismael. The more I discourse with you, the more I am perplexed in mind I bid
you adue, and do confess I carry with me from your discourse a dislike of what
I have been hitherto, an unsettlement in my persuasion, and a compassion of the
poor Pagans, so unjustly banished from our Nation, if what Doctor Stillingfleet
says, be true, he is a learned, Religious, and diligent searcher into
Scripture; the Ancient D. Drs. and Fathers of the Church reading Scripture,
judged and taught, that Jupiter was a Devil, as well as the rest of the Gods
which the Gentiles adored; Dr. Stillingfleet and other Reformed D. Drs. reading
Scripture, Judge he was no Devil, but the the true God blessed for ever more;
any Child of the Reformation may believe either of both, and put Jupiter into
our Litanies, as well as JESUS Christ, and offer Sacrifice to him as formerly
our Ancestors did; for whatever any man of sound Judgment judges to be the
Doctrine of Scripture, may be safely believed, and is the Doctrine of the
Reformation: As for my part I see our Wise Parliament sits now upon a new
settlement of Government and Religion, and I will not resolve upon any
Religion, until I see what it concludes. If Dr. Stillingfleet be so zealous as
to put in a good word for Paganism before that Religious Assembly, he may find
Abbetors, and as the Parliament cherishes Dr. Oats for the extirpation of
Popery, so it may cherish Dr. Stillingfleet for the introduction of Paganism,
and the erecting of Temples and Altars for holy Jupiter his true and evermore
blessed God; and if he be successful in this undertaking, as for exchanging
Presbytery for Protestancy, he was promoted to the Deanery of St. Paul, so by
changing Christianity for Paganism, he may expect to be his Holy Jupiters High
Priest, in London Capitol, and reign with him everlastingly in the other life,
in case he believes there is another.


FINIS.

