GRIMALKIN, OR, THE REBEL-CAT: A NOVELL Representing the Unwearied Attempts of
the Beasts of his Faction Against SOVEREIGNTY and SUCCESSION Since the Death of
the LIONS in the TOWER.

Dic mihi, si fias tu Leo, qualis eris? LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1681.

GRIMALKIN, OR The Rebell-CAT: A NOVELL: Representing the Unwearied Attempts of
the Beasts of his Faction against SOVEREIGNTY and SUCCESSION, since the Death
of the Lions in the Tower.
YOU cannot but have heard of the late Havoc and Depopulations which Death
has made in the Tower among the Lions. No less than Three of the Royal Line
being Dead at once: And what is observed by some, to the great Grief and
Astonishment of all, that the Deceased Lions (of happy memory) were Protestant
Lions, and their Successor, who only now survives, a Popish Lion. But such as
are not without Hopes of the Establishment of what they call Protestant
Religion, with, or without the Government, talk of his being removed from his
High Place and Dignity, by a Bill of Exclusion: Insomuch as it is credibly
reported by some, that the Cat-a-mountains, with the rest of the Plebeian
Creatures in the Grates, are already entered into a strict Association, to cast
off their Allegiance to the Popish Lion (under whom they were born) and to
adhere unanimously to the Perkin-Lion, or Leopard, who is the Natural Son of a
Lion and a Pard. And, so far as he is a Creature born of two Families at once,
claims to be a Lion by the Father's side, as he is of the Family of the
Panthers by the Mother's. Now the main Contrivance, if not the whole Manage and
carrying on of this Design of the Beasts Revolt from the true-born Lion to the
Bastard Leopard, is generally laid upon the Cat, as being esteemed by all a
subtle, sly, shifting Creature, and whose activity in climbing is well known,
no less than its Dexterity in shifting upon every Fall, so as in every Toss and
Revolution of Fortune, it has been found to light upon its Feet. And albeit
the Nature of the Lion is, never to hurt, or trample upon the Prostrate, and
that he is a Creature so Generous in the Use of his Royal Power, as even under
him the unfortunate, when they submit, fall gently. And though none has oftener
tasted of his Princely Mercy, or less deserved it than the Cat; insomuch, as if
we number his Escapes from the Paw of Justice, he seems, when all Reprieves are
reckoned, to have lived, even beyond the Natural Term of Nine Lives: Yet all
this notwithstanding, so it is, that this active, cunning Creature, though
neither in Strength nor Courage is of a size for bold and daring Attempts; in
hunting its Prey not caring to observe the Laws of a free and equal Chase; but
industriously waiting the Advantages of secret Ambushes, sudden surprizals, and
close lurking in the dark: and when it is hunted hard, trusting rather to neat
shiftings, and nimble Escapes, than to any solid Resistance, or open Force. Nor
is it better armed by Nature for Combat, the best of its Weapons being no other
than an envenomed Tongue, and sharp Fangs, still impotently venting its
wretched Malice in such feeble Expressions, as Spitting and Scratching,
Aspersing and Blemishing all those it cannot fairly run down and conquer; and
for such Enemies it cannot march in Combat, it spares not filthily to Defile,
or lewdly to Disfigure them, by casting Indecencies, and setting marks of
Disgrace upon them: In all Assaults and Encounters still trusting to the basest
Advantages, its Tongue and its Feet; nor unjustly, for the Weak in Fight, are
often found at once the best prepared for Defiance and Escape: Even this
little, despicable Animal, which is overpowered and overmatch'd by every
Creature, unless it may be an innocent Dove, or an harmless Robin, of so petty
and inconsiderable Account, that it has not the luck to pass for a Mock-Lyon,
or a Beast of Prey, but among the feeble Mice, among whom it plays the arrand
Tyrant, and acts over all the Rigours of the Lion with an ill Grace. Such is
the unparalled Pride, and intolerable Vanity of this Ridiculous Creature,
that not a silly Mouse e're goes to Pot, but must be sacrificed with all the
Solemnity of the Theater, abusing the poor deluded Captive with a show of
Pastimes and Plays, though all the mockery of Sport ends in this, the poor
Mouse is at length miserably cheated out of its Life with an Interlude, A piece
of Pageantry as useless as it is Barbarous, but that we may suppose the Coward
Murderer turns Death and Massacre into Ridicule, because the Death of a Mouse
is so terrible without this Disguise, that it has not Courage enough to kill
it but in jest. Even this same Trifle of a Creature, presuming too much on the
Gallantry of the Lion, and that he is of a Nature too Generous, and too brave
to stoop to any thing so unequal in Chase or Combat, and having been too long
neglected by the Lion, in a Noble kind of Scorn, vainly supposing this Disdain
to be no other than Fear, and mistaking this Neglect for License, has, from
such Encouragements, stepped into some Point of good Opinion of himself, and of
Reputation with other Brutes, with whom, of late, he has proceeded to act
clandestinely, not a little to the Disadvantage of the Lion. A thing the less
to be wondered at, since the most impotent of Creatures have ever proved the
strongest Underminers; and Histories tell us, of a whole Town in Spain
undermined by the Conies, and that the Moles, as feeble and blind as they are,
did as much for another in Africa. But this Design against the King of the
Beasts, had not in likelihood arrived to this Perfection, but that the Mischief
was at first despised, and the Actors in it improvidently slighted. Whereas,
alas! things of Tragical importance have had their Rise from very slender and
improbable Beginnings; and Cats have ordinarily, from a very small
Acquaintance, with the Favor and Indulgence of their Masters, proceeded to
surprise them by the Throat. Moreover, no Beast whatsoever seems to be formed
with greater Advantages of Nature for a Conspirator than the Cat, as being a
sly, skulking, thievish Creature, and living, for the most part, by surprise
and stealth, and whose course of Life is, in a manner, wholly led in the dark;
inasmuch as its Walks, its Watches, and its Chase, are altogether in the Night:
and therefore its steps and motions must, in reason, of necessity pass
undiscerned and undiscovered of all, because few Creatures else have walking
Eyes, or Sight in the dark; and those few that have, are near Allies to the Cat
or his Game (and Thieves are not very famous for discovering one another) One
of them being of Puss's Family, if not of Puss's Calling too; and the other,
but that it lives more aloft, might pass for his Prey, with a very little
difference, I mean the Owl and the Bat, which are, in downright English, no
other than Cat and Mouse among the Birds. To this we may add, that what the Cat
is wanting in due proportions of Strength and Courage, it evermore abundantly
supplies in the skill of Finenesses, of petty Tricks, and all the little wily
Arts, for which this Creature is wont to be celebrated, and in which it is
arrived to so eminent a degree of Reputation, as even that ingenious Engine
which curious Art has formed to supply the place of a Cat, and to do Puss's
Duty in his absence, and which has given Name to all the fine Policies which
either Wit or Malice have invented, to catch Men or Beasts; I mean the same
which the Vulgar call a Trap, is no more than Puss in effigy, and but a duller
imitation of a Cat, in Wood.

But, to return to our purpose. No where has this little Machiavel employed
greater Diligence, or more constant Application, and upon no occasion
whatsoever showed more Address, or set more Engines and Arts on work, than of
late, against the Lion, and his Royal State and Dignity. All has been done,
which the lewdest Wit could suggest, or the basest Malice put in practice: And,
in fine, nothing that lay within the lawless Power of ill Nature, Calumny,
Ingratitude and Treachery, has been omitted. One while, with loud Cries,
exclaiming long and largely against the ill Government, and Arbitrary Rule of
the Lion, though this little Tyrant, at the same time, spares none of the
lesser Fry, that has either Wings or Feet: Another while, with bitter
Catterwawlings, bemoaning the hard Burdens, and miserable Slavery of the
Beasts under such an Oppressor, of whose Generosity and Goodness Himself has
had but too large Experience; till, what with moving Speeches, Cajollery, and a
counterfeit Zeal, working upon that Discontent which he has raised, he
proceeds to engage the unwary, unthinking Brutes, under the soft Name, and
specious Notion of Liberty, and being Assertors of Themselves, and that, first,
into Rebellion, and then into Ruin: Having, at the same time, drawn in the
Leopard (though a By-blow of the Lions) to be a prime Leader, and principal
Promoter of this unnatural Rebellion against his Father, and his Race. But this
Base Son of the Lion is esteemed a pure Property of the Cat's, insomuch as,
even in common Discourse, he ordinarily passes under the Name of the Cats-Foot,
though, in conclusion, the poor deluded Stalking horse meets with no other
Return for his good Services, than to be fed with dazzling shows of empty
Honor, and to be rewarded with catching at the shadow of Sovereignty. And
accordingly, for crowning his vain hopes, great Endeavors are used for
removing the Ducal-Lyon in the Tower (the only one left at present) out of the
way, as a Popish Sight; and for providing, that in all future Solemnities of
showing the Lions in the Tower, to Strangers and curious Spectators, the
Leopard there be henceforth in his stead duly showed as a Lion. A Ceremony so
ridiculous, as turns even the whole Conspiracy into a Jest, and which raised no
small Mirth among the Graver sort, and created no less laughter among ethers,
than if they had seen, the second time, the sight of the Ass in the Lions Skin.
Though, at the same time, to promote the Belief of this Imposture, many fair
stories are told the People, of the Lyon's Fierce and Intractable Disposition,
and of his unmerciful Usage of All that come to see him, that no Den in the
Tower is sufficient to hold him, no Chain nor Law strong enough to Bind him,
but that he will of necessity break loose, seize, and tear every Spectator in
pieces, as his Prey. All which, and much more, is easily swallowed by the
credulous Multitude, who take all shows for Realities, and receive
Representations for Truth, not having the Wit to distinguish betwixt their
Friends and their Enemies, any otherwise, than by taking it for granted, that
All that speak them fair are the One, as All that are ill spoken of are the
Other; and who, in short, never fail to be imposed upon, because they never
duly consider, that the Lion is not so fierce as he is painted.

Nor is it to be imagined, how much these groundless Fears and Jealousies have
gained upon the Belief of the Country People, insomuch, that in many places,
they have already proceeded so far, as to take down the Lion from the King's
Arms in their Churches, and from their Signs in the Country Towns, and to
advance the Leopard with a Crown in the place of the Lion in both: though, for
the same Reason, if it may take place, it would be convenient, for the complete
extinguishing and utter expunging all memory of so Monarchical a Creature, that
the Norman Lions in the Coin, which came in with the Conqueror, might be
removed, to make way for the Leopards. But, for the abovementioned
Reformations both in City and Country respectively, some zealous Patrons,
forsooth, are not wanting to varnish them over with specious Pretenses, and to
frame, as they think, some colorable Excuses for obtruding the Leopard upon
Spectators for the Lion, in showing the Lions in the Tower; and likewise for
advancing this new Supporter to the Kings Arms in the Country Churches, and
so, upon all such Loyal Signs in their Towns as the Lion possessed before,
usurping no less boldly upon our Reason, with such pitiful Sophistry, than the
Leopard has already on the Lyon's Dignity. In order to this end, many fine
Stories are told us, of the Beauty and Gracefulness of the Figure of the
Leopard, of his Parentage, and of many exact resemblances of his Father the
Lion, but much softened with a milder, and more agreeable Aspect of his own, and
what fair Hopes may all conceive from so promising a Creature, as inherits at
once the Majesty and Graces of the Lion, tempered with a more certain
sweetness, more peculiar to himself. And for Succession in the Right Line, they
are bold to tell us, that it matters not so long as the Nobler Beasts of Prey
at least, whether true born or not, are all the Lyon's Cousins, and therefore
of the Blood Royal; and, which is the last Refuge they are driven to, they
stick not to affirm, that all the Beasts of the Field are born equal, and
therefore it could be none of Natures intendment, that any One should have
Sovereignty or Rule over another, inasmuch as they were all Freeborn: and for
that cause, it was not the Ancient, or just Right of any one, like a Nimrod, or
Mighty Hunter, to tyrannize over all the rest, but that the same was a manifest
Encroachment against Nature, and an unjust Usurpation, which came in at first
by Mastery and Conquest. Now such is the ill luck of those that have started
such kind of Arguments, as it is very observable, that there is not one of them
but may be turned with greater force on the Lyon's behalf, upon the Objectors
themselves; they being, all of them, but false and fading Colors, which will
easily fall off and vanish, by a just consideration how ill they become that
Cause they are pretended to adorn. What is mis-called Beauty and Mildness of
Aspect in the Leopard, is, in truth, when we give it the right Name, no other
than a base and amorous Delicacy. And, instead of the Majesty and Graces of the
Lion, tempered with a peculiar sweetness of his own, we may rather behold the
Masculine Graces and Majesty of the Lion, his Father, gilt with the soft and
wanton effeminacy of his Prostitute Mother, the Panther, from whom he receives
a stronger Tincture than from his Father; witness all his Spots, which remain
as so many legible and lasting Stains of his Mothers Lust and Pollutions; and
yet his Motley Skin is not a Livery unworthy the Mongrel, when we consider his
pled Ancestors were Sire and Dam of two several Colors. Indeed, what else
could be expected would ensue, when in so bold a contradiction to the Levitical
Law, Nature would go to Plow with Creatures more unequally yoaked than an Ox
and an Ass? For the same unevenness and incongruity appears evermore in
Nature's mis-matching of Creatures, which is daily found in Art's mis-matching
of Metals, where the purer and more refined Metal is really much embased and
impoverished by its mixture with a courser, and yet, at the same time, the
courser Metal it self rendered much more course, by appearing in Conjunction
with a Finer. Nor fares it otherwise in the present case; that Majesty which
shines pure and bright in the Lion, when stamped on the Leopard, looks dim, and
is clouded, as being embased with the course Allay of the Panther; where,
instead of the Pard's being dignified by Rising into Lion, the Lion is rather
wholly degraded, by degenerating altogether into Pard. What shall we say more
to the Boast of the Leopard's Parentage and Extraction? Why sure that they were
at a loss to make a Boast of that which is so soul a shame and disparagement;
and is so far from being of the Nature of a Plea, that it is indeed no other
than an Imputation. For, either they ought to have concealed that part of the
Truth which they are not ashamed to publish or else, not to have concealed the
other part which they are ashamed to publish; and not to have made such a noise
of his Father, as, at the same time, quite drowns all Report and Speech of his
Mother. For, what though he was begotten by the King of Beasts, yet still was
it not by his Queen, but on the prostitute Body of a base Subject. And, if such
promiscuous and vile Engendring was no small Diminution of Honor to the Royal
Sire, sure then it cannot be urged as the least Accession of Honor to his
Bastard Issue. Be it granted, that he had a Royal Father, yet this in no wise
intitles him to the Name, and Privilege of a Royal Son, being indeed but a
Leap by chance, and no more than a Creature of Fortune. For, whereas nothing
can get a Lion but a Lion, the Leopard quite otherwise, though he may have the
King of Beasts for his Father, must stand to the courtesy of the whole Herd
for a Mother. The next Plea drawn from those exact Resemblances of his Royal
Sire, which are to be found in his Spurious Issue, is so frivolous, as rather
merits a Smile for its Confutation, than a serious Answer. For, who could
expect that should be turned to his Praise, which is indeed but matter of
Sport? For, let such tell me, if, at least, they can, be serious, is it any
part of the Ape's Praise, that, in the first forming him, he began to be made
Man, but was left off before he was finished; for which reason, the poor
chattering Creature is disowned by the Herd, as being but an Essay of a Brute,
and imperfectly Theirs; and yet, at the same time, disdained by men, as being
no more than dough-bak'd, and unfinished Man. In like manner, who can imagine
otherwise, but that the Leopard, when he was made, would fain have been a Lion
if he durst. And accordingly he ventured a little way, and made some few faint
steps toward it, but, in conclusion, his Courage failing him, he was wrought
off in haste, as you see, before the moist-strokes were perfected. And now, I
beseech you, behold the profound Argument. The Leopard is the very picture of
the Lion. What then? Therefore let us fairly rid City and Country at once of the
true Original. Admirably urged, but that such an Inference has no more the
true Force and Color of right Reason, than the Leopard has of the Majestic
show and strength of the Lyon's true-born Issue. No, rather, let us love the
Original and the Copy presented together in one view, that so, from a close and
near Survey of Both at once, we may come up to all the Measures of an equal and
just comparison. But these men, who are so fond of beholding the Picture of a
Lion, and, at the same time, will needs appear so eager for banishing the
Original, I doubt not may have learned so necessary a Policy from, Plutarch's
Painter, who, having made a wretched Figure of a Cock, and publicly exposed
the same, though possibly; even so ill a Picture might have passed for a good
Malkin or Scarecrow, had yet, notwithstanding, employed his Boy on purpose to
chase away all the Cocks and Hens in the Yard, from appearing to the just
Reproach and Scandal of so lewd a piece of Painting; as well knowing, that even
the fairest Counterfeits are evermore seen with the greatest Advantages, when
the Truth is not in view, and that all wants and weaknesses in the Imitations
of Art, never have the luck to be so easily betrayed, as when they are compared
near at hand, with the Life. Now, is the wise Contrivance of these men any
other than the very Moral of this Story? and have they not adventured to
establish the precarious Reputation of the Leopard, by the self-same Means and
Methods, which their Master, the unhappy Painter, had made choice of, as the
likeliest, to make the best of a bad Market? For what else mean the repeated
Proposals and endeavors still on foot, for dispossessing the Lion of that
place he has long held in the Tower, and of obtruding the Leopard for a Lion
upon all Spectators? And what else signify the like unwearied Attempts, of
cozening the credulous Country People with a Leopard for a Lion, in the Kings
Arms, and so many of their Sign-Posts in the Country Towns? Do they not
plainly confess to all by such a wretched shift, how unwilling they are that
the enormous Disproportion and Disparity between the Lyon's Genuine Issue and
his Bastard, should be betrayed, upon a near and just comparison of both
together? For then, as they are conscious to themselves, that Generous Vigor,
that Heroic Bravery, and those Masculine Graces which eminently shine in their
full Proportions, and sit on the Majestic Forehead of the One, will all
appear as undeniable, as the weak Approaches to, and faint Emulations of all
these will in the Other, which is the base and inglorious Counterfeit: whereas,
they are pleased to say, that for Succession in the Right Line, it matters not,
it is barely said without any color of Proof, and is so slender a Cavil, as
carries with it, it is own Confutation; Succession and Birthright being no
other than the plain and uniform Course and Order of Nature: which Order is no
sooner broke at any time, but all things, by an immediate Consequence, fall
into direct Confusion, no Subordination being left of First and Last, no
Distinction of Leaders and Led; and in fine, no Establishment of Right and
Wrong, all things being resolved into the Power of blind Fortune, and committed
to the unsteady Determinations of giddy Chance: Nor is it to be represented in
any Sense, but the disorderly Face of an Army, fencing with it self, and put to
Rout by it is own Forces; or to be marched with any Instance, but the wild
Encounters in the Air, of ravenous Kites and Crows, rudely flocking and
fighting together, as preying on one another, without Distinction, Method, or
Measure. Nor does that which follows, mend the matter, when they add, that the
nobler Beasts of Prey at least, whether true born or not, are all the Lyon's
Cozens; as, if in case the Lion were disabled, yet the Succession need not be
lost. But, alas! What can be more vain than such Discourses? Since, upon the
Remove of the Succession, the whole Fabric tumbles down, and the very
Situation and Figure of the Government, are at once entirely destroyed; for,
the Right of governing being once lost, who is there under the Right of being
governed? And where no one is under any Right of being governed, there all have
equally a Right to govern: and thus, in Conclusion, the Government is
unavoidably tossed, like a Ball of Contention, from one to another, among as many
Pretenders, as there are Members of the Government, and a Gap is open for a
Civil War, in every Age; so impossible is it, even for the Monarchy it self,
any where to outlive the Succession, unless any think it practicable, for the
Monarchy to last, when the Foundations are gone; which Foundations, are no
sooner removed, but the many short-lived Vicissitudes und Revolutions of State,
which happen to start up on a sudden, in it is stead, (like hasty Mushrooms,
which are but the Birth of a Night) will appear no other than the May-games of
Chance, and mere Sportings of Fortune; by all which restless Throws, and
innumerable Tosses and Turnings from side to side, Nature seems abundantly to
declare, That she is ill at Ease, and can never possibly be at rest, till such
time, as all things whatever out of frame and place, duly recover their right
Center, and return to settle on the ancient Bottom. But, these zealous
Assertors of the Pretensions and Claims of all the nobler Beasts, at least, as
the Lion's Cozens, and therefore, of the Blood Royal, have committed sure, no
small Oversight, in neglecting, when so fair Occasion offered, to garnish this
Point, with many fine Stories of Alexander's Bucephalus, and how Caligula did
his Horse the Honor, to make him a Consul, and perhaps, he was no more
unworthy the Consulship, than his Master the Empire: then they might have
proceeded farther, That the two Brothers that laid the first Foundation of
Rome's Greatness, Romulus and Rhemus, were not ashamed to owe the Charge and
Nursery of their tender Years, to the kindness of a Wolf. From these old
Stories, they might have led us yet, to more modern Instances, and acquainted
us, that of late the Landtgrave of Hesse has declared himself so far in Favor
of the Cat, as he now gives that Creature in his Arms, and even at this day,
glories in no other Style, than that of Prince of the Cats. To pass b^ the
mention of Whittington's Cat, so celebrated in Stories of our own; and what?
Even the Turkish Aleoran, if that at least affords us any authentic Records of
the Creation, has left us no other Original of the Cat, but this, That the
King of Beasts sneezing, was delivered of a Cat at his Nostrils; whether that
Custom hence took Rise or no, I know not, so much in ordinary use yet among the
Common People, of saluting this Creature upon occasion, by the Name of Puss, in
her Majesty.

But what needs all this ado? Will some say, when the Argument which they
retreat to as their last Refuge, when all the rest fail, flatly assures us,
That all the Beasts are equal, and that Nature having left us no exact scale of
Creatures, it could be none of her Intendment, that any one should have Rule or
Sovereignty more than another; the Truth of which bold Assertion, is daily
confronted by every Observation: the Fowls of the Air being no more equal
either in point of Sharpness of Sight, Strength of Talons, or their towering
Flight, than the Trees in which they build, are found aspiring to an Equality
in Pitch and Eminence: nor is there more a Parity among the Beasts of the
Field, in regard of their Prowess, Strength of Body, or natural Weapons, than
the Earth on which they couch, is every where, all of a level; part of which,
is seen ever and anon; proudly ascending to be crowned with lofty Hills, while
part bows down under them, and stoops so low, till it submits it self into
humble Valleys. Nay, to avoid the Consusion of Equality, even in so much as the
mingling such Liquors as Water and Oil, it is observed, that Oil, as affecting
the supreme Place, will evermore be getting uppermost, and keeping the Water in
Subjection, to be sure to float a top: much more, among all Orders and Ranks of
Creatures, has it been the constant rule and unalterable Appointment of
Nature, to select some one from the rest of the Flocks and Herds, whom she has
accordingly formed with peculiar Graces, and crowned with nobler Prerogatives,
and every way eminently signalized with greater Advantages, as it should seem
on purpose; that where those fair Marks of natural Authority and Majesty, shine
conspicuous, they might appear to all, worthily preferred to be the Chief and
Leader of the furred or feathered Kind: to say then, that all the Birds of the
Air, or Beasts of the Forest, are equal, is such another Solecism in effect,
as to affirm, that all the Birds are Eagles, or that all the Beasts are Lions.

To proceed then, whoever shall consider that innate Dread and Reverence, which
common Instinct has implanted in all Beasts of their King, and which he duly
seems to challenge from them, as their natural Homage and Duty, as often as he
roars, or lashes the Ground with his incensed Tail, whoever shall reflect on
his own mere Generosity and Gallantry, in spaving to insult upon the Prostrate,
as well as on his invincible and matchless Courage, in admitting no Equal, and
enduring no Superior, either in Chase or Combat: In a Word, whoever shall
follow that Painters Example, who computed the Proportions, and took the
Measures of an entire Lion, by seeing no more than his Foot; and shall in like
manner, proceed to a true Estimate of the complete Majesty of this royal
Creature, from so small a Hint, as that little Image or Signature of a Crown,
which Nature has visibly stamped in his Imperial Paw: I say, he that
deliberately weighs any or all of these, will, in the end, upon the whole
matter, conclude, that the Lyon's Rights are no more to be disputed, than
himself; and that as no Creature whatever is the Lyon's just Match in a fair
Field, so also, no Arguments against his Claims and Pretensions to a natural
Empire and Dominion over the Beasts, as his Inheritance, will be sound of equal
Force and Strength to those for them. Nor does he hold his Reign by such a
Tenure as came in with the Conqueror, this Rule being an Establishment of such
Antiquity, as is beyond the Memory of many Ages, and of which, neither the
eldest men nor Records, can assign the first Beginning; and certainly, such a
Rule as this, of which we can trace no Beginning, could have no other, than
purely from God and Nature; for, were it true that it was no better than an
Usurpation, which came in by Mystery and Conquest, as has been suggested: it
might still deserve a Question, whether or no, in those Ages before such
Usurpation, there were not Lions, as well as in all Ages since? And if so,
whether the Lions of former Ages were e're a jot tamer, or less Lions than
those of later Ages? and then, at length, when they came to usurp, and get all
the Power into their Clutches, what Ages it first came in, the who, or what
Creature living it was that they usurped upon? For, but now we were told, that
before such time, as this Usurpation took place, all Creatures were equal; and,
it is plain, that among Equals, no one has a Right of Mastery over another,
and where there was no Right, there could indeed be no Usurpation.

Moreover, if this Imperial Right came in at first by Mastery and Conquest,
since every Conquest is but the Fortune of the War, and nothing can be more
inconstant than the Successes of Fortune, it may be demanded farther, how it
has happened that the King of Beasts has been crowned with constant Successes
against every Creature, in all Disputes for the Mastery? and no Creature, with
any Successes, against him? And, whence comes it to pass, that this Nimrod, or
Mighty Hunter, has been never, at any time, Himself hunted out of his Rights,
run down upon the Spot, and fairly killed by none of the baser Herd? If it be
said here, that the Royal Creature is so far superior to the rest in Strength
and Spirit, that he seems to be formed with greater Advantages than all others
for a Natural Conquest; such an Answer will still leave room for a farther
Enquiry; why Nature, who is supposed to do nothing in vain, should be so
liberal of her Favors to no end and purpose? and, whether it be reasonable to
imagine, that she should Arm any Creature whatsoever, for a Natural Conquest,
unless she had designed the same for Natural Monarchy.

And thus, at length, I have dispatched the several Arguments produced for
setting up the Leopard in the room of the Lyon's True-born Issue, all of which,
as you may observe, but the last, plead for a new King of Beasts, as that in
the end for no King of Beasts. So nearly are the Succession and the Monarchy
allied, that the change of the Succession, is by one and the same Fate, both in
the Practice and Proposal of the King, evermore made a step to the Monarchy.
For, as all the preceding Arguments are framed to disable the Lyon's next Heir
from inheriting his Imperial Rights, so the last is framed no less to disable
the Bastard Pretender, or any other. But, I hope, by what has been said, it
will sufficiently appear, that the Lion and a just Cause are both alike strong
and invincible, and not to be disabled by any Force whatsoever.

One thing I had almost forgot to note, that whereas there were some Proposals
of showing the Leopard and the Cat more publicly in Remoter parts of the
Country, accordingly, of late, some Progresses have been made in that matter,
and not without some small Success, as it was not otherwise likely. For, upon
their first Approach, some silly Brutes in the Country, that had never seen
the Tower, nor the Lions in their Lives, through a well-meaning and mis-taught
Ignorance, paid their mistaken Reverence to the Leopard, as to the King of
Beasts. Upon which occasion, it is incredible to imagine, how strangely his
little Oracle, the Cat, is transported, as little Creatures are evermore the
vainest; witness the Fly in Aesop, which was in great trouble forsooth, for the
mighty Dust it raised, that, in truth, was stirred by the motion of the
Chariot-wheel, on the top of which it perched: but alas, good Soul! his
Cat-ship seems to be fallen into the same mistake with the Ass in the Story,
that carried the Image of Isis, which fondly imagined, as this profound
Creature was no wiser, that all the Honors were paid to him, which were indeed
directed to the Image of the Goddess: And thus, in like manner, the Caps and
Cringings of the Country Clowns, which the Cat has, with no little Vanity,
arrogated to himself and the Leopard, were purely addressed to the fair Image
of the Protestant Religion, which was publicly exposed, and carried before
them; and the same might be possibly increased in some places, by the roaring
Noises they made against Popery wherever they came. So that, upon a right
understanding, I do not see that the Cat is in great danger of being had in
Idolatry, though Time was, they say, when Sacrifices and Altars to the Race of
Tybert and Grimalkin were in fashion. And, if this will gratify any of the
Nine-liv'd Immortal Kind, it shall be freely acknowledged, that the Egyptians
made no scruple to admit this Creature in the number of their Gods; and,
accordingly, Puss was, with great Formality, shut up in her Temple, and kept to
be showed in State, with a false, dissembling Crocodile, and such like good
company; though it ought to be impartially remembered withal, that these good
People, who were so Devout as to worship a Cat, were led, as we may suppose,
with the same blindness or Zeal, to acknowledge, no less worthily, even
Darkness it self for a Deity.

What shall I say more? To lay before you all, the Finenesses and thin-spun
Policies of our little Machiavil, were an attempt, not unlike that of
Heliogabalus, who had with great Care, caused all the Cobwebs in Rome, to be
brought and laid together in a place; that all the curious Labors of those
little venomous Creatures, being amassed together in one Heap, and presented in
one View, all might from thence proceed to compute the Greatness of Rome, and
take their Measures of the Extent of its Buildings, which could conveniently
Lodge so vast a Number of Spiders at once; though such a Choice Collection of
their Webbs, might be exposed with better reason, for a Map of the Sluttishness
of Rome, than for any Tipe of its Greatness.

Besides, this way of Calculation might prove very fallacious: For perhaps,
there was hardly any nasty, little Village, but might have afforded a more
plentiful Harvest of Cobwebs, than the Imperial City it self.

However, such it seems were the worthy Employments of the Emperors in those
days: For as one very industriously applied himself to that Imperial Sport in
Hunting Flies, another was very gravely taken up, in so laudable an
Undertaking, as the sweeping of Cobwebs together, and crowding them up in an
Heap.

In this State are things depending at present, what the Issue and Event of all
may be, as yet is not a little uncertain: In the mean time, Conjectures are
framed, and Censures are spent, with such Variety of Difference, as men stand
diversely affected. One Party are of Opinion, that it shows but little Skill, to
rowse a Sleeping Lion: And that it is no less, than a point of intolerable
Vanity, to reckon upon the Lyon's Skin. and proceed to share the Spoil so long
before he be caught. Another Party, which makes no great Noise for its Zeal to
Monarchy, and cannot over-passionately wish it a long Continuance, either among
Men or Beasts, seem to take the same malicious Pleasure in foreseeing its
Ruin, which some do, in looking on a Shipwreck, and accordingly, live but only
in expectation of such brisk Steps and hopeful Beginnings, being proportionably
improved, and fairly carried on, proposing, by Change of Governors, to change
their Fortunes and Conditions.

But these vain Hopes are as much derided, by a third sort of Men, who are
declaring, ever and anon, that Lands, and Servants, and Fortunes, have evermore
the best Usage under their Old Masters; and are sure to be the most gently
treated by their Right Owners: Whereas Usurpers, who are the greatest Robbers
in the World, for the most part, lead such a merry, jovial Course of Life, as
Thieves use to do, idly squandring, and notoriously wasting, what in Conclusion
is none of their own.

What remains then, but that it should fare with other Creatures, in such
Variety of Changes, much as it did with the Frogs in the Fable, who could not
away with the Gentleness of an easy Log; and therefore, were deservedly preyed
upon in the end, by a devouring Stork.

In a word, when Governments are once so miserable, as to be in the Hands of
the baser Herd, they seem to dispose of them as wildly as Boys of their Cocks,
which they set up, only for the fond sport of knocking them down again.

There are in Conclusion, to add no more, who are of belief, that the
prevailing Success of this Imposure, is not altogether owing so much to the
Manage of some, as to the Inadvertency of others, with whom, every fair Tale
passes for Truth, that has the Fortune to be well told; and whatever has the
luck to make a good Figure, or a fine Show at a distance, is taken for no less
than it seems: For this Mischief had never been fomented, and fed to such a
Degree; but that the well-meaning Brutes, have been less diligent and daring,
less circumspect and unanimous, than the crafty Cat, and his close
Confederates, whose familiar Employment, is haunting of blind Corners, obscure
Places and Holes; and lying, ever and anon upon the Catch, to surprise the
unwary: It being the constant, unhappy Lot of such Creatures as are innocent,
not suspecting themselves, and their own Intentions, to be less apprehensive
and suspicious than they ought, of the pernicious Designs, and ill Practices of
others; and for that reason, to lie more open, and exposed to the secret Arts
and Endeavors of their Enemies: Nay, what is more, even among such as could see
farther, and had a clearer Prospect before them; every one neglecting all Care
and Thought of the Common Danger, seems to provide no farther than for his own
Security, until, in the end, it happen to them, as to men in a Storm, where,
while every one casts about, to save no more than one, all the Passengers drown
together.

And thus in the Case before us, as to the Attempt of hanging the Bell about
the Cat's Neck, every one declines, and shifts off so necessary a Service from
himself, to another, till at length, what no one durst adventure upon, is left
un-attempted by all. Whereas, alas! this growing Mischief, which has so
fatally prevailed and spread, since the Cat was under restraint in the Tower,
might have been seasonably prevented and stopped at first, by a timely Riddance
of the Cat out of the way. A Course which had been no less necessary for the
Common Security, than that applauded Custom, yet of frequent use, in times of
General Sickness and Contagion; when, among other means to divert the spreading
of the Infection, the People turn Executioners, and with their own Hands, fail
not to do Solemn Justice on all the Cats in the Town.

I may be thought perhaps, by some, to have introduced Brute Creatures upon the
Stage, designing and acting beyond their Powers and Capacities; and so to have
taken a Liberty, beyond even the Extravagance of Romances: For though they are
allowed to be such Pictures as show us things much bigger than the Life; and
that their Giants are much larger than those in any Age; their Horses fairer
than those bred in any Country; their Armor brighter than what is at any time
made in the Shops; and their Shipping fairer, than any the Universal World
affords: Yet notwithstanding, it may deserve a Question,

Whether their Brutes are so artificial and ingenious, so well bred and
accomplished, as to lay Plots and form Designs, or at least, to be so far
concerned in Man's witty way of Rebellion, as to enter into Cabals, or engage
in Associations and Clubs?

But then such as start these Scruples, may please to remember, that there are
Thoughtful Beasts, as well as there are Unthinking Men in the World; and that
the Odds is not so great betwixt the Plodding Carrier and his Pack horse; but
that it may come to a Question, which is the Carrier, and which the Beast? Such
Men as have the constant Charge and Attendance of Beasts, being indeed rather
Relics of Men, than Men themselves, as having no more Humanity left in them,
than what is sunk to a base Degeneracy, and runs so low, as it appears at Ebb:
whereas, on the contrary, such Creatures as arc preferred before the rest of
the Herd, to associate with man, as their Companion, or wait on him, as their
Master, to be Partners with him in his Labor, or to share with him in his
Sports, are, I know not how civillz'd and improved, to that Degree, as they
seem raised above the Common Pitch and Stature of Beasts; and rising very near
to the height of Man, who, in the Philosopher's Language, is no more than a
Sociable Creature. The Privilege of which Definition is by none denied to the
Dog and the Horse, as being upon every occasion, a part of his Train, and of a
piece with his Household and Family, and no less indeed than his ordinary Menial
Servants. And, for the Cat, besides its just Pretensions to the same Interests
with these, I shall more particularly add, that the ingenious Montaigne.
playing with his Cat, found it so good Company, and such pleasant
Entertainment, and agreeable Conversation, that he could not forbear
celebrating his purring Play-fellow to all Posterity; and purely, for Puss's
sake, to exalt all Brute Creatures to some degrees of Reason. An Opinion,
which, it may be, he the rather inclined to embrace, as thinking for Mankind to
damn all other Creatures whatever, as Irrational, at one Blow, was so hard a
Censure, as tasted somewhat of that severe and uncharitable Pride, which the
Ancient Greeks and Romans were accused of, when they thought fit to Reprobate
all the rest of Mankind, besides themselves, as Barbarous.

If it be true, as some have constantly affirmed, upon what grounds they best
know themselves, that all men whatever are found naturally to represent in
signature, some one Creature or other; I hope it will not appear so
unpardonable an Error, and so far removed from that Latitude which is allowed
to Fiction and Romance, to introduce Brute Creatures personating, and playing
the parts of men; since, at the same time, Nature it self, in our Composition,
has borrowed so many strokes and lineaments, as gives us no inconsiderable
Tincture and semblance of some or other of the Brutes. Nay, even that Erection
of Figure which is contended for as peculiar to Man, and, almost his sole
Discrimination from other Creatures, is not, it may be, altogether so natural
as is imagined, when we consider the many steps and Essays which Children make
at their first beginning to go, to march upon all four; insomuch as Nurses and
Leading-strings, and little Chariots, are all but little enough to reclaim and
rescue them from such a Motion, and which, crawling Age, of its own accord, at
length returns to, in spite of all the vain Endeavors and support of a stick.

For the Beasts I have made choice of for these Characters, I was not far to
seek for them: The Lion, Leopard, Cat-a-mountain, etc. being, though not
Natives of this Island, and born within the four Seas, yet Inhabitants within
the Precincts and Liberties of the Tower, and so seem to be naturalized, and,
in a, sort, Free of the City, which is the Scene where the Story is principally
laid. And then the Cat, in Right of Whittington's Puss, that was Lord Mayor of
London, may fairly pretend to no small Interest in the Charter and Freedom of
the City. To which, give me leave to add, that I thought the Cat no less fit to
sustain the Politic Character than the Fox, the very mention of which, is now,
in a manner, nauseous, since he is made to serve the turn so often in Aesop's
Fables, that he is worn all out as thread bare, as the Knight that is to get
the better of the Giant in Romances.

For the League between the Leopard and the Cat, and so between those shadowed
under their Names and Characters, it is not a little countenanced by those
Alliances which Nature has made between both these Creatures, in their Make,
manner of Hunting, and way of Defiance: The Leopard being marked in Head, Feet,
and Tail, like a Cat, is observed to spit as a Cat does, and, in fine, to jump
upon his Prey after the self-same manner.

There needs no great Force to bring so near Allies, as the Leopard, Cat, and
Cat-a-mountain, which the whole Faction engaged against the Lion, within the
Compass of an Association: Nature it self having proceeded a little way, and
made some steps toward it, in incorporating them already in some sort, into a
Tribe; these Creatures being all of them of Cat-kind, and differing at length,
from a Cat, no otherwise than a Kite does from an Eagle.

And, might it not be conveniently enough supposed, that such as already were
the Cat's Allies in Nature, might prove his Confederates and Accomplycies in
Design; and as they were Creatures of his kind, turn also Creatures of his
Faction, and accordingly (as great Bodies are moved by slender Springs) be
purely influenced, and perfectly managed by him, in a joint Conspiracy against
the King of Beasts; he being besides, as little Creatures ordinarily are, of a
nimbler Wit, and of a finer Sense, and having much a deeper Reach, than any of
the whole Gang besides. And though the Leopard is sometimes said to be the
Leader of the Faction aganist the Lion, yet is he at the same time also, called
the Cat's Foot, as being indeed no more than the Handle of the Cause, and a
Creature so purely passive, that though for Honor sake, he has the Name of
Leader of the Faction, yet in effect, is he led by the whole Faction round, by
Turns; wearing this empty Feather in his Cap, as the Fore-horse in the Team;
and though like him too, he seems to lead the Van, yet is he no less thrust on,
and pushed forwards by those in the Rear. If any yet stubbornly insist, that
the Leopard is a wild Creature, and wild Creatures use not to appear in Herds,
and therefore the Supposition of his affecting Cabals and Associations, and
Clubs, is no less than monstrous, and such as perfectly exceeds at once, all
Imagination and Belief.

To what has been already said, I shall add yet farther, that his very
Original and Generation are such, as gives Color of Countenance to such a
Supposition, inasmuch as he owes his Birth to an unclean Club of a Lion and
Panther, and so indeed, was purely begotten by an Association of two several
Tribes and Creatures. However, if I have yet made him amends, and done him as
much Right another way, by supposing him as ignorant, as lame, and as much a
Stranger to Business, as I found him, he being so errant a Property, that the
only use which has been made of him all along, has been no other, than the
showing this pretty Booby in all places, for a Sight, remaining yet,
notwithstanding a great Variety of Opportunities, a raw and unpracticed Novice,
and no more improved, with all the Assiduities and Application of the Cat, than
the Ass, in the Story, was edified, that went to hear Porphyrie's Lectures.

Neither ought it to seem strange, in the least, to hear of the Cat's going a
Caballing, and running to Clubs, and haunting Associations; for, it is no new
thing, for the Cat of the House, both on the Account of Catterwauling, and
other Scores, to gossip with his Comrades, and to have frequent Meetings with
the Cats in the Vicinage; so that this is no more in Conclusion, than Cat after
kind.

But, because the Cat is introduced as the Principal Actor in this Romance, and
upon whom, in a manner, the whole Affair turns and moves, and because also it
may appear somewhat new for the Cat to play the part of such a little
Politician as it is designed to represent; to obviate therefore such
Inconvenience, I shall present some Reasons, why he may not appear altogether
unworthy the Character assigned him, which shall be such as lie open to every
Consideration, and with these I shall shut up the whole Discourse.

It is a Creature of the greatest Thought and Reflection, and evermore so
intent upon its Sport and Prey, as its busy imagination figures to it self
Rats and Mice, wherever there are Chairs and Hangings, sharpening and
whetting its Claws perpetually against them, in Meditation and Conceit,
perhaps, of the next Rat it is to encounter.

It is a Creature so very Watchful and Wary, that it is seldom observed to be
overtaken, and when it is, is so dextrous and nimble in shiftings and
Tergiversations, that, as if it were all Feet, which way soever it happens to
be thrown, by a notable Felicity, it still falls upon all four; that as Pauso's
Horse, which, at first sight passed for the Picture of a Horse overthrown, but,
turned the other way, for that of a running Horse; so, when upon every Toss we
look to find this Creature laid flat on his back, he, quite contrary, deceives
our Expectation, and eludes the Fall at once, by lighting, unhurt, on his Feet.
So far is it exempt from those Mischances to which other Creatures are subject,
as it seems, in some degree, placed out of the Reach and Power of Destiny, and,
in a manner, to be enchanted, for which cause, the waggish Vulgar, somewhat not
unpleasantly, are wont to ascribe to it a little kind of Immortality, lasting
the length of Nine Lives. And not without reason, when we consider how often it
has been near the Point, and how narrowly still it has escaped, what a number
of Forfeitures of its own Life it has outlived, and what a variety of
Tragical Ends of others it has out-lasted, so as where other Creatures have
not failed ducly to go to pot, this has been ever sure to save his Bacon.

Once for all; It is a Creature of no very fair Reputation, and under somewhat
suspicious Circumstances, lying so far under the deep displeasure of some, that
nothing affords them matter of higher distaste, or can be more their peculiar
Aversion, or perfect abhorrence. A thing the more to be taken notice of,
because so peaceable is Nature, as she evermore very sparingly kindles these
kinds of Feuds and Antipathies; insomuch as in the whole number of Beasts, that
are not mere Vermin, or Venomous Creatures, there is hardly any one to be
named, with whom any part of Mankind is fallen out so implacably, and to that
degree, as to live in perpetual War and Enmity with all besides the Cat, and
which is to be treated as an Enemy to their Nature and Constitution, and to be
banished accordingly, at the greatest Distances, never to be seen so much as in
their Company, or to come within the reach of their Sight or Smell. Nor scapes
this Creature any better among the common sort of People, with whom it is
generally so ill in Esteem, as it is familiar and frequent for them to
reprobate all Cats for Witches; A great Indignity and severe Imputation for all
to suffer under without Exception; but such, it may be, as will stick more
easily on the Cat of the Romance, if we consider the Truth of that saying, that
Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft.

This, I hope, however will be granted for the Honor of this little, great
Incendiary, and, as no less than a due to his Catilineship, that the Exemplary
Virtue of Rebellion, in which he has happily excelled the most inimitable
Masters of his time, can never be celebrated in our Age, or recommended to
Posterity in a more advantageous and agreeable Style, than that Name it has so
long worthily enjoyed, of that lusty Puss, the GOOD OLD CAUSE.

FINIS.

