Gospel Truths SCRIPTURALLY ASSERTED IN ANSWER TO Joseph Hallett's Twenty Seven
QUERIES.

Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have Eternal Life, and they are
they which testify of me: and ye will not come to me that ye might have Life,
John 5. 39. 40. Come unto me all ye that Labor, and are heavy Laden, and I
will give you Rest; take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in Heart, and you shall find Rest unto your Souls, Matthew. 11. 28, 29. By
John Gannacliff and Joseph Not.

Printed, and Sold by T. Soul at the Crooked-Billet, in Holywell Lane, in
Shoreditch, 1692.

Gospel Truths Scripturally asserted, etc.
The PREFACE.
NOw by this the Reader may know, that we lately received twenty seven Queries,
with Josph Halletts Name to them, Preacher amongst the Presbyterians in Exon,
who in his Introduction, says, That these kind of People, commonly called
Quakers, are said to hold many pernicious and dangerous Doctrines, no way
agreeable to the Truth, as it is taught by Jesus. Now we shall answer thus, That
those that say these aforementioned things of us, cannot prove them, for they
are not true; for we hold nothing contrary to the Truth; for our Doctrine is
neither pernicious nor dangerous, but according to the holy Scriptures of
Truth, as it may farther appear in the Answers to the aforementioned Queries.
The Queriest seems not Ingenious nor Charitable in prejudicially pre-supposing
that doubtful, ambiguous, prevaricating, shuffling, absurd and cloudy
Expressions, or Answers may be given to his Questions, which becomes not one
pretending to Query for Information, but gives us occasion to question, Whether
he will ingeniously accept our plain and sincere Answers, though therein we are
truly Conscientious toward God.

Query 1 st. I would desire them to resolve me what the Light within is, of
which they talk and write so much; and that they would give me a plain
Description of it?

Answer. THis Light within, of which we talk and write so much, is Heavenly and
Divine; for it is the Light of Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior, as may be
proved by the holy Scriptures of Truth; for the Lord speaking by the Prophet
Isaiah, of Christ, says, I the Lord have called thee in Righteousness, and
will hold thine Hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the
People, for a Light of the Gentiles, Isa. 42. 6. And in Chap. 49. 6. the Lord
speaks by the same Prophet again of Christ; and says, I will also give thee
for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the Ends of
the Earth. And Simeon that Just and devout Man, took the Child Jesus up in his
Arms, and blessed God, and said, Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in
Peace, according to thy Word, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation which thou
have prepared before the face of all People, a Light to lighten the Gentiles,
and the Glory of thy People Israel, Luke 2. 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. And
Jesus Christ bears Testimony of himself, saying, I am the Light of the World,
he that follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of
Life, John 8. 12. And the Apostle John bears Testimony of Christ, and says, In
him was Life, and the Life was the Light of m^n, and the Light shines in
Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it not: There* was a Man sent from
God, whose Name was John, the same came for a Witness to bear Witness of the
Light, that all men through him might believe, (mark) he was not that Light,
(to wit John) but was sent to bear Witness of that Light* that was the true
Light which lights every man that comes into the World, John 1. 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9. And the Apostle Paul spoke of this Light, and said, God who commanded the
Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of
the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ: But we have this
Treasure in Earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7. Well then, This is the
Condemnation that Light is come into the World, and men love Darkness rather
than Light, because their Deeds are Evil, John 3. 19. And now indeed we may
say, we do greatly admire at the Ignorance of Joseph Hallett, concerning the
Light, seeing he is a pretended Minister of Christ: But let him pretend to what
he will, he appears to be a Minister of Antichrist, and of those that rebel
against the Light, and know not the Ways thereof, nor abide in the Paths
thereof, Job 24. 13.

Query 2. Do the Quakers believe that there are Three in One, or that there is
a Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and that these three are
but one God in Essence and Nature?

Answ. We do most certainly believe as it is recorded in the holy Scriptures of
Truth, That there are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one, 1 John 5. 7. And Jesus Christ our
Lord and Redeemer says, I and my Father are one, John 10. 30. And this we most
certainly believe.

Query 3. Whether they esteem the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to
be the written Word, Will or Mind of God, and to be the only Rule of Faith,
Worship and Manners? Or whether the Light within be a higher or superior Rule,
to which we must more especially attend in all matters of Doctrine, Worship and
Conversation.

Answ. We esteem the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to be given
by Divine Inspiration, to contain Words of God, and a True Declaration of the
Will and Mind of God, and of the Word and only Rule of Faith and Worship, etc.
and therefore the holy Spirit, divine Inspiration and Light, as preferred to,
and higher than the Scriptures or Writings. Anti-Query, 1. Where do the holy
Scriptures call themselves the written Word, Will or Mind of God? 2. How can
they be, or contain his Will or Mind which is essential to himself? 3. Where do
the holy Scriptures so call themselves the Only Rule of Faith, Worship and
Manners? 4. They who so hold, and cannot prove the aff^rmative by Scriptures,
is not their Faith greatly defective as to this great Article of their Faith,
namely in their believing that the Scriptures are the Only Rule of there Faith,
and yet cannot prove they are so by plain Scriptures. 5. What mean the Words
Only Rul^ of Faith? etc. Do they not either mean Only by way of Emmence, or
higher, or superior to all other, or only as the sole Rule exclusive of all
other? which to affirm of Scriptures, is to exclude the Spirit. 6. But if the
holy Spirit be included in the Only Rule of Faith, how can it be properly or
truly said of the Scriptures that they are the only Rule of Faith, and yet have
no Scripture that says they are so? Now this we do really believe, that the
Scriptures, the Old and New Testament, were written by the Holy Men of God, as
they were moved thereunto by the Holy Ghost: And we do believe whatsoever
things were written afore-time, were written for our Learning, that we through
Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15. 4. And we do
believe, That the Scriptures are able to make wise unto Salvation, through
Faith which is in Christ Jesus, (mark) through Faith which is in Christ Jesus:
And in this the Scripture is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. Now
here we may see, that it is through Faith in Christ Jesus that the Scriptures
are profitable unto us: But we do not remember that the Scriptures in any place
do say they are the Written Word, Will and Mind of God, or the Only Rule of
Faith, Worship and Manners; and therefore we do desire Joseph Hallett, or any
other man, to prove it by Scripture if they can. But this we do find, that
Jesus Christ is called the Word of God in several places in the holy
Scriptures; for John says, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God, the same was in the beginning with God, all
things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made,
John 1. 1, 2, 3.

Now here it is plain that the Apostle called Christ the Word of God: for it
cannot be reasonably supposed or said, that the Scriptures were in the
beginning with God, or that the Scripture was God, or that all things were made
by them; for what we understand, Moses did write the first five Books, which
was many hundred Years after the beginning: So that it is plain, that Christ is
the Word of God, by whom the Worlds were framed, Heb. 11. 3. So now we would
not have any to be ignorant of this, That by the Word of God the Heavens were
of Old, and the Earth standing out of the Water, and in the Water, 2 Pet. 3. 5.
And John has written in the Revelations of this Word of God; for he says, I
saw Heaven opened, and behold a White Horse, and he that sat upon him was
called Faithful and True, and in Righteousness he does Judge and make War; his
Eyes were as a Flame of Fire, and on his Head were many Crowns, and he had a
Name written that no man knew, but he himself; and he was clothed with a
Vesture d^pt in Blood, and his Name is called the Word of God, Rev. 19. 11, 12,
13. And this is The Word of God which is quick and powerful, and sharper than
any two edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing assunder of Soul and Spirit,
and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of
the Heart, Heb. 4. 12. Now this Word of God is nigh unto People, even in the
Mouth and in the Heart, Romans 10. 8. And this Word of God (to wit Christ Jesus)
does declare the Mind and Will of God, and is the only Rule of Faith, Worship
and Manners: For if we say that these aforementioned things, are things of
God, then the Apostle says, The things of God knows no man, but the Spirit
of God. And he farther says, Now we have received not the Spirit of the World,
but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely
given to us of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11, 12. Now if any would know the Will and Mind
of God, they must turn in their Minds unto the gift of God's Spirit in their
own Hearts; For that which may be known of God, is manifest in them, for God
has showed unto them, Romans 1. 19. And again, the Apostle says, It is God that
works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. Now
concerning Faith, Christ says, When the Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith
on Earth? Luke 18. 8 Now it is written that Faith comes by hearing, and
heari^g by the Word of God, Romans 10. 17. Christ is the Word of God, and he is
the Author and Finisher of our Faith, it is undeniable; for the Apostle says,
Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12. 2. And
concerning Worship, Christ says, The Hour comes, and now is, when the true
Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father
seeks such to worship him: And he further says, God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him must worship him in Spirit and in Truth, John 4. 23, 24. We
desire the Reader to take notice of this, for it is a weighty thing to be a
Worshipper of God, and it must be performed by the assistance of God's Spirit;
for Christ says in plain words, Without me ye can do nothing, John 15. 5. And
the Apostle Paul says, As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
Sons of God, Romans 8. 14. And we say, if Sons, then true Worshippers. The
Apostles were come unto the Spiritual Worship; for the Apostle Paul says, We
are the Circumcision which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the Flesh, Phil. 3. 3. Now concerning Manners,
we find it thus written, that Evil Communications corrupt good Manners, 1 Cor.
15. 33. Therefore if any be willing to know good Manners, then let them take
the Apostle's advice in the next Verse, where he says, Awake to Righteousness,
and sin not: Now it is the holy Ghost that teaches People Good Manners; for
Christ says, He shall teach them all things, and bring all things to your
Remembrance, John 14. 26.

And now concerning the Light within, it does manifest unto the Sons and
Daughters of men their States and Conditions, and by it Thoughts, Words and
Actions are tried; and by the Light of Jesus we come to understand these things
which are written in the holy Scriptures of Truth; and therefore it is a higher
and superior Rule, unto which we ought more especially to attend, it being
according to Scripture; for Christ says, While ye have the Light, believe in
the Light, that ye may be the Children of the Light; These things spoke Jesus,
John 12. 36. And it is written, That every one that does Evil, hates the
Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved: But he
that does Truth, comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest that
they are wrought in God, John 3. 20, 21. (Mark) it is the Light that
discovers and makes manifest, as it is walked in, it is an undeniable Truth;
for it is evidently set forth by the Apostle Paul, for he says, All things
that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light; for whatsoever does make
manifest is Light, Ephesians. 5. 13.

And observe John's Testimony of the Light, and the Privilege that does attend
those that walk therein: for he says, God is Light, and in him is no Darkness
at all: If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we
Lie, and do not the Truth; but if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light,
we have fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7. Well then, the Nations of them
which are saved, shall walk in the Light, Rev. 21. 24. And the Lord sent the
Apostle Paul to turn People from Darkness to Light, Acts 26. 18. But what have
the Watchmen of the Night, the Merchants of Babylon been a doing these many
Years? Why, they have labored to keep People from the Light, and Woe and Misery
will be their Portion, if they Repent not.

Qu. 4. Whether they believe any such thing as Original Sin? that is, Whether
every Man is a Sinner, and defilled from his very Birth? Or whether Children,
when born into the World, have their Natures depraved and corrupted by Sin.

Answ. If by Original Sin, be meant the first Sin of Adam, there was such a
Sin: But all have not sinned after that similitude, nor is every Man or Child a
Sinner depraved and corrupted by Sin from his Natural Birth. The Prophet
Ezekiel says, This Proverb shall no more be used in Israel, The Fathers have
eaten sower Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth are set on edge: Behold, says the
Lord, all Souls are mine, both the Soul of the Father and the Soul of the Son
are mine; the Soul that sins it shall dye, Ezekiel. 18. 2, 3, 4, 5. Jer. 31.
29, 30. Shall we ascribe the Wages of Sin to those that never sinned? Christ
said, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such
is the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 19. 13, 14. Mark 10. 13, 14. And Christ says,
Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child, shall not
enter therein. Some were said to be sanctified from the Womb, as John the
Baptist; the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 1. 5. Before I formed thee in the Womb I
knew thee; and before thou came out of the Womb I sanctified thee, and
ordained thee to be a Prophet unto the Nations. But as to the General estate of
Mankind, the Apostle has made known what man is by Nature, dead in Sins and
Trespasses, and how man is saved, 2 Ephesians. You has he quickened, who were dead
in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. And you who were dead in Sins and the
Uncircumcision of your Flesh has he Quickened together with him, Forgiving you
all your Trespasses, 2 Ephesians. 5. When we were dead by Sins, has he quickened
us together in Christ, by whose Grace we are saved, 2 These. 2. 13. But we ought
to give Thanks always for you Brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has
from the beginning chosen you to Salvation through Sanctification of the Spirit
and Belief of the Truth.

Qu. 5. Whether the Soul or Spirit of a Man is Immortal? Whether it will never
dye? Or Whether the Soul lives whilst the Body lies rotting in the Grave?

Answ. Yea, Immortal, never Dies, but ever Lives, which are all one; The
Querist might have spared such impertinant Reitterations. Yea, we believe, and
that really as the Body goes to Dust, so the Spirit returns to God that gave
it; for if in this Life we have hope only, we are of all Men most Miserable.

Qu. 6. Whether the Bodies of the Saints shall be raised again, by the Power of
God, out of their Graves at the last day?

Answ. Yea, Spiritual, we believe according to Scripture the Resurrection of
Just and Unjust; and that each shall receive a reward according to things done
in the Body; The Righteous unto Everlasting Life, and the Wicked unto
Everlasting Condemnation. Well, but now we may say as the Apostle Paul said,
Awake to Righteousness and Sin not: But yet some one may say. How are the Dead
Raised up, and with what Bodies do they come? Thou Fool, that which thou sowest
is not Quic^ened except it Dye, and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not
that Body that shall be; But God gives it a Body as it has pleased him, and
to every seed his own Body. There are Celestial Bodies, and Bodies Terrestial;
but the Glory of the Celestial is one, and the Glory of the Terrestial is
another: There is a Natural Body, and there is a Spiritual Body; And as ^ne
have born the Image of the Earthly, we shall also bear the Image of the
Heavenly; but this I say, Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God,
neither does Corruption Inherit Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38,
40, 44, 45, 50.

Qu. 7. Whether Christ that suffered without the Walls of Jerusalem, was true
God, and also true Man? I demand a full direct Answer to this Question, and
pray let there be no Equivocation or shiftings here?

Answ. Yea, Christ was true God, and true Man, though it was as Man that he
suffers, for the Divinity and Manhood of Christ; see Matthew. 1. 23. John 1. 1,
2, 3, 4. Prove. 8. 22, 23, 24. to the en^. Psalm. 33. 6. Coll. 1. 16, 1^* Ephesians. 3.
9. Heb. 1. 2. Romans 9. 5. Rev. 3 14. 1 John 5. 20. Psalm. 45. 6, 7. Heb. 1. 9.
Isa. 9* 6. 7. Chap. 32. 2. John 10. 29* and Chap. 14. 28. Romans 1. 3, 4. 1 Cor.
15. Chap. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 45, 47. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Gal. 3. 20. Heb. 8. 6. chap.
9. 15. chap. 12. 24. And if the Querist will not believe us, but think we
Equivocate, let him ask us no more Questions until he be more charitable.

Qu. 8. Whether Christ by his Holy Life, and painful Death, Satisfied the
Justice of God that was offended by the Sin of Man, and thereby merited Pardon
of Sin, and all other Mercies and Blessings for us?

Answ. This Query appears not consistant in the matters employed between
satisfying offended Justice and Pardon of Sin, or between a Strict payment and
a forgiveness of the Debt; Yet no doubt God was well pleased, and so satisfied
in his Dear Son Christ (being the Son of his Love) both in his Life, Suffering
and Death, and all the Worth, Merit, Desert and Dignity thereof, and truly
ascribed unto Christ in Holy Scriptures for the universal good of Mankind, we
must needs own and highly esteem, yet not as intended to acquit the Guilty* nor
to indemnifie, Pardon, or Justify Persons in their Sins, or without Faith in
his Name, true repentance and Conversion; But that they may come under these
conditions, and receive Pardon thereupon. Antiquery, 1. How did Christ satisfy
the offended Justice of the Father? 2. Did he undergo vindicative Justice in
the Offenders stead? 3. Did he pay all the debt in Man's stead? 4. And was it
for all Mankind, or for some only? 5. Or did he not rather appease, stay and
suspend the Execution of Divine Vengeance and Wrath, and manifest God's
forbearance in order to reconcile Mankind, and obtain Redemption for all. 6.
And did not Christ dye for all Men, tasted Death for every Man?

Qu. 9. Whether Christ has not a Body in Heaven now? And whether he continues
not to be a Man as well as God still?

Answ. Yea, to both; we do believe that Christ has a Body, and that he is in
Heaven, and that he continues to be the Heavenly Man, as well as God still,
Glorified with the same Glory that he had with the Father before the World was,
according as he Prayed; John 17. 5.

Qu. 10. Whether Christ does not now Intercede with the Father for Holy Souls
in Heaven* And if so, what this Intercession is?

Answ. This Query appears Unlearned, and Unscriptural; where does the Scripture
say, that Christ does now Intercede for Holy Souls in Heaven, and for what end?
Though he be in Heaven Intercessor and Mediator for Mankind or Souls on Earth.
Now this we do believe that there is one Mediator between God and Man; the Man
Christ Jesus; for the Apostle speaking concerning Christ, says, He is able to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him seeing he ever Lives to
make Intercession for them, Heb. 7. 25. Christ does not only make Intercession
for Sinners, that their Sins may be forgiven them, but for them also that are
delivered from Sin, that they may be preserved out of Sin, and that they may be
where he is, as is evident from Christ's Words, for he says, I pray not that
thou should^st take them out of the World; but that thou should keep them
from the evil. And he farther says, Father, I will that they also whom thou
have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory, which thou
have given me, John 17. 15. 24. And this is the Intercession which Christ makes
for his People, which is according to the Will of God.

Qu. 11. Whether Christ will not at the last Day, at the Dissolution of the
World, come to Judge the whole World appearing in his Manhood, pronouncing the
Wicked Accursed, and the Holy Blessed?

Answ. The Lord Jesus Christ will Judge the World in Righteousness, and reward
every Man according to his Works, the Wicked Accursed, the Righteous Blessed,
Acts 10. 42. He commanded us, to wit Christ, to testify that it was He that
was Ordained of God to be Judge both of Quick and Dead, because he has
appointed a Day in which he will Judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man
of which he has given Assurance to all Men, in that he has raised him from
the Dead. See Acts the 17. and 31. And we have this Assurance, and do believe,
that at the last Day, the Man Christ shall come in his Glory to Judge all
People, according to his own Testimony; for he says, When the Son of Man shall
come in his Glory, and all the holy Angels with him, Then shall he set upon the
Throne of his Glory, and before him shall be Gathered all Nations, and he shall
Separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the
Goats, and he shall set the Sheep on his Right hand, but the Goats on the
Left: Then shall the King say unto them on his Right Hand; Come ye Blessed of
my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the
World. And then shall he say also unto them on the Left Hand, Depart from me ye
Cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25.
31, 32, 33, 34, 41.

Qu. 12. Whether the Rule according to which the Judge will proceed in Judging
of Persons at that Day, will be the Light within, or the Gospel of Christ?

Answ. This Query is unlearned, and unscriptural; the Gospel of Christ and his
Light within, are inseparable and not divided; According to which Gospel and
Light he will Judge the Secrets of Men, yea, the whole World in Righteousness.
The Gospel of Christ thou seem to be Ignorant of, who art Ignorant of the
Light and Spirit, of which Paul said he was made an able Minister, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit, which gives Life; And the Gospel is the Power of God
to Salvation, and Life and Immortality is brought to Light by the Gospel, and
we who have received it can Bles* the Lord for it. And Christ says, This is
the Condemnation of the World, that Light is come into the World, But Men Love
Darkness rather then Light, because their deeds are Evil.

Qu. 13. Whether now in the times of the Gospel, there ought not to be a
Mininistry? that is, whether some particular Persons, ought not to be appointed
and set apart solemnly for the Preaching of the Gospel, and the Administration
of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper? And whether such Ministers ought not to
have an Allowed Maintenance from the People?

Ans. Here are several Questions in cluded in this Query. To the first, Yea,
there is, and Ought to be a Gospel Ministry in this Gospel-Day* 2. Such
Ministry as is appointed and called by Christ. 3. To Preach the Gospel. 4. Such
a Ministry may be without having a Commission to Baptize with Water any more
then Paul had. 5. Not Commissionated to Administer the Lords Supper in the Sign
and Figure, but to turn People to Christ Jesus, that he may Administer it in
the Substance, that is the Bread of Life, and Cup of Blessing at his Table in
his Kingdom, which is the Substance. 6. Such Ministers Preach the Gospel
freely, not for either set or forced Maintenance, and yet to have their
necessities freely relieved (when in Want.) Ministers of Christ we own, that
Turn People from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to the Power of God,
which is the Gospel, and none can preach the Doctrine of Faith, Grace,
Conversion and Spirit, truly, without the Light of Christ, which shines in the
Heart, and gives the knowledge of them; and the true Ministers and Gospel they
received, was not of man, nor by man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ;
They received it freely, and preached it freely: We do not read that they
agreed with any People for a settle'd Maintenance, as is now practiced; and
they were careful not to make the Gospel chargeable to any, and wrought with
their Hands many times to avoid it, a thing you were never brought up unto;
neither did they make a Merchandise of the Word, as many of you do of their
Words. So you may see what Ministers such are, who are seeking their Gain from
their Quarter.

Qu. 14. Whether it be lawful now in these Gospel Times for Women to Speak or
Preach in public Assemblies, for the public Instruction of others?

Answ. Yea, for Women divinely Inspired, when called thereunto; and we do
believe that it is as Lawful now for Women to Preach, as it was in former Ages:
there were Prophetesses both in the time of the Law and Prophets, and in the
Apostles days; for there was Miriam the Prophetess, the Sister of Aaron, Exodus
15. 20. And there was Deborah, a Prophetess, the Wife of Lapidoth, she judged
Israel, Judge. 4. 4. And the good King Josiah sent unto Huldah the Prophetess,
the Wife of Shalum, to inquire of the Lord for him and the People, 2, Kings 22.
13, 14. And there was the Prophetess Noadiah, Nehem. 6. 14. And the Lord spoke
by his Prophet Joel, and said, I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and
your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy, Joel 2. 28. (Mark) Sons and
Daughters shall prophecy: And in Christ's Days there was one Ama a Prophetess,
Luk 2. 36. And the Woman of Samaria was a public Preacher; for when she had
received some understanding of Christ, she went her way into the Ci^y, and
says unto the Men, Come see a Man which told me all things that ever I did* is
not this the Christ? Then they went out of the City, and came (...) Job ^4. 28,
30. Now observe, this Woman labored to bring People unto Christ* and many
believed her Testimony, and came unto him. And now we may say, that the Work of
the Gospel Ministers is to bring People unto Christ, And again, we may see that
Jesus Christ was pleased to make use of a Woman, Mary Magdalen, first to preach
his Resurrection; for he said unto her, Go to my Brethren, and say unto them, I
ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God. And Mary
Magdalen went and told the Disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he
had spoken these things unto her, John 20. 17, 18. (Mark) Christ sent this
Woman to declare these things unto his Disciples; and the Apostle Paul was so
far from denying Women's Praying or Prophesying, that he signifies how they
ought to Pray or Prophecy; for he says, Every Woman that Prays or
Prophesies with her Head uncovered, dishonors her Head, 1 Cor. 11. 15. And
Philip had four Daughters, Virgins, which did Prophecy, Acts 21. 8, 9. And the
Apostle writing to the Phillipians, says, I entreat thee also, true
Yoke Fellow, help those Women which labored with me in the Gospel, Phil. 4. 3.
(Mark) those Women labored with him in the Gospel. But now if any should say,
that Prophesying is not Preaching, we shall answer thus, That the Testimony of
Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy, Rev. 19. 10.

Qu. 15. What Warrant the People called Quakers have in the Scriptures for
their Silent Meetings?

Answ. The same they have for waiting on God until endued with Power from on
High, and until required of him to Speak or Preach; and in the mean time to be
silent at the presence of God. Yet we limit not our Meetings beforehand to
Silence, or Preaching, but submit them to what God shall require. We do greatly
admire the Ignorance of many People, professing themselves Christians, and
Ministers of Christ; for the Prophecy of the Prophet it is on this wise, All
thy Children shall be Taught of the Lord, and great shall be the Peace of thy
Children, Isa 54. 13. And again it is said, I am the Lord thy God which
teaches thee to profit, Chap. 48. 17. And the Prophet farther said, Yet shall
not thy Teacher be removed into a Corner any more, but thine Eyes shall see thy
Teacher, and thine Ears shall hear a Word behind thee, saying, This is the Way,
walk ye in it, when ye turn to the Right Hand, and when ye turn to the Left,
Chap. 30. 20, 21. And now we do desire all People to consider, how it is that
the Lord does teach his People himself, if not by his Spirit? And if by his
Spirit, then where? And how must People be taught by him, if not in the secret
of their own Hearts, and in the stillness and quietness of their Minds? for
David says, Wait on the Lord, be of good Courage, and he shall strengthen
thine Heart, Psalm. 27. 14. And again he says, Rest in the Lord, and wait
patiently for him, Chap. 37. 7. And the Wise man says, Wait on the Lord, and
he shall save thee, Prove. 20. 22. And Isaiah says, That they that wait upon
the Lord, shall renew their strength: they shall mount up with Wings as Eagles,
they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint, Isa. 40.
31. And many other places might be Instanced. And now how must People wait upon
the Lord, if not in Silence? for Solomon says, That there is a Time to keep
Silent, and a Time to Speak, Eccles. 3. 7. Now it were well if all did know
this time to keep silent, and so wait upon the Lord in Silence, for the Lord
speaking by the Prophet Isaiah, says, Keep Silence before me, O Islands, and
let the People Renew their Strength, Isa: 41. 1. And again it is written, The
Lord is in his holy Temple, let all the Earth keep Silence before him, Hab. 2.
20. And it is farther written, Be Silent, O all Flesh, be fore the Lord; for he
is raised up out of his Holy Habitation, Zach. 2. 13. So now all Flesh ought to
keep Silent before the Lord, and wait upon him for the Teaching of his holy
Spirit in their own Hearts, that so they may come to know God, and his Mind and
Will; for we live in the New Covenant Dispensation spoken of in Jer. 31. 31,
32, 33, 34. Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10, 11. where the Lord says, They shall teach no
more every man his Neighbor* and every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord;
for they shall all know me from the least of them unto the greatest of them,
says the Lord. And now we say, it is good for all to be inwardly gathered, and
wait in Silence for the Teachings of the Lord, for there his Appearance is,
according to the Apostle's Testimony; for he says, That which may be known of
God, is manifest within, Romans 1. 19. And the same Apostle says, That the Grace
of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us that
denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lust, we should live Soberly, Righteously, and
Godly in this present World, Tit. 2. 11, 12. (Mark) the Grace of God was the
Apostle's Teacher: And now forasmuch as that Grace that brings Salvation,
has appeared to all men, we would have all to mind the Teachings of it. And
the Apostle John says, The Anointing which ye have received of him, abides in
you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches
you of all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie, 1 John 2. 27. (Mark) John says
that the Anointing abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you. Well
then, as People meet together in true Silence, in the stillness and quietness
of there Minds to wait upon the Lord, although there may be no Words spoken as
outwardly, yet there is a sufficient Teacher near unto them, to teach them the
Way of the Lord, that so they may find Peace and Acceptance with him; Glory be
to God for evermore; Amen.

Qu. 16. Whether it be lawful now in these Gospel times, for the Civil
Magistrates to punish Offenders by the Sword?

Answ. We do believe that it is lawful in these Gospel times, for the Civil
Magistrate to punish Evildoers whith the Sword of Justice; for the Law was
added because of Transgressions* and this is according to the Apostle's
Testimony, for he says, If thou do that which is Evil, be afraid, for he
bears not the Sword in vain, Romans 13. 4. And we do believe, that while
Wickedness does remain, that there will be need of the Civil Magistrate and
Outward Law for to keep People from abusing of one another.

Qu. 17. Whether the waging of Wars may, on any Account, be Lawful?

Answ. Yea, on a Spiritual Account: Not otherwise, unless as a fore Judgment
from God. Antiquery, 1. Is it lawful for Christ's Ministers to Preach up Wars,
Fighting and Bloodshed now in the Gospel day? 2. Is it suitable for Christ's
Lambs and Ministers, whose Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual? 3. Is it
agreeable to Christ's Ministry, Kingdom and Coming, which was not to destroy,
but save men's Lives? 4. Does not Christ's coming and Kingdom put an End to
Wars? The Apostle James tells us, Wars and Contentions arise from men's Lusts.
Paul saying, The Weapons of our Warfare are not not Carnal, but Spiritual, and
mighty through God to the pulling down the strong Holds of Sin, 2 Cor. 10. 4.
bringing down every high Thought and Imagination that is exalted against the
knowledge of God.

Qu. 18. Whether daily Family Prayer be not a Duty?

Answ. We are exhorted to Pray always, with all manner of Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit: And it is also said, I will therefore that men Pray
every where, lifting up Holy Hands without wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2. 8. But
the long Prayers of the Pharisees were not accepted of the Lord, whose Hands
and Hearts were not Holy; but they were Envious against Christ, and doubting
whether he was the Christ or not, as thou seem to be at this day, what the
Light is which comes from him, with which every man is lightened that comes into
the World; but Praying with the Spirit and with Understanding we own, 1 Cor.
13. 15. Jude verse. 20. But ye beloved, edify your selves in your most holy
Faith, Praying in the Holy Ghost, this is acceptable to the Lord, Jam. 5. 16.
The Prayer of the Righteous Man avails much, if it be fervent. And as it is
Men and Women's duty to love and serve the Lord their God, so it is their Duties
also, if they have any Children, to watch over them for their good, and to be
good Examples of Piety unto them, and to keep them out of the Vain Customs and
Fashions, Words and Actions, Pride and Foolish Talking that is in the World.
And indeed the Wise man's Counsel ought to be taken here, for he says, Train
up a Child in the Way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from
it, Prove. 22. 26. And they that have Servants, ought to watch over them for
Good, and to Advise them to that which is Good. And thus is the true daily
Family-Duty performed.

Qu. 19. Whether Water Baptism ought not to be Practiced, and Administered new
as well as of Old?

Answ. No; because their appears not the same or the like Call from Heaven for
it, as John had. Antiquery, 1. Whom does the Queriest intend as the subjects of
Water Baptism in ^nfants or Believers? 2. if Infants, by what Scripture? If
Believers, how proves he his Commission from Heaven? Produce us one Scripture
which warrants your Practice to be as of Old, that is the sprinking Water on a
Child's Face, and calling it an Ordinance of Christ, and that by which the
Child is Regenerated and Born again: Prove this to us by Scripture. If Joseph
Hallett intends by his Baptism the Sprinkling of Infants, as I believe he does,
because he is such a one as uses it; Then we say, that they that practice it,
has neither Command nor Example for it, from Christ nor his Apostles; for
there is not one Text of Scripture to prove that Christ Commanded it, or that
his Apostles practiced it; and therefore it is but an old Popish Ceremony. But
as for John's Baptism, it was unto Repentance, and he baptized such as were
capable of Repenting, and of confessing their Sins; for he begins his Dnctrine
on this wise, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. And it is said,
Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region-round about
Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their Sins; But when he
saw many of the Pharisees and Saduces come to his Baptism, he calls them
Generation of Vipers; and he bids them bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance.
And he further says, I indeed baptize you with Water unto Repentance, but he
that comes after me, is mightier than I, whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear,
he shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, whose Fan is in his
Hand, and he will thoroughly purge his Floor, and gather his Wheat into the
Garner; but he will burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire. Then comes Jesus
unto John to be baptized of him, but John forbid him, saying, I have need to be
baptized of thee, Matthew. 3. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14. (Mark) John said
unto Christ, I have need to be Baptized of thee. And now this is certain, that
every Man and Woman have need to be Baptized of Christ, and with his Baptism,
which is with the holy Ghost and with Fire; for he thoroughly purges his Floor,
he thoroughly purges the Souls of Men and Women from Sin, fits them for God's
Kingdom: And this is the one Baptism which the Apostle Paul spoke of, Ephesians. 4.
5. the which is necessary unto Salvation; and without this Baptism people
cannot be saved, nor yet enter God's Kingdom; for there is nothing that is
unclean shall enter Gods Kingdom; for it is written, That he that believes and
is baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. And this is the Baptism that the
Apostle Peter spoke of, when he said, Baptism does now save us, not the putting
away of the Filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a Good Conscience toward
God, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Now as there is but One Lord unto us, nor yet but one Faith
that is saving; so there is but one Baptism that is necessary unto Salvation;
for John he was a forerunner of Christ, and he bore Testimony of him, that so
people might believe in him, to wit Christ: for John said, I am the Voice of
one crying in the Wilderness, make straight the Way of the Lord, John 1. 23.
And John speaking of Jesus Christ, further said, He must increase, but I must
decrease, Chap. 3. 30. And Christ speaking unto his Disciples, said, John truly
baptized with Water, but ye shall be Baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days
hence, Acts 1. 5. And we do believe that this Baptism is alone needful unto
Salvation, to wit, the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, seeing the Baptism is but one
that is necessary, as is proved before: And this is the Baptism that the
Apostle Paul spoke of, when he said, By one Spirit are we all Baptized in to
one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. (Mark) Christ said, Ye shall be Baptized with the Holy
Ghost. And the Apostle Paul said, By one Spirit are we all Baptized. Now this
was no Water Baptism, for it was done by the Spirit of God, and not with Water
by Man. And the Apostle further said, As many of you as have been Baptized unto
Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. Now they that have put on Christ, are
in Christ; And if any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. And
now that which we do desire of People every where, is that they will turn in
their minds unto the gift of Gods Spirit in their own Hearts, and wait to be
made a new by it.

Qu. 20. Whether the Lord's Supper, as to its Administration and Participation,
be not a Duty still incumbent upon Christians in these Days? that is, whether
Persons ought not to take Real Bread and eat it, and Real Wine and drink it, in
Remembrance of the Death of Christ Jesus?

Answ. Not incumbent in the Type or Figure, but in the Substance or Antitype.
Antiquery, 1. Where proves the Queriest that the Lord's Supper in this
Gospel-day, consists of eating outward Bread, or drinking outward Wine? 2. What
was really the Lords Supper in the Figure, and what in the Substance or
Mystery? 3. Were not the outward Bread and Cup typical or figurative of the
Spiritual Meat and Drink? 4. What Commemoration of him or his Death by outward
Sign is comparable to his own inward Spiritual coming and appearance? See the
first Epistle of John, Chap* 5. 20 But we know that the Son of God is come, and
has given us an Understanding to know him that is true; and we are in him that
is true: This is the true God and Eternal Life, and we are Witnesses of his
Second coming without Sin unto Salvation; and we eat his Flesh and drink his
Blood, by which we have Life. John 6. 56, 57 As the living Father has sent me,
and I live by the Father, so he that eats me, shall live by me. But the Jews
it is said strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give us his Flesh
to eat? The Apostle Paul tells us, There were them that did eat and drink
unworthily, not discerning the Lord's Body; and what that Body was some did
eat? Must not the Lord's Body be discerned by true Believers? Rev. 3. 20.
Christ says, Behold I stand at the Door and knock, if any one hear my Voice,
and open the Door, I will come in to him and Sup with him, and he with me: And
this Supper is not outward. And the Lord said by his Prophet, He would make
unto all People in his holy Mountain a Feast of fat things. And the Apostle
Paul says in Cor. 10. 14, 15, 16, 17. Wherefore my dearly Beloved, flee from
Idolatry, I speak as to Wise men, judge ye what I say; The Cup of Blessing
which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which
we break is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we being many, are
one Bread and one Body: For we are partakers of that one Bread; and the Bread*
of God is he that comes down from Heaven, and gives Life to the World. This was
the Saints Food in all Ages But of this Spiritual Food and Communion thou art
ignorant, who art ignorant of the Light, in which the Saints fellowship was and
is; and such as walk in it, have and do know the Blood of Christ cleansing them
from all Sin; so that the Substance being witnessed, to such here is no need of
outward Signs to put them in Remembrance; and this the Apostle Paul labored to
know, the Power of his Death and the Virtue of his Resurrection.

Qu. 21. Whether any of the Sons or Daughters of Adam are able to attain to a
Sinless Perfection in this Life?

Answ. Yea, by the Power of Christ, and not of themselves: The Work of the
Ministry is for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. And
although we say, as the Scriptures testify, It is attainable; yet not without
great Diligence and Watchfulness to the Power of God. And the Apostle Peter, 1
Pet. 1. 3, 4* writing to the Saints, says, Blessed be God, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant Mercy, has begotten us
again unto a lively hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, to
an Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved
in Heaven for you who are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto
Salvation, which is prepared to be showed in the last Times. The Power of God
is greater to keep out of Sin, then the power of Satan to lead into Sin: So
said Christ, Greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the World. But
this Perfection spoken of, admits of degrees and a growth; as a Child when
born, if complete in all its Parts and Members, is said to be a perfect Child;
so it is in the new Birth, he that is born of the Spirit, and lives up to the
Manifestations of it, may be said to be perfect in kind; and yet there may be a
growth still. John writes to Little Children, whose Sins were forgiven them for
his Names sake; as also he writes to Young Men, because they had overcome the
Wicked One; and to Fathers, because they had know him that was from the
beginning. And the Apostle preached Wisdom among them that are perfect: but not
the Wisdom of this World which denies it: But God, Christ and the Apostles
exhort unto it. Job was said to be a perfect man: And Paul was crucified to the
World, and the World to him, and Christ lived in him; And the Life, says he, I
now live, is by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for
me: And he had faught a good Fight, finished his Course, and kept the Faith;
Henceforth there is laid up for me, said he, a Crown of Righteousness.

Qu. 22. Whether the Quakers expect to be saved with a Christ within them, or a
Christ without them?

Answ. This is an Unlearned and Unscriptural Question. They profess not two
Christ's, but the one very Christ of God within them and without them, according
to holy Scriptures. That Christ we expect Salvation by, is both within and
without, as has been sufficiently expressed, how he suffered for Sin, the Just
for the Unjust, and he died and rose again* that he might be Lord of quick and
dead, and that those that live, might not live unto themselve, but unto him
that died for them, and rose again for their Justification. And it is Christ
that died, or rather that is risen again, and because he lives we live also;
And God has chosen us to Salvation through Sanctification of the Spirit and
belief of the Truth, 2 These. 2. 13. And is not this Work to be known within of
the Spirit and Faith of Christ; read Romans 10 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. But thou do not
seem to love to hear of Christ and his Light within, which Paul preached, and
said, Know you not that Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates: This was
the Mystery hid from Ages and Generations, Christ within the Hope of Glory.

Qu. 23. Whether the way of serving of God that the Quakers use, be the Way to
Heaven? And if it be the Way, whether it be the only Way?

Answ. The Way we profess and own is the Way to Heaven, which is Christ, the
Way, the Truth and the Life, in whom our acceptance is; Neither is there
Salvation by any other Name; And the Worship which he set up, we practice,
which is in Spirit and Truth; and that this is the right Way and the true
Worship, yea, the only way to Heaven, we have great assurance, the Lord
manifesting his presence in the midst of us, which is his Seal of approbation;
and we have known, and do know an Overcoming and Victory over the World by our
Faith, which stands in the Power of God, which Paul exhorted the Believers
unto, that their Faith might not stand in the Wisdom of Words, but in the Power
of God; and God is the Author and Finisher of our Faith, and the Day of God's
Power is known, which has made us a willing People; and for the Word of our
Testimony we have not, neither do we love our Lives to the Death; but far be it
from us to limit the Holy One, for in every Nation he that fears God and works
Righteousness is accepted of him. But can a man be said truly to fear God and
work Righteousness without having regard to this inward Law, by which the
Gentiles are said to have attained to the Righteousness which is of Faith; and
they doing the things contained in the Law, showed the Effect of the Law
written in their Hearts, their Consciences also bearing Witness, and their
Thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another? At the Day,
says Paul, when God shall Judge the Secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to
the Gospel, Romans 2. 15, 16. This was the Gospel (that great Apostle to the
Gentiles preached) the Law in the Heart, the New Covenant, Jer. 31. 32. Heb. 8.
9, 10. This is the Covenant I will make with the House of Israel after those
days, I will put my Laws into their Minds, and in their Hearts will I write
them, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People; and they
shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying,
Know the Lord, for all shall know me from the least to the greatest. So that we
believe as the Scripture testifies, God has been always good to such as are of
an Upright Heart, though under various Professions and Ministrations and of
this some have had experience before the Way of Truth was clearly made known to
us, as has been since made manifest through the refreshment from the presence
of the Father. And our desire is for thee, and for all Men, that you would
receive him (that is) Christ in his Light with which he has lightened you and
all men, and thereby you will receive Power to become the Sons of God: And take
heed of grieving the good Spirit of God, as the Apostle Exhorts, Grieve not the
Holy Spirit of God whereby you are sealed unto the Day of Redemption. And this
I say farther take heed of Opposing this Work, for it is of God, and shall
stand; Goa's Foundation stands sure, 1 Peter, 2. 6. Wherefore it is contained
in the Scripture, Behold I lay in Sion a Chief Cornerstone, Elect, Precious,
and he that believes on him, shall not be confounded; unto you therefore that
believe, he is precious, but unto them which are disobedient, the Stone which
the Builders Disallowed, the same is made the Head of the Corner, and a Stone
of Stumbling, and a Rock of Offense even to them that Stumble at the Word,
being disobedient. (Mark) such as Stumble at the Word, he is a Stone of
Stumbling unto them; And the Word is near in the Mouth and in the Heart; This
is the Word of Faith which we Preach, Romans 10. 8.

Having Answered thy Three and Twenty Questions by Scripture-proofs, we proceed
to Answer the other four, put forth by Thee.
Qu. 1. Whether, when a Man at any time Speaks to a single Person, it be
unlawful for him to use the Word You?

Ans. It seems, thou art offended at the Word Thee and Thou, but was it not the
Language of Christ, and the Holy Men of God, both to Superior and Inferior,
as is sufficiently Manifested in the Scripture? And it seems strange that thou,
or any Man Learned in the Tongues, should put forth such a Question, knowing
there is to be an Agreement in the number, both in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, as
our Translation makes apparent; and why are Children taught Singular, and
Plural Number, by the Grammar Rules; but that it is absolutely necessary in the
Latin Tongue, as well as in other Tongues, and without it thou know cannot
be true; so the Word You to one is improper; it is as proper for a Man to use
the Word Thee unto a Thousand Men, as it is for him to use the Word You unto
One; for Thou is in the Singular Number; but You is in the Plural; So that, for
to use the Word You unto One, it is nonsense; For One is but one, and the Word
You signifies to more then one; and it is also contrary unto the Holy
Scriptures of Truth to use the Word You unto one, and therefore it is unlawful;
for Christ said Thou unto Peter, and Peter said Thou unto Christ several times,
in the 21. Chap. of John; and its the common Language throughout all the
Scriptures of Truth, to use the Word Thee or Thou unto one; and we desire all
People to take notice of it; for the Lord used to Speak the Word Thee or Thou,
when he Spoke unto any particular of his People; and his People used to speak
Thee or Thou unto the Lord, and one unto another. And People do use the Word
Thee and Thou unto the Lord in their Prayers; and we do greatly admire that
People should count that Language, which they give unto the Lord, is not good
enough for themselves: For some have been very angry with us, when we have used
the simple proper Language, as the Word Thee or Thou unto one. O blush! and be
ye ashamed and bow before the Lord, all ye proud ones that think scorn to
receive that Language unto your selves, that you give unto the Lord God, that
Created you for a purpose of his own Glory, that you should reverance his great
Name, and dread before him. And indeed, we do Account it a great point of
Ignorance in Joseph Hallett, or any other Man to Question such a thing; and we
may to such, as Christ Jesus our Lord, said unto some in former Ages, Ye do
Err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God, Matthew. 22. 29.

Qu. 2. Whether a Person, putting off his Hatt to a Friend he meets in the
Streets, be a thing forbidden by the Scriptures of Truth?

Ans. Vain customs are forbiden and Respect of Persons, James 2. 1. My
Brethren, says he, Have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of
Glory with respect of Persons. And is not this respect of Persons, used and
practiced among you at this Day which the Apostle James forbids, saying in the
9th Verse of the chap. He that respects Persons, commits Sin, and is rebuked of
the Law, as a Transgressor; for whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and fails
in one point, is Guilty of all. It seems, thou would have the honor and
Respect kept up, Pharisee like, which Christ forbad, and cried, Woe against. And
Christ said, How can you believe that seek Honor one of another, and seek not
the Honor that comes from God only?

Qu. 3. Whether it be a thing Unlawful for any Man, for the Confirmation of a
matter of fact, to Swear before the Civil Magistrate?

Ans. Christ's Law and Doctrine does not Warrant, but prohibits it, Matt. 5.
34. James 1. 5. 12. We do believe that it is altogether Unlawful, and a breach
of the Command of Christ, for such are true Christians, followers of Christ,
and obeyers of him, to Swear at all, either for the confirmation of a matter of
fact, or other ways. For Christ Jesus said unto his Followers, Ye have heard
that it has been said by them of Old Time, Thou shall not Forswear they self,
but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths; but I say unyou, Swear not at all;
(Mark) Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne, nor by the
Earth, for it is his Footstool, neither by Jerusalem for it is the City of the
Great King; neither shall thou Swear by thine Head, because thou caust not make
one hair White or Black. And he farther said; But let your Communication be
Yea, Yea; Nay, Nay, for whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil, Matt. 5.
33, 34, 35, 36, 37. (Mark) Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior says, Swear not
at all. Now here Christ forbids all Swearing, for Swear not at all, is a full
prohibition. And James, a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, said,
Above all things my Brethren, Swear not, Neither by Heaven, neither by the
Earth, neither by any other Oath: But let your Yea, be Yea; and your Nay, Nay,
least you fall into condemnation, Chap. 5. 12. And now we desire all People
every were, where these Lines may come, to take the Advice of Jesus Christ, and
of James his servant, and Swear not at all.

Qu. 4. Whether it be Lawful for a Man to Endeavor to furnish himself with
Humane Learning?

Ans. Yea, so as he use Humane Learning in it is place. It Is Lawful to Acquire
Humane Learning, but not to Idolize or use it Unlawfully; But if Joseph Hallett
Intends for a Man to furnish himself with Humane Learning in order to make him
a Minister of Christ; then we Answer thus; Learning is good in its place, but
not to be the motive cause of making Men Ministers, for that is the Lord's
Work, and he makes Ministers of whom it pleases him, whether Poor or Rich,
Learned or Unlearned; for what Learning had Jeremiah? for he said, Ah! Lord
God, behold I cannot speak, for I am a Child: But the Lord said unto him, Say
not I am Child, for thou shallt go to all that I shall send Thee; and
whatsoever I command Thee, Thou shall speak. And he farther said, Be not afraid
of their Faces, for I am with Thee, to deliver Thee, says the Lord. And
Jeremiah says, Then the Lord put forth his Hand, and touched my Mouth, And the
Lord said unto me, Behold I have put my Words in thy Mouth, Chap. 1. 6, 7, 8,
9. Now here we may see that the Lord was both the Sender and Teacher of
Jeremiah. And what Learning had Amos, and how was he sent? for he said, I was
no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets Son, but I was an Herds-Man, and a
Gatherer of Secomore-Fruit. And he farther said, The Lord took me, as I
followed the Flock: (Mark) and not from Schools of Learning, but as I followed
the Flock. And he also said, the Lord said unto me, Go, Prophecy unto my
People of Israel, Chap. 7. 14, 15. And what Learning had them that Christ
called unto the Work of the Ministry, Peter, Andrew, James and John,
Fishermen? Matthew. 4. 18. 21. And we may see, that the Pharisees reflected upon
Christ, because he was pleased to make use of mean Instruments; For they said,
Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees Believed on him; But this People
who know not the Law, are Cursed? John 7. 48, 49. And it is Written in Acts 4.
13. That when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they
were Unlearned and Ignorant Men, they marvelled, and they took knowledge of
them, that they had been with Jesus. Now here we may see, that although Peter
and John were Ignorant and Unlearned Men, (as to Humane Learning) Yet they were
bold and Valiant for the Truth. And this is according to the promise of Christ;
For he said, I will give you a Mouth and Wisdom, which all your Adversaries
shall not be able to gainsay, nor resist, Luke 21. 15. And the Apostle Paul
said unto the Corinthians, And I Brethren, when I came to you, came not with
Excellency of Speech or of Wisdom, declaring unto you the Testimony of God. And
farther he said, I was with you in Weakness and in Fear, and in much Trembling,
and my Speech and my Preaching was not with Enticing Words of Men's wisdom, but
in demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, that your Faith should not stand
in the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 3, 4, 5. And in the
foregoing Chap. the Apostle Speaks much of such things, of which we shall
Insert one, Verse 21. where he says, The World by Wisdom knew not God; in the
Wisdom of God it pleased God by the Foolishness of Preaching to save them that
believe. The Apostles did not boast of other Men's Labors or of other Men's
Lines, of things made ready to their Hands, but they Labored in the Spirit and
Power of God, and their Glorying was in him, 2 Cor. 10 15, 16, 17. And now we
do desire all to seek after that Wisdom, which is from above, that the Lord by
his Spirit is the Teacher of, which is first Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle, and
Easy to be Entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality, and
without Hypocrisy, James 3. 17.

And now whereas thou do Entreat those that shall Answer these or the former
Questions, to prove their Opinions, as they deliver them; so Accordingly it is
done. And by these foregoing Answers, thou may know, what Ground and
Foundation we have for what we hold. If thou can but see with the Spiritual
Eye, that God is the opener of. And whereas thou say, The great God by his
Holy Spirit, lead you into all Truth, and deliver you from all Error. We say,
this is that which our Souls desire; and we should be glad if thou wast but as
mindful of the Leadings of God's Spirit in thy own Heart, as thou have been in
putting of us in Remembrance of it, for then thou would not be such a great
Stranger unto the Right Way of the Lord, as now thou appearest to be. And
therefore we do desire all that may Read or hear these Lines, to be mindful of
the Leadings of Gods Spirit in your own Hearts (to wit) the Spirit of Truth,
which Guides into all Truth, John 16. 13.

Exon, the 8th Month, 1691. John Gannacliff, Joseph Not.

Now having Answered Joseph Hallett's Twenty Seven Queries, we shall propound
some Queries for him, or any of the Preachers among the Presbyterians, to
Answer.
Query 1. WHat was that Labor in the Gospel that them Women labored with the
Apostle Paul in Phil. 4. 3. if not preaching the Gospel? And if Preaching the
Gospel, why then are we blamed for suffering Women to preach amongst us?

Qu. 2. What is that one Baptism that the Apostle Paul spoke of, Ephs. 4. 5. if
not a Spiritual Baptism? seeing he says, By one Spirit are we all baptized, 1
Cor. 12. 13. Is not this the Baptism that is only essential to Salvation?

Qu. 3 What is that true Light which lights every man that comes into the
World, John 1. 9. if not the Divine Life and Light of Christ? And if it be the
Light of Christ, why then do so many call it a natural Light, diabolical? etc

Qu. 4. Whether the Grace of God that brings Salvation, which has appeared
to all men, Tit. 2. 11. be not saving? And if it be saving, why then do so many
say, That the saving Grace has not appeared unto all men?

Qu. 5. Whether Christ be not the Word of God, and the holy Scriptures a true
Testimony of him; seeing Christ says, They are they which testify of me? John
5. 39. And the Scripture calls Christ the Word of God, John 1. 1. Rev. 19. 13.
And if so, why then do any blame us for saying Christ is the Word of God, and
not the Scriptures?

Qu. 6. Whether People ought not first to seek the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, seeing that Christ bids us do so? Mat. 6. 33. And where must
People seek it, if not in their own Hearts, seeing Christ says, The Kingdom of
God is within you? Luke 17. 21. And whether Christ ought not to rule and reign
in his Kingdom, and to have the Government of the Hearts, Minds and Affections
of the Sons and Daughters of men? And if it be granted that he ought, why then
are we blamed for Preaching of Christ within, the Hope of our Glory? Col. 1. 27.

Qu. 7. Whether the Spirit of Truth be not the Spirit of Christ, seeing he
says, I am the Truth? John 14. 6. And whether every Man and Woman ought not to
be led and guided by the Spirit of Truth in their own Hearts, seeing it guides
into all Truth, chap. 16. 13. And that as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
they are the Sons of God? Romans 8. 14.

Qu. 8. Whether People may not attain to the Knowledge of God by the Immediate
Revelation of Jesus Christ, now in our day? seeing it is written, They shall
all know the Lord, Jer. 31. 34. Heb. 8. 11. And if people may, then where, if
not in their own Hearts? seeing that which may be known of God is manifest
within? Romans 1. 19.

Qu. 9. Whether People ought not to wait to be set free from Sin by Jesus
Christ, seeing it is said, He shall save his People from their Sins, Mat. 1.
21. And Christ says, No man can serve two Masters? chap. 6. 24.

Qu. 10. Whether every true Worshiper ought not to worship God in Spirit and in
Truth, seeing Christ says, The true Worshipers shall worship the Father in
Spirit and in Truth? And whether there be any other true Way of Worship beside
this, seeing Christ farther says, God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him,
must Worship him in Spirit and in Truth? John 4. 23, 24.

Qu. 11. Whether the Apostles did not direct People unto this Inward Teacher?
See 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7. Col. 1. 27. 2 Pet. 1. 19. 1 John 2. 27. And if they did,
why then do not many now in our day, that profess themselves Ministers of
Christ, direct people unto this inward Teacher?

Qu. 12. Whether this inward Teacher, the Spirit and Grace of God, be not
sufficient to teach People, as they turn in their minds unto it, and wait in
silence for the Teachings of it, although there may be no outward Teacher,
seeing the Apostles were taught by the Grace of God, Tit. 2. 12. And John
says* The (...) the same Ancinting teaches you of all things, 1 John 2. 27.
And if it be sufficient, why then are we blamed for waiting in silence for the
teachings of it?

Qu. 13. Whether People must not walk in the Light of Jesus Christ, wherewith
they are lighted, if they will have benefit by his Death, seeing it is written,
If we walk in the Light, the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin?
1. John 1. 7.

Qu. 14. Where have you any Example from the holy Scriptures, for the putting
off the Hat to Man; and to use the word Tou* to one?

Qu. 15. Whether you have the Spirit of Christ or not, seeing its written, If
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his? Romans 8. 9. And
whether you are fitted and prepared, authorized and sent forth to preach the
Gospel by the Spirit of the Lord? And if not, why then do you Preach, seeing
that ^hey which run, and the Lord never sent them, shall not profit the People
at all? Jer. 23. 24.

So n^w we desire of Joseph Hallett, or some of the beforementioned People, to
give their Judgment of these things, in their Answers.

John Gannacliff, Joseph Not.


A few more Questions propounded according to Scripture, for the said Joseph
Hallett, or any of the Preachers aforesaid to answer, which are added by
another Hand.
Query 1. Whither Joseph Hallett or you do believe that them Presbyterians in
New England were not guilty of Murder, in Hanging them Innocent Persons,
called Quakers, in the year 1658, and 1659? if not by what Law of God or the
King did they it?

Qu. 2. Whether in those Acts of Cruelty, to wit, of Imprisoning, Whipping,
Burning, Cuting off Ears, and Hanging, they acted like Christ and according to
his Doctrine? or like the Devil, who was a Murderer from the b^ginning? John
8. 44.

Qu. 3. Whether the learned Jews were not Blind Leaders of the Blind, and wit
out a right understanding (and who notwithstanding they had Scriptures; and did
they not so err) that they killed the Prophets, and Murdered the Son or God?
Mat 22* 29. and 23* 27. Acts 7. 52.

Qu. 4. Whether the Scriptures are Rightly understood by the Spirit of God, or
by Humane Learning, to wit, Latin, Greek and Hebrew? Or whether by Humane
Learning any man can or did ever attain to the Knowledge of the things of God,
seeing the Apostle says, The World by Wisdom knew not God? 1 Cor. 1. 21.

Qu. 5. Whether Joseph Hallett, or any of the rest of the Teachers of the
Presbyterians, do perform any act or part of Worship toward God without the
assistance of the Spirit of God? If they do, are they not like the false
Prophets, Jer. 29. 9. And Will-Worshipers, and found offering strange Fire?
Levit. 10. 1, 2, 3.

THE END.

