At a Meeting of the Council of the R. Society. January 21. 1674/5. Ordered,
THAT a Discourse made before the R. Society, December. 10. 1674. by Dr. Nehemiah
Grew, Concerning the Nature, Causes, and Power of Mixture, etc. be Printed by
the Printer of the R. Society.

Brouncker. P.R.S.

A DISCOURSE Made before the ROYAL SOCIETY, December. 10. 1674. Concerning the
Nature, Causes, and Power of MIXTURE.

By Nehemiah Grew, M. D. and Fellow of the R. Society.

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn Printer to the Royal Society, and are to be
Sold at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1675.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord Viscount BROVNCKER, PRESIDENT of the
ROYAL SOCIETY.
My Lord,
ONE Reason why I dedicate the following Discourse to Your Lordship, is because
by Your great and undeserved respects, You have obliged me to do no less. How
much more I cannot say, unless I were able to compute the value of Your
obligation.

Another Reason, my Lord, is because I could not but publicly return Your
Lordship thanks, for minding the Royal Society of so good a way, as they are
lately resolved upon, for the management of a great part of their business.
Wherein, my Lord, I do more then presume, that I also speak the sense of the
whole Society; I think, not any one excepted.

I may with the same confidence intimate, my Lord, how happy they account
themselves, in having a Person so fit to preside their Affairs, as Your
Lordship. The largeness of Your Knowledge, the exactness of Your Judgment, the
evenness of Your Comport; being some of those necessary Qualifications, which
His Majesty had in His eye, (as right well understanding what He did) when He
fixed His choice upon Your Lordship.

I know, my Lord, that there are some men, who have just so much understanding,
as only to teach them how to be ambitious: the flattering of whom, is somewhat
like the tickling of Children, till they fall a dancing. But I also know, that
Your Lordship unconcerneth your self as much, in what I even now spoke; as
Caesar did himself, when his Soldiers began to style him King. For as he said,
Non Rex, sed Caesar: so let Your Lordship be but once named, and all that
follows, is but a Tautology to what You are already known to be. Your being
President of the Royal Society, Your being the first that was chosen, and
chosen by so Wise a King; amounts to so high and real a Panegyric to Your
Lordship, as makes verbal ones to be superfluous, and leaves them without any
sound.

Whence, my Lord, I have a third Reason most naturally emergent; which is, that
I dare to submit my self, as to what I have hereafter said, to Your Lordships
Censure. You being so able, and just an Arbiter, betwixt the same and all those
persons therein concerned; that You can neither be deceived, nor corrupted, to
make a Judgment in any Point, to the injury of either.

And truly, my Lord, were it only from a principle of self-interest, yet I
could not desire it should be otherwise. For the World, if it lives, will
certainly grow as much wiser then it is; as it is now wiser then it was
heretofore. So that we have as little reason, to despise Antiquity; as we can
have willingness, that we our selves should be despised by Posterity.

Yet some difference there is to be made; viz. betwixt those of all Ages, who
have been modestly ignorant; and those who have thought, or pretended, that
they were Omniscient. Or if knowing and acknowledging that they were ignorant;
have yet not been contented to be so; unless, with as good manners, as sense,
they did conjure all Mankind, not to offer at the knowing any more then
themselves.

Upon the whole, my Lord, I desire not You should be a Patron, any further then
You are a Judge. For if this small Essay has deserved the least acceptance, I
am sure, that in being one, You will be both. Whereby, my Lord, You will not a
little nourish and inspire my future endeavors of the like nature: being very
sollicitous to approve my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most faithful and obedient Servant, Nehemiah Grew.

A DISCOURSE Made before the ROYAL SOCIETY.
HAVING the honor to perform the task of this day; I shall endeavor to
conform to the Philosophy, which this Society does profess; which is,
Ratiocination, grounded upon Experiment, and the Common Notions of Sense. The
former being, without the latter, too subtle and intangible; the latter,
without the former, too gross and unmanageable: but both together, bearing a
true analogy to our selves; who are neither Angels, nor mere Animals, but Men.

The Subject I have chosen to speak of, is Mixture. Whereof, that our Discourse
may be the more consistent, and the better intelligible; all I have to say,
shall be ranged into this Method; viz.

1. First, I shall give a brief account of the received Doctrine of Mixture.

2: Next, lay down some Propositions of the Principles whereof all Mixed Bodies
consist.

3. Then, open the true Nature of Mixture; or say, What it is.

4. And then enumerate the Causes of Mixture; or say, How it is made.

5. Lastly, I shall show the Power of Mixture; or, What it can do.

SECT. I.
FIRST, As to the received Doctrine of Mixture; not to trouble you with tedious
quotations of what Aristotle, Galen, Fernelius, Scaliger, Sennertus, Riverius,
and others say hereof; we may suppose the whole summed up in that Definition
which Aristotle himself has given of it, and which the greater number of his
Followers, have almost religiously adhered to; viz. that it is, (...) Lib. 1. de
Gener. and Corrupt. Cap. ult. that it is, Miscibilium alteratorum unio. Which
Definition, as it is usually explicated, is both Unintelligible, and Vnuseful.

Two things are unintelligible; what they mean by Alteration; and what by
Union. In this Alteration, they say, That the very Forms of the Elements are
altered. And therefore lay it down for an Axiom, Quod in Mixto, Formae
Elementares tantum sint in potentia. But let us see the consequence. For if in
a mixed body, the Forms of the Elements are but in potentia; then the Elements
themselves are but in potentia: for we all say, Forma dat esse. And if the
Compounding Elements, are only in potentia; then the Compound; Body it self can
be only in potentia: yet to say it is no more, is most absurd.

As for the Union of Elements in a mixed Body; they make it such, as brings
them at last to assert, the Penetration of bodies, and that the Union of mixed
bodies is nothing else. For they say, it is made in such sort, that every
particle of the mixed body, partaketh of the Nature of the whole. Which Nature,
arises from the contemperated Qualities of the four Elements. Whence they
conclude, That every particle of the mixed body, contains in it self all the
four Elements. Which is plainly to assert a penetration of bodies. For every
Element is, at least, one particle; if therefore every particle of the mixed
body, contains four Elements; then four particles, are but one. I conclude
then, That the received Doctrine of Mixture, is Unintelligible.

Whence it follows, That it is also Barren and Vnuseful. For who can make any
use of that which he understands not? And the experience of so many years,
wherein it has been ventilated by the disputes of men, proves as much: Scarce
any of them, except the Learned Sennertus, daring to venture upon Experiment,
for fear they should come to understand themselves.

It is confessed, that many gallant things have been found out by artificial
Mixture. But no thanks to this Definition of it. For as an Ignorant Person may
make bad Work, and a good Rule be never the worse; so an Ingenious Person may
make good Work, and a bad Rule be never the better. The question is not, what
have men done? but what have they done upon this foundation, Quod Mixtio sit
miscibilium alteratorum unio. Had this ever taught them to do any thing, even
so much as to make the Ink wherewith they have wrote all their Disputes; I
confess, they would have had something to show for it. But the truth is, their
notions of Mixture, have been so far from doing us any good, that they have
done us much harm: being, through their seeming subtlety, but real absurdity,
as so many fantastic Spectrums, serving only to affright men from coming near
them, or the Subject whereof they treat.

I shall therefore endeavor to open the true Nature of Mixture. And I shall
build my Doctrine upon the Common Notions of Sense: which none can deny; and
every one may conceive of. In order to which, I shall take leave to lay down
some Propositions, of the Principles of all mixed bodies.

SECT. II.
1. AND first, by Principles, I mean Atoms, or certain sorts of Atoms, or of
the simplest of Bodies. For otherwise they would not be Principles; for a
compounded Principle, in strict speaking, is a contradiction. Even as fives,
threes, or twos, are not the Principles of Number, but Unites.

2. Whence, secondly, it follows, that they are also Indivisible. Not
Mathematically; for the Atoms of every Principle have their dimensions. But
Physically; and so, what is but one, cannot be made two.

If it be asked, Whether a Stick cut with a Knife, be not of one, made two? I
say, that a Stick, is not one body, but many millions of bodies; that is, of
Atoms; not any one whereof is divided within it self, but only they are
separated each from other, where the Knife forces its way. As in the drawing
of a man's Finger through an heap of Corn; there is no division made in any one
Grain, but only a separation of them one from another, all remaining still in
themselves entire. I say therefore, that what is physically one, is also most
firm, and indivisible; that is, impenetrable: for penetration is but the
separation, not the division of Atoms.

3. Hence, thirdly, they are also Immutable. For that which cannot be divided,
cannot be changed. So that of the whole World of Atoms, not any one has ever
suffered, or can suffer the least mutation.

Hereupon is grounded the Constancy of Causes and Effects. So that, in all
Generations, it is not less certain, that the self same Principle is still
propagated from the same; than, that Man is from Man. Wherefore, Compounded
bodies are generated; but Principles are not, but only propagated; that is, in
every Generation, they pass, in themselves unaltered, from one body, into
another.

4. If Principles, or Atoms are all Immutable; it again follows, That they are
of diverse kinds. For one and the same Principle, or kind of Atoms, will still
make the same thing, and have the same effect: so that all Generations would
then be the same. Wherefore, since they are Immutable, they must be diverse.

5. This diversity, for the same reason, is not small, but very numerous. For
as the World, taken together, is Natures Shop; so the Principles of Things, are
her Tools, and her Materials. Wherefore, as it speaks the goodness of a Shop;
so the perfection of the Universe, That it is furnished with many Tools
wherewith, and many Materials whereupon to work. And consequently, that
Philosophy bears best its own name; which does not strain all to two or three
Principles, like two or three Bells in a Steeple, making a pitiful Chime: but
tries to rise up to Natures own number, and so to ring all the changes in the
world.

6. Yet does not this vast Diversity, take away the Regiment and Subordination,
of Principles. There being a certain lesser number of them, which either by
their greater quantity, or other ways, have Rule and Dominion, in their several
Orders, over all the rest. For wherever the Subject is Multitude, Order is
part of its Perfection. For Order is Proportion. And how can Nature be imagined
to hold Proportion in all things else, and not here? Wherefore, as certainly,
as Order and Government are in all the parts of the Rational; so certainly, of
the Material World.

Whence it is, That although the Species of Principles be very numerous; yet
the Principles called Galenical, Chemical, or any others, which do any way fall
under the notice of Sense, are notwithstanding reduceable to a smaller number:
viz. according to the number of Predominant Principles in Nature; or, at least,
in this part of the Universe which is near and round about us. To the Power and
Empire whereof, all other Principles do submit. Which Submission, is not the
quitting of their own Nature; but only their appearance under the external Face
or Habit of the said Predominant Principles.

7. As there can be no Order of Principles, without Diversity; so no Diversity,
but what is originally made by these two ways; sc. by Size and Figure. By these
they may be exceeding different: and all other Properties besides, whereby they
differ, must be dependent upon these two.

8. Nor therefore, can they be of any other Figures, than what are Regular. For
Regularity, is a Similitude continued. Since therefore all kinds of Atoms are
diverse only by their Size and Figure; if the self same Size and Figure were not
common to a certain number of Atoms, they could not be said to be of any one
kind: and consequently, if there were no Similitude of Atoms, there could be
no Distinction of Principles.

9. Hence also, these two Modes of Atoms, viz. their Size and Figure, are the
true, and only original Qualities of Atoms. That is, an Atome is such or such,
because it is of such a certain Size and Figure.

10. Lastly, As these two Modes, taken severally, are the Qualities of an
Atome: so considered together, they are its Form. A substantial Form of a Body,
being an unintelligible thing. I say of a Body; for although the Rational Soul
be a substantial Form, yet is it the Form of a Man, and not of a Body. For the
Form of a Body, we can conceive of no otherwise, then as of the Modification of
a Body, or a Complexion of all the Modes of a Body. Which also agrees with that
Definition of a Form, which amongst the Peripatetick Philosophers is well
enough accepted, viz. Quod sit, Ratio ejus Essentiae, quae cuique Rei competit.
Which Ratio, if it be referred to a Body, what is it but the Modification of
that Body? Having thus proposed a Summary of my Thoughts about Principles; I
shall next proceed to show what their Mixture is.

SECT. III.
AND first of all, from the Premises, we arrive at this Conclusion; sc. That
the Formation and Transformation of all Bodies, can be nothing else, but the
Mixture of Bodies. For all Principles are immutable; as we have above proved:
and therefore not generable, formable, or transformable. And the Forms of
Principles, being but their Modes, are also immutable. So that the whole
Business of the Material World, is nothing else, but Mixture.

Again, as Nature works every where only by Mixture; so is this Mixture every
where but one thing, and can be but one. For whether it be the Mixture of great
Bodies, or of small; of Compounds, or of Atoms; it is every where Mixture, and
the Mixture of Bodies. Wherefore, Mixture is either an intelligible Affection
of all Bodies, or of none; which latter, no man will say. As many ways,
therefore, as we can see, or conceive the Mixture of any gross Bodies, which we
hold in our hand; so many ways, we may, of the subtilest Mixtures which Nature
makes, or of Atoms themselves; and no other ways.

Now all the ways we can distinguish Mixture by, are in general these two;
either in respect of the Bodies Mixed, or else of the Modes of the Mixture it
self.

In respect of the Bodies Mixed, Mixture is distinguished also two ways; viz.
by Conjugation, and by Proportion.

By Conjugation, I mean, a Certain Mixture of some such Principles, and not of
others. Which is threefold.

First, As to Number: as when one Body may be compounded of two Principles,
another of three, a third of four, a fourth of five, and so on.

Secondly, As to Kind: where, though there be a conjunction of the same Number,
yet not of the same Kind.

Thirdly, When they differ from one another both in Number and Kind.

So many ways the Principles of Bodies may be conceived to be Conjugated; and
therefore are: for here, that which may be, is. The Consequence is clear. For
first, Nature has various Materials wherewith to make these Mixtures; as we
have showed. Secondly, By these Mixtures she may, and without the concurrence
of any imaginary Forms, must produce all the varieties in the material world;
as likewise has been said. Wherefore, since all imaginable Mixtures may be
made, and that to some purpose; if they should not be so, Nature would be
Imperfect: because we our selves can think, how she might put her Materials to
further use, then so she would do.

To think, therefore, that all kinds of Principles, or all Elements go to make
up every Compounded Body; is a conceit, no more to be credited, then one that
should tell us, all kind of Wheels and other parts of a Watch, were put into a
Clock; or that there were no other Materials wherewith to build an House, then
for a Tent or a Ship. For why should Nature, the great Artificer by which all
perfect Works are made, be feigned to cram and ram all things into one, which
we our selves look upon as absurd?

Secondly, The Mixture of Principles is diversifi'd, as by Conjugation, so also
by Proportion. That is, by the diverse Quantities, of the several Principles or
Parts mixed together.

As if the quantity of one, were as five to ten; of a second, as five to
fifteen; of a third, as five to twenty, etc.

Or if that of one, be as five to six; of a second, as six to seven; of a
third, as seven to eight. By which, and by other Proportions, Mixture may be
varied innumerable ways.

Again, As Mixture is varied with respect to the Bodies Mixed; so likewise in
respect of the Mixture it self, which I call the Location of Principles, or the
Modes of their Conjunction. Which may be various, as well as their Conjugation
and Proportion. Yet are they all reduceable unto two general Modes: all Bodies,
and therefore all Principles, being Mixed, either by Mediation, or by Contact.

Now all Contact, whether of Compounds, or of Atoms, can be no other way, then
such as is answerable to their Figures. Whereof, therefore, we can conceive but
three general ways, viz.

First, By Contact in a Point, or some smaller part: as when two Atoms meet,
which are globular or otherwise gibbose.

Secondly, By Contact in a Plain: as in the conjunction of the sides of
Triangular or Quadrangular Atoms, or otherwise flat.

Thirdly, By Contact in a Concave: as when one Atome is admitted into the
Concave or hole of another; as a Spigot is into a Fosset.

The first may be called, Apposition; the second, Application; the third,
Reception or Intrusion.

In the two last ways, Atoms may be joined by Mediation; but best of all the
last. As when the two extremes of one Atome are received into the Concaves or
the holes of two others.

And these are all the general ways, whereby we can conceive Bodies to be Mixed
together; sc. by their various Conjugation, Proportion, and Location.

So that the Composition of Atoms, in Bodies; is like that of Letters, in
Words. What a Thunderclap would such a Word be, as wherein all the four and
twenty Letters were packed up? One therefore is compounded of more, another of
fewer; this of some, and that of others: and both the Conjugation, Proportion,
and Location of Letters is varied in every Word: whereby, we have many
thousands of differing Words, without any alteration at all, in the Letters
themselves; and might have ten times as many more. In like manner, therefore,
or in the self same analogous way, as the Letters of the Alphabet, are the
Principles of Words; so Principles, are the Alphabet of Things.

What we have said of Principles; and of Mixture as consequent thereupon; may
be a foundation for an intelligible account, of the Nature and Cause of most of
the Intrinsic Properties, and Qualities of Bodies: as of Gravity, Levity,
Fixity, Fluidity, Angularity, Roundness, Heat, Cold, Blackness, Whiteness,
Sowerness, Sweetness, Fragrancy, Fetidness, and very many more. I say an
intelligible account; sc. such as is grounded upon the Notions of Sense, and
made out Mechanically. But the exemplification hereof, being too large a field
for this, or any one Lecture, I shall, before I come to the Causes of Mixture,
only deduce from the Premises, these following Corollaries.

1. First, That there is no alteration of Principles or of Elements, in the
most perfect Mixture of Bodies. It cannot be; for Principles are Immutable, as
we have said. And if it could be, yet it needs not to be: for they are also
many, and compoundable infinite ways; as has been showed. So that we have no
need to perplex our selves with any of those difficulties, that arise from the
Doctrine of the Alteration of Elements. The ground of which conceit, is that,
of there being but four Elements, and that all the Elements must needs be in
every Body. And so men being puzzled, how from thence to make out the infinite
variety of Bodies, they feigned them to be alterable, and altered, upon every
perfect Mixture. Not considering, that if their four Elements be alterable; as
few as they are, no fewer then three of them may be spared: for one Element, if
alterable, may be made any.

2. Hence, secondly, may be solved that great Dispute, Whether such as we call
Lixivial Salts, are made by the fire?

For first, No Principle is made by the fire: all Principles being unalterable;
and therefore unmakeable.

Secondly, We must therefore distinguish betwixt the Principle, and the
Modification of a Principle; or its various Mixture with other Principles,
whence it may receive a various denomination.

Wherefore, a Lixivial Salt, qua Lixivial, is certainly made by the fire. But
quatenus Salt, it is not: that Principle being extractable out of most Bodies;
and by diverse other ways, then by the fire. For whether you Calcine a body, or
Ferment it, (after the manner showed by the diligent and curious Improver of
Chemical Knowledge, Dr. Daniel Coxe) or else putrify it under ground, or drown
it in the Sea; it still yields some kind of Salt. All which Salts are made,
not by making the Saline Principle; but only by its being variously Mixed, upon
those various ways of the Solution of Bodies, with other Principles: from which
its various Mixture, it receives the various Denominations, of Marine, Nitrous,
Volatile, or Lixivial.

3. Hence, thirdly, the most perfect Mixture of Bodies, can go no higher then
Contact. For all Principles are unalterable; and all Matter is impenetrable; as
has been said. In the most visible and laxe Mixture, there is Contact; and in
the most subtle and perfect, as in Generation it self, there is nothing more.

4. Hence, fourthly, we easily understand, how diverse of the same Principles,
belonging both to Vegetables and many other Bodies, are also actually existent
in the Body of Man. Because even in Generation, or Transmutation, the
Principles which are translated from one body to another, as from a Vegetable
to an Animal, are not in the least altered in themselves; but only their
Mixture, that is, their Conjugation, Proportion, and Location, is varied.

5. Hence also the difference of Mixture, arising from the difference of
Contact, is intelligible; sc. as to those three degrees, Congregation, Union,
and Concentration.

Congregation, and Inconsistent Mixture, is when the several Atoms touch but
in a Point, or smaller part. In which manner, I have diverse arguments, inducing
me to believe the Atoms of all Fluid Bodies, qua Fluid, do touch; and in no
other.

Union, is when they touch in a Plain. As in the Crystals and Shootings of all
Salts, and other like Bodies. For if we pursue their divided, and subdivided
parts, with our eye, as far as we can; they still terminate, on every side, in
Plains. Wherefore, it is intelligible. That their very Atoms do also terminate,
and therefore touch, in Plain.

Concentration, is when two, or more Atoms touch by Reception and Intrusion of
one into another: which is the closest, and firmest Mixture of all; as in any
fixed, unodorable, or untastable body: the Atoms of such bodies, being not
able to make any Smell or Taste, unless they were first dissolved; that is to
say, unpin'd one from another.

6. Hence, sixthly, we understand, how in some cases, there seems to be a
Penetration of Bodies; and in what sense it may be admitted: viz. if we will
mean no more by Penetration, but Intrusion. For the Intrusion of one Atome into
the Concave or hole of another, is a kind of Penetration; whereby they take up
less room in the mixed Body, then they would do by any other way of Contact. As
a naked knife and its sheath, take up almost double room, to what they do, when
the knife is sheathed.

Whence we may assign the reason, Why many Liquors being mixed; take up less
room or space, then they did apart; as the very Ingenious M. Hook makes it to
appear by Experiment that they do. I say the plain reason hereof, or at least
one reason, is the Intrusion of many of their Atoms one into another. Which
yet is not a Penetration of Bodies strictly so called.

7. If all that Nature makes, be but Mixture; and all this Mixture be but
Contact: it is then evident, That Natural and Artificial Mixture, are the same.
And all those seeming subtilties whereby Philosophers have gone about to
distinguish them; have been but so many Scarcrows, to affright Men from the
Imitation of Nature.

8. Lastly, Hence it follows, That Art it self may go far in doing what Nature
does. And who can say, how far? For we have nothing to Make; but only to Mix
those Materials, which are already made to our hands. Even Nature her self, as
has been said, Makes nothing new; but only Mixeth all things. So far,
therefore, as we can govern Mixture, we may do what Nature does.

Which, that we may still the better understand; let us before, and in the next
place, see the Causes of Mixture. For since Natural and Artificial Mixture are
the same; the immediate Causes of both, are and must be the same.

SECT. IV.
NOW all the Causes of Mixture we can conceive of, must, I think, be reduced to
these six in general; viz. Congruity, Weight, Compression, Solution, Digestion,
and Agitation.

1. Congruity, or aptitude and respondence betwixt the Sizes and Figures of
parts to be mixed: whereby bodies may be truly called the Instrumental Causes
of their own Mixture, As when a plain answers to a plain, a square to a square,
a unequal to a concave, or a less to a greater or an equal, etc. according to
which Respondencies in the parts of Bodies, they are more or less easily
mingleable.

2. Weight; by means whereof, all Fluid Bodies, upon supposition of the
Congruity of their parts, must unavoidably mingle

3. Compression; which either by the Air, or any other body, added to Weight,
must, in some degree, further Mixture. Because, that Weight it self is but
Pression.

For further proof of all the said Causes, I made this Experiment* Let Oil of
Anise-seeds, and Oil of Vitriol be put apart into the Receiver of an Air-Pump.
And, having exhausted it of the Air, let the two said Oils be then affused one
upon the other. Whereupon

First, It is visible, that they here mix and coagulate together; that is,
their parts are wedged and intruded one into another, without the usual
compression of the Air; for that is exhausted: and therefore only, by the
Congruity of their receiving and intruding parts; and by their Weight; by which
alone they are so compressed, as to make that Intrusion.

Secondly, It is also evident, That although they do Coagulate; yet not
altogether so much, as when powered together in the same manner, and quantity,
in the open Air. Wherefore, Compression, whether made by the Air, or any thing
else, does somewhat further the Mixture of Bodies, and the greater the
Compression, the more.

4. Solution; For all bodies mix best, in Forma fluida. And that for two
reasons.

First, Because the parts of a body are not then in a state of Union, but of
Separation; and therefore, in a more capable state, for their Mixture and Union
with the parts of another body.

Secondly, Because then they are also in a state of Motion, more or less; and
therefore, in a continual tendency toward Mixture; all Mixture being made by
Motion.

Wherefore, all Generations, and most perfect Mixtures in Nature, are made by
Fluids; whether Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral. Which is also agreeable to the
Doctrine of the Honorable Mr. Boil, in his excellent Treatise of the Nature
and Virtues of Gems.

And it is well known, That bodies are ordinarily- petrified, or Stones made,
out of Water. That is, out of petrifying parts dissolved per minima in Water,
as both their Menstruum and their Vehicle. Wherefore, if we will talk of making
Gold; It must not be by the Philosophers Stone, but by the Philosophers Liquor.

5. Digestion. For which there is the same reason, as for Mixture, by Solution.
For

First, All heat does attenuate, that is, still further separate the parts of a
body; and so render them more mingleable with the parts of another. And
therefore

Secondly, Does also add more Motion to them, in order to their Mixture.

6. Agitation. Which I am induced to believe a great and effectual means of
Mixture, upon diverse considerations. As

First, That the making of Blood in the Bodies of Animals, and the mixing of
the Chyle therewith, is very much promoted by the same means; sc. by the
Agitation of the parts of the Blood and Chyle, in their continual Circulation.

Again, From the making of Butter out of Milk, by the same means: whereby alone
is made a separation of the oleous parts from the whey, and a mixture of them
together.

Moreover, From the great Effects of Digestion; well known to all that are
conversant in Chemical Preparations. Which Digestion it self, is but a kind of
insensible Agitation of the parts of digested bodies.

It Is also a known Experiment, That the readiest way to dissolve Sugar in Wine
or other Liquor; is to give the Vessel a hasty turn, together with a smart
knock, against any hard and steady body: whereby all the parts of the Sugar and
Liquor, are put into a vehement Agitation, and so immediately mixed together.

And I remember, that having (with intent to make Mr. Mathews's Pill) put some
Oil of Turpentine and Salt of Tartar together in a bottle, and sent it up
hither out of the Country; I found, that the continual Agitation upon the Road,
for three or four days, had done more toward their Mixture; then a far greater
time of Digestion alone had done before. And it is certain, That a vehement
Agitation, especially if continued, or joined with Digestion; will accelerate
the Mixture of some bodies, ten times more, then any bare Digestion alone; as
may be proved by many Experiments.

I will instance in this one. Let some Oil of Turpentine and good Spirit of
Nitre be stopped up together in a bottle, and the bottle held to the fire, till
the Liquors be a little heated, and begin to bubble. Then having removed it,
and the Bubbles by degrees increasing more and more; the two Liquors will of
themselves, at last fall into so impetuous an Ebullition, as to make a kind of
explosion; sending forth a smoke for the space of almost two yards high.
Whereupon, the parts of both the Liquors, being violently agitated, they are,
in a great portion, incorporated into a thick Balsam in a moment: and that
without any intense heat, as may be felt by the bottle. And thus much for the
Causes of Mixture.

SECT. V.
HAVING enumerated the general Causes, we shall, lastly, enquire into the Power
and Use of Mixture; or, into what it can Do and Teach. And I shall Instance in
six particulars.

First, To Render all Bodies Sociable, whatsoever they be.

Secondly, To Make Artificial Bodies in Imitation of those of Natures own
production.

Thirdly, To Make or Imitate the sensible Qualities of Bod^es; as Smells, and
Tastes.

Fourthly, To Make or Imitate their Faculties.

Fifthly, It is a Key, to discover the Nature of Bodies.

Sixthly, To discover their Use, and the Manner of their Medicinal Operation.

Instance I.
FIRST, To render all Bodies Sociable or M^ngleable: as Water with Oil, Salt
with Spirit, and the like. For Natural and Artificial Mixture, are the same; as
we have before proved. If therefore Nature can do it, as we see in the
Generation of bodies she does; it is likewise in the Power of Art to do it.

And for the doing of it, two general Rules result from the Premises, sc. The
Application of Causes, and the Choice of Materials. As for the Causes, they are
such as I have now instanced in. And for the Application of them, I shall give
these two Rules.

First, That we tread in Natures steps as near as we can; not only in the
application of such a Cause, as may be most proper for such a Mixture; but also
in allowing it sufficient time for its effect. For so we see Nature her self,
for her more perfect Mixtures, usually does. She makes not a Flower, or an
Apple, a Horse, or a Man, as it were in a moment; but all things by degrees;
and for her more perfect and elaborate Mixtures, for the most part, she
requires more time. Because all such Mixtures are made and carried on per
minima; and therefore require a greater time for the completing of them.

A second Rule is, Not only to make a due Application of the Causes; but
sometimes to Accumulate them. By which means, we may not only Imitate Nature,
but in some cases go beyond her. For as by adding a Graft or Bud to the Stock,
we may produce Fruit sooner, and sometimes better, then Nature by the Stock
alone would do: So here, by accumulating the Causes of Mixture; that is, by
joining three, or four, or more together; or by applying more in some cases,
where Nature applies fewer; we may be able to make, if not a more perfect, yet
a far more speedy Mixture, than Nature does. As by joining Compression, Heat,
and violent Agitation, and so continuing them all together, by some means
contrived for the purpose, for the space of a week, or month, or longer,
without cessation. Which may probably produce, not only strange, but useful
effects, in the Solution of some, and the Mixture of other Bodies. And may
serve to mix such Bodies, as through the small number of their congruous parts,
are hardly mingleable any other way. Agitation being, as carrying the key to
and fro, till it hit the lock; or within the lock, till it hit the wards.

Secondly, For the Choice of Materials, if they are not immediately, that is,
of themselves, mingleable; we are then to turn one species of Mixture into a
Rule; which is, To mix them by mediation of some third, whether more simple or
compounded body, which may be congruous in part to them both: as sulphurious
Salts are to Water and Oil; and are for that reason mingleable with either of
them.

Or, By any two congruous Bodies, which are also, in part, congruous to two
others: and other like ways. Whereby the parts of Bodies, though never so
heterogeneous, may yet be all bound and locked up together. Even as twenty keys
may be united, only by uniting the two Rings whereon they hang.

The consideration of these things, have put me upon making several
Experiments, for the Mingling of heterogeneous Bodies. I shall give two
Examples of trial; the one upon fluid, the other upon consistent, Bodies.

For the first, I took Oil of Anise-seeds, and pouring it upon another Body; I
so ordered it, that it was thereby turned into a perfect milk-white Balsam, or
Butter. By which means the said Oil became mingleable with any other Liquor,
Oil, Wine, or Water; easily, and instantaneously dissolving therein, in the
form of a Milk. And note, That this is done, without the least alteration of
the smell, taste, nature or operation of the said Oil.

By somewhat the like means, not only Oil of Anise-seeds, but any other
stillatitious Oil, may be transformed into a perfect milk white Butter; and in
like manner be mingled with Water or any other Liquor. Which is of various use
in Medicine; and what I find oftentimes very convenient and advantageous to be
done.

Again, Not only fluid but consistent bodies, which of themselves will mix only
with Oil; by due mixture with other bodies, maybe rendered easily dissoluble in
Water; as may Rosin, and all resinous and friable Gums. As also Wax: and this
without changing much of their Color, Taste or Smell. Whereof likewise,
whatsoever others may do, the Physician may make a manifold Use.

Instance II.
BY Mixture also, we may be taught to Imitate the Productions of Nature. As to
which, from what we have before said of Mixture, we may conclude; That there is
no generation of Bodies unorganical, but what is in the power of Mixture to
imitate. As of Animals, to Imitate Blood, Fat, Chyle, Spittle, Phlegm, Bile,
etc. Of Vegetables, to Imitate a Milk, Mucilage, Rosin, Gum, or Salt. Of
Minerals, to Imitate Vitriol, Allom, and other Salts; as also Metals, and the
like.

I do not say, I can do all this: but if upon good premises we may conclude
this may be done; it is one step to the doing of it. But I will also give an
Instance of somewhat that may be done in every kind. And

1. First, For the Imitation of an animal body, I will instance in Fat. Which
may be made thus; Take Oil Olive, and power it upon high Spirit of Nitre. Then
digest them for some days. By degrees, the Oil becomes of the color of Marrow;
and at last, is congealed, or hardened into a white Fat or Butter, which
dissolveth only by the fire, as that of Animals.

In converting Oil thus into Fat, it is to be noted, That it hardens most upon
the exhalation of some of the more Sulphurous parts of the Spirit of Nitre.
Which I effected, well enough for my purpose, by unstopping the glass after
some time of digestion; and so suffering the Oil to dissolve and thicken diverse
times by successive heat and cold.

Hence, The true Congealing Principle, is a Spirit of Nitre separated from its
Sulphur. For the better doing whereof, the Air is a most commodious Menstruum
to the said Spirit of Nitre.

Whence also, if we could procure such a Spirit of Nitre, we might congele
Water in the midst of Summer. We might also refrigerate Rooms herewith
artificially. And might Imitate all frosty Meteors. For the making of Fat, is
but the Durable Congelation of Oil* which may be done without frost, as I have
showed how.

Hence also it appears, That Animal Fat it self, is but the Curdling of the
Oily parts of the Blood; either by some of its own Saline parts; or by the
Nitrous parts of the Air mingled therewith.

Hence likewise it is, That some Animals, as Conies, and Fieldfares, grow
fatter in frosty weather: the oily parts of the blood, being then more than
ordinarily coagulated with a greater abundance of nitrous parts received from
the Air into their bodies.

For the same reason it is, That the Fat of Land-Animals is hard; whereas that
of Fish is very soft, and in a great part runs to Oil, sc. Because the Water,
wherein they live, and which they have instead of breath, has but very few
nitrous parts in it, in comparison of what the Air has.

2. For the Imitation of a Vegetable Body, I will give three Instances; In
Rosin, Gum, and a Lixivial Salt. The first may be made thus; Take good Oil of
Vitriol, and drop it upon Oil of Anise-seeds; and they will forthwith
incorporate together; and by degrees, will harden into a perfect Rosin; with
the general and defining Properties of a truly Natural Resinous Gum. Being not
in the least dissoluble in Water; or at least, not any more, then any natural
Rosin or Gum: yet very easily by fire: as also highly inflammable: and
exceeding friable.

Although this artificial rosin, be the result of two Liquors, both which very
strongly affect the Sense: yet being well washed from the unincorporated parts,
(which is to be done with some care) it has scarce any Taste or Smell.

The Concentration of these two Liquors, is likewise so universal; that the
Rosin is not made by Precipitation, but almost a total Combination of the said
Liquors; and that with scarce so much, as any visible fumes.

Again, Having taken a certain Powder and a Saline Liquor, and mixed them
together in a bottle, and so digested them for some time; the Powder was at
last transmuted to a perfect Oily Gum; which will also dissolve either in Oil,
or in Water; in the self same manner, as Galbanum, Ammoniac, and the like will
do.

And Lastly, A Lixivial Salt may be imitated thus; Take Nitre, Oil of Vitriol
and high Spirit of Wine, of each a like quantity. Of these three Bodies, not
any two being put together; that is to say, neither the Nitre with the Oil, nor
the Oil with the Spirit, nor the Nitre with the Spirit; will make the least
ebullition: yet all three mingled together, make a very conspicuous one. The
Spirit of Wine being as the Sulphur; and so that, and the Nitre together,
standing, as it were, in the stead of an Alkalizate, that is, a Sulphurious
Salt, against the Oil of Vitriol. Diverse other Experiments I can show of the
like nature.

3. In the last place, for the Imitation of a Mineral Body, I will instance in
two, sc. Nitre and Marine Salt; if I may have leave to reckon them amongst
Mineral Bodies. As for Nitre, by mixing of four Liquors together, and then
setting them to shoot; I have obtained Crystals of true and perfect Salt; which
have had much of a nitrous taste; and would be melted with a gentle heat, as
Nitre is; and even as easily as Butter it self: I mean, not by the addition of
any sort of Liquor, or any other body, to dissolve it; but only by the fire.

And as for a Sea Salt, that I might Imitate Nature for the making hereof, I
considered, That the Salt so called, was nothing else but Animal and Vegetable
Salt, freed from its true Spirit and Sulphur, and some Saline particles,
specifically Animal or Vegetable, together with them. For both Animal and
Vegetable bodies being continually carried by all Rivers into the Sea; and many
likewise by Shipwreck, and diverse other ways, immersed therein: they are at
last corrupted, that is, their Compounding parts are opened and resolved. Yet
the Resolution being in the Water, is not made precipitately, as it is in the
Air; but by degrees, and very gently. Whence the Sulphurious, and other more
Volatile parts, in their avolation, make not so much have, as to carry the more
fixed Saline parts along with them; but leaves them behind in the Water, which
imbibeth them, as their proper Menstruum.

And the Imitation of Nature herein, may be performed thus; Put as much of a
Lixivial Salt as you please, into a wide mouthed bottle, and with fair Water
make a strong Solution of it; so as some part thereof may remain unresolved at
the bottom of the bottle. Let the bottle stand thus for the space of about half
or three quarters of a year, all the time unstopped. In which time, many of the
Sulphurious and other more Volatile parts gradually flying away; the top of the
unresolved Salt will be incrustate, or as it were frosted over, with many small
and hard Concretions, which for their nature, are become a true Sea Salt.
Whereof there is a double proof; First, In that most of the said Concretions
are of a Cubical, or very like Figure. Especially on their upper parts; because
having a fixed body for their basis, their under parts, therefore, contiguous
thereto, are less regular. Whereas the parts of Salt in the Sea, being
environed on all sides with a fluid; their Figure is therefore on all sides
regular. Secondly, In that a strong Acid Spirit or Oil being powered upon a full
body'd Solution hereof; yet it makes herewith no Ebullition; which is also the
property of Sea Salt. And thus much for the more general Imitation of Bodies.

Instance III.
FROM the aforesaid Premises, and by the aforesaid Means, there is no doubt to
be made, but that also the other sensible Qualities of Bodies may be Imitated,
as their Odours and Tastes. And that not only the general ones, as Fragrant, or
Astringent: but also those which are specifical and proper to such a species of
Bodies. Thus, for example, by mixing several Bodies together, in a due
proportion, I have Imitated the Smells of diverse Vegetables; as of Tansy, of
Lignum Rhodium, and others. And I conclude it feasible, To Imitate the Taste or
Smell of Musk, or Ambergris, or any other body in the world.

Instance IV.
HENCE also we may be Taught, How to Imitate the Faculties, as well as other
Qualities of Bodies. The reason is, because even these have no dependence upon
any substantial Form; as in the first Part of my last Book of the Anatomy of
Vegetables, I think, I have, in a few lines, clearly made out: but are the mere
result of Mixture; effected by the same Causes, whether in Nature or Art; as
also in the premises of this Discourse has been showed.

Instance V.
FROM whence, again, it is likewise a Key to Discover the Nature of Bodies. For
how far soever we can attain to Mingle, or to Make them, we may also know what
they are.

For Bodies are mingleable, either of themselves, or by some third. As to those
which mingle of themselves, we may certainly conclude, That there is a
congruity betwixt them, in some respect or other. So upon various trials I
find, that Essential Oils do more easily imbibe an Acid, then an Alkaly. Whence
it is evident, That there is some congruity and similitude betwixt Essential
Oils, and an Acid, which there is not betwixt the said Oils and an Alkaly.

As to those that mingle only by some third; we may also certainly conclude,
That though the two extremes are unlike; yet that they have both of them a
similitude to or congruity with that third, by which they are united.

Moreover, We may make a Judgment from the Manner or Degree of Mixture. Thus
the Acid Spirit of Nitre, as is said, will coagulate Oyl-Olive, and render it
consistent. Whence it might be thought, That any other strong Acid will do the
like; and that therefore, there is no great difference in the Nature of the
said Acid Liquors. But the contrary hereunto, is proved by Experiment. For
having digested the same Oil, in the same manner, and for a much longer time,
with strong Oil of Sulphur; although it thence acquired some change of Color,
yet not any Consistence.

Again, Because the said Spirit of Nitre coagulates Oyl-Olive; it might be
expected, it should have the same effect, upon Oil of Anise-seeds; or, at
least, that if other Acids will coagulate Oil of Anise-seeds, that this should
do it best. But Experiment proves the contrary. For of all I have tried, Oil
of Vitriol is the only Acid that does it instantaneously. Oil of Sulphur, if
very strong, will do it; but not so soon, nor so much. Aqua fortis, and Spirit
of Salt, for the present, do not at all touch it. And Spirit of Nitre it self
will not coagulate it, under eight or ten hours at least.

Instance VI.
LASTLY, and consequently, It is a Key, To Discover the Medicinal Use and
Operation of Bodies. Thus, for example, by the Imitation of Rosins and Resinous
Gums, we certainly know what all of them are, and when, and wherefore to be
used. For what are Mastick, Frankincense, Olibanum, Benzoin, and other like
Rosins, or Resinous Gums, for their principal and predominant parts, that is,
qua Rosins; but Bodies resulting from Natural, in like manner, as I have
showed, they may be made to result, from Artificial Mixture? That is to say,
the Oleous, and Acid parts of Vegetables, being both affused and mingled
together, per minima, in some one Vessel of a Plant, they thus incorporate into
one consistent and friable body, which we call Rosin.

Now from hence it is, that the said Rosins, and Resinous Gums; as also Amber
and Sulphur for the same reasons; are of so great and effectual Use against
most thin and salt Rheums; sc. as they are Acido-oleous Bodies. For by their
Acid parts, which in all these Bodies are exceeding copious, they mortify and
refract those salt ones which feed the Rheum. And by their oleous parts, the
same salt ones are also Imbibed. Whence, they are all, in some degree,
incorporated together; that is, the Rheum is thickened: which is the desired
effect.

Whereas, on the contrary, if the Cough proceed not from a thin and especially
a salt Rheum, but from a Viscous Phlegm; the use of many other Bodies, which are
also more oleous, and abound not so much with an Acid as these do, especially
some of them, is more proper: such as these, in this case, proving sometimes
not only ineffectual, but prejudicial. Since the very Cause of the said
Viscousness of Phlegm, is chiefly some great Acidity in the Blood, or in some
other part; as may be proved by diverse arguments.

Many more Instances might be hereunto subjoyned: and may hereafter be offered
to the acceptance of such, who are inquisitive into matters of this Nature. If
I shall not herein anticipate, or reiterate the Thoughts and Observations, of
those two accurate and Learned Persons Dr. Willis, and Dr. Walter Needham, as
to what the one has already published, and both have put us in expectation of.
But the Instances already given, are sufficient to evidence what I have said.
And, I hope, this present Discourse to prove, in some measure, thus much; That
Experiment, and the Common Notions of Sense are prolifick; and that nothing is
barren, but fancy and imagination.

FINIS.

