At a Meeting of the Council of the ROYAL SOCIETY, Feb. 22. 1681/2
DR. Grew having read several Lectures of the Anatomy of Plants, some whereof
have been already printed at diverse times, and some are not printed; with
several other Lectures of their Colors, Odours Tastes, and Salts; as also of
the Solution of Salts in Water; and of Mixture; all of them to the satisfaction
of the said Society: It is therefore Ordered, That He be desired, to cause them
to printed together in one Volume.

CHR. WREN P.R.S.

THE ANATOMY OF PLANTS. WITH AN IDEA OF A Philosophical History of Plants. And
several other LECTURES, Read before the ROYAL SOCIETY.

By NEHEMJAH GREW M.D. Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY, and of the COLLEGE of
PHYSICIANS.

Printed by W. Rawlins, for the Author, 1682.

TO HIS MOST Sacred Majesty CHARLES II. King of Great Britain, etc.
May it please Your Majesty,
THE Dedication of one Part of the following Anatomy having been very
graciously received by Your Majesty: I am now emboldened most humbly to present
the Whole into Your Royal Hands.

By which Your Majesty will find, That there are Terrae Incognitae in
Philosophy, as well as Geography. And for so much, as lies here, it comes to
pass, I know not how, even in this Inquisitive Age, That I am the first, who
have given a Map of the Country.

Your Majesty will here see, That there are those things within a Plant, little
less admirable, than within an Animal. That a Plant, as well as an Animal, is
composed of several Organical Parts; some whereof may be called its Bowels.
That every Plant has Bowels of diverse kinds, containing diverse kinds of
Liquors. That even a Plant lives partly upon Aer; for the reception whereof, it
has those Parts which are answerable to Lungs. So that a Plant is, it were, an
Animal in Quires; as an Animal is a Plant, or rather several Plants bound up
into one Volume.

Again, that all the said Organs, Bowels, or other Parts, are as artificially
made; and for their Place and Number, as punctually set together; as all the
Mathematick Lines of a Flower or Face. That the Staple of the Stuff is so
exquisitely fine, that no Silkworm is able to draw any thing near so small a
Thread. So that one who walks about with the meanest Stick, holds a Piece of
Natures Handicraft, which far surpasses the most elaborate Woof or Needle Work
in the World.

That by all these Means, the Ascent of the Sap, the Distribution of the Aer,
the Confection of several sorts of Liquors, as Lympha's, Milks, Oils, Balsames;
with other parts of Vegetation, are all contrived and brought about in a
Mechanical way. In sum, Your Majesty will find, that we are come ashore into a
new World, whereof we see no end.

It may be, that some will say, into another Utopia. Yet not I, but Nature
speaks these things: the only true Pallas, wherewith it is treasonable for
the most couriously handed Arachne to compare. In whose Name, I, the meanest of
her Pupils, do in all humility crave Your Majesty's Gracious Patronage. Whereof
I cannot doubt, since Your Majesty has been pleased to be the Founder, and to
style Your Self the Patron of the Society, of which I have the honor to be a
Member. Your Majesty deeming it to be a more Noble Design, To enlarge the
Territories of Knowledge, than those of Dominion: and the Highest Pitch of
Human Glory, not to rule, in any sort, over many; but to be a Good Prince over
Wise Men. I am

Your Majesty's most humble and most obedient Subject NEHEMIAH GREW.

THE PREFACE.
IT is a Politic or Civil Virtue in every prudent man's Eye, To set himself an
example, in what he does, unto others. And in so doing, he looks upon himself
as accountable, in some sort, to all Men. To those therefore, who may either
expressly, or tacitly, expect the Reasons, upon which I first undertook the
Anatomy of Plants, and also made the after-progress therein; I shall sum them
up as follows.

The first occasion of directing my Thoughts this way, was in the Year 1664,
upon reading some, of the many and curious Inventions of Learned Men, in the
Bodies of Animals. For considering, that both of them came at first out of the
same Hand; and were therefore the Contrivances of the same Wisdom: I thence
fully assured my self, that it could not be a vain Design; to seek it in both.
And being then newly furnished with a good stock of Seeds, in order to raise a
Nursery of Plants; I resolved, besides what I first aimed at, to make the
utmost use of them for that purpose: that so I might put somewhat upon that
side the Leaf which the best Botanicks had left bare and empty. And in which,
notwithstanding some other Learned Men had inserted somewhat of this nature; as
Dr. Highmore in his Book of Generation, Dr. Sharrock of the Propagation of
Plants, and Mr. Hook in his Micrography: yet but collaterally, and whithout
showing any purpose of managing this Part of Natural History. And although it
seemed at first an Objection in my way, That the first projectors seldom bring
their business to any good end: yet I also knew, That if Men should stay for an
Example in every thing; nothing extraordinary would ever be done.

But notwithstanding the reasonableness of the Design; yet I did not forget,
that, in respect of the Undertaker, there might be Impar congressus. And
therefore, before I had ventured very far, in the Year 1668, I imparted it to
my Brother-in-Law, the Learned Dr. Henry Sampson, now Fellow of the College of
Physicians in London. Who not only very well liked the same; but also excited
me to a vigorous and accurate prosecution of it. Which he did, partly, by
mentioning a very pertinent passage of Dr. Glisson, in the Preface to his Book
de Hepate, Chapter 1.
which I had not then read.

Plantae quoque in hunc censum (sc. Anatomicum) veniunt; varia enim Partium
textura, and disserentiis constant: and proculdubio, ex acurata earundem
dissectione, utiles valde observationes nobis exurgerent: praestaretque in
illis (inferioris licet ordinis) rebus examinandis operam impendere, quam in
transcribendis ut saepe sit, aliorum laboribus, inutiliter aetatem transigere.
Quippe hoc pacto, ignavarum apum more, aliena duntaxat alvearia expilamus,
nihilque bono publico adjicimus.

After I had finished the First Book, that I might know the sense also of other
Learned Men, whether the steps I had already taken, would warrant me to proceed
any further: I put some part of it into the same Hand; who, in the Year 1670,
communicated the same to Mr. Oldenburge, then Secretary to the Royal Society:
and after he had read it over, it was, upon his motion, delivered to that
excellent Person Dr. John Wilkins then Bishop of Chester; who produced it at a
Meeting of the Royal Society, and desired, they might see the rest. Which, or
the greatest part, being also presented to them, the Right Honorable the Lord
Vicount Brouncker, then President of the Royal Society, was pleased to peruse
the same. Presently, after which, at a Meeting of the Council of the said
Society, the following Order was made, and entered in their Council-Book with
this Date, and in these words: May 11th 1671.

Then was Licensed Dr. Nehemjah Grew's Book, Entitled, The Anatomy of
Vegetables begun; together with an account of Vegetation grounded thereupon.
And Ordered to be Printed by the Printer to the Royal Society.



Hereupon, I was obliged to send the Book to the Press. And upon the 9th of
November following in the same Year 1671, when it was near being printed, my
Lord Brouncher signed the forementioned Order: the Printer, whose Name was to
be inserted therein, not having received his Diploma till that time.

The Book being quickly after printed off; I ordered it to be Presented to the
Royal Society; which was accordingly done at one of their Meetings December 7,
1671. And also to be sent to the Bishop of Chester; who was pleased to signify
his acceptance thereof by a Letter dated at Chester, December 26th 1671. now
filed amongst others in the Custody of the Royal Society: part whereof, in
regard it relates to matter of Fact, I shall here recite.

Sir,
I did yesterday receive your Book; and am very sensible of the Honor you have
done me in the Dedication of it. You was very happy in the choice of this
Subject to write upon; one of the most Noble and the most Copious parts of
Philosophy; and such an one, as has hitherto lain uncultivated. And you have
been very successful in your first Attempt about it, in so many remarkable
Observations and Discoveries, as you have made already. I could heartily wish,
that you would still apply your self to this kind of Enquiries. You will find
that Additionals will come in more copiously and easily. And it is not fit,
that any one should, by his Superstructions, carry away the praise from him,
who was the first Inventor, and who laid the Foundations, wherein the greatest
difficulty does consist, etc.

Having thus submitted my self to the Judgment of many Learned Men; I saw that
my Journey must not here end. So that, like one who is got into a Wood, I
thought I might as fairly find my way out, by going on, as by making a retreat.
Whereupon, I began to draw up a Scheme of the whole Design.

While I was doing this, I received news from London, that the same day,
December 7. 1671, in which my Book, then printed, was presented to the Royal
Society: there was also presented a Manuscript (without Figures) from Seignior
Malpighi, upon the same Subject; dated at Bononia, November, 1st 1671. the
same, which Mr. Oldenburge, when it came to be printed, calls his Idea. And
of this, entry was made in their Journal Book. So that the Royal Society having
now a Prospect of the good service of an Ancient Member, and one, who had
highly merited by his Works then extant; from thence forward, I looked upon my
self to be excused.


But soon after, receiving another Letter from the Bishop of Chester, dated at
London, Febr. 18. 1672. I found the matter otherwise; and that the Society were
pleased to engage me to proceed. Whereof entry was made by the Secretary in
their Journal Book, at one of their Meetings, April, 18. 1672, in these words:
The Society was made acquainted with one particular lately passed in the
Council; sc. That the Bishop of Chester had there proposed Dr. Grew to be a
Curator to the Royal Society for the Anatomy of Plants: and that the Council
had approved of that Proposal. Upon which, it was Ordered, That the Thanks of
the Society be returned to the Lord Bishop of Chester, for this Proposal, and
to the Council for their Approbation of the same.

This they might be induced to do; upon considering, that it would be no
disadvantage to the credit of those matters, which were so new and strange, to
be offered to the World from a double Authority. For one, although he may have
no mind to deceive; yet is it more likely for one, than for two, to be
deceived. Likewise, that the same Subject, being prosecuted by two Hands, would
be the more illustrated by the different Examples produced by both. And that,
as in other matters, so here, the defects of both, would mutually be supplied.

Whether for these, or other Reasons also, they were pleased to pass the
forementioned Order; that being done, it had been very ill manners in me, not
to have answered their expectation therein. And therefore reassuming the Design
I had laid by, and having reduced it to some intelligible Idea, it was
submitted to the Censure of the Royal Society: and it was thereupon ordered it
should be printed.

Not long after, I received a Curious and Learned Book from Mons. Dodart,
Archiater to the Prince of Conde, and Fellow of the Royal Academy at Paris; in
persuance of whose Order, it was by him composed and published. Which being a
Design of a like Import, I was glad to see it so far justified by that
Illustrious Society, as well as by our own.

In this Idea, one principal Thing I insist upon, for a Philosophical History
of Plants, is Anatomy. And, agreeing to the Method therein proposed, all the
Observations contained in the First Book, except one or two, were made with the
Naked Eye. To the end, I might first give a proof, How far it was possible for
us to go, without the help of Glasses: which many Ingenious Men want; and more,
the patience to manage them. For the Truth of these Observations, Seignior
Malpighi, having procured my Book to be translated into Latin for his private
use, speaks his own sense, in some of his Letters to Mr. Oldenburge, printed at
the end of his Anatomy of Plants. And some of them, have since been confirmed,
both by our Learned Countrymen Dr. Wallis, and Mr. Lister; and by the
Ingenious Mr. Lewenhoeck, abroad.

Having thus begun with the bare Eye; I next proceeded to the use of the
Microscope. And the Observations thereby made, first on Roots, and afterward
on Trunks and Branches, together with the Figures, were all exhibited to the
Royal Society at several times from May 15. 1672. to April 2. 1674; being the
Materials for the Second and Third Parts: and hereof Memorials were inserted in
their Journal Books.

After this, the Royal Society received from Seignior Malpighi his Second Part
of the Anatomy of Plants, together with the Figures therein described, and his
Letters to their Secretary, dated at Bononia Aug. 20th of the same year 1674.
when, and not before, he gave leave that the two said Parts should be printed.

So soon as I had finished the Second and Third Parts, I proceeded to the Last,
sc. of Leaves, Flowers, Fruits and Seeds: and those Things I met with, more
remarquable, were presented to the said Society in the Years 1676 and 1677. And
the publishing of the former Parts successively, as well as of all together,
has been done in pursuance of their several Orders for the same.

Having concluded the History of Perfect Plants; I intended to have subjoyned
the Description of those which are Imperfect. As also of Parasitical, Marine,
and Sensitive Plants. And lastly, a view of the chief Particulars, wherein the
Mechanisme of a Plant, is different from that of an Animal. But these things I
leave to some other Hand.

The First Book, a little after it came forth; was translated into the French
Tongue, by Mons. Le Vasseur an Ingenious Gentleman in Paris; elegantly, and in
the Judgment of those who are well skilled in that Language, with much
exactness, as to the sense. He having taken special care, to have all the
difficulties of our own, by Me, cleared to him. And in a late Book Entitled,
Philosophia vetus and nova printed at Noriberg 1682. the Learned Author seems
to have made use of this Translation, for all that he has taken notice of in
that my First Book.

By the Ingenious Collectors of the German Ephemerides, both my First, Second,
and Third Books, are all published in Latin. But their unskilful Interpreter
does often fail of the Grammatical Sense. Whose Errors, many of them very
gross, I desire may be imputed neither to them, nor to my self.

Besides these, the Second Lecture of Mixture is also translated into French,
by Mons. Mesmin a Learned Physician in Paris: whose Version is very well
approved by those who are competent Judges hereof.

This, and the rest which follow, are placed, not in the order of Time; but
more according to their Nature or Relation one to another. All of them intended
as a Commentary upon some particulars mentioned, either in the First Lecture,
or in the Idea.

In the Plates, for the clearer conception of the Part described, I have
represented it, generally, as entire, as its being magnified to some good
degree, would bear. So, for instance, not the Barque, Wood, or Pith of a Root
or Tree, by it self; but at least, some portion of all three together: Whereby,
both their Texture, and also their Relation one to another, and the Fabric of
the whole, may be observed at one View. Yet have I not every where magnified
the Part to the same degree; but more or less, as was necessary to represent
what is spoken of it. And very highly, only in some few Examples, as in Tab.
40. which may suffice to illustrate the rest. Some of the Plates, especially
those which I did not draw to the Engravers hand, are a little hard and stiff:
but they are all well enough done, to represent what they intend.

AN IDEA OF A Philosophical History OF PLANTS. Read before the ROYAL SOCIETY,
January 8. and January 15. 1672.

By NEHEMJAH GREW M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the College of
Physicians.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, 1682.

TO THE Most Illustrious THE ROYAL SOCIETY, The following IDEA Is most HUMBLY
PRESENTED, AND, In their NAMES also PROPOSED TO THE CONSIDERATION Of other
Learned Men. By the AUTHOR NEHEMJAH GREW.

THE CONTENTS.
UNTO what Degree the knowledge of Plants is arrived,. 1. Wherein defective,.
2. Why concluded to be so,. 3. Yet capable of Improvement,. 4. And worthy of
it,. 5.

Diverse Instances given, wherein; first of the Organical Parts, as to their
external Accidents and Oeconomical Uses, 6. Then of their Contents, Qualities,
and Powers, 7. And an Improvement of this Part, will further that of diverse
other parts of knowledge; whereof Instances are given, 8.

In order whereto, Five General Means are propounded, 9. The First, a
particular and comparative Survey of whatever is of more External consideration
about Plants, 10. Instanced as to their Figures, 11, 12. Proportions, 13.
Seasons, 14. Places, 15. Motions, 16.

The Second, A like Survey of the Organical Parts by Anatomy, as that which is
very necessary, 17. In what manner to be prosecuted, both without, and with the
Microscope, 18. What thereupon to be observed, 19. And what, from observantion
made, probably attainable, 20.

The Third, A like Survey of the Contents of Plants; their several Kinds, 21.
Of all which, their Receptacles, 22. Motions, 23. Qualities, 24. Consistence,
25. Colors, Smells, and Tastes, 26. Where also the same Qualities are to be
inquired into, as generally belonging to Plants, 26. As their Colors, 27.
Odours, 28. Tastes, 29. Also their Faculties, 30. All these to be further
examined, 31. By Contusion, 32. Agitation, 33. Frigifaction, 34. Infusion, 35.
Subsession, 36. Digestion, 37, 38. Decoction, 39. Destillation, 40. Arefaction,
41. Assation, 42. Vstion, 43. Calcination, 44. By Composition with other
Bodies, 45. And by Compounding the Experiment it self, 46. What hence
attainable, 47.

The Fourth, A like Survey of the Principles, as well as of the Contents, of
the Organical Parts, 48. The Difficulty hereof, in some respects cleared, 49.
Further, by two Instances, 50, 51. Some Remarques hereupon, of the Principles
of Plants, 52. From hence will be attainable a further knowledge of the Modes
of Vegetation, 53. Of the Qualities of Vegetables, 54. And of their Powers, 55,
56.

The Fifth, A like Survey of those Bodies, either from which these Principles
are derived, or wherewith they have any communion, 57. Which are Four in
general, scil. Earth, and all solid Receptacles, 58. Water, and all liquid
Receptacles, 59. Aer, 60. And Sun, 61.

A Sixth General Inquiry, only hinted, 62.

The Conclusion, 63.

AN IDEA OF A Philosophical History OF PLANTS.
IF WE take an account of the Degrees whereunto the Knowledge of Vegetables is
Advanced, it appears, That besides the great Varieties, which the Successful
Arts of Florists, or Transplantations from one Climate to another, have
produced; we have very many Species brought to light, especially Natives of the
Indies, which the Ancients, for any thing that appears in their Writings now
extant, were ignorant of. In which particular Clusius, Columna, Bauhinus,
Boccone, and others, have performed much. Withal, That their Descriptions (of
all Parts above ground) their Places and Seasons, are with good diligence and
preciseness set before us. Likewise their Order and Kindred: for the adjusting
whereof our Learned Countryman Mr. Ray, and Dr. Morrison, have both taken very
laudable pains. As also the ordering of them with respect to their Alimental
and Mechanic Uses; for which, amongst others, Mr. Evelyn and Dr. Beal have
deserved many thanks, and great praise. We are also informed, of the Natures
and infallible Faculties of many of them. Whereunto so many as have assisted,
have much obliged their Posterity.

2.. By due Reflection upon what has been Performed; it also appears, what is
left Imperfect, and what Undone. For the Virtues of most Plants, are with much
uncertainty, and too promiscuously ascribed to them. So that if you turn over
an Herbal, you shall find almost every Herb, to be good for every Disease. And
of the Virtues of many, they are altogether silent. And although, for the
finding out, and just appropriation of them, they have left us some Rules, yet
not all. The Descriptions likewise of many, are yet to be perfected; especially
as to their Roots. Those who are very curious about the other Parts, being yet
here too remiss. And as for their Figures, it were much to be wished, That they
were all drawn by one Scale; or, at most, by Two; one, for Trees and Shrubs;
and another for Herbs. Many likewise of their Ranks and Affinities, are yet
undetermined. And a great number of Names, both English and Latin, not well
given. So what we call Goat's-Rue, is not at all of kin to that Plant, whose
Generical Name it bears. The like may be said of Wild-Tansy,
Stock-July-Flowers, Horseradish, and many more. So also when we say Bellis
Major, and Minor, as we commonly do, these Names would intimate, That the
Plants to which they are given, differ (as the great double Marigold, does from
the less) only in Bulk: whereas, in truth, they are two Species of Plants. So
we commonly say, Centaurium Majus and Minus, Chelidonium Majus and Minus, and
of others in like manner, which yet are distinct Species, and of very different
Tribes. But for the Reason of Vegetation, and the Causes of all those infinite
Varieties therein observable (I mean so far as Matter, and the various
Affections hereof, are instrumental thereunto) almost all Men have seemed to be
unconcerned.

3.. That Nothing hereof remains further to be known, is a Thought not well
Calculated. For if we consider how long and gradual a Journey the Knowledge of
Nature is; and how short a Time we have to proceed therein; as on the one hand,
we shall conclude it our ease and profit, To see how far Others have gone
before us: so shall we beware on the other, That we conceive not unduly of
Nature, whilst we have a just value for Those, who were but her Disciples, and
instructed by Her. Their Time and Abilities both, being short to her; which, as
She was first Designed by Divine Wisdom; so may Her vast Dimensions best be
adjudged of, in being compared Therewith. It will therefore be our Prudence,
not to insist upon the Invidious Question, Which of Her Scholars have taken the
fairest measure of Her; but to be well satisfied, that as yet She has not been
Circumscribed by Any.

4.. Nor does it more behove us to consider, how much of the Nature of
Vegetation may lie before us yet unknown; Than, to believe, a great part
thereof to be knowable. Not concluding from the acknowledged, much less
supposed Insuccessfulnes, of any Men's Undertakings: but from what may be
accounted Possible, as to the Nature of things themselves; and from Divine
Providence, by Infinite Ways conducting to the knowledge of them. Neither can
we determine how great a part This may be: Because, It is impossible to
Measure, what we See not. And since we are most likely to under-measure, we
shall hereby but entrench our Endeavors, which we are not wont to carry beyond
the Idea, which we have of our Work.

5.. And how far soever this kind of Knowledge may be attainable, its being so
far also worthy our attainment will be granted. For beholding the Many and
Elegant Varieties, wherewith a Field or Garden is adorned; Who would not say,
That it were exceeding pleasant to know what we See: and not more delightful,
to one who has Eyes, to discern that all is very fine; than to another who has
Reason, to understand how. This surely were for a Man to take a True Inventory
of his Goods, and his best way to put a price upon them. Yea it seems, that
this were not only to be Partaker of Divine Bounty; but also, in some degree,
To be Copartner in the Secrets of Divine Art. That which were very desirable,
unless we should think it impertinent for us to design the Knowing of That,
which God has once thought fit to Do.

6.. If for these, and other Reasons, an inquiry into the Nature of Vegetation
may be of good Import; It will be requisite to see, first of all, What may
offer it self to be enquired of; or to understand, what our Scope is: That so
doing, we may take our aim the better in making, and having made, in applying
our Observations thereunto. Amongst other Inquiries therefore, such as these
deserve to be proposed. First, by what means it is that a Plant, or any Part of
it, comes to Grow, a Seed to put forth a Root and Trunk; and this, all the
other Parts, to the Seed again; and all these being formed, by continual
Nutrition still to be increased. How the Aliment by which a Plant is fed, is
duly prepared in its several Parts; which way it is conveyed unto them; and in
what manner it is assimilated to their respective Natures in them all. Whence
this Growth and Augmentation, is not made of one, but many differing Degrees,
unto both extremes of small and great; whether the comparison be made betwixt
several Plants, or the several Parts of one. How not only their Sizes, but also
their Shapes are so exceeding various; as of Roots, in being Thick or Slender,
Short or Long, Entire or Parted, Stringed or Ramified, and the like: of Trunks,
some being more Entire, others Branched, others Shrub'd: of Leaves, which are
Long or Round, Even-edg'd or Escallop'd, and many other ways different, yet
always Flat: and so for the other Parts. Then to inquire, What should be the
reason of their various Motions; that the Root should descend; that its descent
should sometimes be perpendicular, sometimes more level: That the Trunk does
ascend; and that the ascent thereof, as to the space of Time wherein it is
made, is of different measures: and of diverse other Motions, as they are
observable in the Roots, Trunks, and other Parts of Plants. Whence again, these
Motions have their Different, and Stated Terms; that Plants have their set and
peculiar Seasons for their Spring or Birth, for their Full Growth, and for
their Teeming; and the like. Further, what may be the Causes as of the Seasons
of their Growth; so of the Periods of their Lives; some being Annual, others
Biennial, others Perennial; some Perennial both as to their Roots and Trunks;
and some as to their Roots only. Then, as they pass through these several
Seasons of their Lives, in what manner their convenient feeding, housing,
clothing or protection otherwise, is contrived; wherein, in this kind and
harmonious Economy, one Part, may be officious to another, for the
preservation of the health and life of the whole. And lastly, what care is
taken, not only for themselves, but for their Posterity; in what manner the
Seed is prepared, formed and fitted for Propagation: and this being of so great
concernment, how sometimes the other Parts also, as Roots, in putting forth
Trunks; Trunks in putting forth Roots; yea in turning oftentimes into Roots
themselves; whereof, in the Second Book of the Anatomy of Plants, I shall give
some instances. With other Heads of Inquiry of this kind.

7.. Nor are the Natures, Faculties, and Contents of Vegetables less various,
or a particular Inspection hereinto, of less concernment. For since All, or
Most, seem to grow in the same manner, with one Sun, one Rain, indifferently
well upon one Soil, and, to outward appearance, to have the same Common Parts;
it may be asked, How it comes to pass, that their Liquors, or other Contained
Parts, are of such different Kinds; one being Watery, another Winy, a third
Oily, a fourth Milky, and the like. How also there is such a variety in their
Sensible Qualities, as their Colors, Tastes, and Smells; what those Materials
are, which are necessary to the Being of these Qualities; and those
Formalities, wherein their Essence does consist; as what it is that makes a
Plant, or Flower, to be White or red; fragrant or fetid; bitter or sweet; or to
be of any other Color, Smell, or Taste. In like manner, their Faculties and
Powers, what that is, or those things are, by which they are constituted; as
whence one becomes Purgative, another Vomitory, a third Diaphoretick, etc,
These, I say, with many other particular Inquiries depending hereupon; as they
cannot but much oblige the Reason of Man to be obsequious to them, so by
bringing in, at least, some satisfaction, will no less reward it. Especially,
if it be withal considered, that besides our satisfaction as to the Nature of
Vegetation; some further Light, to diverse other parts of Knowledge, may
likewise hence arise.

8.. For since the present Design will engage us, to an accurate and
multifarious Observation of Plants; we may hereby be enabled to range and sort
them with more certainty, according to the Degrees of their Affinity. And all
Exoticks, Plants or Parts of Plants, may probably be reduced to some such
Domestics, unto which they may bear the best Resemblance. Again, it may
frequently conduct our minds to the consideration of the State of Animals; as
whether there are not diverse material Agreements betwixt them both; and what
they are. Wherein also they may considerably differ, and what those things are
which are more essential to their distinguishment. And besides, not only to
compare what is already known of both; but also, by what may be observed in the
one, to suggest and facilitate the finding out of what may yet be unobserved in
the other. So also the consideration of the Colors, Smells and Tastes of
Vegetables, may conduce to the Knowledge of the same Qualities in General; or
of what it is, that constitutes them such, in any other Body: not as they are
actually received by Sense; but so far, as such Materials or external
Circumstances, are requisite to their becoming the Adequate Objects thereof. It
may lead us also to inquire into further Ways of Cultivation, with respect to
the whole Plant, or to the Flower, Fruit, or other Part: To amend them as to
their Sizes, Colors, Tastes, Fruitfulness, or otherwise: To think of other
Ways of Propagation; or to apply those already known to other Plants than has
been used. Likewise the Knowledge of their Mechanical Uses may hereby be
enlarged; both as to the Reason of their use, in such particular Trades and
Manufactures, already known; and the discovery of other uses yet unknown. As
also their Alimental, with respect both to Meats and Drinks; the preparation of
some, and the finding out of others. But especially their Medicinal; some
Plants which have hitherto been neglected, may be applied to use; the Perverted
uses of some, and the Confused uses of others, may be rectified. What may best
correct their Malignancies, or enforce their Virtues; When needful to add the
preparations of Art to That of Nature; How to Enlarge those of Art, and
Rectify those which are indeed Inartificial, may hereby be better conjectured.
The knowledge of all which, that we may know how far it is accessible, and what
probable Approaches may be made toward it; those several Means I have thought
of, and suppose necessary thereunto, are next to be proposed.

9.. Reflecting then upon the present Design, and seeing this to lie wide; we
shall, in the first place, conclude the Means attending thereon, should do so
likewise. Wherefore, although some may present themselves unto us as more
promising; yet let us suppose what several Persons, were they hereunto engaged,
each according to his Sense and Genius, would possibly make choice of.
Believing, that although Considering Men may vary, in the approval of their own
Sense and Notion; yet not always mearly, because it is their own; but because
each, may probably see somewhat more in his own, than others do. Wherefore it
will be our surest Logic to conclude, Not because no Mean may be approved by
all Men, that all Means should be rejected; but rather, because each may be
approved by some, that therefore, all be made choice of. And these, I think,
may be comprehended under Five General Heads of Enquiry. First, Of those
Things, which are of more External Consideration about Plants, as their
Figures, etc. Secondly, Of their Compounding Parts, as Vessels, etc. Thirdly,
Of their Liquors, and other Contents. Fourthly, Of their Principles, as Salts,
etc. Fifthly, Of their Aliment, as Water, and other Means of Growth.

10.. AND FIRST of all, The First General Mean.
whatever is of more External Consideration, as the Figures, Proportions,
Motions, Seasons, Situations of Vegetables, and of their several Parts, should
be observed. In doing which, a particular survey of all their Varieties should
be taken. And then a Comparison made betwixt these, and the several Plants, or
Parts of Plants, whereof they are the Properties. To the end, We may, if
possible, be thereby conducted to find out, what other, either sensible, or
more recluse Property, any of them may agree together in. For it is not more
certain, that the three Angles of every Rectilinear Triangle, because all ways
equal to two Right Angles, are therefore, if put together, always the same:
than that one Property, agreeing to diverse Vegetables, should have one Cause:
For although the Scope and End may vary; yet the Cause, as it is the Cause of
that Property, must be one: and consequently, must also import some Identity in
the Nature of all those Vegetables wherein it Acts. Wherefore by thus comparing
of them, we shall be able more exactly to state the Orders and Degrees of their
Affinities; Better to understand both the Causes and Ends of their Varieties:
And more probably to conjecture of their Natures and Virtues.

11.. First then the various Figures of their several Parts should be observed;
and that with respect both to the Forms, and the Positions, by which their
Roots, Trunks, Branches, Leaves, Flowers, Fruits, and Seeds may vary, or agree;
and those several Lines, by which both the said Varieties are determined. In
which of these Parts, the agreement chiefly lies; this being both more
observable, and more material in some of them; less in the Root, more in the
Flower, or Seed. And in how many of these Parts together; whether one, more, or
all. By both which, the Orders and Degrees of Affinity, which are many, may be
accounted; either as to what we strictly call Kindred, or else Analogy. For
there are found, not only Herbs accounted of several Tribes, which are allied;
and some of the Smallest, which are of kin to the Greatest: But there are also,
probably, some Herbs, which have a particular Relation, to many Kinds of
Shrubs; and some Shrubs, to many Kinds of Trees. Thus the several sorts of
Letuce, are of Kin, together in the First Degree; with Endive, in the Second.
The several Clarys, amongst themselves in the First; with Horehound, in the
Second; with Lamium, in the Third. All Strawberries agree together, in the
First Degree; with Cinquefoyl, in the Second; with Tormentil in the Third; and
with Avens, etc. in other Degrees more remote. So Agrimony, has alike Analogy
unto Strawberry; as Goats-Rue, has to Claver: And Strawberry, the like unto
the Rasp; as Goosberry to the Vine; or Burnet, to the Rose. Amongst the several
Sorts of Grass, there are some which match all those of Corn; which is but a
greater kind of Grass. So again all Pulse, are not only of kin, in their
several Degrees, to one another; but likewise, to almost all kinds of Trefoyls,
as Melilot, Foenugreek, and the common Clavers themselves; as by comparing not
only their Leaves, but Flowers, Seeds, and Cods together, may be evident. For
the several parts of the Flower of a Trefoyl, are so many more Flowers,
containing so many Cods of small Seeds, all, in shape, agreeable to the
Flowers, Cods, and Seeds of Pulse. The same Relation, which Trefoyls have to
the Peace or other Pulse; Coltsfoot, has to Buttyr-Bur; Chickweed to
Leu^anthemum; Ground-sell, to Jacobaea, or Scorodonia, to Foxglove: Or, to go
higher, as the Leguminous Kinds of Herbs, have to Sena, or some other of the
Lobed Shrubs and Trees. And, as among Animals, there are some which connect
several Kinds; as the Batt does Beasts and Birds: So, among Plants, there are
some also, which seem to stand between two Tribes; as Lappa, between Knapweeds
and Thistles; Lampsana, between the Intybaceous Kind, and the Mouse-ears.

12.. From hence likewise, the Natures of Plants may be conjectured. For in
looking upon diverse Plants, though of different Names and Kinds; yet if some
a^^inity may be found betwixt them, then the Nature of any one of them being
well known, we have thence ground of conjecture, as to the Nature of all the
rest. So that as every Plant may have somewhat of Nature individual to it self;
so, as far as it obtains any Visible Communities with other Plants, so far,
may it partake of Common Nature with those also. Thus the Wild, and Garden
Cucumers, have this difference; that the one purges strongly, the other, not
at all: yet in being Diuretic, they both agree. The Natures of Umbelliferous
Plants, we know, are various; yet it is most probable, that they all agree in
this one, scil. in being Carminative. The several sorts, both of Corn and
Grass, are all akin; there is no doubt therefore, but that the Seeds of Grass
themselves (of Rye and Oats it is tried) if it were worth the while to order
them, as Barley, would yield an inflammable Spirit. So likewise the several
Kinds of Pulse, have some one community in their Form, as is said: for which
reason, I question not, but that in some Cases, wherein Cicers are esteemed a
good Medicine; a Decoction of the better sort of Pease, especially that we call
the Sugar-Pease, may go beyond them. As does also the Flower or Meal of Beans,
that of the Seeds of Foenugreek; even there, where they are accounted
excellent. So Tulips, Lillies, Crocuses, Jacynths, and Onions themselves, with
many others, in their several Degrees, are all allied. If therefore Crocuses,
Onions, Lillies, agree in one or more Faculties, then why may not all the rest?
as in being Anodyne; or in some other Common Nature; whereby, in their
Vegetation, their Parts are Governed and Overruled, to one Common or Analogous
Form.

13.. The Proportions likewise, amongst the several Parts of Vegetables, for
the same Reasons, deserve to be observed; the comparison being made, both
betwixt the Parts of several Plants, and the several Parts of one. And here
again, either betwixt any Two of the Parts, or any One of them, and the Whole
besides, or all the rest put together. So some larger Seeds, produce a small
Root; as those of Cucumer: and others smaller, produce one very great; as those
of Bryony. Some Plants, as the Melon, though themselves but very slender, yet
have a vast and bulky Fruit; others again, as Thistles, and many yet more
substantial, have no other Fruit, besides their Seed. So the Seeds of all
Pulse, and especially, the Garden Bean, though large, yet produce but a small
Plant: but those of Foxglove, Mullen, Burdock, Sun-flower, etc. being
themselves much less, do yet produce a far greater. And especially, those
Seeds, which are enclosed in the Thicker sort of Cover, (analogous to that I
have elsewhere called the Secondine) as that of Peony; Anat. Plant. Book 1.
Chap. ult.
whose Seed, so called, is only the Nest wherein the true and real Seed is
lodged, no bigger than a little Pins head: which is also observable of the
Seeds of diverse other Plants. These, and the like Proportions, as they lie
betwixt the several Parts, should be noted: and to what Plants or Parts
especially, any of them may agree: comparing also in what other kind of
Properties an agreement betwixt the said Parts may be found: that so doing, we
may, if possible, amongst all their Individual Natures, be instructed to single
out those Common Ones, which are concomitant to such Agreeing Properties.

14.. The several Seasons also of Plants, and of their Parts, should be
considered. Observing at what particular Times of the Year, any of them chiefly
Spring, Early or Late. The Times wherein they Germinate; whether for some Space
only, or all the Year long. Wherein they Spring, after Sowing; or Flower, after
Springing, sooner, or slower. Which Flower, the first Year, or not till the
second. Which after the Leaves are put forth, or before them; for so, some do,
as the Crocus Vernus, Bears-foot, Hepatica aurea, and others; all the Leaves,
at the time of their flowering, being old, or of the foregoing Year's growth.
So likewise the Maturation of the Fruit or Seed; how long after the Flower, and
the like. All or some of which Varieties, being laid together, we may probably
conjecture the Causes thereof; and the Natures of the Plants in which they are
seen: scil. as such a Degree of Heat may be necessary for the Fermentation, or
the better Distribution of the Sap of such a Plant; or for the Impregnation of
the Aer, to be mixed therewith; or the due Disposing of the Soil, to render the
most convenient Aliment thereunto. So the Principles of such Plants, which
flower all the Year, may be more equally proportioned. Those which flower
before the Leaves put forth, as the Crocus Vernus, and those which flower in
Spring, may be accounted Rank, and full of Volatile Salt. But Autumn Plants
especially, to abound with a Fixed: and the like.

15.. The proper Places also of Plants, or such wherein they have, from their
Seeds, or other way of Propagation, a Spontaneous growth, should be considered.
And that as to the Climate; whether in one Colder, Temperate, or more Hot. The
Region; Continent, or Island. The Seat; as Sea, or Land, Watery, Boggy, or Dry;
Hills, Plains, or Valleys; Open, in Woods, or under Hedges; Against Walls,
rooted in them, or on their Tops: and the like. And perhaps the Seeds of some
Plants, as of Mosses, (which, through their smallness, will ascend like Moths
in the Sun) may fly or swim for some time, in the Aer, viz. till they begin to
shoot, and so become heavy enough, to fall down upon the Ground. From whence,
in like manner, as from their Seasons, their particular Natures may be directed
unto. In that, so far as we may conjecture the nature of such an Aer, Soil, or
Seat, we may also of such a Plant, to which they are congenial.

16.. So likewise, those many Varieties observable in the Motions of Plants,
and of their Parts, both Kinds and Degrees; Ascending, Descending, and
Horizontal; Rectilinear, and Spiral Motions, should be noted; to what Plants
they agree, and wherein any of these Motions may be analogous to those of
Animals. And in a word, any other Forensick Properties of Plants. And then, to
Compare them all together; both being necessary. For Thoughts cannot work upon
nothing, no more than Hands. He that will build an House, must provide
Materials. And on the contrary, the Materials will never become an House,
unless, by certain Rules, we join them all together. So, it is not, simply, the
Knowledge of many things, but a multifarious Copulation of them in the Mind,
that becomes prolifick of further Knowledge. And thus much for the first
General Mean.

17.. THE NEXT which I propose, The Second General Mean.
and that a most necessary one, is Anatomy. For when upon the Dissection of
Vegetables, we see so great a difference in them, that not only their Outward
Figures, but also their Inward Structure, is so Elegant; and in all, so
Various; it must needs lead us thus to Think, That these Inward Varieties, were
either to no End; or if they were, we must assign to what. To imagine the
first, were exceeding vain; as if Nature, the Handmaid of Divine Wisdom, should
with Her fine Needle and Thread, stitch up so many several Pieces, of so
difficult, and yet so groundless a Work. But if for some End, then either only
to be looked upon, or some other besides. If for this only, then this must be
such as in respect whereof, Her Work is at no time, nor in any degree
frustrate; the contrary whereunto, is most manifest. For although Men do every
where, with frequent pleasure, behold the Outward Elegancies of Plants; yet the
Inward Ones, which, generally, are as Precise and Various as the Outward; we
see, how usual it is, for the beholding of These, to be omitted by them. And
besides, when we have observed Nature's Work, as well as we can; it may be no
impediment to our best Endeavors, to believe, That some Parts of it, will
still remain behind, Unseen. So that if to be Seen, were the only End of it, it
must needs be wholly frustrate, as to the greater number of Men; and, in some
part, as to all. Wherefore, we must suppose some other Ends of the said
Varieties, which should have their Effect, and so These, not be in vain,
whether Men beheld them or not; which, are, therefore, such as have respect to
Vegetation: That the Corn might grow, so; and the Flower, so, whether or no Men
had a mind, leisure, or ability, to understand how.

18.. If then the Anatomy of Vegetables be so useful a Mean, we ought not to
streighten it; but to force this, as well as the rest, to its utmost Extent.
And therefore, first of all, To go through all the Parts, with equal care;
examining the Root, Trunk, Branch, Leaf, Flower, Fruit, and Seed. Then to
Repeat or Retrograde the Dissection, from Part to Part: in that, although the
best Method of Delivery, for clear Discourse, can be but one, according to that
of Nature, from the Seed forward, to the Seed: yet can it not but be useful,
for That of Dissection, to proceed to and fro; somewhat or other being more
Visible in each several Part, from whence still an Hint may be taken, for the
ushering in the observation of it in the others. To examine, again, not only
all the Parts, but Kinds of Vegetables, and comparatively, to observe diverse of
the same size, shape, motion, age, sap, quality, power, or any other way the
same, which may also agree, in some one or more particulars, as to their
Interior Structure: and to make this comparison, throughout all their Parts
and Properties. To observe them likewise, in several Seasons of the Year, and
in several Ages of the Plants, and of their Parts; in both which, diverse of
them may be noted to change, not only their Dimensions, but their Natures also;
as Vessels, do into Ligaments; and Cartilages, into Bones, sometimes, in
Animals. And to do all this by several Ways of Section, Oblique, Perpendicular,
and Transverse; all three being requisite, if not to Observe, yet the better to
Comprehend, some Things. And it will be convenient sometimes to Break, Tear, or
otherwise Divide, without a Section. Together with the Knife it will be
necessary to join the Microscope; and to examine all the Parts, and every Way,
in the use of That. As also, that both Immediate, and Microscopical
Inspections, be Compared: since it is certain, That some things, may be
demonstrated by Reason and the Eye conjunct, without a Glass, which cannot be
discovered by it; or else the discovery is so dark, as which, alone, may not be
safely depended on.

19.. By these several Ways of Inspection, it will be requisite, To observe
their Compounding Parts; as Simply considered, and as variously Proportioned,
and Disposed. As Simply considered, to note their Number; what, and whether the
same, in all: their Kinds, wherein different in the same, or diverse Vegetables:
their Original, in part, or in whole: Structure, as to their Contexture and
their Cavities; Their Contexture, within themselves severally, and as joined
together: their Cavities, as to their Size, Shape, and Number; in which a great
variety will be sound. Next their Positions one amongst another, which are also
various; as Anterior, Posterior, Collateral, Surrounding, Mediate, Immediate,
Near, Remote; both as they respect the several Parts, and the several portions
of one: And all these, as few, or more; these or others of them, may be
diversely Compounded together. And then the Proportions they bear one to
another; whether as to Minority, Equality, or Excess; each Part compared with
each, and that as to the several Degrees appearing in the said Proportions; the
Varieties whereof may be exceeding numerous. For if we should suppose but Four
considerable Parts generally constitutive of a Vegetable: These Four, produce a
Variety Four ways. First, when One is Unequal; and then it produces only Four
Varieties: and those two ways, scil. when one is Greater, and the other three,
Equal and Less; or when one is Less; and the other three, Equal and Greater.
Secondly, when Two be Unequal; and then they produce Six Varieties. Thirdly,
when Three be Unequal, which produces Twelve Varieties. Or lastly, when all
Four be Unequal; which produces Twenty four: which general Varieties, may be
further multiplied by their several Degrees.

20.. From all which, we may come to know, what the Communities of Vegetables
are, as belonging to all; what their Distinctions, to such a Kind; their
Properties, to such a Species; and their Peculiarities, to such Particular
ones. And as in Metaphysical, or other Contemplative Matters, when we have a
distinct knowledge of the Communities and Differences of Things, we may then be
able to give their true Definitions: so may we possibly, here attain, to do
likewise: not only to know, That every plant Inwardly differs from another, but
also wherein; so as not more surely to Define by the Outward Figure, than by
the Inward Structure, What that is, or those things are, whereby any Plant, or
Sort of Plants, may be distinguished from all others. And having obtained a
knowledge of the Communities and Differences amongst the Parts of Vegetables;
it may conduct us through a Series of more facile and probable Conclusions, of
the ways of their Causality, as to the Communities and Differences of
Vegetation. And thus much for the Second General Mean.

21.. HAVING THUS far examined the Organical and Containing Parts of
Vegetables; The Third General Mean.
it will be requisite, more designedly, to observe those also which are Fluid,
or any others Contained in them: and that, for our better understanding both of
the Nature of Vegetation, and of the said Contained Parts. And to make inquiry,
First of their Kinds; as Spirits; both such as agree, in general, in being
Vinous; and those that are Special, to particular Plants. Aers and Vapors; for
the existence whereof, in all Vegetables, there are Arguments certainly
concluding. And for the difference of their Natures, in being more dry, or
moist, more simple or compounded, as they are existent in several Parts, there
are probable ones. Lympha's or clear and watery Saps; which most Plants, in one
Part or other, at some time of the Year, do Bleed Mucilages; as in Mallow and
Violet Leaves; in many Seeds, as of Quinces, Clary; Fruits, as in Cucumers;
distinct from the watery Sap, as by permitting it to stand and gelly upon the
Vessels from whence it issues, is plain: And in the young Berrys of White
Bryony, when about the bigness of a Pepper-Corn; the juice whereof is so
Viscous, that the twentieth part of a Grain, will draw out above a Yard in
length. Oils; not only in Seeds, and some Fruits, but other Parts; as in
certain little cavities in the Leaves of Savine, visibly collected while they
are growing. Gumms or Resines; as in Pine, Fir, and others of this Kind. Milks;
as in a vast number of Plants, and amongst them, many not suspected to yield
any. For, of Herbs, not only most of the Umbelliferous Kind, are Milky; but all
or most of the Intybous; Poppys; Tracheliums; Perwinkles; diverse Thistles; and
even Onions, if cut at the bottom; with a great many more. Of Trees, not only
the Little Maple, but the young Shoots of Laurel, especially being crushed; as
also those of Elder, and some others. To which may be added, such Mucilages,
which though not so properly contained within the Parts, yet are found lying
over them; as over the first Spring-leaves of all kinds of Docks; betwixt the
Leaves and the Veil wherein they are involved. That fine white Flower or
Powder, which lies over the Leaves of some Plants, as of Bears-Ear: And in
Princes-Feather, about certain Apertures only on the edges of the Leaves.

22.. Of all these should be observed, first their Receptacles; some of them,
being proper to one; others, common to two or more of them: since it is
certain, that some of them do Transmigrate from one, into another Receptacle,
or that the same Receptacle is filled with Fluid Bodies of a quite different
Nature, at the different Seasons of the Year, and Ages of the Vegetable. And it
is also very probable, That two of some of them, may, sometimes, be contained
in one Receptacle, at the same time; as in Animals, the Lympha in the D.
Thora^icus, and that, and the Chyle, in the Sanguineous Vessels.

23.. Then their Motions; both Natural, and such as may be effected by Art: and
those either by Descent or Ascent; And in ascending, through what different
Channels or Parts of the Trunk; since it is certain, That there is a variety,
both in respect of the Season, and of Vegetables. Where it will fall in, To
observe the Tapping of Trees. As also their Bleeding: to what Trees it is
proper to bleed: in those to which it is, with what difference of Celerity: and
when their peculiar Season: for none will bleed at all times; neither will all
bleed at the same. And then their Collateral Motion, together with the Mode of
their Transition from one Organical Part to another.

24.. Next their Quantities, either of one; as the Comparison is made betwixt
several Plants, or betwixt the Parts of the same. So the true Seed of all
Plants, contains more Oil, in proportion, than any of the other Parts. Or
else of diverse, as coexistent and bearing such a proportion one to another in
the same Part: of most of which, it may be known by their respective
Receptacles. Yet the Computation must not be made from the number of the said
Receptacles, simply; but as that is in conjunction with their Capacity; and as
their Capacity is proportioned to their surrounding Sides; the Sides of those
of the least Capacity, being usually as thick, as those of the greatest: so
that suppose Ten lesser, to lie within the compass of One greater; the Content
of these altogether, would scarce be equal to half the Content of than One.

25.. Also their Consistence; scil: of so many of them as are discriminable by
Touch; in being Soft or Hard; Thin or Thick; Muc^laginous, Gummous, Glutinous,
Friable, etc. And these in their several Degrees; in which there is a Variety,
as in the Milks of some Plants, which are more Dilute, than that of others:
Mucilages; which in some, are very thick and Viscous, in others, more diluted
and coming nearer to a watery Sap. And by This, to be compared in the same
manner, as by their Quantity.

26.. Likewise their Colors, Smells, and Tastes: The general and particular
Kinds of all which should be noted. And to what Contained Parts, and in what
Variety, they appertain. So most Resinous Gumms are Tinctured, some, not; as
that which drops from the Domestic Pine, is as clear as Rock-water. The Milks
of some Plants are Paler, as in Burdock; of other Whiter, as in Dandelyon,
Scorzonera; Citrine, as in the Root of Trachelium, Angelica; Yellow, as in
Lovage. In some Plants, Odorous, as in Umbelliferous; in others not, as in
Cichoraceous. That of Little Maple, Tastless; of Garden Chervil, Sweet; of
Fenil, Hot; of Scorzonera, Astringent; of Dandelion, Bitter; and generally, in
other Plants; but with many Degrees of Strength, and in conjunction with other
Tastes. But most Mucilages, have little either Color, Taste, or Smell; and the
like. Here also the same Qualities are to be inquired into, as, in general
speaking, they are said to belong to a Vegetable. Since it is more than
probable, that all Colors (excepting White, which is sometimes common both to
Containing and Contained Parts) all Odours, and Tastes, which are more
immediately, and without a resolution of their Essential Principles,
perceptible in a Plant; are not ascribable either to the Organical, or
Containing Parts; but only to Those, Contained in them; as from diverse reasons
hereafter may appear.

27.. And first, their Colors; where, with respect to several Plants and
Parts, they are more Changeable; as Red, in Flowers; or Constant, as Green, in
Leaves. Which, with respect to several Ages of one Part, are more fading, as
Green in Fruits; or durable, as Yellow in Flowers, In what Parts more Single,
as always in the Seed; or more Compounded, as in the Flower; and in what Plants
more especially, as in Pancy. Which proper to Plants that have such a Taste or
Smell, as both, in White Flowers, are usually less strong. To Plants that
flower in such a Season, as a Yellow Flower, I think, chiefly, to Spring
Plants. And to Plants that are natural to such a Soil or Seat, as to
Water-plants, more usually, a white Flower. What, amongst all Colors, more
Common to Plants, as Green; or more Rare, as Black. And what all these
Varieties of Colors are upon Cultivation, but chiefly, in their natural Soil.
To observe also with their superficial Colors, those within: so the Roots of
Docks, are Yellow; of Bistort, Red; of Avens, Purple; but of most, White. Where
the Inward, and Superficial Colors agree; as in the Leaves; or vary, as in the
other Parts frequently. And in what manner they are Situated; some universally
spreading, others running only along with the Vessels, as in the Leaves of Red
Dock, and the Flowers of Wood Sorrel.

28.. Next their Odours; what may be their principal Seat; whether one or
diverse Seats in the same Plant. What the chief Matter out of which they are
continually bred. What similitude betwixt the Smells of diverse Vegetables; as
betwixt Baume, and a Limon; the Green Leaves of Meadow-sweet, and the green
Rinds of Walnuts. Or betwixt those of Plants and Animals; as the Smell of green
and well-grown Carduus, is like to that rank scent, ab aliquorum axillis
spiranti. Which have a more sensible Smell; as most have; and which have less,
as Corn. Where the green Leaf is the most Fragrant Part, as in Musk-Cranesbill;
where the Flower, as in Roses; the Root, as in sweet Calamus. Where all the
Parts have some Odor, where some, or one, only; as in Scurvy Grass, only the
Flowers, unless the Leaves are bruised; and in Arum, the Pestil only; for
neither the Leaf, nor Root has any Smell, unless cut; but this is strong
enough, not much unlike to Humane Excrements.

29.. But especially their Tastes, which it much imports us more precisely to
distinguish; First, by their general Kinds; for the number, even of these, may
be computed greater than usually it is. I remember not, that Heat and Acritude,
with respect to Taste, are distinguished; yet Arum-Root is very Pungent,
without any proper Heat; and Cloves, are very Hot, without any proper Pungency.
So the White Roots of Yarrow, have a Taste, hardly any other way perceptible,
than by causing a gentle glowing and continued Warmth upon the Tongue. Also
their Respondencies one to another; as that of Zedoary, and of the lesser
Cardamoms, is somewhat like to Camphire. Likewise their Degrees; in which there
is a great latitude, and may be extended from One to Ten, or with easy
distinction, from One to Five: So the Root of Sorrel, is Bitter in the first;
of Dock, in the second; of Dog-Rose, in the third; of Dandelyon, in the fourth;
of Gentian, in the fifth: observing them, not only as they vary in several
Kinds of Plants, but the several Species of one, as in Cichory, Hawkweed,
Dandelyon. And then their Compositions; for Tastes are as truly conjunct in one
Part, as Colors: by which, the latitude is still greater; In that all Kinds of
Tastes, in all their Degrees, and in differing Numbers, may be variously
Compounded together: For the most part, Two, as in the Leaves of sharp-pointed
Dock, Astringent, and Sour; in Sorrel-Roots, Astringent and Bitter; and in
Aloes, Bitter and Sweet; the one in the fifth, the other, in the first Degree;
as upon an unprejudiced trial may be perceived: and yet more evidently in the
Gall of any Land-Animal. Sometimes three, as in Agrimony, Bitter, Rough, and
Sowrish; and in Agarick, Bitter, Rough, and Sweet. And sometimes, perhaps more.
The Sensible distinctions of all which, may lie almost as wide, as of Plants
themselves. Wherefore, although it may be thought rashness, to take away the
distinctions of Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry, Thin, Gross, and other Qualities, in
their several Degree, which the Ancients have affixed to particular Plants: yet
since they have done it, to many of them, with much uncertainty; and that,
withal, they are, more properly, the Effects and Operations of Plants, than
their Qualites; Practical Observation, may therefore approve it useful, to add
these Sensible Ones of various Tastes, precisely distinguishing their
Conjugations and Degrees. Lastly, their several Varieties and Mutations, with
respect to the Subject wherein they reside, should also be noted, As, of all
Tastes found in Plants, Bitter and Sour, are most common; Sweet and Salt, most
rare. Which latter, is not only perceptible in some Sea-Plants; but upon some
others, as upon the fresh Leaves of Tamarisk; which being licked while they
grow, or when immediately gathered, are plainly Saltish. How they vary with the
Age of the Plant, or Part; as the Roots of Radishes, growing up to Seed, lose
the strength of their Taste; so most Fruits are first Sour, then Sweet. What
proper to the several Parts of any one Plant; so the Leaves of Wormwood are
extraordinary Bitter; the Root scarcely so at all; of an Hot, but quite
different Taste. What more Common, or Rare, to any Part; so no Root that I ever
tasted, is Sour. And how they Alternate in several Plants; as the Root of
Stock-July-flower is biting, not the Leaves; on the contrary, the Leaves of the
Water-Arsmart, are Biting; but not the Root; and the like. To which we may add
the difference of Time wherein the Tastes of Plants are perceived; as those of
Arum, and Rape-Crowfoot, are both Biting; but that of the first, as it is
slowly perceived, so it continues long; that of the other, quickly comes, and
quickly goes.

30.. Amongst the other Adjuncts of the Contained Parts, though not of these
only, the Faculties of Vegetables are to be reputed. For so the Rosin of Jalap,
which is Purgative, is as truly contained in the Organical Parts of that Root,
as Blood is in Veins: It will be requisite therefore to make particular
observation of these also. And first, what Faculties chiefly may reside in
Plants, above others: so there is none of known use in Salivation, except by
holding in the mouth: Although we may ask, Why some amongst them, may not
(being Taken inwardly) have a power to evacuate by This, as well as other
Violent ways? Where the Faculty is more universally spread over all the Parts
of a Vegetable, as in Asarum. Where belonging chiefly or wholly to any
particular Parts or Part; as chiefly to the Root of Rhubarb; and only to the
true and proper Seed of Barbado Nuts. Whether some Faculties, may be proper to
some Parts especially. What conjunction they may have with any sensible
Qualities. So, many Purgers, are not only Resinous and Gummous; But also
Mucilaginous; as Bryony, wild Cucumer, Lapathum Sativum; and therefore probably
Rhubarb, when growing; Mallows, Violets, etc. Such as are Purging and Vomitory,
though some of them have a strong Taste, yet the greater part, and of those,
many of the stronger sort, have no Taste, or not Great; as Senna, Jalap,
Scammony, Hellebore, Asarum, and others. Amongst which, although Hellebore has
a very Durable Taste, yet is it not very High or Great. So also, those that are
most sensibly tasted, are, I think, for the most part, more or less Bitter;
either simply, as Colocynthis; or Bitter, Astringent, as Rhubarb; or Bitter and
Sweet, as Aloe; or Bitter, Astringent, and Sweet, as Agarick. Few are Hot, as
Iris. Or simply Sweet. And though some may be Subacid, that are Mollifying or
Lenitive, yet no proper Purge or Vomit is Sour. Such Plants as are of a soft
and sweetish Taste, without Viscosity, may be accounted good Antiscorbuticks,
especially against the Sea, or other Salt-Scurvey; as are good sweet Pease: And
sometimes the Water or Spirit of the Shells; which may easily be drawn from
them, being first duly fermented, and has a true Vinous Taste; but very mild,
and not unpleasant. Those Plants, whose Parts are not only Hot but Volatile, as
Onions, are generally good for Burns. Such as have a Balsamic Taste or Smell,
with a little Astringency, as Hypericum, Golden-Rod, Lamium Luteum, etc. the
best Wound-Herbs. And such as are gently Bitter, and Pen^trant upon the Tongue,
or in the Throat, as Daisy, Anagallis, good Cleanfers. That such Bodies,
principally, are Anodyne, which are Yellow, I think, is more than a conceit;
Yelks of Eggs, Foenugreek Seeds, Lint-seed Oil, May-Butyr, Marrow, Ping^edo
Humana, Hyos^yamus luteus, Safron, Sulphur, Opium, all Anodyne and Yellow. How
likewise their Faculties and Qualities may vary their Degrees, either
differently or together: so Aloe and Colocynthis, are both Bitter in the
highest Degree; yet Aloe, which is also Sweet, Purges more moderately;
Colocynthis, which is Bitter, but not Sweet, most Violently. How far the
Faculties of Vegetables, as well as their Qualities, may be Compounded; where,
and which chiefly; as Astrictive and Purgative in Rhabarb. Where this Question
may be put, Whether diverse other, and yet more extreme Faculties, as well as
these of Astrictive and Purgative, may not somewhere or other be also found, or
made, to meet: whereby the same Plant, or some Preparation of it, may be most
Potent, and yet most Innocent; the Malignity thereof exerting its Power, and
the Virtue its Sovereignty at the same time. And lastly, what Affinity there
may be betwixt them; as most Plants, that are strong Purgatives, and especially
Vomitories, I think, are also Sternutatory; as white Hellebore, Jalap, Tobacco:
and on the contrary, such as are Sternutatory, are some of the most proper and
most potent Medicines for the Head, Brain, and Genus Nervosum, Taken inwardly,
as ^ilium convalle, etc. and the like.

31.. Thus far a particular observation of the Qualities and Faculties of the
Contents of Vegetables may proceed, as they are existent in their Natural
Estate. From which, although some probable Conjectures may be made, of their
Material and Formal Essences, and of the Causes of their determinate Varieties,
or the Modes of Vegetation necessary thereunto: yet will our Conceptions hereof
be more facile, clear, and comprehensive, if by all other Ways of Observation,
they be likewise examined, according as Experiment may be applicable to any of
them.

32.. As by Con^usion; so some Plants give their Smell, not without Rubbing, or
not so well; as the green Leaves of Stramonium, Scurvygrass, and many more:
others lose it by Rubbing, as the flowers of Violets, Carnations, Borage, etc.
others yield it both ways, as Rosemary, etc. So some Apples mend their Taste,
by Scoaping, and Pears by Rolling, especially that called the Rolling Pear.

33.. By Agitation; which does that, sometimes, by Force, which Digestion, does
by Heat: so any cold Oil and a Syrup being, in a due manner, agitated together,
of two Fluid bodies will become one Consistent, as is known.

34.. By Frigifaction; how far the Juyces of Plants, either without or within
them, may be any of them, or some more than others, subject to Cold: and
thereby to be deprived of their Motion or natural Consistence, or may suffer
alteration in their Color, Taste, or Smell.

35.. By Infusion; where I mean Infusion only in Common Water; So both Cassia
Lignea, and Cinnamon are a little Mucilaginous; but the former most. Some of
the Contents of Plants, may be wholly dissolved in Common Water; some but in
part, others not at all; or very little; which is proper to some Milks, as well
as Gums. The Colors, Smells or Tastes they hereupon yield, are found various;
and in some very unexpected: So the green Leaves of Bawm, being duly infused in
common Water, without any other Body added, tincture it with a clear and deep
Red, near that of Claret Wine, as I have often tried.

36.. By Subsiding; So the Juice of Sorrel, being ordered as that of Grapes,
will, in time, let fall a kind of Tartar or Essential Salt. And so perhaps will
that of many other Plants, without any previous Decoction; although that be
commonly thought to be necessary.

37.. By Digestion with Fermentation; either of the entire Vegetables, or of
the Juyces, or other Contents; and these by themselves, or with common Water.
And hereby to note, what difference may be in the Strength, Celerity, or
Continuance of the Fermentation. Likewise, how their Qualities may thereby be
altered; as the Smell of Violet-flowers, from a most excellent Fragrancy, may,
by Digestion, be reduced to an odious and abominable Stink, like that of the
black Mud of Gutters.

38.. By Digestion with Calefaction; so the Color of the Juice of Limons, from
Transparency (if that be a Color) may be turned to a perfect Red. Whence it is
that many are deceived in the Preparation called the Tincture of Corals;
supposing the Corals to give the Menstruum its Color. Whereas the Menstruum
will obtain it, only by Digestion, without any Corals, mixed with it.

39.. By Decoction; either of Vegetables themselves, or of their Liquors; and
to observe what alterations follow. So Turpentine boiled becomes friable;
Sugar, Bitter, and of a Brown Red. Turnips lose their Biting Taste; Onions,
their Picquancy; yet neither of them convey those self same Qualities to the
Water. The same may be observed in the Decoction of Sweet-Fennel-seeds,
Aniseeds, and others, losing much of their Tastes themselves, and yet conveying
very little of them to the Liquors wherein they are boiled; the greater portion
of their Volatile parts, and so their Virtue and Taste therewith, flying away.
Whereof therefore it is much better to make an Emulsion, than to decoct them;
or to make an Emulsion from them, with their own Decoction, especially if the
Medicine be intended to be Carminative, as I have frequently observed. The
Decoction should also be carried on throughout all degrees to that of an
Extract; by which the Qualities thereof, sometimes, are much altered; as the
Color of all or most green Leaves, from a kind of Yellow, deepens at last into
a dark one, as Black as Pitch.

40.. By Distillations; both with the cold Still, Alembick, Chappel^ and open
Furnace: and to note what Vegetables thus give their Smell or Taste, and in
what Degrees of strength, either under, or over their natural ones; as Mint,
Pennyroyal, and the like, which are Aromatic and Hot, give their Tastes
perfect: but Wormwood, which is Aromatic and Bitter; gives it but by halfs,
pretty fully as Aromatic, little as Bitter. And Carduus, though also so
exceeding Bitter, yet not being Aromatic, yields a much weaker Taste. Also
what Vegetables yield Oil most plentifully; and what difference may be in those
Oils, as to their Color, Weight, or otherwise; as that of Cloves is sometimes
Red; of Cinnamon, limpid; both Ponderous. So to distill Juices, Gums, or other
Contents, with an hot fire; and to see, what Bodies they yield, and of what
Qualities; as Turpentine is known to yield, besides its Oil, a subacid Water;
Vinegar, an Eager Spirit; as that part may be called, which Chemists are wont
to call the Phlegm.

41.. By Arefaction; so Milks which are Liquid, and White in their Natural
Estate, in Standing, grow Gummous, Yellow, and otherwise different, so does
that of Scorzonera; and that of Fenil becomes a Balsamical, but Limpid Oil. The
Roots of Angelica, being dried, and cut by the length, exhibit their small
Veins filled with an Aromatic Rosin. In the whiter parts of Rhubarb, is
gathered a kind of Saline Concret; by which, this Root, in chewing, seems as if
it were a little gritty. Cabbage-Stalks, sliced, and laid in the Shade to dry,
gather on them a kind of Nitrous Hoar. Raisins and Corins contain, not only a
sweet Juice, but also a true Sugar, which lies curdled in the Pulp, as the more
Saline parts do in Green Soap. And the like is gathered on the outside of a
Fig; saving, that it is more Nitrous, as lying next the Aer. The Roots of Arum,
upon drying, lose much of the strength of their Taste; but the contrary may be
noted of many other Roots, which, upon drying, increase it. Some, being cut and
laid by, change their Natural Colors, into Red, Purple, Yellow, Green, or
White; as Liquorish, into White, in some places; and Peony, into Red: and
sometimes into two; as Patience, into Yellow and Red.

42.. By Assation; thus Apples, by roasting, eat more Sour. The Root of
Horseradish, toasted, tastes like a Turnep. Potatoes, Onions, and many other
Roots, and Parts, have their Tastes, either Altered or Refracted; which
chiefly, and in what manner, should be observed. There is one alteration, as
remarkable, as commonly known; and is that which follows upon roasting or
baking in one kind of the Waldensian Pears, which, for a Walden, we corruptly
call a Warden.

43.. By Ustion; wherein some Plants, or Parts of them, burn very quietly;
others, not without violent motions; so Fenil-Seeds, held in the flame of a
Candle, will spit and spurtle, like the Serum of Blood. Some Vegetables lose
their Smell, as Roses; others, keep it, as Rosemary; and others, mend it, as
Lignum Aloes, To note, not only the alteration of their Qualities, but what
they yield; as Turpentine, which, in Distillation, yields Oil and Water, both
limpid; upon Ustion, shows nothing but a black Soot. So Benzoine, by
Distillation, Oil; by Ustion, white Flowers, as is known.

44.. By Calcination; and here to observe, wherein the Caput Mortuum of one,
may differ from, or agree in Nature with that of another; and also to compare
these with those of Animal Bodies. As also in their Quantities. And to compare
them with what they yield by Distillation and Ustion as to both. Thus far they
have been tried singly, or by themselves. They should also be examined,

45.. By Composition; not only with Water, as in simple Infusions, etc. but
with any other Bodies, which may have a power of acting upon them, or upon
which, these may have a power to act. And so to make Infusions, Destillations,
Decoctions, Digestions, in diverse kinds of Liquors, as Vinegar, Urine, Spirit
of H. H. Wine, Blood, Milk, or others. So in Infusions, some Red Colors are
heightened by Acids; Blews, turned Purple. So fetid Spirits (as of H. H.) may be
rendered much more grateful, by being Rectified, once or twice, with fresh
Aromaticks, To observe also what follows, upon mixing the Liquors, or other
Parts of Plants together; as Oil of Turpentine, by Digestion with a Lixivial
Salt, extracteth thence a Red Tincture. Or with Salts, Earths, Metals, or any
other Bodies; as the Juice of the green Leaves of Rasberry, Primrose, and
diverse other Plants (I think principally such as are Astringent) expressed upon
Steel, as it dries, becomes of a Purple Color.

46.. Lastly, by Compounding the Experiment it self, or joining two or more of
them, upon the same matter: as Fermentation and Destillation, as is used for
some Waters. Infusion and Fermentation, as in making of Beer. Fermentation and
Coction, or rather Assation, as in making of Bread. Arefaction and
Destillation, as may be tried upon some Herbs; and with what difference from
what may be noted, upon their being distilled, moist.

47.. Having proceeded thus far, by all the above particular Ways of
Observation; a Comparative Prospect must be taken of them: by which, at last,
the Communities and Differences of the Contents of Vegetables, may be
discerned; the manner of their Causation and Original, partly, be judged of;
and wherein it is, that the Essence of their several Natures and Qualities does
consist, in some measure comprehended. And consequently, both from the
knowledge of their particular Natures, and the Analogy found betwixt them; we
may be able, better to conjecture, and try, what any of them are, or may be
good for. For certainly, we shall then know, more readily, to apply things
unto, and more fitly to prepare them for, their Proper Uses, when we first
know, what they are. Notwithstanding, since the Faculties of Plants, do often
lie more recluse; it is best, therefore, not wholly to acquiesce in such
Conjectures, as their Tastes, or other Sensible Properties may suggest; but to
subjoyn Experiment. In making of which, and in passing a Judgment thereupon,
many Cautions, both in respect of the Plant whereof, and the Subject whereupon
it is made, are requisite to be attended. Which yet, in regard they result not
so directly from the Matter at present in hand; I shall not, therefore, here
insist upon them, And thus much for the Third General Mean.

48.. THE Contents of the Organical Parts of Vegetables, The Fourth General
Mean.
having been thus duly Examined: it will be requisite to make the like Inquiry,
into their Principles; or the Bodies, immediately concurrent and essential to
their Being. And of these, we are to observe, First, their Number; whether well
reducible to five, six, seven, or more, or fewer: and the Special Differences
observable under any one General; since there are many Bodies, of very
different Natures, confounded under one Name. Next their Conjugation; which
they are, that either under or over those observable in animal, or other
Bodies, are here joined together in a Plant; How far common to the Organical
Parts of diverse Plants; or to the several Organical Parts of one; or how far
different in them. So the predominant Principle of the Parenchymous Parts of a
Plant, that it is an Acid, seems evident, From the general Nature of Fruits;
and of Corn; and most Parenchymous Roots, which are either Spirituous, or
Sower, or by Digestion, do easily become such. Likewise their Proportions;
which stand in the greatest, which in the least, or in the meaner Quantities,
and in what Degrees; both in diverse Vegetables, and in the several Organical
Parts of one. And then the Concentration and Union of them altogether; as to
the degrees of their Closeness or Laxity; or the manner of their Implication
and Coherency; or as to their Location, one being more Central, another more
Exposed and Rampant over the rest; or otherwise different. To examine these
Principles, by their Color, Taste, Smell, Consistence, Fixedness, Volatility,
Weight, Figures, or other Accidents. And to these purposes, to go through the
formentioned Ways of Experiment; as Ustion, Calcination, Destillation, etc. as
any of them may appear applicable hereunto. So the Essential Salt of Wormwood,
which may be obtained from the Lixivial; is Bitter, transparent, and commonly,
of a Cylindrick figure: whereas that which is obtained by Coction, or from the
Extract, is tastless, greyish, and almost Cubick: and that in the Extract of
the Green Leaves of Violets, appears in fine transparent Shoots, like so many
little Needles. And it is probable, That the Salts of most Kinds of Plants,
whether Lixivial or Essential; and of these, whether obtained by Decoction, or
otherwise, have either their Figure, or other Qualities, proper to themselves,
whereby they are all distinguished one from another. And lastly, to make
Experiment upon these Principles, mixing them with one another, or with other
Bodies, or otherwise.

49.. I know it will be difficult to make observations of this kind upon the
Organical Parts of Plants, severally. Yet I have thought of some Ways, whereby
true and undeceivable ones may be made. And the better to illustrate what I
mean, I shall give one or two Instances of Trial to this purpose. For the
making of which, and some others of the like nature, I considered, That upon
the Anatomical Analysis of all the Parts of a Plant, I had certainly found,
(and shall hereafter show) That in all Plants, there are Two, and only Two
Organical Parts Essentially distinct, viz. The Pithy Part, and the Lignous
Part, or such others as are analogous to either of These. So that, if we can
think of any Plants, which will afford us either of these two, though not
perfectly, yet in some good measure, simple and unmixed: We may then see, by
putting them to a Chemical, Test, what Principles and Proportion of Principles,
concur to specify their Substantial Forms.

50.. To the Pithy Part, Starch, or pure Manchet is analogous, as having very
little of the Lignous mixed with them. I therefore ordered lb ij of Starch to
be put into a Retort, and with a Receiver affixed, to be set in a Sand Furnace;
and that all it would yield, should, by degrees, be forced over; which, besides
what was evaporated at the Neck of the Receiver, was about lb j. of an acid and
eager Liquor, of a heavy and blackish Oil ss, and of a light Oil j. The Caput
Mortuum could not be reduced to Ashes, by the strongest heat which a naked fire
in that Furnace would produce.

51. To the Lignous Part, Hemp or Flax is analogous, having very little of the
Pithy mixed with them. I caused therefore lb ij of Flax to be put into a
Retort, and managed as the Starch: whereupon, it yielded a Liquor, as I
remember, somewhat like the former, and about the same quantity; no Oil which
remained liquid, when cold; but instead of that a Butyr, almost of the
Consistence and Color of the Oil of Mace; and of this above iij, or near six
times the quantity of the Oil which was yielded by the Starch. The Caput
Mortuum being burned to a white Ash, yielded some portion of a Lixivial Salt.

52.. From whence, I shall, at present, only make these two Remarques; First,
That although the chief portion, as to quantity, in both these Bodies, (as in
most Plants) is an Acid Liquor; yet the latter, yields also some of an Alkaly,
which the other does not. So that they are the Lignous Parts of a Plant,
generally, which yield the Alkalick Salt, or at least in the greatest
Proportion. Secondly, That the Sulphurious or Oleous Principle, is also much
more predominant in the Lignous Part, than in the Pithy. To these, the like
Trials upon other Plants, should be added; and other ways. So, in regard the
Soot of most Woods, yields a Volatile Alkaly; it were fit to examine, Whether
the Soot which is made of the Pithy Parts and that, of the Lignous, afford the
said Alkaly, in equal qantity; or whether, as is most likely, that of the
Lignous does afford it in a far greater: and the like.

53.. The prosecution of what is here proposed, will be requisite, To a fuller
and clearer view, of the Modes of Vegetation, of the Sensible Natures of
Vegetables, and of their more Recluse Faculties and Powers. First, of the Modes
of Vegetation. For suppose we were speaking of a Root; from a due consideration
of the Properties of any Organical Part or Parts thereof; it is true, that the
real and genuine Causes may be rendered, of diverse other dependent Properties,
as spoken generally of the whole Root. But it will be asked again, What may be
the Causes of those first and Independent ones? Which, if we will seek, we must
do it by inquiring also, What are the Principles of those Organical Parts? For
it is necessary, that the Principles whereof a Body does consist, should be, if
not all of them the active, yet the capacitating Causes, or such as are called
Causae sine quibus non, of its becoming and being, in all respects, both as to
Substance and Accidents, what it is: otherwise, their Existence, in that Body,
were altogether superfluous; since it might have been without them: which if
so, it might then have been made of any other; there being no necessity of
putting any difference, if neither those, whereof it is made, are thought
necessary to its Being. Wherefore if we will allow a Body, and so the Organical
Parts of a Vegetable to have Principles, we must allow these Principles their
necessary Use; and that the Shapes or other Properties of the said Parts, are
as much dependant upon the Nature of These; as is the Roundness of a Drop of
Ink, upon the Fluidity of Water, ingredient to it.

54.. Again, the Principles of the Organical Parts being known, we may from
thence obtain a further knowledge of the Natures, and Causation or Original of
their Contents; since these Contents are not only included in the said
Organical Parts, but also Created by them: and must needs be so, whether we
will suppose the Principles of these Contents to be prae-existent to their
reception thereinto, or not. For, if not prae-existent, what can be clearer,
than that the said Parts give them their Existence? And if prae-existent, yet
in regard they are distinguished, and such only of them admitted in such sort
into an Organical Part, from amongst others, as are apt to combine and mix
together in such a Form, and so to constitute such a Liquor; it is as clear,
that the Existence, if not of those Principles, yet of that Liquor, is
dependent on the said Part.

55.. And if by means of the said Organical Parts, it is, that their Contents
become such and such peculiar Mixtures; it is hence also manifest, That, by the
same means, they are of such distinct Faculties and Powers: Because the Faculty
or Power of a Body, lies not in any of its Principles apart; but is a
Resultance from them all; or from their being, in such peculiar sort and
manner, United and Combined together. So the Principles of the Purgative Parts
of a Root, as of Rhubarb, although we should suppose them to be existent in the
surrounding Earth, yet we cannot say, That that Earth, or the Principles
therein contained, are Purgative; but only that they are such, as by being
combined together, in such a peculiar way, may become so. So the several parts
of a Clock, although they are and must be all prae-existent to it, and it is
their Form, by which they are, what they are; yet is it the setting together of
such Parts, and in such a way only, that makes them a Clock. And since we see
that the Mixture of two Bodies of two different Qualities, as of Two Colors,
will produce a Third Color, differing from them both; as Blue and Red, do a
Murrey: Why should not Two or More Bodies of different Natures, be so combined
together, as to produce a Third Nature? Or wherefore may not that be allowed to
be performed by Nature, which by Artificial Compounding of Medicines, or other
Bodies, is designed, and oftentimes effected? I Will give but one Instance;
Water, Grease, and an Alcalizate Salt, may be easily so ordered as to be
invested with new Qualities, Nature, and Powers; the Salt, to lose its extreme
fiery Pungent Taste; the Tallow, its Smell; and being before unsociable with
the Water, to mingle therewith: neither Tallow, Salt, nor Water alone, will
fetch out a spot of Grease; but all united easily do it: the same Three Bodies
united, are, in some Cases, as in the Jaundies, no ill Medicine; any of which,
given alone, may rather prove prejudicial, than a cure: and all this done, only
by duly boiling them together into one Body, which we call Soap.

56.. Whence again, if it be such an Union, and Proportion, of such a Sort of
Principles, which produces such a Faculty; and that we may, by any means, come
to know what these are; we may, possibly, also attain to the knowledge of such
Rules, whereby any kind of Faculty may be made; as to Compound such Bodies,
which are neither Purgative nor Vomitory, so together, as to be Invested with
those Faculties. And if to Make them, then consequently, to Mend, Exalt,
Strengthen, and Enoble them, with greater ease and certainty. And thus much for
the Fourth General Mean.

57.. HITHERTO, We have considered the Materials of a Vegetable, The Fifth
General Mean.
only as Ingredient to it: there yet remains a Fifth Story to be ascended;
which is, to consider these Materials as they are derived from abroad: or as,
after they are received and naturalized, they may, with others yet abroad, have
any kind of correspondence. And these are Four in general, scil. Earth, Water,
Aer, and Sun; all which, in that they contribute so universally to Vegetation,
and to whatsoever is contained in a Vegetable, it is therefore requisite, that
of These likewise, Particular Observation should be made.

58.. And First, of the Earth, and of all Solid Receptacles of Plants. Where we
are to consider their several Kinds; as Mellow, Sandy, Clayie, Chalky, and
others. Their Ingredients; as Rank and Mellow Earth, with Sand, or with Clay;
or Sand with Clay; or altogether; and in what Proportions. The Principles
whereinto any one of these Ingredients, separated from the rest, and put to the
Test of Distillation, Ustion, Calcination, or other, either alone, or by
mixture with other Bodies, may be Resolved. And by their Qualities, as Color,
Smell, Taste, etc. both Ingredients and Principles to be examined. To make
trial of the growth of Plants, in all kinds of simple Soils; either Earthy or
Mineral, as Clay, Marl, Oker, Fullers Earth, Bole Armeniac, Vitriol, Alum,
etc. or Vegetable, as Rotten Wood, Brans, Starch, or Flower, etc. or Animal, as
Dungs, pounded Flesh, dried and powdered Blood, and the like; that it may
appear, how far any of these may contribute to the growth of a Plant; or to
one, above another.

59.. Next of the Water, and of all Liquid Receptacles. Where the several kinds
of Water, from Wells, Springs, Rain, and Rivers are, by their Qualities and
Faculties, to be examined; as these, and by these, their Principles, either in
their Natural State, or upon Digestion, or otherwise, may be observable: since
Common Water it self, is undoubtedly compounded of several Principles; the
simplicity thereof, not being argued, from its Clearness and Transparency; for
a Solution of Alum, though it contains a considerable quantity of Earth, is
yet very Clear: nor from its seeming to have neither Smell nor Taste; for
Water-drinkers will tell you of the varieties of both in different Waters.
Besides, if these Qualities should be accounted rather Fancy, than Sense; the
difference of Waters is yet more manifest, from their different Effects,
observed by Cooks, Laundresses, Brewers, and others, that have occasion to use
them: for not to mix with Soap, without curdling; not to boil Meat tender, or
without coloring it red; and the like, are the vices of some Waters, not of
others, which yet would seem, in Color, Taste, and Smell, to be the same.
Trial should also be made of the growth of Plants in all kinds of Liquid
Receptacles, as Common Water, Snow Water, Sea Water, Urine, Milk, Whey, Wine,
Oil, Ink, etc. Or any of these, with a solution of Salt, Nitre, Sal prunellae,
Soap, or other body. And hereby to observe what follows, either in the Liquor,
or in the Plant it self: as if any fixed Body, being weighed before its
dissolution in Water; and if the Plant, set herein, grows; the Water, being
then evaporated; whether the quantity of that dissolved body, continue the
same, or is lessened. So, whether any Vegetable will become Opiate, by growing
a considerable time in a plain Solution or Water-tincture of Opium; and the
like. Which Experiments, what event soever they have, yet at least, for our
further instruction in the Nature of Vegetation, may be of use.

60.. Next of Aer, where it will be requisite to inquire, what sort of Bodies
may be herein contained: It being probable, from the variety of Meteors formed
herein; and of Vapors and Exhalations continually advanced hereinto; that some
or other of them, may bear an Analogy, to all Volatile Bodies, whether Animal,
Vegetable, or Mineral. The flourishings also of Frozen Dew; and the Green
Color, which the Aer gives the Ground or Water, when, for some time exposed to
it; and other effects; seem to argue, that it is Impregnated with Vegetable
Principles. To consider also the peculiar Nature of that Body, which is
strictly called, Aer, And of that true Aerial Salt, which to me, seems
probable, that it is dissolved in the Ether, as other salts are in Water, or
in the Vaporous parts of the Aer. As also to try, what different Effects, a
diversity of Aer may have upon a Vegetable; as by setting a Plant, or Seed,
either exceeding Low, as at the bottom of a deep Well; or exceeding High, as on
the top of a Steeple. Or else by exposing some Soil to the Aer, which is
assuredly free from any Seed, and so, as no Seed can light upon it; and to
observe, whether the Aer has a power of producing a Vegetable therein, or not:
and the like.

61.. Lastly of the Sun; as to which, it may be considered, What Influence it
may have upon the Plant* it self; upon the Soil; Or upon the Aer. Whether that
Influence is any thing else besides Heat: or may differ from that of a Fire,
otherwise, than by being Temperate, and more Equal. That it does, seems evident
from an Experiment sometime since given us, in one of the Parisian Journals des
Scavans, and which I therefore think very applicable to our present purpose. If
you hold a Concave at a due distance, against a Fire, it will collect and cast
the Heat into a burning Focus: but if you put a piece of plain Glass between
them, the Glass will scatter the Heat, and destroy the Focus. Whereas the
Sunbeams, being gathered in like manner, will pass through the interposed
Glass, and maintain their Focus. As for That, of the Collection of the
Sunbeams, by the help of Glasses, in the form of a Magistery, or of Flowers,
and such like, I desire to suspend my thoughts of them, till I see them. I will
only say thus much further at present, That I do not understand why the Sun
should not have some Influence upon Bodies, besides by Heat, if it may be
granted, That the Moon has; for which, it should seem, there are some good
Arguments.

62.. WE HAVE thus far examined the Principles necessary to Vegetation. A Sixth
General Mean. Only hinted.
The Question may be put once more, In what manner are these Principles so
adapted, as to become capable of being assembled together, in such a Number,
Conjugation, Proportion, and Union, as to make a Vegetable Body? For the
comprehension whereof, we must also know, What are the Principles of these
Principles. Which, although they lie in so great an abyss of obscurity; yet, I
think, I have some reason to believe, that they are not altogether
undiscoverable. How far they may be so, I am so far from Determining, that I
shall not now Conjecture.

63.. THIS is the Design, The Conclusion.
and these the Means I propose in order thereunto. To which, I suppose, they
may all appear to be necessary. For what we obtain of Nature, we must not do it
by commanding, but by courting of Her. Those that woo Her, may possibly have
her for their Wife; but She is not so common, as to prostitute her self to the
best behaved Wit, which only practices upon it self, and is not applied to
her. I mean, that where ever Men will go beyond Fancy and Imagination,
depending upon the Conduct of Divine Wisdom, they must Labor, Hope and
Persevere. And as the Means propounded, are all necessary, so they may, in some
measure, prove effectual. How far, I promise not; the Way is long and dark: and
as Travelers sometimes amongst Mountains, by gaining the top of one, are so
far from their Journeys end; that they only come to see another lies before
them: so the Way of Nature, is so impervious, and, as I may say, down Hill and
up Hill, that how far soever we go, yet the surmounting of one difficulty, is
wont still to give us the prospect of another. We may therefore believe, our
seize will be imperfect, after we have done all: but because we cannot
attain to all, that therefore we should endeavor after nothing; is an
Inference, which looks so much awry from the Practical Sense of Men, that it
ought not to be answered. Nor with better Reason, may we go about determining,
what may be done. The greatest Designs that any Men undertake, are of the
greatest uncertainty, as to their Success: which if they appear to be of good
Import, though we know not how far they are attainable, we are to propound the
Means, in the utmost use whereof only, we can be able to judge: A War is not to
be quitted, for the hazards which attend it; nor the Councils of Princes broken
up, because those that sit at them, have not the Spirit of Prophecy, as well as
of Wisdom. To conclude, If but little should be effected, yet to design more,
can do us no harm: For although a Man shall never be able to hit Stars by
shooting at them; yet he shall come much nearer to them, than another that
throws at Apples.

FINIS.
THE ANATOMY OF PLANTS, BEGUN. WITH A General Account OF VEGETATION, Grounded
thereupon. The FIRST BOOK. Presented in Manuscript to the ROYAL SOCIETY,
Sometime before the 11th. of May, 1671. And afterward in Print, December 7. of
the same Year 1671.

By NEHEMJAH GREW M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the College of
Physicians.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, 1682.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Lord Vi-Count Brouncker, THE PRESIDENT, And to
the Council and Fellows OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY, The following ANATOMY Is most
HUMBLY PRESENTED By the AUTHOR NEHEMJAH GREW.

TO THE Right Reverend JOHN Lord Bishop of CHESTER.
MY LORD,
I Hope your pardon, if while you are holding That best of Books in one Hand, I
here present some Pages of that of Nature into your other: Especially since
Your Lordship knows very well, how excellent a Commentary This is on the
Former; by which, in part, GOD reads the World his own Definition, and their
Duty to him.

But if this Address, my Lord, may be thought congruous, it is yet more just;
and that I should let Your Lordship, and others know, how much, and how
deservedly, I resent Your extraordinary Favors. Particularly, that you were
pleased, so far to animate my Endeavors, toward the Publishing the following
Observations. Many whereof, and most belonging to the First Chapter, having now
lain dormant, near seven years; and might still, perhaps, have so continued,
had not Your Lordships Eye, at length, created Light upon them. In doing which,
You have given one, amongst those many Tokens, of as well Your readiness to
promote Learning and Knowledge by the hands of others; as Your high Abilities
to do it by Your Own: Both which, are so manifest in Your Lordship, that, like
the first Principles of Mathematical Science, they are not so much to be
asserted, because known and granted by all.

The Consideration whereof, my Lord, may make me not only Just, in owning of
your Favors; but also most Ambitious of your Patronage: Which yet, to bespeak,
I must confess, I cannot well. Not that I think, what is Good and Valuable, is
always its own best Advocate: for I know, that the Censures of Men, are
humorous, and variable; and that one Age, must have leave to frown on those
Books, which another, will do nothing less than kiss and embrace. But, chiefly,
for this Reason, Lest I should so much as seem desirous, of Your Lordships
Soliciting my Cause, as to all I have said. For as it is your Glory, that you
like not so to shine, as to put out the least Star; so were it to Your
Dishonor, to borrow Your Name, to illustrate the Spots, though of the most
conspicuous. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Obliged, And Most Humble Servant NEHEMJAH GREW.
Coventry, June 10. 1671.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Of the Seed in its State of Vegetation.
THE Method propounded,. 1. The Garden-Bean, dissected, 2. The two Coats
Described, 3, 4. The Foramen in the outer Coat, 5, 6. What generally observable
of the Covers of the Seed, 7. The Organical Parts of the Seed, 8. The Main
Body, 9, 10. The Radicle in the Bean, 11. In other Seeds, 12. The Plume, 13,
14. The Similary Parts, 15. The Cuticle, 16, 17. The Parenchyma, 18, 19, 20.
The Inner Body, 21, to 29. No solid Account yet given, of Vegetation, 30. The
Coats how in common subservient to the Vegetation of the Seed, 31. The Foramen,
of what use herein, 32. The use of the Inner Coat, 33. Of the Cuticle, 34. Of
the Parenchyma, 35. Of the Seminal Root, 36. How the Radicle first becomes a
Root, 37. By what means, the Plume all this while preserved, 38. How after the
Root the Plume vegetates, 39. How the Lobes, 40. But not in all Seeds, 41. That
they do in most, demonstrated, 42, 43, 44. What hence resolvable, 45. The use
of the Dissimilar Leaves, 46, to the end.

CHAP. II. Of the Root.
THis also to be Dissected,. 1. The Skin hereof, its Original, 2. The Cortical
Body, its Original, 3. Texture, 4. Pores, 5. Proportions, 6. The Lignous Body,
its Original, 7. Texture, 8. Proportions, 9. The Insertment, its Original, 10.
Pores, 11. Number and Size, 12. A fuller description hereof, with that of the
Osculations of the Lignous Body, 13, 14, 15. The Pith, its original sometimes
from the Seed, 16. Sometimes from the Barque, 17. Its Pores, 18, 19.
Proportions, 20. Fibers of the Lignous Body therein, 21. The Pith of those
Fibers, 22, How the Root grows, and the use of the Skin, Cortical and Lignous
Body thereto, 23. How it grows in length, 24. By what means it descends, 25.
How it grows in breadth, 26* And the Pith, how thus framed, 27. The use of the
Pith, 27. Of the Insertment, 28. The joint service of all the Parts. 29, 30, 31.

CHAP. III. Of the Trunk.
THE Coarcture,. 1. The Skin, its original, 2. The original of the Cortical
Body, 3. Of the Lignous, 4. Of the Insertment and Pith, 5. The Latitudinal
Shooting of the Lignous Body, wherein observable, 6, 7. The Pores of the
Lignous Body, where and how most remarkable, 8. A lesser sort of Pores, 9. A
third sort only visible through a Microscope. Observed in Wood or Charcoal, 10.
Observed in the Fibers of the Trunks of Herbs, 11. The Insertions, where more
visible, 12, 13. Their Weftage with the Lignous Body, 14. The smaller
Insertions, only visible through a Microscope, 15. No Valves in a Plant, 16.
The Ranks of the Pores of the Insertions, 17. The Pores of the Pith, 18 19, 20.
How the Trunk ascends, 21. The disposition of its Parts consequent to that
Ascent, 22. Consequent to the different Nature of the Sap, 23. The effects of
the said Differences, 24, to 28. Which way, and how the Sap ascends, 29, to the
end.

The Appendix. Of Trunk-Roots and Claspers.

Trunk-Roots of two kinds,. 1, 2. Claspers of one kind, 3. The Uses of both, 4,
to the end.

CHAP. IV. Of the Bud, Branch, and Leaf.
THE Parts of the Germen and Branch the same with those of the Trunk,. 1, 2.
The manner of their growth, 3. How nourished, 4. And the use of Knots, 5. How
secured 6. The Parts of a Leaf, 7. The Positions of the Fibers of the Stalks of
Leaves, 8. For what Uses, 9, 10. The visible cause of the different
circumference of Leaves, 11. And of their being flat, 12. And filamentous, 13.
The Foulds of Leaves, their Kinds and Use, 14, 15, 16. The Protections of
Leaves, 17. The use of the Leaf, 18, to the end.

The Appendix. Of Thorns, Hairs and Globulets.

Thorns of two Kinds; the Lignous,. 1. The Cortical, 2. An argument of the
Magnetic Descent of the Cortical Body, 3. Hairs of diverse Kinds, 4, 5. Their
Use, 6. Globulets of two Kinds, 7, 8.

CHAP. V. Of the Flower.
ITs three Parts,. 1. The Impalement, of diverse kinds, 2. Their use, 3, 4. The
Foliation, its nature, 5. Foulds, 6. Protections, 7. Downs, 8, 9. Globulets,
10. Its Use, 11, 12. The Attire of two kinds. The Description of the first, 13,
14, 15, 16. Of the other, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Their use, 22, to the end.

CHAP. VI. Of the Fruit.
THE Vital Parts of all, the same,. 1. The Number, Description, and Original of
the Parts of an Apple, 2. Of a Pear, 3, 4. Of a Plum, 5, 6, 7. Of a Nut* 8. Of
a Berry, 9. The use of the Fruit, 10, to the end.

CHAP. VII. Of the Seed in its State of Generation.
WHat here further observed, not in the First Chapter,. 1. The Case, its
Figures, 2. The outer Coat, its Figures, 3. Various Surface, 4. And Mucilages,
5. The nature of the outer Coat, 6. Its Apertures, 7. Next to which the Radicle
usually placed, 8. The Original of the Outer Coat, 9. The Original of the
Inner, 10. Its Nature, 11, 12. The Essential Parts of a Plant, 13, 14. The
Secondine, 15. The Colliquamentum herein, 16. The Navel Fibers, 17. In the
Generation of the Seed, the Sap first prepared in the Seed-Branch, 18, 19. Next
in the inner Coat, 20. With the help of the Outer, 21, 22. The use of the
Secondine, 23. Of the Ramulets of the Seed-Branch, 24. Of their Inosculation,
25. How the Colliquamentum becomes a Parenchyma, 26, to the end.

THE ANATOMY OF PLANTS, BEGUN. With a General Account of Vegetation, Founded
thereupon.
CHAP. I. Of the Seed in its State of Vegetation.
BEING to speak of Plants; and, as far as Inspection, and consequent Reason,
may conduct, to enquire into the visible Constitutions, and Uses of their
several Parts: I choose that Method, which, to the best advantge, may suit with
what we have to say hereon. And that is the Method of Nature her self, in her
continued Series of Vegetations; proceeding from the Seed sown, to the
formation of the Root, Trunk, Branch, Leaf, Flower, Fruit, and last of all, of
the Seed also to be sown again; all which, we shall, in the same order,
particularly speak of.

2.. The Essential Constitutions of the said Parts are in all Plants the same:
But for Observation, some are more convenient; in which I shall chiefly
instance. And first of all, for the Seed, we choose the great Garden-Bean.

3.. If then we take a Bean and dissect it, we shall find it clothed with a
doubled Vest or Coat. These Coats, while the Bean is yet green, are separable,
and easily distinguished. Or in an old one, after it has lay'n two or three
days in a mellow Soil; or been soaked as long a time in Water: Tab. 1. f. 2.
as in Tab. 1. When it is dry, they cleave so closely together, that the Eye not
before instructed, will judge them but one; the inner Coat (which is of the
most rare contexture) so far shrinking up, as to seem only the roughness of the
outer, somewhat resembling Wafers under Maquaroons.

4.. The Inner Coat, in its Natural State, is every where twice, and in some
places, thrice as thick, as the Outer. Next to the Radicle, which I shall
presently describe, it is six or seven times thicker; and encompasses the
Radicle round about, as in the same Figure appears. Tab. 1. f. 2.


5.. At the thicker end of the Bean, in the outer Coat, a very small Foramen
presents it self, even to the bare Eye. In Dissection it is found to terminate
against the point of that Part which I call the Radicle. Tab. 1. f. 1-a
It is of that capacity, as to admit a small Virginal Wire; and is most of all
conspicuous in a green Bean. Especially, if a little magnified with a good
Spectacle-Glass. This Foramen is not a hole casually made, or by the breaking
off of the Stalk; but designedly formed, for the uses hereafter mentioned. It
may be observed not only in the great Garden-Bean, but likewise in the other
kinds; in the French-Bean very plainly; in Pease, Lupines, Vetches, Lentiles,
and other Pulse it is also found; and in many Seeds not reckoned of this
kindred, as in that of Foenugreek, Medica Tornata, Goats-Rue, and others: In
many of which, it is so very small, as scarcely, without the help of Glasses to
be discovered; and in some, not without cutting off part of the Seed, which
otherwise would intercept the sight hereof.

6.. That this Foramen is truly permeable, even in old Setting-Beans, and the
other Seeds above named, appears upon their being soaked for some time in
Water. For then, taking them out, and crushing them a little, many small bubles
will alternately arise and break upon it.

7.. Of all Seeds which have thick or hard Covers, it is also observable, That
they have the same likewise Perforated, as above said, or in some other manner.
And accordingly, although the Coats of such Seeds as are lodged in Shells or
Stones, being thin, are not visibly perforated; yet the Stones and Shells
themselves always are; as in Chap. 7. shall be seen how. To which Chapter, what
is farther observable, either as to the nature and number of the Covers of the
Seed, I also refer.

8.. The Coats of the Bean being stripped off, the proper Seed shows it self.
The parts whereof it is composed, are three; sc. the Main Body, and two more,
appendant to it; which we may call, the Three Organical Parts of the Bean.

9.. The Main Body is not one entire piece, but always divided, lengthwise,
into two halves or Lobes, which are both joined together at the Basis of the
Bean. These Lobes in dry Beans, are but difficultly separated or observed; Tab.
1. f. 2, 3.
but in young ones, especially boiled, they easily slip asunder.

10.. Some very few Seeds are divided, not into two Lobes, but into more; Tab.
1. f. 4. f. 5.
as that of Cresses into Six. And some are not at all divided, but entire; as
the Grains of Corn. Excepting which few, all other Seeds, even the smallest,
are divided, like as the Bean, into just two Lobes. Whereof, though in most
Seeds, because of their minuteness, we cannot by dissection be informed; yet
otherwise, we easily may, as in this Chapter shall be seen.

11.. At the Basis of the Bean, the two other Organical Parts stand appendent;
by mediation whereof, the two Lobes meet and join together. The greater of
these two Parts stands without the two Lobes, and upon divesting the Bean of
its Coats, is immediately visible. It Is of a white color, Tab. 1. f. 2. and 3
-- a
and more glossie than the Main Body, especially when the Bean is young. In the
Bean, and many other Seeds, it is situated somewhat above the thicker end, as
you hold the Bean in its most proper posture for growth. In Oak Kernels, which
we call Acorns, Tab. 1. f. 6 -- c
Apple-Kernels, Almonds, Almonds, and many other Seeds, it stands prominent
just from the end; the Basis and the End being in these the same, but in the
Bean diverse.

12.. This Part is found not only in the Bean, and the Seeds above mentioned;
but in all others: being that, which upon the Vegetation of the Seed, becomes
the Root of the Plant; which therefore may be called the Radicle: by which, I
mean the Materials, abating the Formality, of a Root. In Corn, it is that Part,
which Malsters, upon its shooting forth, call the Come. It Is not easy to be
observed, saving in some few Seeds, amongst which, that of the Bean is the most
fair and ample of all I have seen. But that of some other Seeds, is, in
proportion, Tab. 1. f. 7 -- c
greater; as of Foenugreek, which is full as big as one of its Lobes.

13.. The lesser of the two said Appendents lies occult beeween the two Lobes
of the Bean, by separation whereof only it is to be seen. It Is enclosed in two
small Cavities, Tab. 1. f* 3 -- b
formed in the Lobes for its reception. Its color comes near to that of the
Radicle; and it is founded upon the Basis thereof, having a quite contrary
production, sc. toward the Cone of the Bean; as being that very Part, which,
in process, becomes the Body or Trunk of the Plant. In Corn, it is that Part,
which after the Radicle is sprouted forth, or come, shoots toward the smaller
end of the Grain; and by many Malsters, is called the Acrospire.

14., This Part is not, like the Radicle, an entire Body, but divided, at its
loose end, into diverse pieces, all very closely couched together, as Feathers
in a Bunch; for which reason it may be called the Plume. They are so close,
that only two or three of the outmost are at first seen: but upon a nice and
curious separation of these, the more interiours still may be discovered. In
the Bean, this may be done: but in very few other Seeds; because of the extreme
smallness of the Plume. Now as the Plume is that Part which becomes the Trunk
of the Plant, so these pieces are so many true, and already formed, though not
displayed Leaves, intended for the said Trunk, and foulded up in the same
plicature, wherein upon the sprouting of the Bean, they afterward appear. In a
French Bean, and especially in the larger white Kind, or in the great Indian
Phaseolus, Tab. 1. f. 8 -- b
the two outmost are very fair and elegant. In the great Garden-Bean two
extraordinary small Plumes often, if not always, stand one on either side the
great one now described: From which, in that they differ in nothing save in
their size, I therefore only here just take notice of them. And these three
Parts, sc. the Main Body, the Radicle, and the Plume, are concurrent to the
making up of a Seed; and no more than these

15.. Having thus taken a view of the Organical Parts of the Bean, and other
Seeds; let us next examine the Similary, sc. those whereof the Organical are
composed: a distinct observation of which, for a clear understanding of the
Vegetation of the Seed, and of the whole Plant arising thence is requisite: To
obtain which, we must proceed in our Anatomy.

16.. Dissecting a Bean then, the first Part occurring is its Cuticle. The Eye
and first Thoughts, suggest it to be only a more dense and glossy Superficies;
but better enquiry discovers it a real Cuticle. It Is so exquisitely thin, and
for the most part, so firmly continuous with the Body of the Bean, that it
cannot, except in some small Rag, be distinctly seen, which, by carrying your
Knife aslant into the Bean, and then very gently bearing upward what you have
cut, will separate, and show it self transparent. This Cuticle is not only
spread upon the Unequal of the Lobes, but also on their Flats, where they are
contiguous, extending it self likewise upon both the Radicle and Plume, and so
over the whole Bean.

17.. This Part, though it be so far common with the Coats of the Bean, as to
be like those, an Integument; yet are we in a quite different Notion to
conceive of it: For whereas the Coats, upon setting the Bean, do only
administer the Sap, and, as being superseded from their Office, then die; as
shall be seen: this, on the contrary, with the Organical Parts of the Bean, is
nourished, augmented, and by a real Vegetation co-extended.

18.. Next to the Cuticle, we come to the Parenchyma it self; the Part
throughout which the Inner Body, whereof we shall speak anon, is disseminated;
for which reason I call it the Parenchyma. Not that we are so meanly to
conceive of it, as if (according to the stricter sense of that word,) it were a
mere concreted Juice. For it is a Body very curiously organized, consisting of
an infinite number of extreme small Bladders; as in Tab. 1. is apparent. The
Surface hereof is somewhat dense, Tab. 1. f. 9.
but inwardly, it is of a laxer Contexture. If you view it in a Microscope, or
with a very good Spectacle-Glass, it has some similitude to the Pith, while
sappy in the Roots and Trunks of Plants; and that for good reason, as in Chapter 2.
shall be seen. This is best seen in green Beans.

19.. This Part would seem by its color to be peculiar to the Lobes of the
Bean; but as is the Cuticle, so is this also, common both to the Radicle and
Plume; that is, the Parenchyma or Pulp of the Bean, as to its essential
substance, is the same in all three. The reason why the color of the Plume,
and especially of the Radicle, which are white, is so different from that of
the Lobes, which are green, may chiefly depend upon their being more compact
and dense, and thence their different Tinctures. And therefore the Lobes
themselves, which are green while the Bean is young; yet when it is old and
dry, become whitish too. And in many other Seeds, as Acorns, Almonds, the
Kernels of Apples, Plums, Nuts, etc. the Lobes, even fresh and young, are pure
white as the Radicle it self.

20.. But although the Parenchyma be common, as is said, to all the Organical
Parts; yet in very differing proportions. In the Plume, where it is
proportionably least, it makes about three Fifths of the whole Plume; in the
Radicle, it makes above five Sevenths of the whole Radicle; and in each Lobe,
is so far over-proportionate, as to make at least nine Tenths of the whole Lobe.

21.. By what has been said, that the Parenchyma or Pulp is not the only
constituting Part, besides the Cuticle, is implied: there being another Body,
of an essentially different substance, embosom'd herein: which may be found not
only in the Radicle and Plume, but also in the Lobes themselves, and so in the
whole Bean.

22.. This Inner Body appears very plain and conspicuous in cutting the Radicle
athwart, Tab. 1. f. 10, 11, and 12.
and so proceeding by degrees toward the Plume, through both which it runs
in a large and strait Trunk. In the Lobes, being it is there in so very small
proportion, it is difficultly seen, especially toward their Verges. Yet if with
a sharp Knife you smoothly cut the Lobes of the Bean athwart, Tab. 1. f. 13.
diverse small Specks, of a different color from that of the Parenchyma,
standing therein all along in a Line, may be observed; which Specks are the
Terminations of the Branches of this Inner Body.

23.. For this Inner body, as it is existent in every Organical Part of the
Bean; so is it, with respect to each Part, most regularly distributed. In a
good part of the Radicle it is one entire Trunk; toward the Basis thereof, Tab.
1. f. 14.
it is divided into three main Branches; the middlemost runs directly into
the Plume; the other two on either side it, after a little space, pass into the
Lobes; where the said Branches dividing themselves into other smaller; and
those into more, and smaller again, are terminated toward the Verges of each
Lobe; in which manner the said Inner Body being distributed it becomes in each
Lobe a true and perfect Root.

24.. Of this Seminal Root, as now we'll call it, from the Description here
given, it is further observable; That the two main Branches hereof; in which
the several Ramifications in each Lobe are all united, are not committed into
the Seminal Trunk of the Plume, nor yet stand at right angles with That and the
Radicle, and so with equal respect toward them both: but being produced
through part of the Parenchyma of the Radicle, are at last united therein to
the main Trunk, and make acute Angles therewith: Tab. 1. f. 14.
as may be seen in the same. f. 14.

25.. This Seminal Root being so tender, cannot be perfectly excarnated, (as
may the Vessels in the Parts of an Animal) by the most accurate Hand. Yet by
dissection begun and continued, as is above declared, its whole frame and
distribution may be easily observed. Again, if you take the Lobe of a Bean, and
lengthwise pare off its Parenchyma by degrees, and in extreme thin slices, many
Branches of the Seminal Root, (which by the other way of Dissection were only
noted by so many Specks) both as they are fewer about the Basis of the Bean,
and more numerous toward its Verges, in some good distinction and entireness
will appear. For this you must have new Beans: or else soaked in Water, or
buried for some time.

26.. As the Inner Body is branched out in the Lobes, so is it in the Plume:
For if you cut the Plume athwart, and from the Basis proceed along the Body
thereof, you will therein find, first, one large Trunk or Branch, and after four
or five very small Specks round about it, which are the terminations of so many
lesser Branches therewith distributed to the several parts of the Plume. The
distribution of the Inner Body, Tab. 1. f. 11- c
as it is continuous throughout all the Organical Parts of the Bean, is
represented, Tab. 1. f. 14.

27.. This Inner Body is, by dissection, best observable in the Bean and great
Lupine. In other larger Pulse it shows likewise some obscure Marks of it self.
But in no other Seeds, which I have observed, though of the greatest size: as
of Apples, Plums, Nuts, etc. is there any clear appearance hereof, upon
dissection, saving in the Radicle and Plume; the reason of which is partly from
its being, in most Seeds, so extraordinary little; partly from its Color,
which in most Seeds, is the same with that of the Parenchyma it self, and so
not distinguishable from it.

28.. Yet in a Gourd-Seed, the whole Seminal Root, not only its Main Branches,
Tab. 1. f. 15- c
but also the Sub-divisions and Inosculations of the lesser ones, are without
any dissection, upon the separation of the Lobes, on their contiguous Flats
immediately apparent.

And as to the existence of this Seminal Root, what Dissection cannot attain,
yet an ocular inspection in hundreds of other Seeds, even the smallest, will
demonstrate; as in this Chapter shall be seen how.

29.. In the mean time, let us only take notice; That when we say, every Plant
has its Root, we reckon short. For every Plant has really two, though not
contemporary, yet successive Roots; its Original or Seminal-Root within the
Lobes or Main Body of its Seed; and its Plant-Root, which the Radicle becomes
in its growth: the Parenchyma of the Seed, being in some resemblance, that to
the Seminal Root at first, which the Mould is to the Plant-Root afterward; and
the Seminal Root being that to the Plant-Root, which the Plant-Root is to the
Trunk. For our better understanding whereof, having taken a view of the several
Parts of a Bean, as far as Dissection conducts; we will next briefly enquire
into the Use of the said Parts, and in what manner they are the Fountain of
Vegetation, and concurrent to the being of the future Plant.

30.. THE GENERAL Cause of the growth of a Bean, An Account of the Vegetation
of the Seed.
or other Seed, is Fermentation. That is, the Bean lying in the Mould, and a
moderate access of some moisture, partly dissimilar, and partly congenerous,
being made, a gentle Fermentation thence arises. By which, the Bean swelling,
and the Sap still increasing, and the Bean continuing still to swell, the work
thus proceeds: as is the usual way of explicating. But that there is simply a
Fermentation, and so a sufficient supply of Sap is not enough: but that this
Fermentation, and the Sap wherein it is made, should be under a various
Government, by diverse Parts thereto subservient, is also requisite; and as the
various preparation of the Aliment in an Animal, equally necessary: the
particular process of the Work according whereto, we find none undertaking to
declare.

31.. Let us look upon a Bean then, as a piece of Work so framed and set
together, as to declare a Design for the production of a Plant; which, upon its
lying in some convenient Soil, is thus effected. First of all, the Bean being
enfoulded round in its Coats, the Sap wherewith it is fed, must of necessity
pass through these: By which means, it is not only in a proportionate quantity,
and by degrees; but also in a purer body; and possibly not without some
Vegetable Tincture, transmitted to the Bean. Whereas, were the Bean naked, the
Sap must needs be, as over-copious, so but crude and immature, as not being
filtred through so fine a Cotton as the Coats be. And as they have the use of a
Filtre to the transient Sap; so of a Vessel to that which is still deposited
within them; being alike accommodated to the securer Fermentation hereof, as
Bottles or Barrels are to Beer, or any other Fermentative Liquor.

32.. And as the Fermentation is promoted by some Aperture in the Vessel; so
have we the Foramen in the upper Coat also contrived. That if there should be
need of some more Aerie Particles to excite the Fermentation; through this,
they may obtain their Entry. Or, on the contrary, should there be any such
Particles or Steams, as might damp the genuine proceeding thereof, through this
again, they may have easy issue. Or if, by being over copious, they should
become too high a Ferment; and so precipitate those soft and slow degrees, as
are necessary to a due Vegetation. The said Aperture being that, as a common
Pasport, here to the Sap, which what we call the Bung-hole of the Barrel, is to
the new tunn'd Liquor.

33.. And the Radicle being designed to shoot forth first, as presently shall
be showed how; therefore is it distinctly surrounded with the Inner and more
succulent Coat. That being thereby suppled on every side, its eruption may be
the better promoted.

34.. The Sap being passed through the Coats, it next enters the Body of the
Bean; yet not indiscriminately neither; but, being filtred through the Outer
Coat, and fermented in the Body of the Inner, is by mediation of the Cuticle,
again more finely filtr'd, and so enters the Parenchyma it self under a
fourth Government.

35.. Through which Part the Sap passing toward the Seminal Root, as through
that which is of a more spacious content; besides the benefit it has of a
farther percolation,' it will also find room enough for a more free and active
fermenting and maturation herein. And being moreover, part of the true Body of
the Bean, and so with its proper Seminalities or Tinctures copiously repleat;
the Sap will not only find room, but also matter enough, by whose Energy its
Fermentation will still be more advanced,

36. And the Sap being duly prepared here, it next passes into all the
Branches of the Seminal Root, and so under a fifth Government. Wherein how
delicate it is now become, we may conceive by the proportion betwixt the
Parenchyma and this Seminal Root; so much only of the best digested Sap being
discharged from the whole Stock in that, as this will receive. And this,
moreover, as the Parenchyma, with its proper Seminalities being endowed; the
Sap for the supply of the Radicle, and of the young Root from thence, is duly
prepared therein, and with its highest Tincture and Impregnation at last
enriched.

37.. The Sap being thus prepared in the Lobes of the Bean, it is thence
discharged; and either into the Plume, or the Radicle, must forthwith issue.
And since the Plume is a dependent on the Radicle; the Sap therefore ought
first to be dispensed to this: which accordingly, is ever found to shoot forth
before the Plume: and sometimes an inch or two in length. Now because the
primitive course of the Sap into the Radicle, is thus requisite; therefore, by
the frame of the Parts of the Bean is it also made necessary. The two main
Branches of the Seminal Root, being produced, as is before observed, not into
the Plume, but the Radicle. Now the Sap being brought as far as the Seminal
Root, in either Lobe; and according to the conduct thereof continuing still to
move: it must needs immediately issue into the same Part, whereinto the main
Branches themselves do; Tab. 1. f. 14.
that is, into the Radicle. By which Sap, thus bringing the several Tinctures
of the Parts aforesaid with it, being now fed; it is no longer a mere Radicle,
but is made also Seminal, and so becomes a perfect Root.

38.. The Plume, all this while, lies close and still. For the sake of which,
chiefly it is, that the Bean and other Seeds are divided into Lobes, viz. That
it might be warmly and safely lodged up between them, and so secured from the
Injuries so tender a Part would sustain from the Mould; whereto, had the Main
Body been entire, it must, upon the cleaving of the Coats, have lay'n
contiguous.

39.. But the Radicle being thus impreguated and shot into a Root; it is now
time for the Plume to rouse out of its Cloisters, and germinate too: In order
whereto, it is now fed from the Root, with laudable and sufficient Aliment. For
as the Supplies and Motion of Sap were first made from the Lobes, toward the
Root: so the Root being well shot into the Mould, and now receiving a new and
more copious Sap from thence; the motion hereof must needs be stronger, and by
degrees proceed in a contrary course, sc. from the Root toward the Plume: and,
by the coutinuation of the Seminal Root, is directly conducted thereinto; by
which being fed, it gradually enlarges and displays it self.

40.. The course of the Sap thus turned, it issues, I say, in a direct Line
from the Root into the Plume: but collaterally, into the Lobes also; sc. by
those two aforesaid Branches which are obliquely transmitted from the Radicle
into either Lobe. By which Branches the said Sap being disbursed back into all
the Seminal Root, and from thence, likewise into the Parenchyma of the Lobes,
they are both thus fed, and for some time augmenting themselves, really grow:
as in Lupines is evident.

41.. Yet is not this common to all Seeds. Some rot underground; as Corn; being
of a laxer and less Oleous Substance, differing herein from most other Seeds;
and being not divided into Lobes, but one entire thick Body. And some, although
they continue firm, and are divided into Lobes, yet rise not; as the great
Garden Bean. In which, therefore, it is observable, That the two Main Branches
of the Lobes, in comparison with that which runs into the Plume, are but mean;
and so insufficient to the feeding and vegetation of the Lobes; the Plume, Tab.
1. f. 14.
on the contrary, growing so lusty, as to mount up without them.

42.. Excepting a few of these Two Kinds, all other Seeds whatsoever, (which I
have observed) besides that they continue firm; upon the Vegetation of the
Plume, do mount also upwards, and advance above the Ground together with it; as
all Seeds which spring up with one or more Dissimilar Leaves: These Dissimilar
Leaves, for the most part Two, which first spring up, and are of a different
shape from those that follow, being the very Lobes of the Seed, divided,
expanded, and thus advanced.

43.. The Impediments of our apprehension hereof are the Color, Size and Shape
of the Dissimilar Leaves. Notwithstanding, that they are nothing else but the
Main Body of the Seed, how I came first to conceive, and afterward to know it,
was thus. First, I observed in general, that the Dissimilar Leaves, were never
jagg'd, but even edged: And seeing the even verges of the Lobes of the Seed
hereto respondent, I was apt to think, that those which were so like, might
prove the same. Next descending to particular Seeds, I observed, first, of the
Lupine; that, as to its Color, advancing above the Ground, (as it uses to do)
it was always changed into a perfect Green. And why might not the same by
parity of Reason be inferred of other Seeds? That, as to its size, it grew but
little bigger than when first set. Whence, as I discerned (the Augmentation
being but little) we here had only the two Lobes: Tab. 2. f. 1.
So, (as some augmentation there was) I inferred the like might be, and that,
in farther degrees, in other Seeds.

44.. Next of the Cucumber-Seed, That, as to its Color, often appearing above
ground, in its primitive white, from white it turns to yellow, and from yellow
to green; the proper color of a Leaf. That, as to its size, though at its
first arise, the Lobes were little bigger than upon setting; Tab. 2. f. 2.
yet afterward, as they changed their Color, so their dimensions also,
growing to a three-four-five-fold amplitude above their primitive size. But
whereas the Lobes of the Seed, are in proportion, narrow, short and thick: how
then come the Dissimilar Leaves, to be so exceeding broad, or long, and thin?
The Question answers it self: For the Dissimilar Leaves, for that very reason
are so thin, because so very broad or long; as we see many things, how much
they are extended in length or breadth, so much they lose in depth, or grow
more thin; which is that which here befalls the now effoliated Lobes. For being
once dis-imprisoned from their Coats, and the course of the Sap into them, now
more and more increased; they must needs very considerably amplisie themselves:
and from the manner wherein the Seminal Root is branched in them, that
amplification cannot be in thickness, Tab. 2. f. 3.
but in length or breadth. In both which, in some Dissimilar Leaves, it is very
remarkable; especially in length, as in those of Lettice, Thorn-Apple, and
others; whose Seeds, although very small, yet the Lobes of those Seeds growing
up into Dissimilar Leaves, are extended an Inch, and sometimes more, in length.
Though he that shall attempt to get a clear sight of the Lobes of Thorn-Apple,
and some others, by Dissection, will find it no easy Task; yet is that which
may be obtained; and in the Last Book shall be showed. From all which, and the
observation of other Seeds, I at last found, that the Dissimilar Leaves of a
young Plant, are nothing else but the Lobes or Main Body of its Seed. So that,
as the Lobes did at first feed and impregnate the Radicle into a perfect Root;
so the Root, being perfected, does again feed, and by degrees amplify each
Lobe into a perfect Leaf.

45.. The Original of the Dissimilar Leaves thus known, we understand, why some
Plants have none; because the Seed either rises not, as Garden-Beans, Corn,
etc. Or upon rising, the Lobes are little altered, as Lupines, Pease, etc. Why,
though the proper Leaves are often indented round; the Dissimilar like the
Lobes are even-edg'd. Why, though the proper Leaves are often hairy, yet these
are ever smooth. Why some have more Dissimilar Leaves than two, as Cresses,
which have six, Hist. of the Prop. of Vege.
as the Ingenious Mr. Sharrock also observes. The reason whereof is, because
the Main Body is not divided into Two, but Six, distinct Lobes, as I have often
counted. Why Radishes seem at first to have four, which yet after appear
plainly two: because the Lobes of the Seed, have both a little Indenture, and
are both plaited, one over the other. To which, other Instances might be added.

46. The use of the Dissimilar Leaves is, first, for the protection of the
Plume; which being but young, and so but soft and tender, is provided with
these, as a double Guard, one on either side of it. For this reason it is, that
the Plume, in Corn, is trussed up within a membranous Sheath: and that of a
Bean, cooped up betwixt a pair of Surfoyls: Tab. 3.
But where the Lobes rise, there the Plume has neither of them, being both
needless.

47.. Again, since the Plume, being yet tender, may be injured not only by the
Aer, but also for want of Sap, the supplies from the Root being yet but slow
and sparing; that the said Plume therefore, by the Dissimilar Leaves, may have
the advantage likewise of some refreshment from Dew or Rain. For these having
their Basis a little beneath that of the Plume, and expanding themselves on all
sides of it, they often stand after Rain, like a Vessel of Water, continually
soaking and suppling it, lest its new access into the Air, should shrivel it.

48.. Moreover, that since the Dissimilar Leaves by their Basis intercept the
Root and Plume, the greater and grosser part of the Sap, may be, by the way,
deposited into those; and so the purest proceed into the yet but young and
delicate Plume, as its fittest Aliment.

49.. Lastly, we have here a demonstration of the being of the Seminal Root:
which, since through the color or smalness of the Seed, it could not by
Dissection be observed, except in some few; Nature has here provided us a way
of viewing it in ^he now effoliated Lobes, not of one or two Seeds, but of
hundreds; the Seminal Root visibly branching it self toward the Cone or Verges
of the said Lobes, or now Dissimilar Leaves.

CHAP. II. Of the ROOT.
HAVING Examined and pursued the Degrees of Vegetation in the Seed, we find its
two Lobes have here their utmost period: and, that having conveyed their
Seminalities into the Radicle and Plume; these therefore, as the Root and Trunk
of the Plant, still survive. Of these, in their order, we next proceed to
speak; and first, of the Root: whereof, as well as of the Seed, we must by
Dissection inform our selves.

2.. In Dissection of a Root then, we shall find it with the Radicle, as the
Parts of an Old Man with those of a Foetus, substantially, one. The first Part
occurring is its Skin, the Original whereof is from the Seed: For that extreme
thin Cuticle which is spread over the Lobes of the Seed, and from thence over
the Radicle, upon the shooting of the Radicle into a Root, is co-extended, and
becomes its Skin.

3.. The next Part is the Cortical Body. Which, when it is thin, is commonly
called the Barque. The Original hereof, likewise is from the Seed; or the
Parenchyma, which is there common both to the Lobes and Radicle, Tab. 2. f. 4.
being by Vegetation augmented and prolonged into the Root, the same becomes
the Parenchyma of the Barque.

4.. The Contexture of this Parenchyma may be well illustrated by that of a
Sponge, being a Body Porous, Dilative and Pliable. Its Pores, as they are
innumerable, so, extreme small. These Pores are not only susceptive of so much
Moisture as to fill, but also to enlarge themselves, and so to dilate the
Cortical Body wherein they are: which by the shriv'ling in thereof, upon its
being exposed to the Air, is also seen. In which dilatation, many of its Parts
becoming more lax and distant, and none of them suffering a solution of their
continuity; it is a Body also sufficiently pliable; that is to say, a most
exquisitely fine-wrought Sponge.

5.. The Extention of these Pores is much alike by the length and breadth of
the Root; which from the shrinking up of the Cortical Body, in a piece of a cut
Root, by the same dimensions, is argued.

6.. The proportions of this Cortical Body are various: If thin, it is, as is
said, called a Barque; and thought to serve to no other end, than what is
vulgarly ascribed to a Barque; which is a narrow conceit. If a Bulky Body, in
comparison with That within it, as in the young Roots of Cichory, Asparagus,
etc. it is here, because the fairest, therefore taken for the prime Part; which,
though, as to Medicinal use, it is; yet, as to the private use of the Plant,
not so. The Color hereof, though it be originally white, yet in the continued
growth of the Root, diverse Tinctures, as yellow in Dock, red in Bistort, are
thereinto introduced.

7.. Next within this Part stands the Lignous Body: This Lignous Body, lies
with all its parts, so far as they are visible, in a Circle or Ring. Tab. 2. f
4. b.
Yet are there diverse extreme small Fibers thereto parallel, usually mixed with
the Cortical Body; and by the somewhat different color of the said Cortical
Body where they stand, may be noted. These Fibers the Cortical Body, and Skin,
altogether, properly make the Barque. The Original of this Lignous Body, as of
the two former, is from the Seed; or, the Seminal Roots of both the Lobes,
being united in the Radicle, and with its Parenchyma co-extended, is here in
the Root of the Plant, the Lignous Body.

8.. The Contexture hereof, in many of its parts, is much more close than that
of the Cortical; and their Pores very different. For whereas those of the
Cortical are infinitely numerous, these of the Lignous are in comparison
nothing so. But these, although fewer, yet are they, many of them, more open,
fair and visible: as in a very thin Slice cut athwart the young Root of a Tree,
and held up against the light, is apparent. Yet not in all equally; in
Coran-Tree, Goosberry-Tree, etc. less, in Oak, Plums, and especially Damascens,
more; in Elder, Tab. 2. f. 5.
Vines, etc. most conspicuous. And as they are different in number and size, so
also (whereon the numerousness of the Pores of the Cortical Body principally
depends) in their shape. For whereas those of the Cortical Body are extended
much alike both by the length and breadth of the Root; these of the Lignous,
are only by the length; which especially in Vines, and some other Roots is
evident. Of these Pores, it is also observable, that although in all places of
the Root they are visible, Tab. 2. f. 7 a. b.
yet most fair and open about the filamentous Extremities of some Roots, where
about, the Roots have no Pith; as in Fenil. And in many Roots, higher.

9.. The proportion betwixt this Lignous Body and the Cortical, is various, as
was said; yet in this, constant, sc. that in the filamentous and smaller Parts
of the Root, the Lignous Body is very much the less; running like a slender
Wire or Nerve through the other surrounding it. Whereas in the upper part, it
is often times of far greater quantity than the Cortical, although it be
encompassed by it. They stand both together pyramidally, which is most common
to Infant Roots, but also to a great many others.

10. The next Part observable in the Root, is the Insertment. The existence
hereof, so far as we can yet observe, is sometimes in the Radicle of the Seed
it self; I cannot say always. As to its substantial nature, we are more
certain; that it is the same with that of the Parenchyma of the Radicle; being
always at least augmented, and so, in part, originated from the Cortical Body,
and so, at second hand, from the said Parenchyma. For in dissecting a Root, I
find, that the Cortical Body does not only environ the Lignous, but is also
wedged, and in many Pieces inserted into it; and that the said inserted Pieces
make not a mere Indenture, but transmit and shoot themselves quite through as
far as the Pith: Tab. 2. f. 5.
which in a thin Slice cut athwart the Root, as so many lines drawn from the
Circumference toward the Center, show themselves.

11.. The Pores of the Insertment are sometimes, at least, extended somewhat
more by the breadth of the Root, as about the top of the Root of Borage may be
seen; and are thus different from those of the Cortical Body, which are
extended by the length and breadth much alike; and from those of the Lignous,
being only by its length.

12.. The number and size of these Insertions are various. In Hawthorn, Tab. 2.
f. 5. and 6.
and some others, and especially Willows, they are most extreme small; in
Cherries and Plums they are Biger; and in the Vine and some other Trees, very
fairly apparent. In the Roots of most Herbs they are generally more easily
discoverable; which may lead to the observation of them in all.

13.. These Insertions, although they are continuous through both the length
and breadth of the Root; yet not so in all Parts, but by the several shootings
of the Lignous Body they are frequently intercepted. For of the Lignous Body it
is (here best) observable; That its several Shootings, betwixt which the
Cortical is inserted, are not, throughout the Root, wholly distinct, strait and
parallel: but that all along being enarch'd, the Lignous Body, both in length
and breadth, is thus disposed into Braces or Osculations. Betwixt these several
Shootings of the Lignous Body thus osculated, Tab. 2. f. 8.
the Cortical shooting, and being also osculated answerably Brace for Brace,
that which I call the Insertment is framed thereof.

14.. These Osculations are so made, that the Pores or Fibers of the Lignous
Body, I think, notwithstanding, seldom or never run one into another; being,
though contiguous, yet still distinct. In the same manner as some of the
Nerves, though they meet, and for some space are associated together, yet it is
most probable, that none of their Fibers are truly inosculated, saving perhaps,
in the Plexures.

15.. These Osculations of the Lignous Body, and so the interception of the
Insertions of the Cortical, are not to be observed by the traverse cut of the
Root, but by taking off the Barque. In the Roots of Trees, they are generally
obscure; but in Herbs often more distincty apparent; and especially in a
Turnep: the appearance whereof, the Barque being stripped off, is as a piece of
close-wrought Network, filled up with the Insertions from thence.

16.. The next and last distinct Part of the Root is the Pith. The substantial
nature thereof, is, as was said of the Insertment, the same likewise with that
of the Parenchyma of the Seed. And according to the best observation I have yet
made, it is sometimes existent in its Radicle; in which, the two main Branches
of the Lobes both meeting, and being osculated together, are thus disposed into
one round and tubular Trunk, and so environing part of the Parenchyma, make
thereof a Pith; as in either the Radicle, or the young Root of the great Bean
or Lupine, may, I think, be well seen.

17.. But many times the Original hereof is immediately from the Barque. For in
dissection of diverse Roots, both of Trees and Herbs, as of Barberry or Mallows,
it is observable, That the Cortical Body and Pith, are both of them participant
of the same Color; in the Barberry, both of them tinged yellow, and in
Mallows, green. In cutting the smaller Parts of the Roots of many Plants, as of
Borage, Mallows, Parsley, Columbine, etc. it is also evident, That the Lignous
Body is not there, Tab. 2. f. 9. ^
in the least Concave, but stands Solid, or without any Pith, in the Center;
and that the Insertions being gradually multiplied afterward, the Pith, at
length, toward the thicker parts of the Root, shows and enlarges it self.
Whence it appears, that in all such Roots, the Pith is not only of the same
substantial nature, and by the Insertions does communicate with the Barque; and
that it is also augmented by it; which is true of the Pith of all Roots; but is
moreover, by mediation of the said Insertions, wholly originated from it; that
is to say, from the Parenchymous Part thereof. The various appearances of the
Insertions and Pith from the filamentous Parts to the top of the Root, Tab. 2.
f. 9.
see in Tab. 2. The Pores of the Lignous Body, as it stands entire in the said
filamentous Parts, are best seen when they have lain by a night to dry, after
cutting.

18.. A farther evidence hereof are the Proportions betwixt the Cortical Body
and Pith. For as about the inferior Parts of the Root, where the Pith is
small, the Cortical Body is proportionably great; so about the top, where the
Pith is enlarged, the Cortical Body (now more properly becoming a Barque)
grows proportionably less, sc. because the Insertions do still more and more
enlarge the Pith. Likewise the peculiar frame of some Roots, wherein besides
the Pith, the Lignous Body being divided into two or more Rings, there are also
one or more thick Rings, of a white and soft substance, which stand betwixt
them; and are nothing else but the Insertions of the Cortical Body collected
into the said Rings; but, toward the top of the Root, being inserted again,
thus make a large and ample Pith; as in older Fennel-Roots, those of Beet, Tab.
2. f. 8.
Turnep, and some other Herbs, is seen.

19.. The Pores of the Pith, as those of the Cortical Body, are extended both
by the breadth and length of the Root, much alike; yet are they more or less of
a greater size than those of the Cortical Body.

20.. The Proportions of the Pith, are various; in Trees, but small; in Herbs,
generally, very fair; in some making by far the greatest part of the Root; as
in a Turnep: By reason of the wide circumference whereof, and so the finer
Concoction and Assimilation of its Sap; that Part which in most old Trunks is a
dry and harsh Pith, here proves a tender, pleasant meat.

21.. In the Roots of very many Plants, as Turnips, Carrots, etc. the Lignous
Body, besides its main utmost Ring, has diverse of its osculated Fibers
dispersed throughout the Body of the Pith; sometimes all alike, and sometimes
more especially in, or near, its Center; which Fibers, as they run toward the
top of the Root, still declining the Center, at last collaterally strike into
its Circumference; either all of them, or some few, keeping the Center still.
Of these principally, the Succulent part of the Lignous Body of the Trunk is
often originated.

22.. Some of these Pith-Fibres, although they are so exceeding slender, yet in
some Roots, as in that of Flower de liz, they are visibly concave, each of
them, in their several Cavities also embosoming a very small Pith; the sight
whereof, the Root being cut traverse, and laid in a Window for a day or two to
dry, may without Glasses be obtained. And this is the general account of the
Root; the declaration of the manner of its growth, with the use and service of
its several Parts, we shall next endeavor.

23.. I SAY THEN, That the Radicle being impregnate, and shot into the Moulds,
An Account of the Growth of the Root.
the contiguous moisture, by the Cortical Body, being a Body laxe and Spongy,
is easily admitted: Yet not all indiscriminately, but that which is more
adapted to pass through the surrounding Cuticle. Which transient Sap, though it
thus becomes fine, yet is not simple; but a mixture of Particles, both in
respect of those originally in the Root, and amongst themselves, somewhat
heterogeneous. And being lodged in the Cortical Body moderately laxe, and of a
Circular form; the effect will be an easy Fermentation. The Sap fermenting, a
separation of Parts will follow; some whereof will be impacted to the
Circumference of the Cortical Body, whence the Cuticle becomes a Skin; as we
see in the growing of the Coats of Cheeses, of the Skin over diverse Liquors,
and the like. Whereupon the Sap passing into the Cortical Body, through this,
as through a Manica Hippocratis, is still more finely filtred. With which Sap,
the Cortical Body being dilated as far as its Tone, without a solution of
Continuity, will bear; and the supply of the Sap still renewed: the purest
part, as most apt and ready, recedes, with its due Tinctures, from the said
Cortical Body, to all the parts of the Lignous; both those mixed with the
Barque, and those lying within it. Which Lignous Body likewise super-inducing
its own proper Tinctures into the said Sap; it is now to its highest preparaton
wrought up, and becomes (as they speak of that of an Animal) the Vegetative Ros
or Cambium: the noblest part whereof is at last coagulated in, and assimilated
to the like substance with the said Lignous Body. The remainder, though not
united to it, yet tinctured therein, thus retreats, that is, by the continual
appulse of the Sap, is in part carried off into the Cortical Body back again,
the Sap whereof it now tinctures into good Aliment. So that whereas before, the
Cortical Body was only relaxed in its Parts, and so dilated; it is now increased
in real quantity or number of parts, and so is truly nourished. And the
Cortical Body being saturate with so much of this Vital Sap as serves it self;
and the second Remainders discharged thence to the Skin; this also is nourished
and augmented therewith. So that as in an Animal Body there is no instauration
or growth of Parts made by the Blood only, but the Nervous Spirit is also
thereunto assistant; so is it here: the Sap prepared in the Cortical Body, is
as the Blood, and that part thereof prepared by the Lignous, is as the Nervous
Spirit; which partly becoming Nutriment to it self, and partly being discharged
back into the Cortical Body, and diffusing its Tincture through the Sap there,
that to the said Cortical Body and Skin, becomes also true Nutriment, and so
they all now grow.

24.. In which growth, a proportion in length and breadth is requisite: which
being rated by the benefit of the Plant, both for firm standing and sufficient
Sap, must therefore principally be in length. And because it is thus requisite,
therefore by the constitution of one of its Parts, sc. the Lignous Body, it is
also made necessary. For the Pores hereof, in that they are all extended by its
length, the Sap also according to the frame and site of the said Pores will
principally move; and that way as its Sap moves, the same way will the
generation of its Parts also proceed; sc. by its length. And the Lignous Body
first (that is by a priority causal) moving in length it self; the Cortical
also moves therewith. For that which is nourished, is extended: but whatever is
extended, is moved: that therefore which is nourished, is moved: The Lignous
Body then being first nourished, it is likewise first moved, and so becomes and
carries in it the Principle of all Vegetative motion in the Cortical; and so
they both move in length.

25.. Yet as the Lignous Body is the Principle of Motion in the Cortical; so
the Cortical is the Moderator of that in the Lignous: As in Animal Motions, the
Principle is from the Nerves; yet being once given to the Muscle or Limb, and
that moving proportionably to its structure, the Nerves also are carried in the
same motion with it. We suppose therefore, that as the principal motion of the
Lignous Body is in length, so is its proper tendency also to Ascend. But being
much exceeded both in Compass and Quantity by the Cortical, as in the smaller
parts of the Root it is; it must needs therefore be overborn and governed by
it; and so, though not lose its motion, yet make it that way wherein the
Cortical Body may be more obedient to it; which will be by descent. Yet both of
them being sufficiently pliable, they are thus capable, where the Soil may
oppose a direct descent, there to divert any way, where it is more penetrable,
and so to descend obliquely. For the same reason it may also be, that though
you set a Bean with the Radicle upward; yet the Radicle, as it shoots,
declining also gradually, is thus arched in form of an Hook, and so at last
descends. For every declination from a perpendicular Line, is a mixed motion
betwixt Ascent and Descent, as that of the Radicle also is, and so seeming to
be dependent upon the two Contrary Tendencies of the Lignous and Cortical
Bodies. What may be the cause of those Tendencies (being most probably
external, and a kind of Magnetisme) I shall not make my Task here to enquire.

26.. Now although the Lignous Body, by the position and shape of its Pores,
principally grows in length; yet will it in some degree likewise in breadth:
For it cannot be supposed that the purest Sap is all received into the said
Pores; but that part thereof likewise, staying about its Superficial Parts, is
there tinctured and agglutinated to them. And because these Pores are prolonged
by its length; therefore it is much more laxe and easily divisible that way; as
in slitting a Stick, or cleaving of Timber, and in cutting and hewing them
athwart is also seen. Whence it comes to pass, that in shooting from the Center
toward the Circumference, and there finding more room, its said original
Laxity does easily in diverse places now become greater, and at length in open
Partments plainly visible. Betwixt which Partments, the Cortical Body, being
bound in on the one hand, by the surrounding Skin and Moulds, and pressed upon
by the Lignous on the other, must needs insert it self, and so move contrary to
it, from the Circumference toward the Center. Where the said contrary motions
continued as begun, they at last meet, unite, and either make or augment the
Pith. And thus the Root is framed, and the Skin, the Cortical and Lignous
Bodies, so as is said, thereunto concurrent. We shall next show the use of the
two other Parts, sc. the Insertment and Pith; and first of the Pith.

27.. ONE true use of the Pith is for the better Advancement of the Sap,
whereof I shall speak in the next Chapter. The use I here observe, is for the
quicker and higher Fermentation of the Sap: For although the Fermentation made
in the Cortical Body was well subservient to the first Vegetations, yet those
more perfect ones in the Trunk which after follow, require a Body more adapted
to it, and that is the Pith; which is so necessary, as not to be only common
to, but considerably large in the Roots of most Plants; if not in their
inferior parts, yet at their tops. Where though either derived or amplify'd
from the Cortical Body, yet being by its Insertions only, we may therefore
suppose, as those, so this, to be more finely constituted. And being also from
its coarctation, while inserted, now free; all its Pores, upon the supply of
the Sap, will more or less be amplified: Upon which accounts, the Sap thereinto
received, will be more pure, and its fermentation therein more active. And as
the Pith is superior to the Cortical Body by its Constitution, so by its
Place. For as it thus stands central, it has the Lignous Body surrounding it.
Now as the Skin is the Fence of the Cortical Body, and that of the Lignous; so
is the Lignous again a far more preheminent one unto the Pith; the Sap being
here a brisk Liquor, tunn'd up as in a wooden Cask.

28.. And as the Pith subserves the higher Fermentation of the Sap; so do the
Insertions its purer Distribution; that separation which the parts of the Sap,
by being fermented in the Pith, were disposed for; being, upon its entrance
into the Insertions, now made: So that as the Skin is a Filtre to the Cortical
Body, so are the Insertions a more preheminent one to the Lignous. And as they
subserve the purer, so the freer and sufficient distribution of the Sap: For
the Root enlarging, and so the Lignous Body growing thicker, although the
Cortical and the Pith might supply Sap sufficient to the nutrition of its Parts
next adjacent to them; yet those more inward, must needs be scanted of their
Aliment; and so, if not quite starved, yet be incapable of equal growth:
Whereas the Lignous Body being through its whole breadth frequently disparted,
and the Cortical Body inserted through it; the Sap by those Insertions, as the
Blood by the disseminations of the Arteries, is freely and sufficiently
conveyed to its intimate Parts, even those, which from either the Barque or
from the Pith, are most remote. Lastly, as the consequent hereof, they are thus
assistant to the Latitudinal growth of the Root; as the Lignous Body to its
growth in Length; so these Insertions of the Cortical, to its better growth in
Breadth.

29.. Having thus seen the solitary uses of the Several Parts of the Root, I
shall lastly propound my Conjectures of that Design whereto they are altogether
concurrent, and that is the Circulation of the Sap.

30.. That the Sap has a Double, and so a Circular Motion, in the Root; is
probable, from the proper Motion of the Root, and from its Office. From its
Motion, which is Descent: for which, the Sap must likewise, some where, have
such a Motion proper to it. From its Office, which is, To feed the Trunk: for
which, the Sap must also, in some Part or other, have a more especial Motion of
Ascent.

31.. We may therefore suppose, That the Sap moving in the Barque, toward the
Pith, through the Insertions, thereinto obtains a pass, Which passage, the
upper Insertions will not favor; because the Pith standing in the same height
with them, is there large, the fermenting and course of the Sap quick, and so
its opposition strong. But through the lower it will much more easily enter;
because there, from the smalness of the Pith, the opposition is little, and
from the shortness of the Insertions, the way more open. So that the Sap here
meeting with the least opposition, here it will bestow it self (feeding the
Lignous Body in its passage) into the Pith. Into which, fresh Sap still
entering, this being yet but crude, will subside: that first received, and so
become a Liquor higher wrought, will more easily mount upwards. And moving in
the Pith, especially in the Sap-Fibers there dispersed, as in the Arterys, in
equal altitude with the upper- Insertions; the most volatile parts of all will
still continue their direct ascent toward the Trunk. But those of a middle
nature, and, as not apt to ascend, so being lighter than those beneath them,
not to descend neither; they will tend from the Pith toward the Insertions in
a Motion betwixt both. Through which Insertions (feeding the Lignous Body in
its passage) it is, by the next subsequent Sap, discharged off into the
Cortical Body, and so into the Sap-Fibres themselves, as into the Veins, back
again. Wherein, being still pursued by fresh Sap from the Center, and more
occurring from the Circumference, toward the lower Insertions, it thus
descends. Through which, together with part of the Sap afresh imbibed from the
Earth, it reenters the Pith. From whence, into the Cortical Body, and from
thence into the Pith, the cruder part thereof, is reciprocally disburs'd; while
the most Volatile, not needing the help of a Circulation, more directly
ascends toward the Trunk.

CHAP. III. Of the TRUNK.
HAVING thus declared the degrees of Vegetation in the Root; the continuance
hereof in the Trunk shall next be showed: in order to which, the Parts whereof
this likewise is compounded, we shall first observe.

1.. That which without dissection shows it self, is the Coarcture: I cannot
say of the Root, nor of the Trunk; but what I choose here to mention, as
standing betwixt them, and so being common to them both; all their Parts being
here bound in closer together, as in the tops of the grown Roots of very many
Plants, is apparent.

2.. Of the Parts of the Trunk, the first occurring is its Skin: The Formation
whereof, is not from the Air, but in the Seed, from whence it is originated;
being the production of the Cuticle, there investing the two Lobes and Plume.

3.. The next Part is the Cortical Body; which here in the Trunk is no new
substantial Formation; but, as is that of the Root, originated from the
Parenchyma of the Plume in the Seed; and is only the increase and augmentation
thereof. Tab. 3. f. 1, and 4.
The Skin, this Cortical Body or Parenchyma, and (for the most part) some
Fibers of the Lignous mixed herewith, altogether make the Barque.

4.. Next, the Lignous Body, which, whether it be visibly divided into many
softer Fibers or small Threads, Tab. 3. f. 1.
as in the Bean, Fennel, and most Herbs; or that its Parts stand more compact
and close, showing one hard, firm and solid piece, as in Trees; it is, in all,
one and the same Body; and that not formed originally in the Trunk, but in the
Seed; being nothing else but the prolongation of the Seminal Root distributed
in the Lobes and Plume thereof.

5.. Lastly, The Insertions and Pith are here originated likewise from the
Plume, as the same in the Root, from the Radicle: So that as to their
Substantial Parts, the Lobes of the Seed, the Radicle and Plume, the Root and
Trunk are all one.

6.. Yet some things are more fairly observable in the Trunk. First, the
Latitudinal shootings of the Lignous Body, which in Trunks of several years
growth, are apparent in so many Rings, as is commonly known. Tab. 3. f. 5. and
8.
For several young Fibers of the Lignous Body, as in the Root, so here,
shooting in the Cortical one year, and the spaces betwixt them being after
filled up with more (I think not till) the next, at length they become
altogether a firm compact Ring; the Perfection of one Ring, and the Groundwork
of another, being thus made concomitantly.

7.. From these Annual younger Fibers it is, that although the Cortical Body
and Pith are both of the same substantial nature, and their Pores little
different; yet whereas the Pith, which the first year is green, and of all the
Parts the fullest of Sap, becomes afterward white and dry: The Cortical Body,
on the contrary, so long as the Tree grows, ever keeps green and moist, sc.
because the said Sap-Fibers, annually grow therein, and so communicate with it.

8.. The Pores likewise of the Lignous Body, many of them, in well-grown
Timber, as in Oaken boards, are very conspicuous, in cutting both lengthwise
and traverse. They very seldom, if ever, run one into another, but keep, like
so many several Vessels, all along distinct; Tab. 3. f. 2. and 3.
as by cutting, and so following any one of them as far as you please, for a
Foot or half a Yard, or more together, may be observed. And so, the like, in
any Cane.

9.. Besides these, there are a lesser sort; which, by the help only of a good
Spectacle Glass may be observed.

10.. And these are all the Pores visible without a Microscope. The use of
which, excepting in some few particulars, I have purposely omitted in this
first Book. Micrography.
Mr. Hook shows us, besides these, a third, and yet smaller Sort; and (as a
confirmation of what, in the Second Chapter, C. 2.. 8.
I have said of the Pores of the Lignous Body in general) that they are all
continuous and prolonged by the length of the Trunk, as are the greater ones:
whereof he makes Experiment, by filling up, in a piece of Char-coal, all the
said Pores with Mercury: which appears to pass quite through them, in that by a
very good Glass it is visible in their Orifices at both ends; and without a
Glass, by the weight of the Coal alone, is also manifest. All these I have
seen, with the help of a good Microscope, in several sorts of Woods. As they
all appear in a piece of Oak, cut transversely, Tab. 3. f. 7.
See Tab. 3.

11.. Upon further Enquiry, I likewise find, That the Pores of the Lignous Body
in the Trunks of Herbs, which at first I only supposed, by the help of good
Glasses, are very fairly visible: each Fiber being sometimes perforated by 30,
50, 100, or hundreds of Pores. Or what I think is the truest notion of them,
That each Fiber, though it seem to the bare eye to be but one, yet is, indeed,
a great number of Fibers together; and every Pore, being not merely a space
betwixt the several parts of the Wood, but the Concave of a Fiber. So that if
it be asked, what all that Part of a Plant, either Herb or Tree, which is
properly called the Woody-Part; what all that is, I suppose, That it is nothing
else but a Cluster of innumerable and most extraordinary small Vessels or
Concave Fibers: Tab. 3. f. 6.
as in a Slice of the Trunk of Burdock is apparent.

12.. Next the Insertions of the Cortical Body, which in the Trunk of a Tree
sawed athawrt, are plainly discerned as they run from the Circumference toward
the Center; the whole Body of the Tree being visibly compounded of two distinct
Substances, that of the several Rings, and that of the Insertions, running
cross; showing that in some resemblance in a Plain, Tab. 3. f. 5. and 8.
which the Lines of Latitude and of the Meridian do in a Globe. The entrance of
the Insertions into the Wood, is also, upon striping off the Barque, very
apparent; as in the same Fig. 8.

13.. These Insertions are likewise very conspicuous in Sawing of Trees
length-ways into Boards, and those plained, and wrought into Leaves for Tables,
Wainscot, Trenchers, and the like. In all which, as in course Trenchers made of
Beech, and Tables of Oak, there are many parts which have a greater smoothness
than the rest; Tab. 3. f. 2. and Tab. 4. f. 1.
and are so many inserted Pieces of the Cortical Body; which being by those of
the Lignous, frequently intercepted, seem to be discontinuous, although in the
Trunk they are really extended, in continued Plates, throughout its Breadth.

14.. These Insertions, although as is said, of a quite distinct substance from
the Lignous Body, and so no where truly incorporated with it, yet being they
are in all parts, the one as the Warp, the other as the Woof, mutually braced
and interwoven together, they thus constitute one strong and firmly coherent
Body; Tab. 4. f. 1.
as the Timber of any Tree.

15.. As the Pores or Vessels are greater or less, so are the Insertions also:
To the bare eye usually the greater only are discernable: But through an
indifferent Microscope there are others also, much more both numerous and
small, distinctly apparent, as in a transverse piece of Oak. Tab. 3. f. 7.


16.. In none of all the Pores can we observe any thing which may have the true
nature and use of Valves, which is, Easily to admit that, to which they will by
no means allow a regress. And their nonexistence is enough evident, C. 1.. 42.
from what in the first Chapter we have said of the Lobes of the Seed: in whose
Seminal Root, were there any Valves, it could not be, that by a contrary Course
of the Sap, they should ever grow; which yet, wherever they turn into
Dissimilar Leaves, they do. Or if we consider the growth of the Root, which
oftentimes is upward and downward both at once. And being cut transversely,
will bleed, both the same ways, with equal freedom.

17.. The Insertions here in the Trunk give us likewise a sight of the position
of their Pores. For in a plained piece of Oak, as in Wainscot, Tables, etc.
besides the larger Pores of the Lignous Body, which run by the length of the
Trunk; Tab. 3. f. 2.
the Tract likewise of those of the Insertions may be observed to be made by
the breadth, and so directly cross. Nor are they continuous as those of the
Lignous Body, but very short, as those both of the Cortical Body and Pith, with
which the Insertions, as to their substance, are congenerous. Yet they all
stand so together, as to be plainly ranked in even Lines or Rows throughout the
breadth of the Trunk: As the Tract of those Pores appears to the naked Eye, see
in Tab. 3. Fig. 9. The Pores themselves may be seen in the Root of a Vine
described and figured in the Second Book, Tab. 17.
as it appears through a good Microscope.

18.. The Pores of the Pith likewise being larger here in the Trunk, are better
observable than in the Root: the width whereof, in comparison with their Sides
so exquisitely thin, may by an Honeycomb be grossly exemplified; and is that
also which the vast disproportion betwixt the Bulk and Weight of a dry Pith
does enough declare. In the Trunks of some Plants, they are so ample and
transparent, that in cutting both by the length and breadth of the Pith, some
of them through the transparency of the Skins by which they are bounded, or of
which they consist, would seem to be considerably extended by the length of the
Pith; but are really discontinuous and short, and as it is said, somewhat
answerable to the Cells of an Honeycomb. This is the nearest we can come to
them, by the bare Eye without the assistance of a good Microscope. Mr. Hook
shows in his Micrography, That the Pores of the Pith, particularly of
Elder-Pith, so far as they are visible, are all alike discontinuous; and that
the Pith is nothing else but (as he calls them) an heap of Bubbles. Although,
in regard they are not fluid, but fixed Parts, I shall choose rather to call
them, Bladders. As they appear through a good Glass, Tab. 3. f. 6.
in a piece of Burdock, See in Tab. 3. But a more particular Description of the
Sizes, Figures, and admirable Textures hereof, I have given in several places
in the following Books.

19.. Besides what this Observation informs us of here, C. 2.. 3, 16, 17.
it farther confirms what in the Second Chapter we have said of the Original of
the Pith and Cortical Body, and of the sameness of both their natures with the
Parenchyma of the Seed: which is nothing else but a Mass of Bladders; C. 1..
18. and Tab. 1. f. 9.
as in the First Chapter has been said.

20.. In the Piths of many Plants, the greater Pores or Bladders have some of
them lesser ones within them, and some of them are divided with cross
Membranes: And betwixt their several sides, have, I think, other smaller
Bladders visibly interjected. However, that they are all permeable, is most
certain. They stand together not confusedly, but in even Ranks or Trains; as
those of the Insertions by the breadth, so these by the length of the Trunk.
And thus far there is a general corresponding betwixt the parts of the Root and
Trunk. Yet are there some considerable Disparities betwixt them; wherein, and
how they come to pass, and to what especial Use and End, shall next be said.

21.. WE SAY then, An Account of the Growth of the Trunk.
that the Sap being in the Root by Filtrations, Fermentations (and in what
Roots needful, perhaps by Circulation also) duly prepared; the prime part
thereof passing through the intermediate Coarcture, in due moderation and
purity is entertained at last into the Trunk. And the Sap of the Trunk being
purer and more volatile, and so it self apt to ascend; the motion of the Trunk
likewise will be more noble, receiving a disposition and tendency to ascend
therewith. And what by the Sap the Trunk is in part dipos'd to, by the
respective position and quantity of its Parts it is effectually enabled. For
whereas in the Root the Lignous Body being in proportion with the Cortical, but
little, and all lying close within its Center; it must therefore needs be under
its control: on the contrary, being here comparatively of greater quantity,
and also more dilated, and having diverse of its Branches standing more abroad
toward the Circumference, as both in the Leaves and Body of the young Trunk
and Plume, is seen; it will in its own magnetical tendency to ascend, reduce
the Cortical Body to a compliance with it.

22.. And the Trunk thus standing from under the restraint of the Ground in the
open Air, the disposition of its Parts, originally different from that of the
Parts in the Root, will not only be continued, but improved. For by the force
and pressure of the Sap in its collateral Motion, the Lignous Body will now
more freely and farther be dilated. And this being dilated, the Cortical Body
also, must needs be inserted; and is therefore in proportion always, more or
less, smaller here in the Trunk, than in the Root. And as the Cortical Body
lessens, so the Pith will be enlarged, and by the same proportion is here
greater. And the Pith being enlarged it self, its Pores (the Lignous Body, upon
its dilatation, as it were tentering and stretching out all their sides) must
needs likewise be enlarged with it; and accordingly, are ever greater in the
Pith of the Trunk, than of the Root. And the dilatation of the Lignous Body
still continued, it follows, that whereas the Pith descendent in the Root, is
not only in proportion less and less, but also in the smaller extremities
thereof, and sometimes higher, altogether absent: Contrariwise, in the Trunk,
it is not only continued to its top and smallest Twigs, but also there, in
proportion, equally ample with what it is in any other inferior part.

23.. But although the openness of the Aer permitting, be allways alike; yet
the Energy of the Sap effecting, being different; as therefore that does, the
dilatation of the Trunk, will also vary. If that be less, so is this; as in the
Trunks of most Trees: If that be greater, so this; as in Herbs is common; the
Lignous Body being usually so far dilated, that the utmost Shootings thereof
may easily be seen to jut out, and adjoyn to the Skin. And if the Sap be still
of greater energy, it so far dilates the Lignous Body, as not only to amplify
the Pith and all its Pores; but also so far to stretch them out, as to make
them tear. Whereupon either running again into the Cortical Body, or shrinking
up toward it, the Trunk thus sometimes becomes an hallow Stalk, the Pith being
wholly, or in part voided. But generally it keeps entire; and where it does,
the same proportion and respect to the Lignous and Cortical Bodies, as is said.
The Consequences of all which will be, the Strength of the Trunk, the Security
and Plenty of the Sap, its Fermentation will be quicker, its Distribution more
effectual, and its Advancement more sufficient.

24.. First, the Erect Growth and Strength of the Trunk; this being, by the
position of its several Parts, effected: for besides the slendering of the
Trunk still toward the top, the Circumferential position of the Lignous Body,
likewise is, and that eminently, hereunto subservient. So that as the Lignous,
Body, in the smaller parts, of the Root standing Central, we may thence
conceive and see their pliableness to any oblique motion; so here, on the
contrary, the Lignous Body standing wide, it thus becomes the Strength of the
Trunk, and most advantageous to its Perpendicular Growth. We see the same
Design in Bones and Feathers: The strongest Bones, as those in the Legs, are
hollow. Now should we suppose the same Bone, to be contracted into a Solid;
although now it would be no heavier, and in that respect, as apt for motion;
yet would it have far less strength, than as its Parts are dilated to a
Circumferential posture. And so for Quills, which, for the same Reasons, in
subserviency to flying, as they are exceeding light; So, in comparison with the
thinness of their Sides, they are very strong, and much less apt to bend, than
if contracted into a Solid Cylinder. We see it not only in Nature, but Art. For
hence it is, that Joyners and Carpenters. unite and set together their
Timberpieces and several Works oftentimes with double Joints; which, although
they are no thicker, than a single one might be made; yet standing at a
distance, have a greater strength than That could have. And the same
Architecture, will have the same use, in the Trunks of Plants; in most whereof
it is very apparent; as for instance, in Corn. For Nature designing its Sap a
great Ascent; for its higher maturity, has given it a tall Trunk: But to
prevent its ravenous despoiling either of the Ear, or Soil; although it be
tall, yet are its sides but thin: And because again, it should grow not only
tall and thriftily, but for avoiding propping up, strongly too; therefore, the
same proportion as its height bears, to the thinness of its sides, does the
greatness of its Circumference also; being so far dilated as to parallel a Quil
it self.

25.. Besides the position of the Lignous Body within the compass of a Ring,
there are some Shootings thereof, often standing beyond the Circumference of
the said Ring, making sometimes a triangular, oftener a quadrangular Body of the
Trunk. To the end, that the Ring, being but thin, and not self-sufficient,
these, like Splinters to Bones, might add strength and stability to it.

26.. Next, the security and plenty of the Sap. For should the Lignous Body, as
it does in the smaller Parts of the Root, stand Central here also, and so the
Cortical wholly surround it: the greater part of the Sap would thus be more
immediately exposed to the Sun and Aer; and being lodged in a laxe Body, by
them continually be preyed upon, and as fast as supplied to the Trunk, be
exhausted. Whereas, the Pith standing in the Center, the Sap therein being not
only most remote from the Aer and Sun, but by the Barque, and especially the
Wood, being also surrounded and doubly immured, will very securely and
copiously be conveyed to all the Collateral Parts, and (as shall be said how)
the top of the Trunk.

27.. And the Sap by the amplitude, and great porosity of the Pith, being
herein more copious, its Fermentation also will be quicker; which we see in all
Liquors, by standing in a greater quantity together, proceeds more kindly: And
being tuned up within the Wood, is at the same time not only secured from loss,
but all extreme mutations; the Day being thus, not too hot; nor the Night, too
cold for it.

28.. And the Fermentation hereof being quicker, its motion also will be
stronger, and its Distribution more effectual, not only to the dilatation of
the Trunk, but likewise the shooting out of the Branches. Whence it is, that in
the Bodies of Trees, the Barque of it self, though it be Sappy, and many Fibers
of the Lignous Body mixed with it, yet seldom sends forth any; and that in
Herbs, those with the least Pith (other advantages not supplying this defect)
have the fewest or smallest Branches, or other collateral Growths: and that
Corn, which has no Pith, has neither any Branches.

29.. Lastly, the Advancement of the Sap will hence also be more ready and
sufficient. For the understanding where, and how, we suppose, That in all
Trunks whatsoever there are two Parts jointly hereunto subservient. In some,
the Lignous Body and the Cortical, as in older Trunks; the Pith being either
excluded, or dried: But in most, principally, the Lignous Body and Pith; as in
most Annual Growths of Trees; but especially Herbs, where the Cortical Body is
usually much and often wholly Inserted.

30.. Of the Lignous Body it is so apparent by its Pores, or rather by its
Vessels, that we need no farther Evidence. For to what end are Vessels, but for
the conveyance of Liquor? And is that also, which upon cutting the young Branch
of a Sappy Tree or Herb, by an accurate and steady view may be observed. But
when I say the Vessels of the Lignous Body, I mean principally them of the
younger shootings, both those which make the new Ring, and those which are
mixed with the Cortical Body in the Barque: that which ascends by the Pores
or Vessels of the Wood, being probably, because in less quantity, more in form
of a Vapor, than a Liquor. Yet that which drenching into the sides of its
Pores, is with all thereunto sufficient Aliment; as we see Orpine, Onions, etc.
only standing in a moyster Aer will often grow. And being likewise in part
supplied by the Insertions from the younger Shoots: But especially because as
it is but little, so (considered as Aliment) it serves only for the growth of
the Wood, and no more; whereas, the more copious Aliment ascendent by the
younger Shoots, subserves not only their own growth, but the generation of
others; and is besides with that in the Cortical Body the Fountain of
Perspirations, which we know even in Animals are much more abundant than the
Nutritive Parts; and doubtless in a Vegetable are still much more.

31.. But these Pores, although they are a free and open way to the ascending
Sap; yet that mere Pores or Vessels should be able of themselves to advance the
Sap with that speed, strength and plenty, and to that height, as is necessary,
cannot probably be supposed. It follows then, that herein we must grant the
Pith a joint service. And why else is the Pith in all Primitive Growths the
most Sappy part, why has it so great a stock of Sap, if not, after due
maturation within it self, still to be disbursed into the Fibers of the Lignous
Body? Why are the Annual Growths of all both Herbs and Trees, with great Piths,
the quickest and the longest? But how are the Pores or Bladders of the Pith
permeable? That they are so, both from their being capable of a repletion with
Sap, and of being again wholly emptied of it, and again, instead thereof filled
with Aer, is as certain as that they are Pores. That they are permeable, by the
breadth, appears from the dilatation of the Lignous Body, and from the
production of Branches, as has been, and shall hereafter be said. And how else
is there a Communion betwixt This and the Cortical Body? That they are so also,
by the length, is probable, because by the best Microscope we cannot yet
observe, that they are visibly more open by the breadth, than by the length.
And withal are ranked by the length, as those of the Insertions by the breadth
of the Trunk. But if you set a piece of dry Elder-Pith in some tinged Liquor,
why then does it not penetrate the Pores, so as to ascend through the Body of
the Pith? The plain reason is, because they are all filled with Aer. Whereas
the Pith in a Vegetating Plant, as its Parts or Bladders are still generated,
they are at the same time also filled with Sap; which, as it is gradually spent,
is still repaired by more succeeding, and so the Aer still kept out; as in all
Primitive Growths, and the Pith of Elder it self: Yet the same Pith, by reason
of the following Winter, wanting a more copious and quick supply of Sap, thus
once become, ever after keeps dry. And since in the aforesaid Trial the Liquor
only ascends by the sides of the Pith, that is of its broken Bladder, we should
thence by the same reason conclude that they are not penetrable by the breadth
neither, and so no way; and then it need not be asked what would follow. But
certainly the Sap in the Bladders of the Pith is discharged and repaired every
moment, as by its shriv'ling up, upon cutting the Plant, is evident.

32.. We suppose then, that as the Sap ascends into the Trunk by the Lignous
Body, so partly also by the Pith. For a piece of Cotton with one end immersed
in some tinged Liquor, and with the other erect above, though it will not
imbibe the Liquor so far as to overrun at the top, yet so as to advance toward
it, it will. So here, the Pith, being a porous and spongy Body, and in its
Vegetating state, its Pores or Bladders being also permeable, as a curious
Filtre of Natures own contrivance, it thus advances, or as people use to say,
sucks up the Sap. Yet as it is seen of the Liquor in the Cotton; so likewise
are we to suppose it of the Sap in the Pith; that though it rises up for some
way, yet is their some term, beyond which it rises not, and toward which the
motion of the ascending Sap is more and more broken, weak and slow, and so the
quantity thereof less and less. But because the Sap moves not only by the
length, but breadth of the Pith; at the same time therefore as it partly
ascends by the Pith, it is likewise in part pressed into the Lignous Body or
into its Pores. And since the motion of the Sap by the breadth of the Pith not
being far continued, and but collateral, is more prone and easy, than the
perpendicular, or by its length; it therefore follows, that the collateral
motion of the Sap, at such a height or part of the Pith, will be equally strong
with the perpendicular at another part, though somewhat beneath it; and that
where the perpendicular is more broken and weak, the collateral will be less;
and consequently where the perpendicular tendency of the Sap has its term, the
collateral tendency thereof, and so its pressure into the Pores or Vessels of
the Lignous Body, will still continue. Through which, in that they are small,
and so their sides almost contiguous, the Sap as fast as pressed into them will
easily run up; as in very small Glass Pipes, or betwixt the two halves of a
Stick first slit, and then tied somewhat loosely together, may also any Liquor
be observed to do. By which Advantage the facility and strength of that ascent
will be continued higher in the said Vessels, than in the Pith. Yet since this
also, as well as that in the Pith will have its term; the Sap, although got
thus far, would at last be stagnant, or at least its ascent be very sparing,
slow and feeble, if not some way or other reinforced. Wherefore, as the Sap
moving by the breadth of the Pith, presses thence into the Vessels of the
Lignous Body; so having well filled these, is in part by the same Collateral
motion disbursed back, into a yet higher Region of the Pith. By which partly,
and partly, by that portion of the Sap, which in its perpendicular ascent was
before lodged therein; it is thus here, as in any inferior place equally
replenished. Whereupon the force and vigor of the perpendicular motion of the
Sap herein, will likewise be renewed; and so its Collateral motion also, and so
its pressure into the Vessels of the Lignous Body, and consequently its ascent
therein: and so by a pressure, from these into the Pith, and from the Pith into
these, reciprocally carried on; a most ready and copious ascent of the Sap will
be continued, from the bottom to the top, though of the highest Tree.

An Appendix. Of Trunk-Roots and Claspers.
THE distinct Parts whereof these are composed, are the same with those of the
Trunk, and but the continuation of them.

1.. Trunk-Roots are of two kinds: Of the one, are those that vegetate by a
direct descent: The place of their Eruption is sometimes all along the Trunk;
as in Mint, etc. Sometimes only at its utmost point, as in the Bramble.

2. 2. The other sort are such as neither ascend nor descend, but shoot forth
at right Angles with the Trunk; which therefore, though as to their Office,
they are true Roots, yet as to their Nature, they are a Middle Thing betwixt a
Root and a Trunk.

3.. Claspers, though they are but of one kind, yet their Nature is double; not
a mean betwixit that of the Root and that of the Trunk, but a compound of both;
as in their Circumvolutions, wherein they often mutually ascend and descend, is
seen.

4.. The use of these Parts may be observed as the Trunk Mounts, or as it
Trails. In the mounting of the Trunk, they are for Support and Supply. For
Support, we see the Claspers of Vines: the Branches whereof being very long,
fragile and slender; unless by their Claspers, they were mutually contained
together, they must needs by their own weight, and that of their Fruit,
undecently fall; and be also liable to frequent breaking. So that the whole
care is divided betwixt the Gardener and Nature; the Gardener, with his
Ligaments of Leather, secures the main Branches; and Nature, with these of her
own finding, secures the Less. Their Convenience to which end, is seen in their
Circumvolutions, a motion, not proper to any other Part: As also in their
toughness, though much more slender than the Branches whereon they are
appendent.

5. The Claspers of Bryony have a retrograde motion about every Third Circle,
to the form a Doublet-Clasp. Probably for the more certain hold; which, if it
miss one way, it may be sure to take another.

6.. For Supply, we see the Trunk-Roots of Ivy. For mounting very high, and
being of a closer or more compact Substance than that of a Vine; the Sap could
not be sufficiently supplied to the upper Sprouts, unless these, to the
Mother-Root, were jointly assistant. Yet serve they for support likewise;
whence they shoot out, not as in Cresses, Brook-lime, etc. recipocrally on each
side, but commonly, all on one; that so they may be fastened at the nearest hand.

7.. In the Trailing of the Trunk, they serve for stabiliment, propagation and
shade. For stabiliment, the Claspers of Cucumbers are of good use. For the
Trunk and Branches being long and fragile, the Brushes of the Winds would
injuriously hoise them to and fro, to the damage both of themselves and their
tender Fruits, were they not by these Ligaments brought to good Association and
Settlement.

8.. As for this end, so for Propagation, the Trunk-Roots of Chamaemile do well
serve. Whence we have the reason of the common observation, that it grows
better by being trod upon: the Mould, where too laxe, being thus made to lie
more conveniently about the said Trunk-Roots newly bedded therein; and is that
which is sometimes also effected in Rolling of Corn.

9.. For both these ends, Serve the Trunk-Roots of Strawberries; as also for
shade; for in that all Strawberries delight; and by the trailing of the Plant
is well obtained. So that as we are wont to tangle the Twigs of Trees together
to make an Arbor Artificial; the same is here done to make a Natural one: as
likewise by the Claspers of Cucumbers. For the Branches of the one by the
Linking of their Claspers, and of the other by the Tethering of their
Trunk-Roots, being couched together; their tender Fruits thus lie under the
Umbrage of a Bower made of their own Leaves.

CHAP. IV. Of the GERMEN, BRANCH, and LEAF.
THE Parts of the Germen and Branch, are the same with those of the Trunk; the
same Skin, Cortical and Lignous Bodies, Insertment and Pith, hereinto
propagated, and distinctly observable herein.

2.. For upon Enquiry into the Original of a Branch or Germen, it appears, That
it is not from the Superficies of the Trunk; but so deep, as to take, with the
Cortical, the Lignous Body into it self: and that, not only from its
Circumference, but from in Inner or Central Parts; So as to take the Pith in
also. Diverse of which Parts may commonly be seen to shoot out into the Pith;
from which Shoots, the surrounding and more superior Germens are originated;
in like manner as the Succulent Part of the Lignous Body of the Trunk is
sometimes principally from those Fibrous Shoots which run along the Pith in the
Root.

3.. The manner wherein usually the Germen and Branch are framed, is briefly
thus: The Sap (as is said, Chap. 3.) mounting in the Trunk, will not only by
its length, but by its breadth also, through the Insertions partly move. Yet,
its Particles being not all alike qualified, in different degrees. Some are
more gross and sluggish; of which we have the formation of a Circle of Wood
only, or of an Annual Ring. Others are more brisk; and by these, we have the
Germen propagated. For by the vigor of their own motion from the Center, they
impress an equal tendency on some of the inner Portions of the Lignous Body
next adjacent to the Pith, to move with them. And since the Lignous Body is not
entire, but frequently disparted; through these Dispartments, the said
interior Portions, upon their Nutrition, actually shoot; not only toward the
Circumference, so as to make part of a Ring; but even beyond it, in order to
the production of a Germen. And the Lignous Body thus moving, and carrying the
Cortical along with it; they both make a force upon the Skin. Yet their motion
being most even and gradual, that force is such likewise; not to cause the
least breach of its parts, but gently to carry it on with themselves; and so
partly, by the extension of its already existent parts, as of those of Gold in
drawing of Gilded Wire; and partly, by the accretion of new ones, as in the
enlarging of a Bubble above the Surface of the Water; it is extended with them
to their utmost growth. In which growth, the Germen being prolonged, and so
displaying its several parts, as when a Prospective or Telescope is drawn out,
thus becomes a Branch.

4.. The same way as the propagation of the Parts of a Germen is contrived, is
its due nutrition also. For being originated from the inner part of the Lignous
Body, it is nourished with the best fermented Sap in the Trunk, sc. that next
adjacent to it in the Pith. Besides, since all its Parts, upon their shooting
forth, divaricate from their perpendicular, to a cross Line, as these and the
other grow and thrive together, they bind and throng each other into a Knot:
through which Knot the Sap being strained, it is thus, in due moderation and
purity delivered up into the Branch.

5.. And for Knots, they are so necessary, as to be seen not only where
collaterl Branches put forth; but in such Plants also, as shoot up in one
single Trunk; as in Corn. Wherein, as they make for the strength of the Trunk;
so by so many percolations, as they are Knots, for the trasmission of the Sap
more and more refined toward the Ear. So that the two general uses of Knots
are, For fimer standing, and finer growth.

6.. Lastly, as the due Formation and Nutrition of the Germen are provided for,
so is its security also; which both in its position upon the Trunk, and that of
its Parts among themselves, may be observed. The position of its Parts shall be
considered in speakimg of the Leaf. As to its standing in the Trunk, it is
always betwixt the trunk or older Branch, and the Basis of the Stalk of a
Leaf; whereby it is not only guarded from the Injuries of any contingent
Violence; but also from the more piercing assaults of the Cold; so long, till
in time it is grown larger, and more hardy. The manner and uses of the position
of every Germen, considered as after it becomes a Branch; Hist. of the Prop. of
Veget.
has already been, by the Ingenious Mr. Sharrock very well observed; to whom I
refer.

7.. UPON THE prolongation of the Germen into a Branch, its Leaves are thus
displayed. The Parts whereof are substantially the same with those of a Branch.
For the Skin of the Leaf, is only the ampliation of that of the Branch; being
partly by the accretion of new, and partly the extention of its already
existent parts, dilated (as in making of Leaf-Gold) into its present breadth.
The Fibers or Nerves dispersed through the Leaf, are only the Ramifications of
the Branch's Wood, or Lignous Body. The Parenchyma of the Leaf, which lies
betwixt the Nerves, and as in Gentlewomens Needle-works, fills all up, is
nothing else, but the continuation of the Cortical Body, or Parenchymous part
of the Barque from the Branch into it self, as in most Plants with a thick
Leaf, may easily be seen.

8.. The Fibers of the Leaf neither shoot out of the Branch, or the Trunk, nor
stand in the Stalk, in an even Line; but always in either an Angular or
Circular posture; and usually making either a Triangle, or a Semicircle, or
Chord of a Circle; as in Cichory, Endive, Cabbage, Tab. 4. f. 2. to f. 11.
etc. may be observed. And if the Leaf have but one main Fiber, that also is
postur'd in a bowed or Lunar Figure; as in Mint and others. The usual number of
these Vascular Threads or Fibers is 3, 5, or 7.

9.. The reason of the said Positions of the Fibers in the Stalk of the Leaf,
is for its more Erect growth, and greater Strength: which, were the position of
the said Fibers in an even Line, and so the Stalk it self, as well as the Leaf,
flat; must needs have been defective; as from what we have said of the
Circumferential posture of the Lignous Body in the Trunk, C. 3.. 24.
we may better conceive.

10.. As likewise for the security of its Sap: For by this means it is, that
the several Fibers, and especially the main or middle Fiber of the Leaf,
together with a considerable part of the Parenchyma, are so disposed of, as to
jut out, not from its upper, but its back, or neither Side. Whence the whole
Leaf, reclining backward, becomes a Canopy to them, defending them from those
Injuries which from colder Blasts, or an hotter Sun, they might otherwise
sustain. So that by a mutual benefit, as These give suck to all the Leaf, so
that again protection to These.

11.. These Fibers are likewise the immediate Visible Cause of the Shape of the
Leaf. For if the nethermost Fiber or Fibers in the Stalk (which thence runs
chiefly through the length of the Leaf) be in proportion greater, the Leaf is
long; as in Endive, Cichory, and others: If all of a more equal size, it
spreads rounder, as in Ivy, Doves-foot, Colts foot, etc. And although a
Dock-Leaf be very long, whose Fibers notwithstanding, as they stand higher in
the Stalk, are disposed into a Circle all of an equal size; yet herein one or
more peculiar Fibers, Tab. 4.
standing, in or near the Center, betwixt the rest, and running through the
length of the Leaf, may be observed.

12.. In correspondence also to the size and shape of these Fibers, is the Leaf
flat. In that either they are very small, or if larger, yet they never make an
entire Circle or Ring; but either half of one, as in Borage, Tab. 4.
or at most three parts of one, as in Mullen, may be seen. For if either they
were so big, as to contain, or so entire, as perfectly to include a Pith, the
Energy of the Sap in that Pith, would cause the said Lignous Ring to shoot
forth on every side, as it does in the Root or Trunk: But the said Fibers being
not figured into an entire Ring, but so as to be open; on that hand therefore
where open they cannot shoot any thing directly from themselves, because there
they have nothing to shoot; and the Sap having also a free vent through the
said opening, against that part therefore which is thereunto oppsite, it can
have no force; and so neither will they shoot forth on that hand; and so will
they consequently, that way only, which the force of the Sap directs, which is
only on the right and left.

13.. The several Fibers in the Stalk, are all Inosculated in the Leaf, with
very many Sub-divisions. According as these Fibers are Inosculated near, or at,
or shoot directly to the edge of the Leaf, is it Even, or Scallop'd. Where
these Inosculations are not made, there we have no Leaves, but only a company
of Filaments; as in Fennel.

14.. To the Formations of Leaves, the Fouldings immediately follow. And
sometimes they have one Date, or are the contemporary works of Nature; each
Leaf obtaining its distinct shape, and proper posture together; both being
perfect, not only in the outer, but Central and minutest Leaves, which are five
hundred times smaller than the outer: both which in the Cautious opening of a
Germen may be seen.

15.. Nor is there greater Art in the Forms, than in the Foulds or Postures of
Leaves; both answerably varying, as this or that way they may be most
agreeable. Treat. of the Quincunx.
Of the Quincuncial posture, so amply instanced in by the Learned Sir Thomas
Brown, I shall omit to speak. Others there are, which though not all so
universal, yet equally necessary where they are, giving two general advantages
to the Leaves, Elegancy and Security, sc. in taking up, so as their Forms will
bear, the least room; and in being so conveniently couched, as to be capable of
receiving protection from other Parts, or of giving it one to another; as for
instance,

16.. First, There is the Bow-Lap, where the Leaves are all laid somewhat
convexly one over another, but not plaited; being to the length, breadth and
number of Leaves most agreeable; as in the Buds of Pear Tree, Plum-tree, etc.
But where the Leaves are not so thick set, as to stand in the Bow-Lap, there we
have the Plicature, or the Flat-Lap; as in Rose-Tree, Strawberry, Cinquefoyl,
Burnet, etc. For the Leaves being here plaited, and so lying in half their
breadth, and diverse of them thus also collaterally set together; the thickness
of them all, and half their breadth, are much alike dimensions; by which they
stand more secure within themselves, and in better consort with other
Germen-Growths in the same Truss. If the Leaves be much indented or jagg'd, now
we have the Duplicature; wherein there are diverse Plaits in one Leaf, or Labels
of a Leaf, but in distinct Sets, a lesser under a greater; as in Souchus,
Tansey, etc. When the Leaves stand not collaterally, but single; and are
moreover very broad; then we have the Multiplicature; as in Gooseberries,
Mallows, etc. the Plaits being not only diverse in the same Leaf, but of the
same Set continuant, and so each Leaf gathered up in five, seven or more
Foulds, in the same manner as our Gentlewomens Fans. Where either the thickness
of the Leaf will not permit a Flat-Lap, or the fewness of their number, or the
smalness of their Fibers, will allow the Roll, there This may be observed.
Which is sometimes single, as in Bears-Ears, Arum, Flammula, Jerusalem Cowslip,
etc. Sometimes double, the two Rowls beginning at each edge of the Leaf, and
meeting in the middle. Which again, is either the Fore-Rowl, or the Back-Rowl.
If the Leaf be designed to grow long, now we have the Back-Rowl, as in Docks,
Sorrels, and the rest of this Kindred: as also in Primrose, and other like
Plants. For the main Fibers, and therewith a considerable part of the Cortical
Body standing prominent from the Backside of the Leaf, they thus stand
securely couched up betwixt the two Rowls; on whose security the growth of the
Leaf in length depends. But those of Bears-Ears, Violets, Doves Foot, Warden,
and many more, upon contrary respects, are rolled up inwards. Lastly, there is
the Tre-Rowl, as in Fern; the Labels whereof, though all rolled up to the main
Stem, yet could not stand so firm and secure from the Injuries either of the
Ground or Weather, unless to the Rowls in breadth, that by the length were
super-induc'd; the Stalk or main Stem giving the same Protection here, which in
other Plants by the Leaves, or some particular Mantling, is contrived. These,
and other Foulds, See in the Figures belonging to the First Part of the Fourth
Book.

17.. According to the Form and Foulding of every Leaf or Germen, is its
Protection ordered; about six ways whereof may be observed; sc. by Leaves,
Surfoyls, Interfoyls, Stalks, Hoods and Mantlings. To add to what we have above
given, one or two Instances. Every Bud, besides its proper Leaves, is covered
with diverse Leafy Pannicles or Surfoyls; which, what the Leaves are to one
another, are that to them all: For not opening except gradually, they admit not
the Weather, Wet, Sun or Aer, to approach the Leaves, except by degrees
respondent, and as they are gradually inured to bear them. Sometimes, besides
Surfoyls, there are also many Interfoyls set betwixt the Leaves, from the
Circumference to the Center of the Bud; as in the Hasel. For the Fibers of
these Leaves standing out so far from a plain surface; they would, if not thus
sheltered, lie too much exposed and naked to the Severities of the Weather.
Where none of all the Protections abovenamed, are convenient, there the
Membranes of the Leaves by continuation in their first forming (together with
some Fibers of the Lignous Body) are drawn out into so many Mantles or Veils;
as in Docks, Snakeweed, etc. For the Leaves here being but few, yet each Leaf
and its Stalk being both exceeding long; at the bottom whereof the next
following Leaf still springs up; the form and posture of all is such, as
supersedes all the other kinds of Protection, and so each Leaf apart is
provided with a Veil to it self. These, and other Protections, See in the
Figures belonging to the First Part of the Fourth Book.

18. The Uses of the Leaves, I mean in respect of their service to the Plant it
self, are these: First, for Protection; which, besides what they give one to
another, they afford also to the Flower and Fruit. To the Flower in their
Foulds; that being, for the most part, born and ushered into the open Aer by
the Leaves. To the Fruit, when afterward they are displayed, as in
Strawberries, Grapes, Rasps, Mulberries, etc. On which, and the like, should
the Sunbeams immediately strike, especially while they are young, they would
quite shrivel them up; but being by the Leaves screened off, they impress the
circumjacent Aer so far only as gently to warm the said Fruits, and so to
promote their Fermentation and Growth. And accordingly we see, that the Leaves
abovenamed are exceeding large in propotion to the Fruits: whereas in
Pear Trees, Apple Trees, etc. the Fruit being of a solider Parenchyma, and so
not needing the like protection, are usually equal with, and often wider in
Diameter than the Leaves.

19.. Another use is for Augmentation; or, the capacity for the due spreading
and ampliation of a Tree or other Plant, are its, Leaves. For herein the
Lignous Body being divided into small Fibers, and these running all along their
lax and spongie Parenchyma; they are thus a Body sit for the imbibition of Sap,
and easy Growth. Now the Sap having a free reception into the Leaves, it still
gives way to the next succeeding in the Branches and Trunk, and the voyding of
the Sap in these, for the mounting of that in the Root, and ingress of that in
the Ground. But were there no Leaves to make a free reception of Sap, it must
be needs be stagnant in all the Parts to the Root, and so the Root being
clogged, its fermenting and other Offices will be voyded, and so the due Growth
of the whole. As in the motion of a Watch, although the original term thereof
be the Spring, yet the capacity for its continuance in a due measure throughout
all the Wheels, is the free and easy motion of the Balance.

20.. Lastly, As the Leaves subserve the more copious advancement, so the
higher purity of the Sap. For this being well fermented both in the Root, and
in its Ascent through the Trunk, and so its Parts prepared to a farther
separation; the grosser ones are still deposited into the Leaves; the more
elaborate and essential only thus supplied to the Flower, Fruit and Seed, as
their convenient Aliment. Whence it is, that where the Flowers are many and
large, into which the more odorous Particles are copiously received, the green
Leaves have little or no smell; as those of Rose-tree, Carnations,
French-Marigold, Wood-bind, Tulips, etc. But on the contrary, where the Flowers
are none, or small, the green Leaves themselve are likewise of a strong savor;
as those of Wormwood, Tansie, Baum, Mint, Rue, Geranium Moschatum, Angelica,
and others.

An Appendix. Of Thorns, Hairs and Globulets.
THorns are of two kinds, Lignous and Cortical. Of the first are such as those
of the Hawthorn, and are constituted of all the same substantial Parts whereof
the Germen or Bud it self, and in a like proportion: which also in their
Infancy are set with the resemblances of diverse minute Leaves. Of affinity with
these are the Spinets or Thorny Prickles upon the Edges and Tops of diverse
Leaves, as of Barbery, Holly, Thistle, Furze, and others; all which I think are
the filamentous extremities of the Lignous Body sheathed in the Skin. But this
principal differnce betwixt a Bud and these Lignous Thorns, is observable; That
the Bud has its Original from the Inner part of the Lignous Body, next the
Pith: But these Thorns, from the outer, and less fecund Part; and so produces
no Leaves, but is, as it were, the Mola of a Bud.

2.. Cortical Thorns are such as those of the Rasberry Bush, being not, unless
in a most extraordinary small and invisible proportion propagated from the
Lignous Body, but as, it seems, wholly from the Cortical and Skin, or from the
exterior part of the Barque.

3.. The Growth of this Thorn may farther argue what in the Second Chapter we
supposed; C. 2.. 25.
sc. That as the proper Tendency of the Lignous Body, is to Ascend; so of the
Cortical to Descend. For as the Lignous Thorn, like other Parts of the Trunk,
in its Growth ascends; This, being almost wholly Cortical, points downdward.
The use of Thorns the Ingenious Mr. Sharrock has observed. Hist of the Prop.
of Veget.


4.. Upon the Leaves of diverse Plants two Productions show themselves, sc.
Hairs and Gloubulets. Of Hairs, only one kind is taken notice of; although they
are various. Ordinarily they are of a Simple Figure; which when fine and thick
set, as on most Hairy Buds; or fine and long, as on those of the Vine, we call
them Down.

5.. But sometimes they are Branched out, from the bottom to the top,
reciprocally on every side, in some resemblance to a Stags Horn; as in Mullen.
And sometimes they are Astral, as upon Lavender, and some other Leaves, and
especially those of Wild Olive; wherein every Hair rising in one round entire
Basis a little way above the surface of the Leaf, is then disparted, Star-like,
into several, four, five or six Points, all standing at right Angles with the
said perpendicular Basis.

6.. The Uses of Hairs are for Distinction and Protection. That of Distinction
is but secondary, the Leaves being grown to a considerable size. That of
Protection is the prime, for which they were originally formed together with
the Leaves themselves, and whose service they enjoy in their Infant-estate: For
the Hairs being then in form of a Down, always very thick set, thus give that
Protection to the Leaves, which their exceeding tenderness then requires; so
that they seem to be vested with a Coat of Frize, or to be kept warm, like
young and dainty Chickens, in Wool.

7.. Globulets are seen upon Orach, both Garden and Wild; and yet more plainly
on Mercury or Bonus Henricus. In these, growing almost upon the whole Plant,
and being very large, they are by all taken notice of.

8.. But strict Observation discovers, that these Globulets are the natural and
constant Offspring of very many other Plants. Both these Globulets, and
likewise the diversity of Hairs, I find that Mr. Hook has also observed.
Micrography.
I take notice, that they are of two kinds; Transparent, as upon the Leaves of
Hysop, Mint, Baume, and many more White, as upon those of Germander, Sage, and
others. All which, though the naked Eye will discover, yet by the help of
Glasses we may observe them most distinctly. The use of these we suppose the
same, in part, with those of the Flower, whereof we shall speak.

CHAP. V. Of the FLOWER.
WE next proceed to the Flower. The general Parts whereof are most commonly
three; sc. the Empalement, the Foliation, and the Attire.

2.. The Empalement, whether of one or more pieces, I call that which is the
utmost Part of the Flower, encompassing the other two. It Is compounded of the
three general Parts, the Skin, the Cortical and Lignous Bodies, each Empaler
(where there are diverse) being as another little Leaf; as in those of a
Quince-Flower, as often as they happen to be overgrown, is well seen. As likewise
in the Primrose, with the green Flower; commonly so called, though by a
mistake: For that which seems to be the Flower, is only the more flourishing
Empalement, the Flower it self being White. But the continuation of all the
three aforesaid Parts into each Empaler, is discoverable, I think, no where
better than in an Artichoke, which is a true Flower, and whose Empalers are of
that amplitude, as fairly to show them all: As also, that the Original of the
Skin of each Empaler or Leaf is not distinct from that of the rest; but to be
all one piece, laid in so many Plaits or Duplicatures, as there are Leaves,
from the outermost to the inner and most Central ones.

3.. The Design of the Empalement, is to be Security and Bands to the other two
Parts of the Flower: To be their Security before its opening, by intercepting
all extremities of Weather: Afterward to be their Bands, and ^irmly to contain
all their Parts in their due and most decorous posture: so that a Flower
without its Empalement, would hang as uncouth and taudry, as a Lady without her
Bodies.

4.. Hence we have the reason why it is various, and sometimes wanting. Some
Flowers have none, as Tulips; for having a fat and frim Leaf, and each Leaf
likewise standing on a broad and strong Basis, they are thus sufficient to
themselves. Carnations, on the contrary, have not only an Empalement, but that
(for more firmitude) of one piece: For otherwise, the Foot of each Leaf being
very long and slender, most of them would be apt to break out of compass: yet
is the top of the Empalement indented also; that the Indentments, by being
lapp'd over the Leaves before their expansion, may then protect them; and by
being spread under them afterward, may better shoulder and prop them up. And
if the Feet of the Leaves be both long and very tender too, here the Empalement
is numerous, though consisting of several pieces; yet those in diverse Rounds,
and all with a counterchangeable respect to each other (which also the Learned
Sir Thomas Brown observes) as in all Knapweeds, Treat. of the Quincunx.
and other Flowers; whereby, how commodious they are for both the aforesaid
ends, may easily be conceived; and well enough exemplified by the Scales of
Fishes, whereunto, as to their position, they have not an unapt resemblance.

5.. THE FOLIATION also, is of the same substantial Nature with the green Leaf;
the Membrane, Pulp, and Fibers whereof, being, as there, so here, but the
continuation of the Skin, the Cortical and Lignous Bodies.

6.. The Foulds of the Flower or Foliation are various, as those of the green
Leaf; but some of them different. The most general are, First, The Close-Couch,
as in Roses, and many other double Flowers. Then the Concave-Couch, as in
Blattaria flore albo. Next the Plait, as in some of the Leaves of Pease-Blooms,
in the Flowers of Coriander, etc. which is either single, as in those named; or
double, as in Blew-Bottle, Jacea, and more of that rank. Next, the Couch, and
Plait together in the same Flower, as in Marigolds, Daisies, and all others of
an agreeing form: where the first apparent Fould or Composture of the Leaves is
in Couch; but the Leaves being erect, each likewise may be seen to lie in a
double Plait within it self. Then the Roll, as in the Flowers of Ladies-Bower,
the broad top of each Leaf being by a double Roll foulded up inwardly. Next,
the Spire, which is the beginning of a Roll; and may be seen in the Flowers of
Mallows, and others. Lastly, the Plait and Spire together, where the Part
analogous to the Foliation, is of one piece, the Plaits being here laid, and so
carried on by Spiral Lines to the top of the Flower, as is in diverse, and I
think, in Convolvulus Doronici folio, more elegantly seen. These and other
Foulds, See in the Figures belonging to the Second Part of the Fourth Book. The
reason of all which varieties, a comparative consideration of the several Parts
of the Flower may suggest. I Will only mention, That no Flower, that I find, has
a Back-Rowl, as has the green Leaf. For two Reasons; because its Leaves have
not their Fibers standing out much on their backside, as the green Leaves have;
and because of its Attire, which it ever embosomes, and cannot so well do it by
a Back-Rowl.

7.. The usual Protections of Flowers by the Precedents are expressed, sc.
Green Leaves and Empalements. Some have another more peculiar, that is a double
Veil; as the Spring-Crocus. For having no Empalement, and starting up early out
of the Mould, even before its Green Leaves, and that upon the first opening of
the Spring; lest it should thus be quite starved, it is born swathed up in a
double Blanket, or with a pair of Sheets upon its Back.

8.. The Leaves of diverse Flowers at their Basis have an hairy Tuft; by which
Tufts the Concave of the Empalement is filled up; That, being very choice and
tender, they may thus be kept in a gentle and constant Warmth, as most
convenient for them.

9.. The Leaves of the Flower, though they are not hairy all over, yet in some
particular parts they are often set with a fine Downy Velvet; that, being by
their shape and posture in those parts contiguous to their delicate and tender
Attire, they may thus give it a more soft and warmer touch. Thus in the Flower
of Ladies Bower, those parts of its Leaves which roll inward, and lie
contiguous to the Attire, are Downy; whereas the other Parts are smooth or
bald: So the Flowers of Pease, Spanish Broom, Toad-Flax, and many others, where
contiguous to their Attires, are decked with the like Hairy Velvet.

10.. As upon the Green Leaves, so upon the Flowers are Globulets sometimes
seen; as upon the backside of that of Enula. On none more plainly than that
kind of Blattaria with the white Flower; where they are all transparent, and
growing both on the Stalk and Leaves of the Flower, each showing likewise its
Peduncle whereon it is erected.

11.. The use of the Flower, or the Foliation whereof we now speak, (that is,
as to its private service) is for the protection of the Attire; This, as its
under, and the Empalement as its upper Garments. As likewise of the Fruit: The
necessity of which Service, in some Cases, by the different situation of the
Flower and Fruit, with respect to each other, is evident; Apples, Pears, and
several other Fruits, standing behind or under the Flower; but Cherries,
Aprecots, and diverse others, within it. For these* being of a very tender and
pulpous Body, and withal putting forth with the colder part of the Spring;
could not weather it out against the Variations and Extremities of the Air, (as
those of a more solid Parenchyma can) except lodged up within their Flowers.

12.. And as the Flower is serviceable to the safety of the Fruit, so is it to
its growth; sc. in its Infancy, or Embryo-estate; for which purpose, as there
is a Flower, so that Flower is greater or less, according as the nature of the
Fruit to which it belongs, and the plenty of the Sap by which the Fruit is fed,
does require. Thus, where the young Fruit is of a solider Substance and the
ascent of the Sap less copious, were there here no Flower to promote the said
ascent thereof into the Fruit (in the manner as is effected by the Green
Leaves) it must needs pine and die, or prove less kindly. On the contrary,
should the Flower be over-large, it would not only promote the ascent of the
Sap up to the Fruit, but being as yet over-proportionate to it, would likewise
it self exhaust the same Sap, as fast as ascendent; like a greedy Nurse, that
prepares the Meat for her Child, and then eats it up her self. Thus we see
Apples and Pears, with a Flower of a moderate Size; like their Body, of a
middle Constitution, and their Sap, of a middle quantity: But Quinces, being
more solid, besides that they have as great a Flower, the Imqalers of their
Flower also thrive so far as to become handsome Leaves; continuing also after
the Flower is fallen, firm and verdent a great while; so long, till the Fruit
be able to provide for it self. On the other hand, Plums being more tender and
Sappy than Appels and Pears, besides that their Empalers are much alike, their
Flower is less. and Goosberries and Currants, which are still more Pulpy, and
the course of the Sap toward them more free, have yet a Flower far less. And
Grapes, whose Sap is still of quicker Ascent, have scarce any Flower at all;
only some small resemblance thereof, serving just upon the setting of the
Fruit, and no longer.

13.. THE ATTIRE, I find to be of two kinds, Seminiforme, and Florid. That
which I call Seminiforme, is made up of two general Parts, Chives and Semets,
one upon each Chive. These Semets (as I take leave to call them) have the
appearance, especially in many Flowers, of so many little Seeds: but are quite
another kind of Body. For, upon enquiry, we find, that these Semets, though
they seem to be solid, and for some time after their first formation, are
entire; yet are they really hollow; and their side, or sides, which were at
first entire, at length crack asunder: And that moreover the Concave of each
Semet is not a mere vacuity, but filled up with a number of minute Particles,
in form of a Powder. Which, though common to all Semets, yet in some, and
particularly those of a Tulip or a Lilly, being larger, is more distinctly
observable. Tab. 4. f. 12.


14.. These Semets are sometimes fastened so, as to stand erect above their
Chive, as those of Larks-heel. Sometimes, and I think usually, so as to hang a
little down by the middle, in the manner and figure of a Kidney; as in Mallows.
Their Cleft or Crack is sometimes single, but for the most part double: At
these Clefts it is that they disburse their Powders; f. 12. ^a.
which as they start out, and stand betwixt the two Lips of each Cleft, have
some resemblance to the common Sculpture of a Pomegranate with its Seeds
looking out at the Cleft of its Rind. This must be observed when the Clefts are
recently made, which usually is before the expansion of the Flower.

15.. The Particles of these Powders, though like those of Meal or other Dust,
they appear not easily to have any relugar shape; yet upon strict observation,
especially with the assistance of an indifferent Glass, it does appear, That
they are a Congeries, usually, of so many perfect Globes or Globulets;
Sometimes of other Figures, but always regular. That which obscures their
Figure is their being so small: In Dogs-Mercury, Borage, and very many more
Plants, they are extremely so. In Mallows, and some others, more fairly visible.

16.. Some of these Powders, are yellow, as in Dogs-Mercury, Goats-Ru^, etc.
and some of other Colors: But most of them I think are white; and those of
yellow Henbane very elegant; the disburs'd Powers whereof, to the naked eye,
are white as Snow; but each Globulet, through a Glass, transparent as Crystal;
which is not a fallacy from the Glass, but what we see in all transparent
Bodies whatsoever, lying in a Powder or small Particles together The Parts of
this Attire, see in Tab. 4. But especially, in the Figures belonging to the
Second Part of the Fourth Book.

17.. The Florid Attire, is commonly known by the blind and rude Name of
Thrums; as in the Flowers of Marigold, Tansie, etc. How in adequate its
imposition is, observation will determine. For the several Thrums or rather
Suits, whereof the Attire is made up, however else they may differ in various
Flowers, in this agree, that they are ever consistent of more than one,
sometimes of Two, and for the most part of Three Pieces (for which I call them
Suits) and each Piece of a different, Tab. 4. f. 13. ^.
but agreeable and comely form.

18.. The outer Part of every Suit, is its Floret: whose Body or Tube is
divided at the top (like that of the Cowslip) into five distinct Leaves. So
that a Floret, is the Epitome of a Flower: and is all the Flower that many
Plants, f. 13. b.
as Mugwort, Tansie, and others, have. What the Learned Sir Thomas Brown
observes of the number Five, Treat. of the Quincunx.
as to the Leaves of the Flower, is still more universally holding in these of
the Floret.

19.. Upon the Expansion of the Floret; the next Part of the Suit is from
within its Tube brought to sight; which we may (with respect to that within it)
call the Sheath. f. 13. c.
For this also, like the Floret, is a Concave Body; in its shape very well
resembling the Fistulous Pouches of Wake-Robin, or of Dragon.

20.. The Sheath, after some time, dividing at the top, from within its Concave
the Third and innermost part of the Suit, sc. the Blade advances and displayes
it self. Tab. 4. f 13. d
This Part is not hollow, as the other two, but solid; yet at its Point, is
commonly, divided into two halves.

21.. About the said Point especially, there appears, Globulets, which are of
the same nature with those of a Semet, though not so copious. So that all
Flowers have their Powders or Globulets. The whole Attire may in Aster Per,
Blewbottle, etc. where the Suits are large, be plainly observed without a
Glass. The Parts of this Attire, See in Tab. 4. But especially in the Figures
belonging to the Second Part of the Fourth Book.

22.. The use of the Attire, how contemptibly soever we may look upon it, is
certainly great. And though for our own use we value the Leaves of the Flower,
or the Foliation, most; yet of all the three Parts, this is some respects is
the choycest, as for whose sake and service the other two are made. The use
hereof, as to Ornament and Distinction, is unquestionable; but is not all. As
for Distinction, though, by the help of Glasses, we may make it to extend far;
yet in a passant view, which is all we usually make, we cannot so well. As for
Ornament, and particularly in reference to the Semets, we may ask, If for that
merely these were meant, then why should they be so made as to break open, or
to contain any thing within them? Since their Beauty would be as good if they
were not hollow; and is better before they crack and burst open, than
afterward.

23.. Other uses hereof therefore we must acknowledge, and may observe. One is,
for food; for Ornament and Distinction to us, and for Food to other Animals. I
will not say, but that it may serve even to these for Distinction too, that
they may be able to know one Plant from another, and in their flight or
progress settle where they like best: and that therefore the varieties of these
small parts are many, and well observed by them, which we take no notice of.
Yet the finding out of Food is but in order to enjoy it: Which, that it is
provided for a vast number of little Animals in the Attires of all Flowers,
observation persuades us to believe. For why else are they evermore here found?
Go from one Flower to another, great and small, you shall meet with none
untaken up with these Guests. In some, and particularly the Sun-Flower, where
the parts of the Attire, and the Animals for which they provide, are larger,
the matter is more visible. We must not think, that God Almighty has left any
of the whole Family of his Creatures unprovided for; but as the Great Master,
some where or other carveth out to all; and that for a great number of these
little Folk, He has stored up their peculiar provisions in the Attires of
Flowers; each Flower thus becoming their Lodging and their Dining Room, both in
one.

24.. Wherein the particular parts of the Attire may be more distinctly
serviceable, this to one Animal* and that to another, I cannot say: Or to the
same Animal, as a Be, whether this for the Honey, another for their Bread, a
third for the Wax: Or whether all only suck from hence some Juice; or some may
not also carry some of the Parts, as of the Globulets, wholly away.

25.. Or lastly, what may be the Primary and Private Use of the Attire (for
even this abovesaid, though great, yet is but Secondary) I now determine not.

CHAP. VI. Of the FRUIT.
THE general composition of all Fruits is one, that is, their Essential and
truly Vital Parts, are in all the same, and but the continuation of those which
in the other Parts of a Plant, we have already observed. Yet because by the
different Constitutions and Tinctures of these Parts, diverse considerably
different Fruits result; I shall therefore take a particular view of the more
known and principal of them, sc. Apples, Pears, Plums, Nuts and Berries.

2.. AN APPLE, if cut traverse, appears constitued of four distinct Parts, the
Pilling, the Parenchyma, Branchery, and Coare. The Pilling is only the
spreading and dilatation of the Skin, or utmost part of the Barque in the
Branch. The Parenchyma, when full ripe, is a tender delicate Meat. Yet as the
Pilling is but the Continuation of the utmost part of the Barque; so is this,
but the continuance and ampliation, or (as I may call it) the swelth and
superbience of the Inner Part thereof; which upon observation of a young and
Infant- Apple especially, is evident. Thus we see the Pith, which is often
tough; in many Roots, as Parsneps, Turnips, etc. is tender and edible. So here,
the Parenchyma, though originally no more than the Barque, yet the copiousness
and purity of its Sap being likewise effectual to the largness and fineness of
its growth, it thus becomes a soft and tender meat. The Branchery is nothing
else but the Ramifications of the Lignous Body throughout all the parts of the
Parenchyma; the greater Branches being likewise by the Inosculations of the
less (as in the Leaf) united together. The main Branches are usually Twenty:
Ten are spread and distributed through the Parenchyma, most of them enarching
themselves toward the Cork or Stool of the Flower: The other Ten, running from
the Stalk in a directer Line, at last meet the former at the said Cork, and are
there osculated with them. Of these latter, five are originated from one; which
running along the Center of the Stalk, and part of the Parenchyma of the Fruit,
is therein at last divided. To these the Coats of the Kernels are fastened. So
that whereas most of these Branches were originally extended even beyond the
Fruit, and inserted into the Flower for the due growth thereof; the Fruit
afterward growing to some head, and so intercepting and preying upon the
Aliment of the Flower, starves that and therefrom supersedes the service of the
said Branches to it self, fifteen for its Parenchyma, and five for its Seed.
The Coar is originated from the Pith; for the Sap finding room enough in the
Parenchyma, through which to dispense it self all abroad, quits the Pith, which
thereby hardens into a Coar. Thus we see the Insertions, although originate
from the Cortical Body, yet their Parts being, by the Inosculations of the
Lignous, so much compressed and made to co-incide together, they become a Body
very compact and dense. And in the Barque the same thing is effected by
Arefaction only, or a mere voydance of the Sap; the Inner Part whereof, though
soft and sappy, yet its superficial Rind is often so hard and smooth, that it
may be fairly writ upon. The Parts of an Apple, See in the Figures belonging to
the Third Part of the Fourth Book.

3.. IN A PEAR there are five distinct Parts, Tab. 4. f. 14.
the Pilling, the Parenchyma, Branchery, Calculary, and Acetary. The three
former are here and in an Apple much alike; saving that here the Inner or
Seed-Branches ordinarily stand double. The Calculary (most observable in
rough-tasted, or Choak-Pears) is a Congeries of little stony Knots. They are
many of them dispersed throughout the whole Parenchyma: But lying more
continuous and compact together toward the Center of the Pear, surround the
Acetary there, in a somewhat Globular Form. About the Stalk they stand more
distant; but toward the Cork or Stool of the Flower, they still grow closer,
and there at last gather (almost) into the firmitude of a Plum-stone it self.
Within this lies the Acetary; it is allways sour, and by the bounding of the
Calculary of a Globular Figure. It Is a simple Body, having neither any of the
Lignous branched in it, nor any Calculous Knots. It is of the same substantial
nature with the outer Parenchyma; but whether it be absolutely one with it, or
be derived immediately from the Pith, my Enquiries yet made, determine not.

4.. The Original of the Calculary I seem to have neglected. But hereof we may
here best say, that whereas all the other Parts are Essential and truly Vital;
the Calculary is not: but that the several Knots whereof it consists, are only
so many mere Concretions or Precipitations out of the Sap; as in Urines, Wines,
and other Liquors, we often see. And that the Precipitation is made by the
mixture and re-action of the Tinctures of the Lignous and Cortical Bodies upon
each other: Even as all Vegetable Nutrition or Fixation of Parts is also made
by the joint efficiency of the two same Tinctures, as has been said. Hence we
find, that as the Acetary has no Branches of the Lignous Body, so neither has
it any Knots. Hence likewise it is, that we have so different and contrary a
taste in the Parenchyma beyond the Calculary, from that in the Acetary: For
whereas this is sour, that, wherein the said Precipitations are made, is sweet;
being much alike effect to what we find in mixing of Corals, etc. with Vinegar
or other acid Liquors. The Parts of a Pear, See in Tab. 4. But especially in
the Figures belonging to the Third Part of the Fourth Book.

5.. IN A PLUM (to which the Cherry, Apricot, Peach, Walnut, etc. ought to be
referred) there are four distinct Parts, the Pilling, the Parenchyma, Branchery
and Stone. The Pilling and Parenchyma are, as to their Original, with those of
an Apple or Pear, both alike. As likewise the Brunchery; but differently
ramified. In Plums (I suppose all) there are five main Out-Branches, which run
along the Surface of the Stone from the Basis to the point thereof, four of
them by one Ridge, Tab. 4. f. 15.
and one by the other opposite to it. In an Apricot there is the same number,
but the single Branch runs not upon the Surface, but through the Body of the
Stone. There are likewise two or three smaller Branches, which run in like
manner under the other Ridge for some space, and then advancing into the
Parenchyma, therein disperse themselves: These latter sort in Peaches are
numerous throughout.

6.. But notwithstanding the different disposition of the Branches of the
Fruits aforesaid; yet is there one Branch disposed in one and the same manner
in them all. The entrance hereof into the Stone is at its Basis; from whence
running through its Body, and still inclining or arching it self toward its
Concave, Tab. 4. f. 15.
is at last, about its Cone, thereinto emergent, where the Coats of the Seed
are appendent to it. Of the Seed-Branch it is therefore observable that after
its entrance into the Fruit, it is always prolonged therein to a considerable
length; as is seen not only in Apples, etc. where the Seed stands a good
distance from the Stalk; but in Plums likewise, where it stands very near it;
in that here the Seed-Branch, as is said, never strikes through the Stone into
the Coats of the Seed directly, but runs through a Chanel cut in the Stone,
till it issues, near the Cone, into the Concave thereof.

7.. The Stone though it seem a simple Body, yet it is compounded of different
ones. The Inner Part thereof, as it is by far the thinnest, so is it the most
dense, white, smooth and simple. The Original is from the Pith; difficult, but
curious to observe: For the Seed-Branch, not striking directly and immediately
quite through the Basis of the Stone, but in the manner as is above described,
carries a considerable Part of the Pith, now gathered round about it, as its
Parenchyma, along with it self; which upon its entrance into the concave of the
Stone about its farther end, is there in part spread all over it, as the Lining
thereof. The outer and very much thicker Part, consists partly of the like
Precipitations or concrete Particles, as in a Pear; being gathered here much
more closely, not only to a Contiguity, but a Coalition into one entire Stone;
as we see in Pears themselves, especially toward the Cork, they gather into
the like Stoniness; or as a Stone, Mineral, or Animal, is oftentimes the
product of accumulated Gravel. But as the Parenchyma is mixed with the
Concretions in the Calculary, so is it also, though not visibly, with these in
the Stone, the ground of the Stone being indeed a perfect Parenchyma; but by
the said Concretions so far altered, as to become dry, hard and
undistinguishable from them. All which Particulars, are observable only in the
several degrees of Growth in the young Fruit. And are represented in Tab. 4.
But especially by the several Figures belonging to the Third and Fourth Parts
of the Fourth Book.

8.. IN A NUT (to which an Akern is analogous) there are three general Parts,
the Cap, Shell, and Pith. The Cap is constituted of a Pilling and Parenchyma,
derived from the Barque; and Ramulets from the Lignous Body of the Branch. The
Shell likewise is not one simple Body, but compounded. The Superficial Part
thereof is originated from the Pilling or Skin of the Cap, from the inside
whereof it is, in a Duplicature, produced and spread over the Shell. Which, if
you look at the Basis of the Shell, is farther evident: for that being
continuous with the Parenchyma of the Cap, without the interposure of the Skin,
the said superficial Part is there wanting. The thicker and inner Part of the
Shell consists of the same Parenchyma as that of the Cap, with a Congeries of
Precipitations filled up, as in a Stone. And as the Lignous Body is branched in
a Stone, so, with some difference, in a Shell. The outer Branches or Ramulets
are numerous, each issuing out of the Parenchyma of the Cap, and entering the
Shell at the Circumference of its Basis, and so running betwixt its superficial
and inner Parts toward the Cone, round about. The Inner or Seed-Branch is
single, entering in, as do the other, at the Basis of the Shell, but at the
Center thereof: from whence it runs, not through the Shell, as in Plums through
the Stone; but through the Pith, as far as the Cone; where the Coats of the
Seed hang appendent to it. The Pith whether derived from the same part both in
name and nature in the Branch and Stalk; or from the Cortical Body, I yet
determine not. The Parts of a Nut, See in the Figures belonging to the Third
Part of the Fourth Book.

9.. A BERRY, as a Gooseberry (to which Corinths, Grapes Hips, etc. are to be
referred) consists, besides the Seed, of the three general Parts, Pilling,
Parenchyma and Branchery. The Pilling is originated as in the foregoing Fruits.
The Parenchyma is double, as likewise in some other Berries. The outer is
commonly, together with the Pilling, called the Skin, and is that part we spit
out, being of a sour taste. Now as the Pilling is originated from the outer, so
this from the inner Part or the Barque; and accordingly the Pores thereof may
be observed plainly of a like shape with those both of the Cortical Body and
Pith. The Inner of Pulp is of a sweet taste, and is the Part we eat: It is of a
Substance so laxe and tender, as it would seem to be only a thicker or jellied
Juice; although this likewise be a true Parenchyma, something like that of an
Orange or Limon, with its Pores all filled up with Liquor. The Branchery is
likewise double: The Exterior runs betwixt the Pilling and Outer Parenchyma in
arched Lines, from the Stalk to the Stool of the Flower. These outer Branches,
though of various number at the Stalk, yet at the Cork are usually ten
principal ones; five for the five Leaves of the Flower, and five for the
Attire. The Inner main Branches are two, diametrically opposite to each other,
and at the Cork with the other inosculated. From these two are branched other
smaller, every one having a Seed appendent to it, whose Coats it enters by a
double Filament, one at the Basis, the other at the Cone. They are all very
white and turgent, and by a slaunt cut, may be observed concave; thus
representing themselves analogous to so many true spermatick Vessels. The Parts
of a Gooseberry, See in the Figures belonging to the Third Part of the Fourth
Book.

10.. The Uses of Fruits are for Man, (sometimes also other Animals, as are
Akerns and Haws) and for the Seed. For Man, they are so variously desirable,
that till our Orchards and Store-Chambers, Confectioners-Stoves and
Apothecaries-Shops, our Ladies Closets, their Tables or Hands are empty of
them, I shall not need to enquire for what. If it be asked, how the Fruit
becomes, generally above all the other Parts, so pleasant a Meat? It is partly
from the Sap, the grosser portion thereof being deposited in the Leaves, and so
the purer hereunto reserved. Partly from the Globular Figure of the Fruit. For
the Sap being thus in a greater quantity herein, and in all Parts equally
diffused, the Concoction hereof, as in a Vessel, is with greatest advantage
favored and promoted. Wherefore all Fruits, which we eat raw, how small
soever, are of a Globular Form, or thereunto approaching; and the nearer, the
delicater; amongst Apples, the Pipin; amongst Pears, the Burgundian; and
amongst all Fruits, the Grape; and amongst Grapes, the roundest, are of all,
the most dainty.

11.. The visible cause of this Globular Figure, is the Flower; or the
Inosculation of all the main Branches at the Stool of the Flower; and upon the
fall of the Flower, the obtuseness, and with Wind and Sun, as it were the
seaing of their several ends: For thus the Sap entering the Fruit, being not
able to effect, either a Disunion, or a shooting forth of the said Branches,
and so to carry on their Growth in length; they must of necessity be enarch'd,
and with the Parenchyma more and more expand themselves. Whereas were they
disposed and qualified otherwise, than as is said; instead of forming a Fruit
within bounds, they would run out into all extravagance, and even into another
little Tree or Leafy Growth.

12.. To the Seed, the Fruit is serviceable; First, in order to its being
supplied with a due and most convenient Sap, the greater part thereof, and that
which is less elaborated, being, in its passage toward the Seed, thereinto
received; the Fruit doing the same office to the Seed, which the Leaves do to
the Fruit; the Sap in the Fruit being, in a laxe comparison, as the Wine; and
that for the Seed, a small part of the highest Spirit rectified from it.

13.. So likewise for its Protection, in order to the prosperous carrying on
and perfecting of its generation, and security being perfected. Which
protection it gives not only to the Seminal Sap and Seed it self, but ever also
to its Seed-Branch. Thus we see an Apple, besides that it is it self of ample
compass, for the sake of its Seed, has likewise its Coar; as if it were not
sufficient, that the Walls of their Room are so very thick, unless also
wainscoated. In a Pear again, where the Parenchyma is of less compass than that
of an Apple, to what protection this affords, that of the Calculary is
super-added. But in a Plum, where the Parenchyma is exceeding tender, and in a
Peach, which hangs late, and till Autumn Frosts approach, we have not only the
Rubbish of a Calculary, but stout Stone-Walls. Within which also, not only the
Seed it self, but the Seed-Branch is evermore immured. Lastly, in a Nut, where
the Shell being not surrounded with a Parenchyma, that protection is wanting
without, it is answered by an ample Pith within it; and the Seed-Branch likewise
included, not merely in the Body of the Shell, as in a Plum, but within the
Pith it self. So necessary is this design, that what the Hen by Incubation or
Hovering, is to the Egg or Chick; that the whole Fruit, by comprehension, is to
the Seed.

CHAP. VII. Of the SEED, in its State of Generation.
AS the Original, so the Ultimate end and Perfection of Vegetation is the Seed.
How it is the former, and in its state apt for Vegetation, has already been
seen. How the latter, and in its state of Generation, we shall now lastly
enquire. In doing which, what in the other state, was either not distinctly
existent, or not so apparent, or not so intelligible, will occur.

2.. The two general Parts of the Seed are its Covers and Body. The Covers in
this estate are usually Four. The outmost, we may call the Case. It Is of a very
various form; sometimes a Pouch, as in Nasturtium, Cochlearia; a Cod, as in all
Pulse, Galega; sometimes not entire, but parted, or otherwise open, as in
Sorrel, Knotgrass; with many other forms: I think always more heterogeneous to
that of the Seed, by which it differs from the proper Coats. To this the Caps
of Nuts, and the Parenchyma's of other Fruits are analogous.

3.. The two next are properly the Coats. In a Bean especially, and the like;
from whence, to avoid Confusion, the denomination may run common to the
responding Covers of other Seeds. The Color of the outer, is of all degrees,
from White to the Blackness of Jett. It Is Figure sometimes Kidney'd, as in
Alcea, Behen, Poppy; Triangular, as in Polygonatum, Sorrel; Spherically
triangular, in Mentha, Melissa; Circular, in Leucoium, Amaranthus; Globular, in
Napus, Asperula; Oval, in Speculum Veneris, Tithymalus; half Globe, in
Coriander; that which we take for one single round Seed, being a Conjugation of
two; half Oval, in Anise, Fennel; Hastal, in Lactuca; Cylindrical, as, if I
mistake not, in Jacobaea; Pyramidal, in Geranium Althaeae fol. with many other
differences. But the Perfection of one or two of the said Figures lies in the
Case. So that, as all Lines and Proportions are in the Leaf and Flower; so all
Regular Solids in the Seed; or rather in its Covers.

4.. It Is sometimes glistering, as in Speculun Veneris; Rough-cast, in
Catanance; Studded, in Behen, Balttaria; Favous, in Papaver, Antirrhinum,
Lepidum annuum, Alcea Vesicaria, Hyoscyamus, and many more, before the Seeds
have lain long by; Pounced, in Phalangium Cretae, Lithospermum; Ramisied, in
Pentaphyllum fragiferum Erectum majus, resembling the Fibers of the Ears of the
Heart; some just Quinquenerval, as in Anisum, and many more, the Lignous Body
being in five main Fibers branched therein. The Figures, and Surface, of These,
and other Seeds, See in the Tables belonging to the Fourth Part of the Fourth
Book.

5.. The Covers of not only Quince-Seeds, and those of Psyllium (more usually
taken notice of) but those also of Horminum, Nasturtium, Eruca, Camelina,
Ocymum, and diverse others, have a Mucilage. Which, though it be not visible
when the Seeds are thoroughly dry; yet lying a while in some warm Liquor, or
only on the Tongue, it swells more or less, and upon them all fairly shows it
self, On that of Ocymum it appears grayish; on the other, transparent; and on
that of Nasturtium Hortense very large; even emulous of the inner Pulp
surrounding a Gooseberry-Seed. The putting of Clary-seed into the Eye, may have
been brought into use from this Mucilage, by which alone it may become
Medicinal. And thus far of the Superficies,

6.. The nature of the outer Coat is also various, Membranous, Cartilaginous
and Stony; the like Precipitations being sometimes made herein, as in a Stone
or Shell; as in that of the Seeds of Carthamum, Lithospermum and others. The
Designment hereof, being either with respect to the Seed in its state of
Generation; as where the Case is either wanting, or at least insufficient of it
self, there for its due protection and warmth. Or, in its state of Vegetation,
for the better Fermenting of its Tinctures and Sap; the Fermentations of some
Seeds not well proceeding, unless they lie in their Stony Casks in the Ground,
like Bottled Liquors in Sand.

7.. All Seeds have their outer Covers open; either by a particular Foramen, as
in Beans, and other Pulse, as is said; or by the breaking off of the Seed from
its Peduncle or Stool, as in those in Cucumber, Cichory; or by the entering and
passage of a Branch or Branches, not only into the Concave thereof near the
Cone, but also through the Cone it self; as in Shells and Stones.

8.. For the sake of this aperture it is, that Akerns, Nuts, Beans, Cucumbers,
and most other Seeds, are in their formation so placed, that the Radicle still
stands next to it; That So, upon Vegetation, it may have a free and ready
passage into the Mould.

9.. The Original of the outer Coat, though from Parts of the same substantial
nature, yet is differently made. In a Plum, the Seed-Branch which runns, as is
described, through the Stone, is not naked, but, as is said, invested with a
thin Parenchyma, which it carries from the Stalk along with it; and which, by
the Ramification of the said Branch within the Stone, is, in part, dilated into
a Coat. That of a Bean is from the Parenchyma of the Cod; the superficial part
of which Parenchyma, upon the large peduncle of the Bean becoming a thin
Cuticle, and upon the Bean it self a Cartilaginous Coat.

10.. The Original of the inner Coat of the Bean is likewise from the inner
part of the said Parenchyma; which first is spread into a long Cake, or that
which with the Seed-Branch makes the Penduncle of the Bean; under which Cake,
there is usually a black part or spot; by the length of which, the inner part
of the Cake is next inserted into the outer Coat, and spread all over the
Concave thereof, and so becomes the inner.

11.. Of this Inner Coat it is very observable, That allthough when the Seed is
grown old and dry, it is shrunk up, and in most Seeds, so far, as scarcely to be
discerned; yet in its first and juvenile Constitution, it is a very Spongy and
Sappy body; and is then likewise (as the Womb in a Pregnant Animal) in
proportion, very thick and bulky. In a Bean, even as one of the Lobes it self:
And in a Plum or Apricot, I think I may safely say, half an hundred times
thicker than afterward, when it is dried and shrunk up, and can scarcely be
distinguished from the upper Coat. Upon which Accounts it is, in this estate a
true and fair Parenchyma. The Delineation hereof, See in the Figures belonging
to the Fourth Part of the Fourth Book.

12.. In this Inner Coat in a Bean, the Lignous Body or Seed-Branch is
distributed: Sometimes, as in French-Beans, throughout the whole Coat, as it is
in a Leaf. In the Great Garden-Bean, upon its first entrance, it is bipartite,
and so in small Branches runs along the Circumference of the Coat, all meeting
and making a kind of Reticulation against the Belly of the Bean. In the same
manner the main Branches in the outer Coat of a Kernel, circling themselves on
both hands from the place of their first entrance, at last meet, and mutually
inosculate; as the Veins in the Kidneys of a Man or any Quadrupede; Or the
Carotick Arteries in the Brain.

13.. So that all the Parts of a Vegetable, the Root, Trunk, Branch, Leaf,
Flower, Fruit and Seed, are still made up of Two Substantially different Bodies.

14.. And as every Part has Two, so the whole Vegetable taken together, is a
composition of Two only, and no more: All properly Woody Parts, Strings and
Fibers, are One Body: All simple Barques, Piths, Parenchyma's and Pulps, and as
to their substantial Nature, Pills and Skins likewise, all but One Body: the
several Parts of a Vegetable all differing from each other, only by the various
Proportions and Mixtures, and variated Pores and Structure of these Two Bodies.
What from these two general Observations might reasonably be inferred, I shall
not now mention.

15.. The Fourth or Innermost Cover we may call the Secondine. The sight of
which, by cutting off the Coats of an Infant-Bean, at the Cone thereof, in very
thin Slices, and with great Caution, may be obtained. While unbroken, it is
transparent; being torn and taken off, it gathers up into the likeness of a
Jelly, or that we call the Tredle of an Egg, when rear-boyl'd. This Membrance
in larger or elder Beans, is not to be found distinct. But (as far as our
Enquiries yet discover) it may in most other Seeds, even full grown, be
distinctly seen; as in those of Cucumber, Colocynthis, Burdock, Carthamum,
Gromwel, Endive, Mallows, etc. Tab. 4. f. 16.
It Is usually so very thin, as in the above-named, as very difficultly to be
discovered. But in some Kernels, as of Apricots, it is very thick; and most
remarquably such, in some other Seeds. That all these have the Analogy of one
and the same Cover, which I call the Secondine, is most probably argued from
their alike Natures; being all of them plain simple Membranes, with not the
least Fiber of the Lignous Body or Seed Branch, visibly distributed in them: As
also from their Texture, which is in all of them more close. See this Part in
Tab. 4. As also amongst the Figures belonging to the Fourth Part of the Fourth
Book.

16.. The Concave of this Membrane is filled with a most transparent Liquor,
out of which the Seed is formed; as in cutting a petite and Infant-Bean, may be
seen; and yet better in a young Walnut. In Beans I have observed it to turn,
upon boiling, into a tender white Coagulum.

17.. Through this Membrane, the Lignous Body or Seed-Branches distributed in
the inner Coat, at last shoot downright two slender Fibers, like two
Navel-strings, one into each Lobe of the Bean. The places where the said Fibers
shoot into the Lobes, Tab. 4. f. 18.
are near the Basis of the Radicle; and by their Blackishness well enough
remarked: but the Fibers themselves are so very small, as scarcely to be
discerned. Yet in a Lupine, of the larger kind, both the places where the
Navel-Fibres shoot into the Lobes (which here from the Basis of the Radicle is
more remote) and the Fibers themselves, are fairly visible. For the
Seed-Branch, upon its entrance into the Coat of the Lupine, is presently
divided into two main Branches, and those two into other less; whereof some
underly, others aloft, run along the Coat, and toward its other end meet and
are inosculated: where about, two opposite, shallow, round, and most minute
Cavities, answerable to two Specks of a Cartilaginous gloss, one in either
Lobe, Tab. 4. f. 17.
may be observed; which Specks are the ends of the said Navel-Fibres, upon the
ripening of the Seed there broken off. These Fibers from the Superficies of
each Lobe, descend a little way directly down: presently, each is divided into
two Branches, one distributed into the Lobes, the other into the Radicle and
Plume, Tab. 4. f. 18.
in the manner as in the First Chapter is described. And thus far the History.
I shall now only with a brief account of the Generation of the Seed, as
hereupon dependent, conclude this Discourse.

18.. LET US say then, An Account of the Generation of the Seed.
that the Sap having in the Root, Trunk and Leaves, passed diverse Concoctions
and Separations, in the manner as they are said to be performed therein; it is
now at last, in some good maturity, advanced toward the Seed.

19.. The more copious and cruder part hereof is again separated by a free
reception into the Fruit, or other Part analogous to it: being either
sufficiently ample to contain it, or at least laxe enough for its
transpiration, and so its due discharge. The more Essential part is into the
Seed-Branch or Branches entertian'd. Which, because they are evermore of a very
considerable length, and of a Constitution very fine, the said Sap thus becomes
in its Current therein as in the Spermatick Vessels, still more mature.

20. In this mature estate, from the Seed-Branch into the Coats of the Seed, as
into the Womb, it is next delivered up. The meaner part hereof again, to the
Outer, as Aliment good enough, is supplied. The siner part is transmitted to
the Inner; which being, as is said, a Parenechymous and more spacious Body, the
Sap therefore is not herein, as in the Outer, a mere Aliment; but in order to
its being, by Fermentation, farther prepared.

21.. Yet the Outer Coat, being on the contray hard and dense; for that reason,
as it admits not the Fermentation of the Sap so well within it self; so does
it the more promote and favor it in the Inner; being Bounds both to it and its
Sap; and also quickneth the process of the whole Work in the formation of the
Seed.

22.. Nor does the Outer Coat, for the same reason, more promote, than declare
the purity of the Sap now contained in the Inner: For being more hard and
dense, and so not perspirable, must needs suppose the Parts of the Sap
encompassed by it, since thus incapable of any evacuation, to be therefore all
so choice, as not to need it.

23.. The Sap being thus prepared in the Inner Coat, as a Liquor now apt to be
the Substratum of the future Seed-Embrio; by fresh supplies, is thence
discharged. Yet that it may not be over-copious; which, because of the laxity
of the Inner Coat, from whence it issues, it might easily be: therefore, as the
said Inner Coat is bounded without, by the upper Coat; so by the Secundine, is
it bounded within. Through which Secundine the Sap being filtr'd, or, as it
were, transpiring; the depositure hereof, answerable to the Colliquamentum in
an Egg, or to the Semen Mulibre, into its Concave at last is made.

24.. The other part of the purest Sap embosom'd in the Ramulets of the
Seed-Branch, runs a Circle, or some progress therein; and so becomes, as the
Semen Masculinum, yet more elaborte.

25. Wherein also, lest its Current should be too copious or precipitant, by
their co-arcture and divarication where they are inosculated, it is retarded;
the noblest portion only obtaining a pass.

26.. With this purest Sap, the said Ramulets being supplied, from thence at
last, the Navel-Fibres shoot (as the primitive Artery into the Colliquamentum)
through the Secundine into the aforesaid Liquor deposited therein.

27.. Into which Liquor, being now shot, and its own proper Sap or Tinctures
mixed therewith, it strikes it thus into a Coagulum; or of a Liquor, it becomes
a Body consistent and truly Parenchymous. And the supply of the said Liquor
still continued, and the shooting of the Navel-Fibres, as is above described,
still carried on, the said Coagulation or Fixation is therewith likewise.

28.. And in the Interim of the Coagulation, a gentle Fermentation being also
made, the said Parenchyma or Coagulum becomes such, not of any Texture
indifferently, but is thus raised (as we see Bread in Baking) into a Congeries
of Bladders: For such is the Parenchyma of the whole Seed.

FINIS.
THE ANATOMY OF ROOTS; Presented to the ROYAL SOCIETY at several times, in the
Years, 1672 and 1673. With an Account of the VEGETATION OF ROOTS, Grounded
chiefly hereupon. The SECOND BOOK.

By NEHEMIAH GREW M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the College of
Physicians.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, 1682.

TO THE Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord Vi-Count BROUNCKER THE PRESIDENT AND TO
THE Council and Fellows OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY.
MY LORD,
IF the Dedication of Books were not in use; yet here, I think, I might have
been a Precedent. The promotion of Phytological Science is one Part of Your
Work; and it is You have called me to the management of this Part; for some
time, have entrusted me herein; and by Your most favorable and candid
acceptance of what I have performed thus far, have encouraged me hereunto: I
therefore present but Your Own, into Your Hands.

The great Honor and Advantage of Your Fellowship, I first obtained, by
Mediation of Dr. Wilkins, the late most Reverend Bishop of Chester. Whom I
cannot name, without saying thus much of him, That He was a Person of that
eminent and happy Worth, which, as it was too good, to fear envy; so is it too
great, to need an Elogie.

With Him, it was, You were pleased to commit to Me, the further prosecution of
this Work; the Beginnings whereof, were by Your Order formerly made public.
Had I consulted my own Abilities altogether, I should scarcely have ventured
upon it; seeing very little, for which I could think well of my self, saving,
That I had learned, upon good grounds, to think of You with greatest Honor.
But I also considered, That to insist hereon too much, might be a reflection
upon Your Judgments, who had thought fit to make choice of Me. And, That You
were not more the Patrons of Wit, than of Industry; and of All, who shall
endeavor to find out, or to confirm the Truth of Things. Withal, I looked upon
Nature, as a Treasure so infinitely full; that as all Men together, cannot
exhaust it; so no Man, but may find out somewhat therein, if he be resolved to
Try.

In compliance therefore with Your Commands, I have hereunto devoted a very
considerable part of my Time. These, adding force to my own Desires, of being
somewhat instrumental to the Improvement of Medicinal, and other wholesome
Knowledge: if peradventure, as we increase herein, we may become better, and
more happy. As to which Improvement, though I could not hope; yet, I would not
despair. I have already prepared the Soil, and made some Plantation: what
remains behind, and the Vintage of the whole, will depend much upon the
continued Influence of Your Beams: for how unpromising soever the Stock may be;
yet the Fruit cannot but be somewhat matured, upon which You are pleased to
shine. I am also confident, that the same Nobilty and Goodness, which accept
the endeavors, will likewise pardon the faults, of,

September 1. 1673. My Lord, Your Lordships most humbly and most sincerly
devoted Servant NEHEMJAH GREW.

THE CONTENTS.
THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I.
OF the Original of Roots,. 1, 2, 3. Of their Figures, 4, to 8. Of their
Motions, 9, to 15. And of their Ages, 16, to the end.

CHAP. II.
OF the Skin. Its external Accidents, and Original,. 1, 2. Compounding Parts.
Whereof the one Parenchymous, 3. The other Lignous, 4, to the end.

CHAP. III.
OF the Barque. Its Original and external Accidents,. 1. Size, 2. Compounding
Parts: Whereof the one Parenchymous, 3. The Bladders of the Parenchyma, 4, 5,
6. The Diametral Portions, 7, to 11. The other Part, Lignous, consisting of
long Pipes or Vessels, 12, to 17, Of several Kinds, 18, to 23. In different
Proportion, 24, 25. And in different and elegant Position. 26, to the end.

CHAP. IV.
OF that Part of the Root next within the Bark; in Trees and Shrubby Plants,
called the Wood. Hereof the Parenchyma,. 1, 2, 3, and 7. The Lignous Portion:
of which, the Sap-Vessels, 4. The Aer-Vessels, 5, 6. The Position of the
Former, 8, 9. Of the Latter, 10, 11, 12. Their Proportion, 13, 14, 15. The
Latter, sometimes a little tapering. 16. Their Texture, 17, to 22. Content, 23.

CHAP. V.
OF the Pith. Found in the upper part of most Roots,. 1. Its size and shape, 2.
Sap-Vessels, 3. Original, 4, 5. Bladders, 6, Fibers and Texture, 7, to 11. That
of the Insertions and Barque the same, 12. Hence, the Original of the
Aer-Vessels conjectured, 13. What the whole Body of a Root, concluded, 14, 15.
The Contents of the Pith, 16.

The SECOND PART.
THeology, the Beginning and End of Philosophy,. 1, to 6. The Divine Wisdom
seen in the Growth of Plants, 7. If we observe, How the Ground is Prepared, 8,
to 14. How the Sap is Imbibed, and Distributed to the several Parts of the
Root, 15, to 28. How the several Parts are Nourished and Formed, 29, to 35. How
the several Parts receive their respective Situation, 36, to 40. How Roots
receive their different Size and Shape, 41, to 47. How Roots receive their
different Motions, 48, to 53. How Roots are differently Aged, 54, 55, 56. How
the Liquors and other Contents of the several Parts are made 57 to 63. How the
Odors of Roots are made, 64. How their Colors, 65, to 67. How their Tastes, 68,
to the end.
THE ANATOMY OF ROOTS; PROSECUTED With the bare EYE, AND WITH THE MICROSCOPE.
PART I.
CHAP. I. Of the ORIGINAL, FIGURES, MOTIONS, and AGES of ROOTS.
BEING TO speak of Roots; it is requisite, for our better understanding of what
follows, that some things, as to their Original, Figures, Motions and Ages, be
premised.

1.. Roots, taken altogether, have a Threefold Original. Either from the
Radicle; as all Roots which come of the Seed: or from the Trunk or Caulis,
above ground; as in Strawberry, Chamaemile, and many other Creepers: or from
the Trunk or Caulis, after it is sunk under ground; as in Primrose, Bistort,
and many others; and presently shall be showed how.

2.. In the Growth of a Bud, and of a Trunk-Root, there is this observable
difference; That the former, carries along with it, some portion of every Part
in the Trunk or Stalk; whereof it is a Compendium. The latter, always shoots
forth, by making a Rupture in the Barque, which it leaves behind, and proceeds
only from the inner part of the Stalk.

3.. As also, That in a Bud, the Lignous Part is spread abroad, so as to
encompass a Pith. Whereas in a Trunk-Root, it makes a solid Thread standing in
the Center. Which is the Cause of its descending into the Ground: as is
already, in the First Book, and shall in This be further showed.

4.. ROOTS are generally distinguished, as to their Figures, in being more
Entry, as is that of Liquirish; or Parted, as of St. Johnswort. Parted or
Forked, either at the Bottom, as most Roots; or at the Top, as Dandelyon, and
some others. A thing very odd, and unintelligible, without the knowledge of the
Motions of Roots; whereof presently.

5.. Parted, again, are either Ramified, as that of Cumfry; or Manifold, as of
Crowfoot: both are Parted; but the former, by the subdivision of greater
Branches, into lesser; these, when diverse Strings, have all their distinct
original from one Head. Some are Straight, as a Radish; others Crooked, as
Bistort. Smooth, as Bugloss; or Stringy all round about, as Columbine. And to
Carnations, this seems to be peculiar, That sometimes many of the Strings run
parallel with the Wood of the great Root, through the Barque, or betwixt the
Wood and the Barque.

6.. Again, some are Thick, as Rhubarb; Slender, as the Vine. Long, as Fenil;
Short, as a Turnep: which are distinct from Great and Little; in that these,
are so called with respect to several Roots; those, with respect to the several
Dimensions of one. Short, are Stubbed, as Iris tuberosa; or Round, as
Dracontium. Round are Tuberous, or Simply Knobbed, as Rape-Crowfoot; Bulbous,
that is Scaled, as some Lilys; or Shell'd, as an Onion. Where note, That all
Bulbous Roots, are, as it were, Hermaphrodites, or Root and Trunk both
together: for the Strings only, are absolute Roots; the Bulb, actually
containing those Parts, which springing up, make the Leaves or Body; and is, as
it were, a Great Bud under ground.

7.. Roots, again, are Even or Uneven; Even, are Cylindrical, as Eryngo; or
Pyramidal, as Borage. Growing smaller Downwards, as do most; or Upwards, as
Skirrets. Uneven, are Pitted, as Potato's, where the Eyes or Buds of the future
Trunks lie inward; or Knotted, as Jerusalem-Artichoke; where they stand out.
These Differences, are also Compounded: so some Roots are both Entire and
Smooth, as Peony; others Entire, but Stringy, as Clary: that is, neither
Ramifi'd, nor yet Brushy, or divided at the Top into several small Strings;
but a Single Root surrounded with many Hairy Threads. Some both Plain in some
parts, and Knobbed in others, as Filipendula, Lilium non bulbosum, and others.

8.. Some also have two or more Roots; and those of one Kind: of which, some
are distinctly fastend to the bottom of the Stalk, as in Dogstones; some stand
one under another, so as only the uppermost is fastened to the Stalk, as in
Dragon, Crocus, and others. And there are some, which have not only two Roots,
at the same time; but those also of two distinct Kinds, as in Bistort; one of
them, a slender strait Cylindrick and horizontall Root; the other large and
crooked, and bred of the Descending Trunk; as in speaking next of the Motions
of Roots, will be understood, how. All which, with other Differences by Those
that undertake the Descriptions of Plants, are accurately to be Noted. But the
Differences, above mentioned, will serve for our present Purpose.

9.. THE MOTIONS of Roots are also diverse. Sometimes Level, as are those of
Hops, Ammi, Cinquefoyle; and all such as properly Creep. Sometimes
Perpendicular, as that of Parsnep: Which is different from Straightness; for
some Straight Roots, are Level. Both of them are either Shallow or Deep: some
run Level, and near the Turf, as Woodbind, Wild Anenomy; others lower, as
Dogs-Grass. Some strike down, but a little way, as Stramonium; others grow
deep, as Horseradish: Which is different from being Long; for many long Roots,
are Level, as Hops.

11.. Some again Descend, as Tulips, and other Bulbous Roots, which differs
from growing only Downwards; in that here, the Head of the Root is Immovable;
but in Descending, the whole Root obteineth different Places, running deeper,
time after time, into the Earth. Some also Ascend, sometimes, and in some part,
appearing above ground, as Turnips.

11.. These Motions are also Compounded; both in respect of the several Parts
of the Root, and of several Times. So the main Root of Primrose, is Level; the
Strings are Perpendicular. The Roots of most Seedlings grow Downward and
Upward, or shoot out in length at both Ends, at the same time. Those of
Bistort, Iris, and some others, grow, in part, both Downward and Upward at
several times: Whence it is, that Bistort is Crooked, with some resemblance to
an S, according to its Name; And that some Parts of Iris-Root appear oftentimes
above the ground.

12.. There is also another Motion, in some Roots, not heeded; and that is
Contortion: whereby, without being moved out of their Place, they are Writhed
or Twisted; as a piece of Cloth is, when the Water is wrung out of it; as in
Carduus, Sonchus, and others: whether always I cannot say. This Mation cannot
be noted, without stripping off the Barque; whereby the Vessels may be seen,
sometimes, to make two or three Circumvolutions. This Motion seems to be
governed by the winding of the Stalk; and therefore to begin at the Head, and
terminate at the Point or lower end of the Root, which is immovable.

13.. BUT ABOVE all the Motions of Roots, not observed, the most remarkable is
that of DESCENT. Which, although it has been noted, by some Botanicks, of
Bulbous Roots; yet of these only: Whereas it is the Property, of a great many
more; and those, of very different Kinds; probably, of the far greater number
of Perennial Roots of Herbs; as of Arum, Rape-Crowfoot, Valerian, Brownwort,
Bearsfoot, Tansy, Lychnis, Sampier, Primrose, Ammi, Avens, Wood Sorrel, Iris,
and others. Of all which Plants, it is very observable, That their Root, is
annually renewed, or repaired, out of the Trunk or Stalk it self. That is to
say, The Basis of the Stalk continually, and by insensible Degrees, descending
below the surface of the Earth, and hiding it self therein; is thus, both in
Nature, Place, and Office changed into a true Root. Which Root, by the
continuance of the said Motion of the Stalk, also Descends; and so, according
to the durableness of its Substance, becomes a shorter or longer Root; the
Elder or Lower Portion thereof, Rotting off, by the same Degrees with the
Generation of the Upper, out of the Stalk. So in Brownwort, the Basis of the
Stalk sinking down by degrees, ^till it lies under Ground, becomes the upper
part of the Root; and continuing still to sink, the next year, becomes the
lower Part; and the next after that, rots away; a new Addition being still
yearly made out of the Stalk, as the elder Parts yearly rot away. Tab. 5. f. 6,
and 7.
So in Dragon, Crocus, and the like, where the Root is double; the Basis of the
Stalk, this year; the next, becomes the Upper- Root; after that, the Lower-
Root; and at the length dies and is consumed.

14.. The Demonstration hereof, is taken, more evidently, from some Roots, than
from others; as from the Level and Knobed Roots of Wood Sorrel, Tab. 5. f. 1,
and 2.
Primrose, etc. For the Leaves of those Plants rotting off successively, and
the Bases of those Leaves gradually descending into the Ground; each Basis is
thus nourished with a more copious Sap, and so swelled into so many thick
Knots. It may likewise be gathered in some, from the like Position of the
Vessels or Woody Parts, in the Root, as in the Trunk; as in Bares-foot, As
also, from the Root of the Iris Tuberosa: Tab. 5. f. 4.
where, although the Leaves fall off close to the Surface of the Stalk; yet
after that is sunk down, and swelled into a Root, the Seats of the perished
Leaves, and the Ends of the Vessels belonging to them, are not obscurely
visible; whereby the Root is wrought, as it were, with several Seames and
Prickt-Lines; the Seams showing the setting on of the Leaves; and the Pricks,
the Terminations or broken Ends of the Vessels: which ends, are still more
apparent, upon the stripping off the Barque. I considered likewise, That as
among Animals, there are many, which are not Bred of Eggs, immediately; but are
Transformed, one Animal into another: So, it is more than probable, That among
Plants, there are not a few Instances of the like Transformations; whereof,
this is one.

15.. The Cause of this Descent, so far as it is dependent on the Inward
Conformation of the Root, I shall show in the following Part. But the Immediate
Visible one, are the String-Roots, which this kind of Trunks frequently put
forth: which, descending themselves directly into the Ground, like so many
Ropes, l^g the Trunk after them. Hence the Tuberous-Roots of Iris upon the
rotting or fading away of the String-Roots hanging at them, sometimes a little
Re-ascend. Hence also the Shape of some Roots is Inverted: For whereas most are
parted downwards, into several Legs; some are parted upwards into diverse Ne^ks,
Tab. 5. f. 5.
as Dandelyon, and others. For these Roots sending forth at the top several
Trunk-Buds, the said Buds successively put forth new, and cast their old
Leaves; and continually also making their Descent, are at length formed into so
many Necks, of three, four, five, or more Inches long, under Ground.

16.. HENCE ALso we understand, in what particular way, some Roots become
Perennial. Some are wholly so, as those of Trees, Shrubs, and diverse other
woody Plants. Others, in part, or by a new Progenies of Roots, from the old
Head or Body, in the room of those that die yearly, or after a certain Time; as
of Lilium non bulbosum, Jerusalem Arti^hoke, Potato, Dog-stones, Monks-hood,
little Celandine, and others. In which Plants, one or more of their Roots are
firm, the other spongy and superannuated; and partly, by the ravine of the
Trunk, and other younger Roots, reduced to a Consumption and Death.

17.. With these, Tulips, and other Bulbous-Roots consort: For the several
Rindes and Shells, whereof chiefly, the Bulb consists, successively perish and
shrink up into so many thin and dry Skins: betwixt which, and in their Center,
other Leaves and Shells, being successively formed, the Bulb is thus
perpetuated. In the same manner the String-Roots also succeed one another
annually. So that at the end of diverse Years, although it be still looked upon
as the same Individual Root, yet it is, in truth, Another, as to every particle
thereof.

18.. Lastly, many other Roots are perpetuated by the aforesaid Descent of the
Trunk; out of which, it is still annually Repaired, as by the gradual perishing
of its lower parts, it is Diminished; as has been said. Tab 5, f. 3.
Whence also we see the reason of the Rugged and Blunt extremities of these,
and some other Roots, as of that Plant superstitiously called Devils-bit:
because the end of it seems to be bitten off. Yet does it not appear so
originally; but the Lower part thereof rotting off, as the Upper descends; the
living remainder, becomes stumped, or seems Bitten. Thus far of the
Original, Shapes, Motions, and Ages of Roots.

CHAP. II. Of the SKIN.
I NEXT proceed to the several Parts whereof a Root is Compounded. The outer
Part of all is the Skin; which is common to all Roots. It Is diversely Colored:
Whiter in Skirrets; Yellow, in Dock; Red, in Potato; Brown, in Lovage; Black,
in Bugloss. Its Surface, sometimes Smooth, as in Horsradish; Rough, as in
Scorzonera. And the Skins of the several Shells of a Tulip-Root, taken up
fresh, look as if they were perforated with a great many small holes. It Is of
various Size; very Thin, in Parsnep; somewhat Thick, in Bugloss; very Thick in
Iris. Sometimes it is Opacous, as in Thistle; and sometimes Transparent, as in
Madder.

2.. Every Root has successively two kinds of Skins: the one, Coetaneous with
the other Parts; and has its original from that which involveth the Parts of
the Seed it self. The other, Postnate, succeeding in the room of the former, as
the Root ageth; and is orinated from the Bark. So in Dandelyon, the old Skin,
looked upon about the beginning of May, seems to have been one of those several
Rings, which the precedent year composed the Cortical Body of the Root: but by
the Generation of a new Ring, next the Wood, is now thrust off and shrunk up
into a Skin. So also in the Roots of Bugloss and Horseradish, Tab. 14, 15.
as far as the Bladders in the former, and the Vessels in the latter are
Radiated; the Cortical Body seems either annually or oftener, to shrink up into
another new Skin, as, the old ones fall off. And sometimes, perhaps, as in
Assparagus, the whole body of the Perpendicular Roots, Tab. 10.
except the woody Fiber in the Center, becomes the second Skin. So that the
wearing away of the old Skin, succeeds the derivation of the new one; as in
Descending Roots, the Consumption of the Lower Parts, does the Generation of
the Upper. Because the Barque swells, and grows sometimes faster than the Skin
can fall off, or give way to it: therefore are the Roots of many Herbs,
Barquebound, as well as the Trunks of Trees.

3.. This Skin is usually, if not always, compounded of two Kinds of Bodies:
which also is probable of the Coetaneous. The one, Parenchymous, and frequently
constructed of exceeding little Cells or Bladders; which in some Roots, as of
Asparagus, cut traverse, and viewed through a Microscope, Tab. 10.
are plainly visible. These Bladders are of different Sizes; Tab. 14.
in Buglos, larger; in Asparagus less; and sometimes they coincide and
disappear. But in these, and all other Roots, even where these Bladders appear
not, the Parenchyma of the Skin, is of the same Substantial Nature, with that
other more vivid and bulky one of the Bark: As is manifest, from its being
thence Originated; and alike Conformed, as shall be seen; and not only adjacent
to it, as a Glove is to the Hand; but continuous therewith, as the parts of a
piece of flesh, are one with another.

4.. OF THIS Parenchymous Body, the Skin consists chiefly, but not wholly;
there being many Lignous Vessels which are Tubulary, mixed therewith: which,
though hardly by the Microscope, yet otherwise, is demonstrable. For in tearing
the Skin, you shall do it more easily by the length, than breadth; because, by
the first way, the continuity only of the Parenchyma, is dissolved; but by the
latter, both of this, and of the Vessels, these being posited by the length of
the Root: So that, as by the smalness of the Bladders of the Parenchyma, the
Skin is Dense; so by these Vessels, is it Tough.

5.. Again, if you cut a Root traverse, and let it lie by for some time, all
the parts, where there are no Vessels, shrink below the surface of the cut-end;
but wherever These are posited, there is no shrinking; which oftentimes,
evidently appears also in the Skin: because the said Vessels, though, as the
Bladders, they may coincide; yet they cannot visibly shorten or shrink up in
length; no more than a Straw, whose sides may yet be easily crushed together.

6.. Further, the Root being cut traverse, if, near the cut-end, you very
gently press the side of the Root with the edge of your Nail, the Sap will
thereupon arise sometimes from the Skin; in the same manner, as from any other
part of the Root, where the like Vessels are posited. And although the Sap may
likewise be expressed from the Pith, and other Parts where sometimes, there are
none of these Vessels; yet not without a solution of there continuity; which
here does not follow; as appears, from the disappearing of the Sap, together
with the intermission of the pressure; the said Vessels then dilating
themselves by a Motion of Restitution, and so sucking up the Sap again.

7.. Hereunto may be added the Testimony of sight; the very Vessels themselves,
in many Roots, coming under an apparent view, and standing in the utmost
surface of the Root all round about, as in that of Liquirish, Columbine,
Scorzonera, and others. Which Experiments, I have here, once for all, more
particularly set down; because I shall have occasion, hereafter, to refer to
them.

CHAP. III. Of the BARQUE.
NEXT WITHIN the Skin lies the Barque. It Is sometimes Yellow, as in Dock; Red,
in Bistort; but usually, and in Seed-Roots, I think, always White. It is
derived from the Seed it self; being but the extension or prolongation of the
Parenchyma of the Radicle; One of the three Organical Parts of the Seed,
described in the First Chapter of the First Book.

2. It is variously Sized; sometimes very Thin, as in Jerusalem Artichoke,
Goats-beard, and in most Trees; where it also retains the Name of a Barque or
Rind. Sometimes it is more Thick, and makes up the far greatest protion of the
Root, as in the String- Roots of Asparagus, in Dandelion, and others. The
thinnest and the thickest are all analogous, and obtain the same general Uses.
The degrees of its Size, amongst all Roots, may be well reckoned about Twenty,
and seen in the following examples, Tab. 7, 8, 9.
sc. Beet, Dropwort, Jerusalem Artichoke, Orpine, Valerian, Goats-beard,
Nettle, Brownwort, Columbine, Celandine, Asparagus, Horseradish, Peony,
Bryony, Eryngo, Borage, Lovage, Dandelion, Parsnep, Carrot, etc. In the Root of
Beet, scarce exceeding a good thick Skin: but in a Carrot, half the
Semidiameter of the Root, or above half an Inch over in some places: and that
of Dandelion, sometimes, in proportion with the woody Part, twice as thick: the
rest of Several intermediate Degrees: And to most Roots, this is common, To
have their Barque proportionably thicker, at the bottom than at the top.

3.. IT IS Compounded of two Bodies. The one Parenchymous; Continuous
throughout; yet somewhat Pliable without a solution of its Continuity.
Exceeding Porous; as appears from its so much shrinking up, in drying. The
Pores hereof are extended much alike both by the length and breadth of the Root;
therefore it shrinketh up, by both those Dimensions, more equally. And they are
very Dilative; as is also manifest from its restorableness to its former bulk
again, upon its infusion in Water: that is to say, It is a most curious and
exquisitely fine wrought Sponge. Thus much the Eye and Reason may discover.

4.. The Microscope confirms the truth hereof, and more precisely shows, That
these Pores are all, in a manner, Spherical, in most Plants; and this Part, an
Infinite Mass of little Cells or Bladders. The sides of none of them, Tab. 10,
and sequent.
are Visibly pervious from one into another; but each is bounded within it
self. So that the Parenchyma of the Barque, is much the same thing, as to its
Conformation, which the Froth of Beer or Eggs is, as a fluid, or a piece of
fine Manchet, as a fixed Body. The Sides also of these Bladders are as
transparent, as those of Water; or the Bodies of some Insects.

6.. But their Size is usually much smaller; and their Posture more Regular
than those in Bread or Water. In all Roots they are so small, as scarcely,
without the Microscope, to be discerned: yet are they of different Size, both
in the same, and in diverse Roots; the varieties whereof, amongst all Roots, may
be reduced to about Ten or Twelve according to the Standard, Tab. 13, 14.
in Tab. 11. Some of those in Dandelion, being of the Smallest; and in Bugloss,
of the Greatest. They are posited, for the most part, at an Equal Height; and
piled evenly one over another: So that, oftentimes, they visibly run in Ranks
or trains, both by the length and breadth of the Roots, as in the Root of
Bugloss, or of Dandelion, split through the middle, may be seen. Although they
are usually Spherical, yet sometimes, and in some places, they are more
oblonge, Tab. 14.
as in the outward part of the Barque of Bugloss. These Bladders, are sometimes
best seen, after the Root, being cut traverse, has layn by a while, to dry.

6.. They are the Receptacles of Liquor; which is ever Lucid; and I think,
always more Thin or Watery. They are, in all Seed-Roots, filled herewith; and
usually, in those also which are well grown, as of Borage, Radish, etc.

7.. THIS Parenchymous Part, in many Roots, is of one Uniform Contexture; as in
Asparagus, Hors-Radish, Peony, Potato, and others. In many others, it is, as it
were, of a Diversified Woof; the Bladders being, though every where Regular,
yet either in Shape, Size, or Situation, different in some Parts hereof, from
what they are, in other intermediate ones. For these Parts, are like so many
White Rays, streaming, by the Diameter of the Root, from the inward Edge toward
the Circumference of the Barque; as in Lovage, Melilot, Parsnep, etc. cut
transversly, Tab. 8, 9.
is apparent. They are, though not in direct Lines, continued also by the
length of the Root; so that they are, as it were, so many Membrances, by which
the other Parts of the Barque, are disterminated.

8.. The Continuation of these Diametral Rays, or Portions, is diverse:
sometimes, but half through the Barque, or somewhat more, or less, Tab. 9.
as in Melilot. And it is probable, that to the Roots of all or most Trefoyls,
and also of the Leguminous Kind, this is proper, To have their Diametral Rays
come short of the Circumference. Sometimes, they run quite through to the very
Skin, Tab. 8.
as in Lovage. And I think, in the Roots of all Umbelliferous Plants: In which
therefore, the Skin seems to have a closer Communion with the Diametral Rays,
and to be originated especially therefrom. They usually stand at an Equal
Distance in the same Root: But with respect to diverse Roots, their Distance
varies; Tab. 7, 8.
so less, in Parsnep, greater in Bugloss. They are commonly Rectilinear, as in
Lovage; but sometimes winding to and fro, as in a Carrot. Tab. 8.


9.. They are not always of one Size: in a Carrot near the Inner Edge of the
Barque, exceeding Slender, and scarcely discernable; in others, Tab. 8, 9.
Thicker, as in the Three greater ones of Melilot, and in common Chervil. Both
by their Distance, and Size, they are also less or more Numerous; some, only as
they are nearer; some, as smaller; others, as both. And it is proper, I think,
to the Intybous kind, either to have none, or but a few. Sometimes they are of
the same Thickness quite through the Barque from edge to edge, Tab. 7.
as in Marsh-Mallow. And sometimes are considerably spread or dilated as they
aproach the Skin, wherewith they are joined, and whereinto they more visibly
run, as in Parsley, or the smaller part of the Root of Lovage. Tab. 8.
And in some Roots, as of Scorzonera, at some times of the year, when less
succulent, almost the whole Parenchyma seems to be of the Nature of the
Diametral Rays, in other Roots. The Bladders of these Diametral Portions, are
sometimes, greater than those of the other Parenchymous Parts, as in Parsley;
and I think sometimes less. Yet as there, so here, variously sized; to about
six or eight Degrees; and those of Parsley about the third, fourth, and fifth.
Their Figure is Sometimes more oblong; and their direction or respect more
toward the Center of the Root.

11.. As the other Parenchymous Parts of the Barque, are the Receptacles of
Liquor; so these, (where they are) of Aer. This is argued, From their being
more White, and not Transparent, as such Roots and Parts use to be, which are
more copiously and equally filled up with Liquor: as the Pith of Elder, which,
in the old Stalks, is White; was once, and by being well soaked, will become,
again Transparent. And from their being more dry and void of Liquor; whereupon
their Bladders, which cannot be Vacuities, must be filled with more or less
Aer, mixed with the Sap or the Vaporous parts thereof. This is more observable
in those Diametral Portions, which terminate upon, and run into the Skin.

12.. THE BARQUE is not only of a diverse Woof, but as is said, of a Compounded
Substance; there being a certain number of Lignous Vessels, fewer or more, in
some place or other, mixed with the Parenchymous Part above described; and some
way or other, are demonstrable in all Roots As by the Toughness of the Barque,
when pulled by the length. By the visible Continuation of the said Vessels
through the length of the Barque, Tab. 6.
in the resemblance of small Threads. And by the rising up of the Sap in the
traverse cut of the Root, in such places of the Barque, where these Threads
terminate: as the existence of the same Vessels in the Skin, was proved in the
Precedent Chapter.

13. These Tubulary Threads, run not through the Barque in direct lines; but are
frequently Braced together in the form of Network; The Parenchymous Parts
every where filling up the spaces betwixt the Braced Threads; Tab. 6.
as in Burnet, Scorzonera, etc. the Barque being paired or striped off, is
apparent.

14.. They seem, at first, where they are Braced, to be Inosculated; so as to
be pervious one into another. But a more accurate view, especially assisted by
a Miscroscope, discovers the contrary. Neither are they woun'd any way one
about another, as Threads are in a Rope: nor Implicated, as in ravled Yarn, or
the Knots of a Net: but only contiguous or simply Tangent, as the several
Chords in the Braces of a Drum: being thus joined together by the Parenchymous
Parts, as in speaking of the Pith, will be understood how. Yet do not always
the same Threads belong and keep entire to one Brace; but are freqnently parted
into lesser Threads; which are transposed from Brace to Brace. Nor do they
always, in whole or in part, presently after their contingence, mutually fall
off again; but, oftentimes, run along collaterally joined together for some
space.

15.. These Braces are of various number in diverse Roots; more frequent in
Jerusalem Artichoke, Tab. 6.
less in Scorzonera, more rare in Cumfry. The Threads likewise are variously
Divaricated; sometimes more, where the Braces are frequent, as in Jerusalem
Artichoke; and sometimes less, where the Braces are rare, as in Scorzonera,
Dandelion: And in all Roots, more frequent toward the Inner Verge of the Bark.

16.. By what is said, it is partly implied, That these Threads, are not Single
Vessels; but a Cluster of them, Twenty, Thirty, or more or fewer of them
together. Yet as the Threads are not Inosculated in the Braces; so neither are
the Vessels, in the Threads. Nor yet Twisted; but only stand collateral
together; as the several Single Threads of the Silkworm, do in Sleave-Silk.
Neither are these Vessels pyramidal, so far as the Glass will discover; or,
from probable Reason, may be conjectured. Nor Ramified, so as to be
successively propagated one from another, after the manner of the Veins in
Animals: but Cylindrical, and Distinctly continued, throughout the length of
the Root; as the several Fibers in a Tendon or Nerve.

17.. THESE VESSELS are either themselves of diverse kinds, or serve, at least,
to constitute diverse Kinds, in diverse Roots: of the different Natures whereof,
although there may be other ways whereby to judge; yet so far as by Inspection,
we may do it, chiefly, by the Diversity of those Liquors, which they severally
contain. Sometimes they yield a Lympha; and that Thin, as they do in a Parsnep;
especially those that make a Ring, at the inward extremity of the Bark. See the
Root it self. That this Clear Sap ascends only from these Vessels, is
certain. Because no Liquor will do the like, from any Parenchymous Part, as
Chap. 2. has been said. And because it is of a different nature from the Sap
contained in the Bladders of the Parenchyma; although of the same Color, yet
sensibly more Sweet.

18. Sometimes they yield a Thick and Mucilaginous Lympha, as in Cumfry, as
appears by its tenacity. From the Mucilaginous Content of these Vessels it
is, I suppose, that the Sap contained in the Bladders is rendered of the like
nature, so far as it approaches hereto, which sometimes is more, as in
Marsh-mallow; and sometimes but little as in Borage: For in pressing out the
Liquor of this Plant, and then heating it over an indifferent fire; thefar
greater part hereof remains thin; only some certain strings and little bits
of a gellied substance are mixed herewith; which as it seems, were originally
the proper Liquor of these Muciducts.

19.. Oftentimes these Succiferous Vessels yield a Milky or White Sap; and
sometimes Yellow, and of other colors as in Sonchus, and most Cichoraceous
Plants; in Angelica, and most Umbelliferous; in Burdock, and diverse Thistles,
to which that is 'akin: in Scorzonera, Common Bells, and many other Plants, not
commonly taken notice of to be milky. The Milky Saps of all which, although
they differ in Color, Thickness, and other Qualities; yet agree, in being more
Oily than any of the Lymphous Saps. It being the mixture of the Oily parts with
some other Limpid Liquor, but of a different Nature, which causes them to be
of a Milky, or other Opacous Color, in the same manner as common Oil, and a
strong Liquamen of Tartar, shaked in a Bottle together, presently mix into a
White Liquor. And although they will, for the greatest part, separate again;
yet some of their parts, without any Boiling, or so much as the least Digestion
with Heat, by Agitation only, or standing together for some time, incorporate
in the form of a Thin Milky-Sope, which will also dissolve in Water. I suppose,
therefore, That it is the Volatile Salt, chiefly, of these Plants, which being
mixed with their Oil, renders this Liquor of a White or other Opacous Color.

20.. Sometimes the Oil will separate and discover it self: for if you cut a
Fenil-Root traverse, after it has layn some days out of the Ground; the same
Vessels, which, in a fresh Root, yields Milk; will now, yield Oil: the watery
parts of the Milk, which in the drying of the Root are more evaporable, being
spent.

21.. All Gums and Balsams are likewise to be reputed the proper Contents of
these Vessels: for These and Milks, are very near akin. So the Milk of Fenil,
upon standing, turns to a Clear Balsam; of Scorzonera, Dandelion, and others,
to a Gum. In the dried Root of Angelica, etc. being split, the Milk, according
to the Continuation of these Vessels, appears, as Blood clodders in the
Veins, condensed to an hard and shining Rosin. Tab. 9.
And the Root of Helenium cut transversely, presently yields a curious Balsame
of a Citrine Color, and sometimes of the Color of Balsame of Sulphur. I call
it a Balsame; because it will not dissolve in Water. Yet not a Terebinth;
because, nothing near so viscid or tenaceous as that is. But the Root of Common
Wormwood, Tab. 10. E.
bleeds, from large Vessels, a true Terebinth, or a Balsame with all the
defining properties of a Terebinth; although that word be commonly used only
for the Liquors of some Trees.

22.. There is yet another kind of Sap-Vessels, which may be called
Vapour-Vessels; as in Docks, at least some of them. For by the Sap-Vessels it
is, that the Barques of Roots do Bleed. Of which, some Bleed quick and
plentifully, as the Umbelliferous and the Cichoraceous Kinds. Some, very slowly
and scarce visibly, as all or most Trefoyls, and of the Leguminous Kind. And
some seem not to Bleed, as the Dock. Yet that this Root, has also Vessels
distinct from those that carry Aer; does partly appear, from the different
Color they produce where they stand; as will better be understood anon, in
speaking of the Causes of the Colors of Roots. As also from the Toughness of
the Barque, in pulling it by the length; neither the Parenchyma, nor the
Aer-Vessels, being of themselves Tough. But because the Succu^ or Sap they
carry, seems to be a kind of Dewy Vapor, therefore, they may not improperly be
called Roriferous or Vapour-Vessels.

23.. THE Sap-Vessels, are not only of diverse Kinds, in diverse Roots, but in
the same. Whether in all, I doubt: but in some it is certain they are: For if
you cut a Fenil-Root traverse, both Milk and Limpid Sap, Tab. 9.
will presently ascend, and, upon accurate inspection, appear thereupon
dinstinctly. So the Roots, both of Trachelium and Enula, Bleed both a Lympha,
and a Citrine Balsame: and Wormwood, both a Lympha, and a Terebinth, at the
same time. So also the Root of Dandelion being cut in November, seems to bleed
both a Milk and a Lympha; the latter being drowned by the former at another
time when it is more copious. Whether all Roots have Lymphaeducts, is doubtful;
but it is most probable, that they have, more or fewer; standing, for the most
part, in a Ring, at the Inner Verge of the Barque: the Sap whereof, I suppose,
is so far of common Nature in all Roots, as to be Clear, and less Oily.

24.. THE Quantity of these Vessels is very different: In Borage, Peony,
Bistort, but few; in Asparagus, fewer: in Parsnep, Celandine, many; in Fenil,
Marsh-mallow, many more: and betwixt these extremes, Tab. 7, 8, 9.
there are many Degrees, as by comparing the Roots of Horseradish, Turnep,
Briony, Skirrets, Parsley, Goats-Beard, and as many more as you please, may be
seen. Amongst the several Sorts of Docks, they seem in Patience, to be the
fewest; in Red-Dock, the most numerous. There are two ways of judging of their
Number; Either as their Extremeties are visible upon the traverse cut of the
Barque; or as the Barque is diversely Brittle or Tough; being so, from the
various Number of these Vessels therein, as in the Second Chapter has been
said.

25.. The Quantity of the ascending Sap, is a doubtful argument, whether of the
Number, or Size of these Vessels. For it is common to most Milky-Roots, for the
Milk to ascend more copiously: yet in some of them, the Vessels seem, in
proportion with the Parenchymous Part, not to be so numerous, as in some other
Roots, where the ascending Sap is less; as by comparing the Lacteals of
Dandelion, and the Lymphaeducts of Fenil together, may appear: so that it
should seem, that the bore of the Lacteal Vessels, is greater than that of the
Lymphaeducts.

26.. THE Situation of these Vessels, as they appear, even to the naked Eye, in
the transverse Section, is Various and Elegant. Sometimes they are posited only
at the Inner Edg of the Barque, where they make a Ring, Tab. 7, 8, 9, and 10.
as in Asparagus. In which place and position, they stand in most, if not in
all, Roots, how variouslly soever they are posited also otherwise. The Common
Crow-Foot with numerous Roots, has a Ring of Sap-Vessels next the Skin. So the
Barque of Monks-Hood, is encompassed with a transparent Ring of Sap-Vessels.
The Ring is either more Entire, as in Eryngo, Brown-Wort, Valerian, Hop,
Madder, etc. Or it is a Pricked Ring, as in Buttyr-Bur. Sometimes they are
chiefly postur'd in a Prick-Ring, toward the outward part of the Barque, as in
Peony: and some Roots are pricked all over the Barque, as of Melilot. In
others, they stand not so much in Pricks, as Portions or Colums, as in Cumfry*

27.. In others, again, they all stand in more continued Lines, either Rays or
Diametral, as in Borage; or Peripherial, as in Celandine. The Vascular Rays are
not equally extended in all Roots: in Parsnep, Tab. 7, 8, 9.
toward the Circumference of the Barque; in Bugloss, about half way. In all
Docks, and Sorrels, the Rays are extended through about of the thickness of the
Barque, toward the Circumference, whereabout, diverse of them are always arched
in, two and two together. In all or many Trefoyls, and of the Leguminous Kind,
they are extended through no more than d of the Barque. In the Umbelliferous,
they are Ralled in betwixt the Diametral Portions of the Parenchyma. In Borage,
the Rays are more Continuous; in a Carrot, more Pricked. Here also the Pricks
stand in Even Lines; in Lovage, they are Divaricated. Of which, and those of
some other Roots, it is also Observable, That they are not all mere Pricks, but
most of them small, Tab. 8.
yet real Circles; which, after the Milk has been frequently licked off, and
cease to ascend, are visible, even without a Glass. And note, that in
observing all Milk-Vessels, the Milk is to be taken off, not with the Finger
but the Tongue; so often, till it rises no more, or but little. And some Roots
may also be soaked in Water; whereby the Position of the Milk-Vessels, will be
visible by the darker Color of the Barque, where they stand.

28.. The Rays sometimes, run more Parallel, and keep several, as in Monkshood;
Tab. 7, 8, 9.
and sometimes, toward the Circumference of the Barque, they are occurrent; as
not only in Docks, but other Plants: In Eryngo, in a termination more Circular;
and in Bryony, angular, or in the form of a Glory, Tab. 15.
as also in Horsradish, through a Microscope. The Peripherial Lines are in
some, more entire Circles, as in Dandelion; in others, made up of shorter
Chords, as in Potato, Cumfry, and the smaller part of the Root of Monks-hood.
In some, the Pricks are so exceeding small, and stand so close, that, to the
bare eye, they seem to be continous Rings, which yet, through the Microscope,
appear distinct, Tab. 12.
as in Marsh-mallow and Liquirish.

29.. Sometimes Columns and Chords are compounded, as in Burnet; Pricks and
Chords, in Potato; Rays and Rings, in Monkshood; where the Ring is Single. In
Fenil, there is a double or treple order both of Rays and Rings, the
Lymphaeducts standing in Rays and the Lacteals in Rings. And in Marsh-mallow,
the Vessels are so posited as to make both those kinds of Lines at once.

30.. In Celandine, they seem all, to the bare eye, to stand in numerous Rings
lying even one within another. As also in Dandelion; in which yet, Tab. 13.
being viewed through a Microscope, there is an appearance of very many small
Rays; which streaming from the Inner Verge of the Barque, cross three or four
of the smaller Rings, and are there terminated. Whence it should seem that
Lymphatick Rays and Milky Rings, are in that Root, so far mixed together. Only
the Lympha, being confounded with the Milk, cannot be discerned. And where the
Milky-Vessels are evacuated, or at such Seasons, wherein they are less full,
diverse Milky Roots will yield a clear Liquor at the Inner Verge of the Barque,
where, at other times they seem to yield only Milk. And this is the Description
of the Barque.

CHAP. IV. Of the Wood.
THAT Portion of the Root which stands next within the Barque, and in Trees,
and Shrubby Plants, is the Wood; is also compounded of Two Substantially
different Bodies, Parenchymous and Lignous. The Parenchymous, is of the same
Substantial Nature with that of the Barque. And is originated from it; being
not only adjacent to it, but all round about continuous therewith; even as
that, is with the Skin; the Parenchyma of the Barque, being distributed, from
time to time, partly outward into the Skin, and partly inward, into the Wood.

2.. The Position of the several parts hereof, is different. For the most part
it has a Diametral Continuation, in several Portions, running betwixt as many
more of the Lignous, from the Circumference toward the Center of the Root: all
together, constituting that, which in the Second Chapter of the First Book, I
call the Insertment. In the Roots of many Herbs, these Diametral or Inserted
Portions are more observable, as in Cumfry; which leads to the notice of them
in all others, Tab. 9.
both of Herbs and Trees. Sometimes part of this Parenchymous Body is disposed
into Rings, as in Fenil. The Number and Size of which Rings differ: In Fenil,
when the Root is grown large, they are in some places broader, Tab. 8, 9.
but fewer; in Beet they are narrower, but more. The Diametral Portions are
here, in like manner, much varied; in Cumfry, Celandine, larger; in Beet,
Bugloss, meaner; in Borage, Parsnep, more, and smaller; and in most Woody-
Roots, streaming betwixt the Pith and the Barque, as so many small Rays. Their
Continuation is also different; in some Roots, to the Center, as in Columbine;
in others not, as in Parsnep. And sometimes different in the same Root, Tab. 17.
as in the Vine.

3.. The Contexture of these Parenchymous Portions is sometimes Uniform, as in
Bugloss, Peony; and sometimes also, as it is in the Barque, different; in part,
more sappy, and transparent; in part, more white, dry, and aerie, as in Carrot,
Lovage, Scorzonera, and others; which yet cannot be observed without a wary
view. But their general Texture is the same being all made up of many small
Bladders. Which are here of different Sizes, like those of the Barque, but for
the most part smaller. Their Shape likewise, is usually Round; but sometimes
Oblong and Oval, as in Borage; or Oblong and Square, as in the Vine. Tab. 17.


4.. The Lignous Part, if not always, yet usually, is also Compounded of Two
Kinds of Bodies, scil. Succiferous or Lignous and Aer-Vessels. The Lignous as
far as discernable, are of the same Conformation and Nature with those of the
Barque, and in the transverse cut of the Root, do oftentimes, as those, emit a
Liquour. They are also Braced; and many of them run in distinct Threads or
Portions, collaterally together.

5.. The Aer Vessels I so call, because they contain no Liquor, bnt an Aerie
Vapor. They are, more or less, visible in all Roots. They may be
distinguished, to the bare Eye, from the Parenchymous Parts, by their Whiter
Surface; and their standing more prominent, whereas those shrink below the
transverse level of the Root, upon drying. They are frequently Conjugated
diverse of them together, Tab. 10, and 15.
sometimes fewer, and for the most part single, as in Asparagus; sometimes
many, as in Hors-Radish. And their Conjugations are also Braced, as the Threads
of the Succiferous Vessels. But they are no where Inosculated: nor Twisted one
about another; but only Tangent or Collateral. Neither are they Ramified, the
greater into less; but are all distinctly continued, as the Nerves in Animals,
from one end of the Root to the other.

6.. Their Braces, as those of the Succiferous Vessels, are also of various
number: in Jerusalem Artichoke, Cumfry, Scorzonera, more rare; in Borage,
Burnet, more frequent; as by stripping off the Barque of such Roots, Tab. 6.
where it is easily separable, may be seen. And they often vary in the same
Root; so in Borage, Scorzonera, etc. they are more frequent in the Center, and
next the Barque, than in the Intermediate space, Tab. 6.
as by splitting those Roots down the middle does appear. They also vary from
those of the Succiferous Vessels; those being usually more frequent, as in
Jerusalem Artichoke, than these of the Aerial.

7.. Betwixt these Braced Aer-Vessels, and the rest, which make the true Wood,
Tab. 6.
run the Parenchymous Parts above described; as they do betwixt the Succiferous
in the Barque: and so make up two Pieces of Net Work, whereof one is the filling
up of the other.

8.. The Position of both these Kinds of Vessels, is Various. The Succiferous
or Lignous, Tab. 17.
are sometimes posited in diametral lines or portions; as in the Vine, and most
Trees. Sometimes, oppositely to the Aerial, Tab. 8.
as in Beet; each Ring herein being double, and made both of Sap-and
Aer-Vessels.

9.. In Nettle the Position is very peculiar, Tab. 8.
from what it is in the Roots of other Herbs; being curiously mixed; the
Succiferous running cross the Aerial, in several, viz. Five, Six, Seven, or
more Rings. In Bryony the several Conjugations of the Aerial, are distinctly
surrounded with the Succiferous. Tab. 7.
In Patience, the Succiferous are disposed, besides Rays, into many small
Rings, of different Sizes, sprinkled up and down, and not, as in other Roots
having one common Center; within diverse whereof, the Aer-Vessels are included:
especially within those which are drawn, not into Rings, but, as it were, into
little straggling Hedges.

10.. That also of the Aer-Vessels, is Various and Elegant: especially in the
upper part of the Root. In Ammi, Lilium-non-bulbosom, they make a Ring. In
these, a Prick'd-Ring; in Peony, a Ring of Rays; Tab. 7, 8, 9.
in Valerian, a Ring of Pricks and Rays. In others, they make not Rings, but
longer Rays, extended either toward the Center, as in Scorzenera; or meeting
in it, as in Columbine. In the Common Dock, they stand more in single Rays: in
the other Species of Docks, both in Rays, and collateral Conjugations between.

11.. In Beet, they stand in several Rings; and every Ring, made of Rays. In
Cumfry, the Rays and Rings are separate; those stand without, Tab. 8, 9.
these next the Center. In Dandelion, they stand altogether, and make a little
Rope, in the Center it self. In Geranium, and others of that Kindred, they make
a little Thread, in the same place. And in Skirret, they stand in two Threads,
near the Center.

12.. In Celandine, they stand in almost parallel Lines. In Monks-hood, Tab. 8,
9.
of a wedged Figure; divided in the smaller part of the Root, into Three little
Wedges, with their points meeting exactly in the Center. In Cinquefoyle, and
Strawberry, they are also postur'd in three Conjugations, triangularly. In the
young Roots of Oak, they stand neither in Radiated, nor otherwise strait, but
Winding Lines. And in Borage the position, of many of them, is Spiral. As
likewise, sometimes, in Mercury, or Lapathum unctuosum. In Horseradish, Tab.
15.
they stand more confused neither in Rings nor in Rays; yet their several
Conjugations, are radiated: with very many other differences.

13.. The Quantity of these Vessels, as to the space they take up in the Root,
is to be computed Two ways, By their Number, and Size. Their Number may, in
some Roots, and in some measure, be judged of, by the bare Eye; having,
frequently, a whiter surface than the other Parts. As also their Size; the Bore
of these Vessels being greater than that of the Lignous in all Roots;
especially in some. For if you take the Roots of Vine, Fenil, Dandelion,
Plum-tree, Elder, Willow, etc. and lay them by, for some time, to dry; and
then, having cut off a very thin Slice of each, transversely; if you hold up
those Slices before your Eye, so as the Light may be trajected through the said
Vessels, they hereby become visible, as notably different, both in Number and
Size.

14.. But undeceitful and accurate Observation of both their Number, and Size,
must be made by the Microscope; and so they will appear to be much more
various. In Bistort, Skirret, they are very few; in Beet, very many: betwixt
which extremes there are all Degrees; as in Orpine, Venus Looking-Glass,
Scorzonera, Great Celandine, Peony, Borag^, Fenil, etc. may be seen. So their
Size, in some is extreme small, as in Strawberry, Bistort, Valerian; in others
very great, as in Asparagus, Bugloss, Vine. They are also of several Sizes in
one and the same Numerical Root; but in some, are less varied, as in Lilium
(...) bulbosum, Asparagus, Bugloss; in others, more, as in Bryony, Lovage. Tab.
10. to the 17.
Amongst all Roots, they vary by about Twenty Degrees; as by comparing the
Roots of Vine, Thorn-Apple, Bryony, Lovage, Fenil, Wild Carrot, Saxifrage,
Parsley, Peony, Hore-hound, Cinquefoyl, Strawberry, etc. together, may be seen.
Some of those in the Vine, being of the greatest Size; appearing through a good
Glass, at least one Third of an Inch in Diametre: those in Strawberry, and that
Kind, of the smallest; most of them appearing, in the same Glass, no bigger,
than to admit the point of a small Pin, according to the Standard, in Tab. 12.
See also the Figures of so many of them as are drawn.

15.. In some Roots, they are Small, and Few; as in Jerusalem Artichoke; Tab.
11, 14, 15, 17.
in others Small, but Many, as in Horseradish: in Bugloss, they are Great, but
Few; in the Vine, Great and Many. So that the proportion, which those of a
Vine, their Number and Size being taken together, bear to those of Jerusalem
Artichoke, may be, at least, as Fifty, to One. Of the smallest Kinds, as those
of Cinquefoyl, Jerusalem Artichoke, and the like; It is to be noted, That they
are scarce ever visible in the fresh Slices of these Roots; but after they have
layn by a while, at last, by a good Glass, Clear Light, and steady View, are
discernable.

16.. In some Roots, Tab. 13, 15.
the greater of these Vessels stand in or next the Center, as in Taraxacum, or
Dandelion; in others next the circumference, as in Horseradish. Sometimes each
of them is from one end of the Root to the other, of a more equal Size, or more
Cylindrical, as in Marsh-mallow; but usually, they widen, more or less, from
the Top, to the Bottom of the Root, as in Thorn-Apple: about the Top of which,
they are, for the most part, but of the Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth, Magnitude;
some of the Fifth, but none of the Third; but about the Bottom, they are most
of the Third, and Fifth: whence it is manifest, That some of them are, in the
manner of Veins, somewhat Pyramidal. Yet is it observable, That their
ampliation proceeds not toward, but from their Original, as in Nerves.

17.. Of these Vessels Seignior Malpighi has observed; Componuntur (says he)
expositae fistulae Zona tenui and pellucida, velut argentei coloris lamina,
parum lata; quae, spiraliter locata, and extremis lateribus unita, Tubum,
interius and exterius aliquantulum asperum, efficit.

18.. To whose Observation I further add, That the Spiral Zone, or Lamina, as
he calls it, is not ever one Single Piece; but consists of Two or More round
and true Fibers, although standing collaterally together, yet perfectly
distinct. Neither are these Single Fibers themselves flat, like a Zone; but of
a round form, like a most ^ine Thread. According as fewer or more of these
Fibers happen to break off, from their Spiral location, together; the Zone is
narrower, or broader: usually, Narrower in the Trunk, and Broader in the Root.

19.. Of these Fibers I also Observe, That they are not Inosculated side to
side, but are Knit together by other smaller Fibers; those being, as it were,
the Warp, and these the Woof of the Aer-Vessels. Yet I think the several Fibers
are not interwoven just as in a Web; but by a kind of Stitch, as the several
Plates or Bredths of a Floor-Mat. A clear and elegant sight of these Fibers,
and of their Interwestage, by splitting a Vine-Root, or a piece of Oak, may,
with a good Glass in the sides of their Greater Aer-Vessels, be obtained;
having much of the resemblance of Close Needle Work.

20.. The Spiration of the Fibers of these Vessels, may more easily be observed
in the Trunk, than in the Root. And better in younger Plants, than other. And
not so well by Cutting as by Splitting, or by Tearing off some small Piece,
through which they run: their Conformation being, by this means, not spoiled.
Yet this way, the Vessels are seen, chiefly, Unresolved.

21.. But in the Leaves and Tender Stalks of all such Plants, as show, upon
breaking, a kind of Down or Wool; they may be seen Resolved and Drawn out, and
that some times even to the naked Eye, an Inch or two Inches in length. This
Wool being nothing else, but a certain number of Fibers Resolved from their
Spiral position in these Vessels, and Drawn out in Length; and so clustred
together, as so many Threads or little Ropes: appearing thus more or less, in
the Leaves and some other Parts of most Plants; but more remarquably in some,
as in the Vine, Scabious, and others. As also in the Scales of a Squill. In
which last, for example, they are so easily separable, as further to show, what
before was observed; viz. That the Plate or Zone, into which the Aer-Vessels
are usually Resolved, is not one Single Piece, or mere Plate; but made up of
several Round Fibers, all standing and running parallel, and so knit together
by other smaller ones, transversly, in the form of a Zone. For if you break or
cut a Leaf or Shell of a fresh Squill, till you come to the Aer-Vessels, and
having softly drawn them out, for about an Inch or more (to the naked Eye) in
length, you then single out one or two of them from the rest, and roll them, as
they hang at the Shell, eight or nine times round, each Vessel will appear,
through a Glass, to consist of 8, 10, or 12 small Fibers; which, in the
Unresolved Vessel, run parallel; but by this means, are all separated one from
another. See the Figures belonging to the Third and Fourth Books.

22.. The Process of their Spiration, is not, so far as I have observed,
accidental, but constantly the same; scil. In the Root, by South, from West to
East: But in the Trunk, contrarily, by South, from East to West.

23.. The Content of these Vessels, is, as has already been intimated, more
Aerie. The Arguments for which, are, That upon a transverse Cut of the Root, the
Sap ascends not there, where These stand. Being also viewed through a
Microscope, they are never observed to be filled with Liquor. Besides a Root
cut and immersed in Water, till the Water is in some part got into these
Vessels, and then the Root taken out and crushed; the other Parts will yield
Liquor, but These, only Bubbles: which Bubbles are made, by some small quantity
of Liquor mixed with the Aer, before contained in the said Vessels. To which,
other Arguments will arise out of those Things that follow in the Second Part.
As also for this Content, its not being a pure or simple, but Vaporous Aer.
Whether these Vessels may not, in some Vegetables, and at some times, contain
Liquor, is doubtful. See Book 3.
Thus far of the Lignous Part.

CHAP. V. Of the PITH.
WITHIN the Lignous Part lies the Pith. This Part is not common to all Roots,
for some have none, as Ni^o^ian, Srtamonium, and others. Yet many which have
none, or but little, throughout all their lower parts, have one fair enough
about their tops, Tab. 6.
as Mallow, Bourage, Dandelion, and the like. See the Roots. And in many others
there are Parenchymous Parts, of the same substantial nature with the Pith,
distributed betwixt the several Rings of Vessels, and every where visible, Tab.
8.
from the top to the bottom, as in Beet, Fenil, etc.

2.. The Size of the Pith is varied by many Degrees, easily reckoned an
Hundred; in Fenil, Dandelion, Asparagus, but small; in Horseradish, Valerian,
Bistort, great. The Shape hereof, in the lower parts of most Roots, is
Pyramidal; but at the tops, Various, according to the different Distribution of
the Vessels, Tab. 6.
as in Carrot, Hyperbolick, in Parsley, Oval; as appears, in cutting the
Roots lenght-ways.

3.. The Pith, for the most part, especially in Trees, is a Simple Body: but
sometimes, it is, as the Barque, compounded; some certain number of Succiserous
Vessels being mixed herewith; Tab. 6, and 8.
as in Jerusalem Artichoke, Horseradish, etc. upon a traverse cut, by a strict
view, may be discerned. Their Position is sometimes Confused, as in a Carrot;
and sometimes Regular, Tab. 6.
as in Parsley; appearing, by the traverse cut, in Rings, and in cutting by the
length, in Arches. And sometimes the Pith is hollow; as in the Level-Roots of
Bishops-Weed: these Roots being made out of the Stalk,. 13, 14, 15.
as in the First Chapter has been showed, how.

4.. As all the other Parts of the Root, are originated from the Seed; so,
sometimes, is the Pith it self. But sometimes, it has its more immediate
Derivation from the Barque. Hence it is, that many Roots, which have no Pith in
their lower parts, have one at their top, Tab. 4.
as Col^mbine, Lovage, etc. For the Parenchymous Parts of the Barque being, by
degrees, distributed into Diametral Portions, running betwixt those of the
Lignous Body, and at length, meeting and uniting in the Center, they thus
constitute the Pith. In the same manner, at the top of some Roots, the Pith is
either made or augmented, out of the Parenchymous Rings above described; these
being gradually distributed to, and embodied in the Center; as in Fenil, and
some other Roots, their lower and upper parts compared together, may be seen.
Even as in Animals, one Part, as the Dura Matter, is the original of diverse
others.

5.. From hence, it also appears, That the Pith is of the same Substantial
Nature with the Parenchyma of the Barque, and with the Diametral Portions; and
that therefore they are all one body, differing in no Essential Property, but
only in their Shape and Place. The same is also evident from the Continuity of
the Pith with the Diametral Portions, as of These, with the said Parenchyma.
And from their Contexture, which, by a Microscope, appears to be of one and
the same general kind, in all Plants, both in the Parenchyma of the Barque, in
the Insertment or Diametral Portions, and in the Pith, all being made up of
Bladders.

6. The Bladders of the Pith, are of very different Sizes; seldom less, Tab. 9,
and 15.
than in the Barque, as in Asparagus; usually much bigger, as in Horseradish.
They may be well reckoned to about fifteen or twenty degrees; those in
Jerusalem Artichoke, of the largest; in Valerian, Horseradish, of the meaner;
in Bistort, Peony, of the smallest. Their Position is rarely varied, as it is
oftentimes, in the Barque; but more uniform, and in the transverse Cut, equally
respective to all parrs of the Root: yet being piled evenly, one over another,
in the long cut, they seem to run, in Direct Trains, by the length of the Root.
Their Shape also is, usually more orbicular; but sometimes, somewhat angular,
Tab. 11.
in the larger kinds, as in Jerusalem Artichoke.

7.. THUS FAR the Contexture of the Pith is well discoverable in the Root. In
the Trunk, farther, and more easily. Whereof therefore, in the next Book, I
shall give a more particular Description and Draught. Yet since I am speaking
of it, I shall not wholly omit here to observe, That the Sides, by which the
aforesaid Bladders of the Pith are circumscribed, are not mere Paper-Skins, or
rude Membranes; but so many several Ranks or Piles of exceeding small Fibrous
Threads; lying, for the most part, evenly one over another, from the bottom to
the top of every Bladder; and running cross, as the Threads in the Weavers Warp,
from one Bladder to another. Which is to say, That the Pith is nothing else but
a Rete mirabile, or an Infinite Number of Fibers exquisitely small, and
admirably Complicated together: as by cutting the Pith with a Razor, and so
viewing it with a good Glass, may be seen. See the Figures belonging to the
Third Book.

8.. All Plants exhibit this Spectable, not alike distincty; those best, with
the largest Bladders. Nor the same Pith, in any condition; but best, when dry:
Because then, the Sap being voided, the spaces betwixt the Fibrous Threads, and
so the Threads themselves, are more distinctly discernable. Yet is it not to be
dried, after Cutting; Because its several parts, will thereupon coincide and
become deformed. But to be chosen, while the Plant is yet growing; at which
time, it may be often found dry, yet undeformed; as in the Trunks of Common
Thistle, Jerusalem Artichoke, etc.

9.. Neither are these Threads, so far as I can observe, Single Fibires; but
usually, consist of several together. Nor are they simply Collateral, but by
the weftage of other Fibers, in their natural Estate, knit together; much after
the same manner as the Spiral Fibers of the Aer-Vessels. This Connection I have
no where so well seen, as in the White Bottoms of the Bladders of a Bulrush,
being cut traverse; wherein they have the appearance, of very Fine and close
Needle Work.

10.. The Fibers by which the said Threads are knit together, I think are all
Single: and are seldom and scarcely visible, except by obliquely Tearing the
Pith; by which means, they will appear through the Glass, broken off,
sometimes, a quarter or half an Inch, or an Inch in Length; and as small as one
Single Thread of a Spiders Webb. In a Bulrush, they are sometimes discernable in
cutting by the Length. These Fibers, and the Threads, they knit together, for
the most part, are so pellucid, and closely situate, that they frequently seem
to make One entire Body, as a picce of Ice or a film of Water it self: or even
as Animal Skins sometimes show, which yet are known to be Fibrous.

11.. The Situation of these Threads, is contrary to that of the Vessels, as
those by the Length, so these, chiefly, by the Breadth of the Root, or
horizontally, from one edge of the Pith to the other. They are continued
circularly; whereby, as often as they keep within the compass of the several
Bladders, the said Bladders are Round: But where they wind out of one Bladder,
into another, they mutually Intersect a Chord of their several Circles; by
which means, the Bladders become Angular.

12.. The Contexture, likewise, both of the Parenchymous Part of the Barque,
and of the Diametral Portions inserted betwixt the Lignous; is the same with
this of the Pith, now described; that is, Fibrous. Whence we understand, How
the several Braces and Threads of the Vessels are made: For the Vessels running
by the length of the Root, as the Warp; by the Parenchymous Fibers running
cross or horizontally, as the Woof: they are thus knit and as it were stitched
up together. Yet their weftage seems not to be simple, as in Cloth; but that
many of the Parenchymous Fibers are wraped round about each Vessel; and, in the
same manner, are continued from one Vessel to another; thereby knitting them
altogether, more closely, into one Tubulary Thread; and those Threads, again,
into one Brace: much after the manner of the Needle work called Back-Stitch or
that used in Quilting of Balls. Some obscure sight hereof, may be taken in a
Thread of Cambrick, through a Microscope. But it is most visible, in the Leaves
and Flowers of some Plants. The Delineation of these Things I shall therefore
omit, till we come hereafter to speak of the other Parts.

13.. From what has been said, it may be conjectured; That the Aer Vessels
successively appearing in the Barque, are formed, not out of any Fluid Matter,
as are the original ones: But of the Parenchymous Fibers; sc. by changing them
from a Spherical to a Tubulary Form.

14.. From the precedents, it is also manifest, That all the Parenchymous Parts
of a Root, are Fibrous.

15.. And lastly, That the whole Body of a Root, consists of Vessels and
Fibers. And, That these Fibers themselves, are Tubulous, or so many more
Vessels, is most probable: There only wants a greater perfection of
Microscopes to determine.

16.. The Contents of the Pith are, sometimes Liquor, and sometimes a
Vaporous-Aer. The Liquor is always Diaphanous, as that of the Parenchymous Part
of the Barque; and in nature, not much differing from it. The Aer is sometimes
less, and sometimes more Vaporous, than that of the Barque. By this Aer I mean,
that which is contained in the Bladders. Within the Concaves of the Fibers
which compose the Bladders, I suppose, there is another different Sort of Aer.
So that as in the Bladders is contained a more Aqueous; and in the Vessels, a
more Essential Liquor: So sometimes, in the same Bladders, is contained a more
Vaporous; and in the Fibers, a more Simple and Essential Aer.

An Account of the VEGETATION OF ROOTS Grounded chiefly upon the foregoing
ANATOMY. PART II.
TO Philosophize, Theology the Beginning and End of Philosophy.
is, To render the Causes and Ends of Things. No man, therefore, that denies
God can do this, Truly. For the taking away of the first Cause, makes all
things Contingent. Now, of that which is Contingent, although there may be an
Event; yet there can be no Reason or End: so that Men should then study, That,
which is not. So the Causes of Things, if they are Contingent, they cannot be
Constant. For that which is the Cause of This, now; if it be so Contingently,
it may not be the Cause hereafter: and no Physical Proposition, grounded upon
the Constancy and Certainty of Things, could have any foundation. He,
therefore, that philosophiseth, and denies God, plays a childish Game.

2.. Wherefore Nature, and the Causes and Reasons of Things, duly contemplated,
naturally lead us unto God; and is one way of securing our Veneration of Him:
giving us, not only a general Demonstration of his Being; but a particular one,
of most of the several Qualifications thereof. For all Goodness, Righteousness,
Proportion, Order, Truth, or whatever else is Excellent and Amiable in the
Creatures; it is the Demonstration of the like in God. For it is impossible,
that God should ever make any thing, not like Himself, in some degree or other.
These Things, and the very Notions which we have of them, are Conceptions
issuing from the Womb of the Divine Nature.

3.. By the same means, we have a greater assurance of the Excellency of his
Sacred Word. That He, who has Done all things so transcendently well; must
needs Speak as well, as he has Done. That He, who in so admirable a manner,
has made Man; cannot but know best, What his true Principles and Faculties
are; and what Actions are most agreeable thereunto: and, that having adorned
him with such Beauteous and Lovely ones; it is impossible, He should ever put
him upon the Exercise of those Faculties, in any way Deformed and Unlovely.
That He should do all things, so well Himself; and yet require his Creatures,
to do otherwise, is unconceivable.

4.. And as we may come, hereby, to rectify our Apprehension of His Laws; so
also, of His Mysteries. For there are many Things, of the Manner of whose
Existence, we have no certain Knowledge. Yet, of their Existence, we are as
sure, as our Senses can make us. But, we may as well deny, what God has Made,
To be; as, what he has Spoken, To be true, because we understand not how. And
the knowledge of Things being gradually attained, we have occasion to reflect,
That some Things, we can now well conceive, which we once thought
unintelligible. I know, therefore, what I understand not; but, I know not, what
is unintelligible: what I know not now, I may hereafter; or if not I, another;
or if no Man, or other Creature, it is sufficient, That God fully understands
Himself. It is not, therefore, the Knowledge of Nature, but they are the wanton
phansies of Men's minds, that dispose them, either to Forget God, or to Think
unduly of Him.

5.. Nor have we reason to fear going too far, in the Study of Nature; more,
than the entering into it: Because, the higher we rise in the true Knowledge and
due Contemplation of This; the nearer we come to the Divine Author hereof. Or
to think, that there is any Contradiction, when Philosophy teaches that to be
done by Nature; which Religion, and the Sacred Scriptures, teach us to be done
by God: no more, than to say, That the Balance of a Watch is moved by the next
Wheel; is to deny that Wheel, and the rest, to be moved by the Spring; and that
both the Spring, and all the other Parts, are caused to move together by the
Maker of them. So God may be truly the Cause of This Effect, although a
Thousand other Causes should be supposed to intervene: For all Nature is as one
Great Engine, made by, and held in His Hand. And as it is the Watch-makers Art,
that the Hand moves regularly, fromhour to hour, although he put not his Finger
still to it: So is it the Demonstration of Divine Wisdom, that the Parts of
Nature are so harmoniously contrived and set together; as to conspire to all
kind of Natural Motions and Effects, without the Extraordinary and Immediate
Influence of the Author of it.

6.. Therefore, as the Original Being of all Things, is the most proper
Demonstration of Gods Power: So the successive Generations, and Operations of
Things are the most proper Demonstration of his Wisdom. For if we should
suppose, that God did now make, or do any (...), by any Thing; then, no Effect
would be produced by a Natural Cause: and consequently, He would still be upon
the Work of Creation: which yet Sacred Scripture assures us, He rests from.
And we might exspect the Formation of a Child, in an Egg, as well as in a Womb;
or of a Chicken, out of a Stone, as an Egg: And all Sorts of Animals, as well
as Plants, might propagate their Species, without Coition: and the like. For
Infinite Power, needs not make any difference in the Things it undertakes to
manage. But in that, these Things are not only made, but so made, that is,
according to such certain Natural Laws, as to produce their Natural Effects;
here is the Sensible and Illustrious Evidence of his Wisdom. Wherefore as the
Wisdom of Government, is not seen, by the King his interposing Himself in every
Case; but in the contrivance of the Laws, and Constitution of Ministers in such
sort, that it shall be as effectually determined, as if he did so indeed: So
the more complicated and vastly Numerous, we allow the Natural Causes of Things
to be; the more duly we conceive of that Wisdom, which thus disposes of them
all, to their several Effects: All Things being thus, as Ministers in the Hands
of God, conspiring together a Thousand Ways, toward a Thousand Effects and
Ends, at one time; and that with the same certainty, as if he did prepose to
each, the same Omnipotent Fiat, which he used at the Creation of the World.

7.. THIS Universal Monarchy, as it is eminently Visible in all other
Particular Oeconomies; The Divine Wisdom seen in the Growth of Plants; if we
observe,
so is it, no less, in that of Vegetables. Infinite Occurrences, and secret
Intrigues, it is made up of; which we cannot skill, but by the help of manifold
Means; and those, in the foregoing Idea, have been lately proposed. Wherein,
although some Experiments have been briefly touched: yet that which I have
hitherto chiefly prosecuted, has been the Anatomical Part; and that not
thoroughly neither. Notwithstanding, so far as Observations already made will
conduct us, I shall endeavor to go. And if, for the better clearing of the
way, I have intermixed some Conjectures: I think they are not merely such, but
for which I have laid down some Grounds, and of which, the Series also of the
following Discourse, may be some further proof.

8.. LET US say then, that the Root of a Plant being lodged in some Soil,
First, How the Ground is prepared.
for its more convenient growth; it is necessary the Soil should be duly
prepared for it. The Rain, therefore, falling and soaking into the Soil,
somewhat diluteth the Dissoluble Principles therein contained; and renders them
more easily communicable to the Root: Being as a Menstruum, which extracteth
those Principles, from the other greater and useless part of the Soil.

9.. And the warm Sun, joined with the diluting Rain, by both, as it were a
Digestion of the Soil, or a gentile Fermentation amongst its several Parts,
will follow: whereby the Dissoluble Parts therein, will rot and mellow: that
is, those Principles which as yet remained more ^ixed, will now be further
resolved and unlocked, and more copiously and equally spread themselves through
the Body of the Soil.

10.. These Principles, being with the growth of Plants continually exhausted,
and needing a repair; the successions, therefore, of Wet, Wind, and other
Weather, beat down and rot the Leaves and other Parts of Plants. Whereby these
(as Weeds which are wont to be buried under ground) become a natural M^nure,
and Re-impregnate the Soil: Being thus, in part, out of their own Resolved
Principles, annually Compounded again.

11.. Many of these Principles, upon their Resolution, being by the Sun more
attenuated and volatilized; continually ascend into the Aer, and are mixed
therewith. Where, although they lose not their Vegatable Nature, yet being
amongst other purer Principles; themselves also, depositing their Earthy
feculencies, become more subtle, simple and Essential Bodies.

12.. And the Aer being of an Elastick or Springy Nature, pressing, more or
less, upon all Bodies; it thereby forces and insinuates it self into the
Soil, through all its permeable Pores. Upon its own entrance, it carries also
many of the said Vegetable and Essential Principles along with it; which,
together with the rest, are spread all over the Body of the Soil. By which
means, though a less Vehement, yet more Subtle Fermentation, and with the least
advantage of warmth, continuable, will be effected.

13.. The Principles being thus farther resolved and subtilized, would
presently exhale away, if the Rain, again, did not prevent. Which, therefore,
falling upon and soaking through the Ground, is as a fresh Menstruum, saturate
or impregnate with many of them. And as it still sinketh lower, it carries them
along with it self, from the Superficial, to the Deeper parts of the Ground:
thus, not only maturing those parts also, which, otherwise, would be more lean
and cold; but therein likewise, laying up and securing a Store, more gradually
and thriftily to be bestowed upon the Upper parts again, as they need.

14.. And Autumn having laid up the Store, Winter following thereupon, does, as
it were, lock the doors upon it. In which time, some warmer Intervals, serve
further and gradually to mature the stored Principles, without hazard of their
being Exhaled. And the Spring returning, sets the doors open again, with warmer
and more constant Sun, with gentle and frequent Rain, fully resolves the said
Principles; and so furnishes a plentiful Diet, for all kinds of Vegetables:
being a Composition of Water chiefly, wherein are resolved, some portions of
Earth, Salt, Acid, Oil, Spirit, and Aer; or other Bodies of Affinity herewith.

15.. THE ROOT standing in the Ground thus prepared, Then, How the Sap is
imbibed, and distributed to the several Parts.
and being always surrounded with a Barque, which consists chiefly of a
Parenchymous and Spongy Body; P. 1. c. 3.. 3.
it will thus, as Sponges do, naturally suck up the watery parts of the Soil
impregnate with the said Principles. Which Principles notwithstanding, being in
proportion with the watery parts, but few, and also more Essential;. 11, 12
therefore in this Parenchymous Part, are they never much discovered, either by
Color, Taste, or Smell. As it is probable, that some distilled Waters, which
discover nothing, to Sense, of the Plants from which they are distilled, may
yet, in part, retain their Faculties. And it is known, that many Bodies; as
Crocus Metallorum, convey many of their parts into the Menstruum, without any
sensible alteration thereof. So Frost and Snow have neither Taste nor Smell;
yet from their Figures, it is evident, that there are diverse kinds of Saline
Principles incorporated with them; or at least, such Principles as are common
to them and diverse kinds of Salts.

16.. The entrance of this Impregnate Water of Sap is not without difference,
but by the Regulation of the intervening Skin; being thereby strained and
rendered more pure: the Skin, according to the thickness P. 1. c. 2.. 1.
or closeness thereof, becoming sometimes only as a brown paper, sometimes as a
Cotton, and sometimes as a Bag of Leather to the transient Sap, as the nature
of it does require. By which it is also moderated, lest the Barque, being
spongy, should suck it up too fast, and so the Root should be, as it were,
surcharged by a Plethora. And diverse of the Succiferous Vessels being mixed
herewith P. 1. c. 2.. 4.
and lying next the Soil, usually more or less mortified, and so their
Principles somewhat resolved; the Sap is hereby better specified, and further
tinctured; such parts of the Sap best entering, as are most agreeable to those
Principles; which the Sap also carries off, in some part, as it passes into
the Barque.

17.. The Sap thus strained, though it be pure, and consists of Essential
parts; yet being compounded of heterogeneous ones; and received into the
Parenchyma of the Barque a laxe and spongy Body, they will now easily and
mildly ferment. Whereby they will be yet further prepared, and so more easily
in^inuate themselves into all the Bladders of the said Parenchyma; swelling and
dilating it as far as the Continuity of its parts will bear. Whereupon, partly
from the continued entrance of fresh Sap, and partly by a Motion or Pressure of
Restitution in the swollen and Tensed Bladders of the Parenchyma, the Sap is
forced thence into the other parts of the Root.

18.. And because the Parenchyma is in no place openly and Visibly Pervious,
but is every where composed of an Infinite Number of small Bladders P. 1. c.
3,. 4.
; the Sap, therefore, is not only fermented therein, and fitted for Separation;
but, as it passes through it, is every part of it, strained an Hundred times
over, from Bladder to Bladder.

19.. The Sap thus fermented, and strained, is distributed to the other
Organical Parts, according as the several Principles of This, are agreeable to
those whereof the said Organical Parts consist. As the Sap therefore passes
from Bladder to Bladder, such Principles as are agreeable to those of the
Fibers of the said Bladders, will adhere to, and insinuate themselves into the
Body of the Fibers; sc. Watery chiefly, next Acid, then spirituous, Earthy,
Aerie, and Oleus. Idea,. 50, 52.


20.. And the Sap by its continual appulse and percolation, as it leaves some
parts upon the said Fibers; so as it is squeezed betwixt them from Bladder to
Bladder, it licks and carries off some others from them, in some union together
with it; and so is Impregnate herewith: as Water, by passing through a Mineral
Vein, becomes tinctured with that Mineral.

21.. The Sap thus Impregnate with some united Principles of the Parenchymous
Fibers, passes on to the Lignous Vessels, whereinto their correspondent
Principles also enter; sc. Watery, Saline, Oleous and Earthy chiefly. Idea,. 51,
52.
And because the Parenchymous Principles mixed with them, are in some degree
united, and so more ready to fix; some of these therefore will likewise enter
into the said Vessels. Whereupon, the Alkalioleosum of the one, and the Acidum
spirituosum of the other, meeting together; These, with the other Principles,
all concentre, and of diverse fluids, become one fixed Body, and are gradually
agglutinated to the Vessels; that is, The Vessels are now nourished.

22.. The supply of the Sap still continued, the Principles thereof will not
only enter into the Body of these Parts, but also their Concaves. And the
Parenchymous Fibers being wrapped about the Vessels, P. 1. c. 5.. 12.
as often as the said Fibers are more turgid with their own contained Fluid,
they will thereby be somewhat shortened, or contract in length; and so must
needs bind upon the Vessels, and thereby, as it were, squeeze some part of the
Fluid, contained both within themselves and the Vessels, back again into the
Bladders.

23.. And the Sap herein, being thus tinctured with some of the united
Principles of the Vessels, diverse of them will now also insinuate themselves
into the Parenchymous Fibers, and be incorporated with them: Whereby, the said
Fibers, which before were only relaxed and dilated, are now also nourished, and
not till now. Some portion of the united Principles both of the Parenchymous
and Lignous Parts, being necessary to the true nutrition of Each: As the
Confusion and joint assistance of both the Arterious and Nervous Fluids, is to
the nourishment or coagulation of the Parts in Animals.

24.. Some portion of the Sap thus doubly tinctured, is at the same time
transmitted to, and enters the Body of the Aer-Vessels; consisting chiefly of
Water, Aer, and Acid; and, in like manner, as in the other Parts is herein
agglutinated. And the appulse and pressure of the Sap still continued, some
portion hereof is also trajected into the Concaves of the said Vessels;
existing therein as a most Compounded Fluid; partaking, more or less, both of
the Principles and Tinctures of the other Organical Parts, and of the
Aer-Vessels themselves; being as it were, a Mixed Resolution from them all.

25.. And the Parenchymous Fibers being wrapped about These, as about the other
Vessels, P. 1. c. 5.. 12.
and, in like manner, binding upon them; they thus frequently squeeze part of
the said contained Fluid out again: As necessary, though not to the immediate
Nourishment of the Parts, yet the due Qualification of the Sap; being a
Constant Aerial Ferment, successively stored up within the Aer-Vessels, and
thence transfused to the Sap, in the other Organical Parts.

26.. And that there may be a better Transition of the Sap thus tinctured, to
the several Organical Parts; therefore, none of them are close set and compact
within themselves, severally: For so, they would be inaccessible to the Sap,
and their inward Portions, wanting a due supply of Aliment, would be starved.
But the Vessels, both of Aer and Sap, being every where divided into Braced
Portions, and other Parenchymous Portions, filling up the spaces every where
betwixt them P. 1. c. 3.. 13. etc. 4.. 4, 5, 7.
; there is therefore a free and copious communication of the Sap, (and so of
all the Tinctures successively transfused into it) from Part to Part, and to
every Portion of every Part: The Parenchymous Portions, running betwixt the
Braces, as the smaller Vessels do throughout the Viscera, in Animals. Whereby,
none of them want that Matter, which is necessary either for their Nutrition,
or for the good Estate of their Contents, or for the due period of their Growth.

27.. For the better Tempering of the several parts of the Sap, serve the
Diametral Portions of the Parenchymous Body whichrun sometimes directly through
the Barque, as in Lovage, Parsley, etc. is described and figured P. 1. c. 3..
7, 8.
Which being, all or most of them, continued be twixt both the Succiserous and
the Aer-Vessels, from the Circumference to the Center; they hereby carry off a
more Copious and Aerial Ferment from the One, and communicate it unto the
Other. For as the Sap enters the Barque, the more liquid part, still passes
into the succulent Portions thereof; the more Aerie, is separated into those
White and Dryer Diametral ones; and in its passage betwixt the Portions of the
Aer-Vessels, is all along communicated to them. Yet is it not a pure or simple
Aer, but such as carries a Tincture with it, from the Succiferous Vessels. And
therefore it is observable, That when the Diametral Portions are more distant,
the Sap-Vessels run not in a Straight Line betwixt them, but are Reciprocally
so inclined, as to touch upon them; as in Lovage is visible: Thereby
communicating their Tincture to the Aer, as it passes by them, through the
said Diametral Portions.

28.. By the continual appulse of fresh Sap, some, both of the aerie, and of all
the other parts thereof are transmitted into the Pith; where, finding more
room, it will yet more kindly be digested. Especially having the advantage
herein of some degree of Warmth; being herein remoter from the Soil, and, as it
were, Tunn'd up within the Wood, or the Mass of surrounding Vessels. So that
the Pith, is a Repository of better Aliment gradually supplied to those
Succiferous Vessels, which are frequently scattered up and down therein, and
which ascend into the Trunk. P. 1. c. 5.. 3.
But where no succiferous Vessels are mixed, herewith, it usually becomes
Dryer, and is replenished with a more Aerial and Warmer Sap; whereby the growth
of the Caulis is promoted, as by an Hot Bed set just under it. And in many
Plants with diverse knobbed Roots, the younger are more succulent, serving
chiefly to feed the Stalk: the Elder are spongy and filled with Aer, for the
fermenting of the Sap, and more early growth of the Stalk: as in little
Celandine, Dogstones and all of that Kindred. And thus all the Parts have a fit
Aliment provided for their Nourishment

29.. IN THIS Nourishment, How the several Parts are Nourished and Formed.
the Principles of the Sap are, as is said, concentred and locked up one within
another:. 21.
Whence it is, that the Organical Parts, being cleansed of their Contents, have
none of them any Taste or Smell, as in the Piths of Plants, Paper and Linen
Cloth is evident. Idea,. 49, 51.
Because till by Digestion, violent Destillation, or some other way, they are
resolved, they cannot act upon the Organs of those Senses. For the same reason,
they are never tinctured, excepting by their Contents: and although, to the
bare Eye, they frequently show White, yet viewed through a Microscope, they all
appear transparent. In like manner, as the Serum of Blood, Whites of Eggs,
Tendons, Hairs and Horns themselves are transparent, and without much Smell or
Taste, their Principles being, in all of them, more or less concentred: But
when ever these Principles, are forcibly resolved, they are ever variously
invested with all those Qualities.

30.. And as from the Concentration of the Principles, in every Organical Part,
the said Parts do thus far, all agree: So, from the Predominion of the
Principles of each Part, the rest are controuled, not only to a Concentration,
but an Assimilation also; whereby, the Specific Differences, of the several
Organical Parts, are preserved. Hence the succiferous Vessels are always Tough
and very Pliable; for so are all Barques, wherein these Vessels abound; so is a
Handful of Flax, which is nothing else but a heap of the succiferous Vessels in
the Barque of that Plant. For besides Water, and Earth, an Alkaline Salt and
Oil are, as is said, the predominant Principles of these Vessels.. 21.
It is then the Oil, chiefly, by which these Vessels are Tough: for being of a
tenacious Nature, by taking hold of other Principles, it marries them together;
and the Alkaline Salt and Earth, concentred with it, adds to it more
Strength. Hence the Caput Mortuum of most Bodies, especially those that abound
with Oil and a Sal Alkali, is brittle and friable; those Principles, which were
the Ligaments of the rest, being forced away from them. From the same Cause,
the Parenchymous Parts of a Root, even in their Natural State, are brittle and
friable; sc. Because their Earthy, and especially Oleous and Saline Principles
are, as is said,. 19.
so very few. Therefore all Piths and more simple Parenchyma's, break short, so
Corn, and the Roots of Potato's, and diverse other Plants, being dried, will
easily be rubbed to Meal; and many Apples, after Frosts, eat mealy; the
Parenchymous Parts of all which, are not only by Analogy, but in Substance or
Essence, the self same Body. Lib. 1. c. 7.. 14.


31.. And as the Consistence of the several Organical Parts, is dependent on
their Principles; so are their Figures. And first, the Succiferous Vessels,
from their Alkaline Salt, P. 2.. 21.
grow in Length. For by that Dimension, chiefly, This Salt always shoots: And
being a less moveable Principle than the rest, and so apt more speedily to fix
or shoot: It thus overrules them to its own Figure. And even as the Shape of a
Button depends on the Mould, the Silk and other Materials wrought upon it,
being always conformable thereunto: so here; the Salt is, as it were, the
Mould; about which, the other more passive Principles gathering themselves,
they all consort and fashion to it. Hence also the same Sap-Vessels are not
pyramidal, as the Veins of Animals; but of an equal bore, from end to end; the
shootings of the said Salt, being also figured more agreeably to that
Dimension. And as by the Saline Principle, these Vessels are Long; so by the
Oleous, Ib.
they are every where Round, or properly Cylindrical; without some joint
Efficacy of which Principle, the said Vessels would be Flat, or some way Edged
and Angular, as all saline shoots, of themselves, are; as those of Alum,
Vitriol, Sal Ammoniac, Sea Salt, Nitre, etc. And because the Spirituous and
more Fluid part of the Principles, is least of all apt to fix; while therefore,
the other parts fix round about, This will remain moveable in the Center; from
whence every Vessel is formed, not into a solid, but hollow Cylinder; that is,
becomes a Tube.

32.. The Lactiferous Vessels are tubulary, as the Lymphaeducts, but of a
somewhat wider Concave or Bore. For being their Principles are less Earthy and
Oleous, and also more loosely Concentred; as from their easy corruption or
Resolution by the Aer, it appears they are: they are therefore more tender, and
so more easily dilative, and yielding to the said Spirituous part in the
Center. And by this means, obtaining a wider Bore, they are more adapted to the
free motion of the Milky Content: which being an Oleous and Thicker Liquor,
than that in the Lympheducts; and having no advantage of pulsation, as the
Blood has in Animals; might sometimes be apt to stagnate, if the Vessels,
through which it moves, were not somewhat wider.

33.. As the Saline Principle is the Mould of the Succiferous, so is the Aerial
of the Aer-Vessels. P. 1. c. 4.. 23. and P. 2.. 24.
Now the Particles of Aer strictly so called, at least of that part of it
concerned in the Generation of the Aer-Vessels, I suppose, are crooked: and
that by composition of many of those crooked ones together, some of them become
Spiral, or of some other winding Figure: and that thereupon depends the
Elastick Property of the Aer, or its being capable of Rarefaction and
Condensation by force. Wherefore, the said crooked Particles of the Aer, first
shooting and setting together, as the Mould, the other Principle cling and fix
conformably round about them. So that, as by force of the Saline Principles,
the rest of them are made to shoot out in Long continued Fibers; so by force of
the Aerial, those Fibers are still disposed into Spiral Lines, thus making up
the Aer-Vessels. And according as there are fewer of these Aerial Particles, in
proportion to the Saline, the Concave of the Aer-Vessels is variously wider, or
the Fibers continue their shooting by wider Rings; as those that come nearer to
a right Line, and so are more complient to the Figure and shooting of the
Saline parts. And whereas the Lympheducts, shooting out only in length, are
never sensibly amplified beyond their original size: These, on the contrary,
always, more or less, enlarge their Diameter; because their Fibers, being
disposed into Spiral Lines, must needs therefore, as they continue their
growth, be still dilated into greater and greater Rings. And being at the
bottom of the Root more remote from the Aer, and so having somewhat fewer
Particles purely Aerial, there ingredient to them, then at the top; they fall
more under the government of the Saline, and so come nearer to a right Line,
that is into greater Circles; and so the Aer-Vessels, made up of those Circles,
are there generally wider. P. 1. c. 4.. 16.


34.. By mediation of their Principles, the Parenchymous Parts likewise of a
Root have their proper Contexture. For from their Acid Salt they are Fibrous;
from their Oil, the Fibers are Round, and in all parts even within themselves;
and from their Spirit, it is most probable, that they are also hollow. But
because the Spirit is, here, more copious than the Aer; and the Saline
Principle an Acid,. 19.
and so, more under the government of the Spirit, than is an Alkali; therefore
are not the said Fibers continued in straight Lines, as the Sap-Vessels; or by
one uniform motion, into spiral lines, as the Fibers in the Aerial; but
winding, in a circular manner, to and fro a thousand ways, agreeable to the
like motions of the Spirit, that most active, and here most predominant
Principle. And the Spirituous Parts being, as is said, here more copious and
redundant, they will not only suffice to fill up the Concaves of the Fibers,
but will also gather together into innumerable little spaces, without them:
whence the Fibers cannot wind close together, as Thread, in a Bottom of Yarn;
but are forced to keep at some distance, one parcel from another, and so are
disposed, as Bread is in baking, into Bladders. P. 1. c. 3.. 4.


35.. And the under Fibers being set first, as the Warp, the spirituous parts
next adjacent, will incline also to fix, and so govern an over work of Fibers,
wrapping, as the Woof, in still smaller Circles round the other: whereby they
are all knit together. P. 1. c. 5.. 9.
For the same reason, the Lympheducts, being first formed, the Parenchymous
Fibers set and wrap about These also. P. 1. c. 5.. 12.
And the Aer-Vessels being formed in the Center, the succiferous run along
those likewise (as volatile Salts shoot along the sides of a Glass, or Frost
upon a Window) and so are, as it were, Incrustate about them in a Ring.

36.. SOME OF THE more Aetherial and Subtle parts of the Aer, How the several
Parts come to be Situate or Disposed.
as they stream through the Root, it should seem, by a certain Magnitisme, do
gradually dispose the Aer-Vessels, where there are any store of them, into
Rays. This Attraction (as I take leave to call it) or Magnetic power betwixt
the Aer and these Vessels, may be argued, From the nature of the Principles
common to them both: From the Electral nature of diverse other Bodies; the
Lodestone being not the only one which is attractive: And from other Effects,
both before Lib. 1. c. 2.. 25. and c. 4. Append.. 2, 3.
and hereafter mentioned. Wherefore in the inferior parts of the Root, they
are less Regular; P. 1. c. 4.. 10.
because more remote from the Aer. And in the upper parts of many Roots, as
Cumsery, Borage, Parsnep, where those that are next the Center are confused, or
differently disposed; Tab. 7, 8, 9.
those next the Barque, and so nearer the Aer, are postured more Regularly, and
usually into Rays. For the same reason it may be; that even the Sap-Vessels in
the Barque, as often as the Aer Vessels are more numerous, are usually disposed
into Rays, as following the direction of the Aer-Vessels. And that the
Parenchyma of the Barque, is disposed into Diametral Portions: and that where
the Aer Vessels are fewer or smaller, these Portions are likewise smaller or
none; as in Chervil, Asparagus, Dandelion, Orpine, Bistort, Horseradish,
Potato's, etc. Tab. 7, 8, 9, etc.


37.. The said Aetherial parts of the Aer, have a Power over the Aer-Vessels
not only thus to Dispose them; but also to Solicit and spread them abroad
from the Center toward the Circumference of the Root. By which means, those
Roots which have no Pith in their lower parts, obtain one in their upper. P. 1.
c. 5.. 1.
And the same Pith, which in the lower part, is ratably, small, in the upper,
is more or less enlarged. Ib.. 4.


38.. The Spreading of these Vessels is varied, not only according to the Force
the Aer has upon them, but also their own greater or less Aptitude to yield
thereto. As often therefore, as they are Slenderer, they will also be more
Pliable and recessive from the Center, toward the Circumference. Hence, in
such Roots where they are small, Tab. 2, and 6.
they stand more distant; as in Turnep, Jerusalem Artichoke, Potato's, and
others; and so their Braces are fewer: and in the same Root, where they are
smaller, their distance is greater. Besides, in these smaller Aer-Vessels, the
Rings being less, and the Spiral Fibers whereof they are made, continuing to
shoot; the said Rings therefore, must needs be so many more, as they are
smaller; and so take up more space by the length of the Root; and so, not being
capable of being crowded in a right line, every Vessel will be forced to recede
to a crooked or bowed one.

39.. The Sap Vessels, being by the Parenchymous Fibers knit to these, will
likewise comply with Their motion, and spread abroad with them. Yet being still
smaller P. 1. c. 3.. 16.
and more pliable than the Aer-Vessels, and so more yielding to the
intercurrent Fibers of the Parenchyma, their braced Threads will, sometimes, be
much more divaricated, than those of the Aer-Vessels; Tab. 6.
as in Jerusalem Artichoke. And because the Succiferous Vessels, although they
are joined to the Aerial by the Parenchymous Fibers, P. 1. c. 5.. 12.
yet are not continuous with them; neither fall under the like Attractive Power
of the Aer, as the Aerial do; the Aerial therefore, upon their spreading, do
not always carry all the Succiferous along with them; but often, if not always,
leave many of them behind them sprinkled up and down the Pith; Tab. 6.
as in Parsley, Carrot, Jerusalem Artichoke, Turnep, etc. may be seen.

40.. The spreading of the Aer-Vessels still continued, several of them, at
length, break forth beyond the circumference of the Root; and so are
distributed, either in the lower parts, into Branches and Strings; or at the
top, into Leaves. And lest they should all spread themselves into Leaves, and
none be left for the Caulis; as where they are very small, or the Sap-Vessels
to bound them, are but few, they might; therefore diverse of them are,
oftentimes, more frequently braced in the Center; Tab. 6.
for which reason, they cannot so easily separate and spread themselves from
thence, but run more inwardly up into the Caulis, as in Borage.

41.. FROM THE various Sizes, How the whole Root is differently sized and
shaped*
Proportions, and Dispositions of the Parts, Roots are variously sized, shaped,
moved and aged. Those which, by their Annual Growth, are large; have fewer,
both Aerial, and Sap-Vessels, and a more copious Parenchyma. So that the
Aer-Vessels, or rather, the Aerie Ferment contained in them, volatilizing only a
smaller portion of the Sap; the said Sap is less capable of advancement into
the Trunk; and so must needs remain and fix more copiously in the Root, which
is thereby more augmented. And where the Sap-Vessels alone, are but few, the
Root is yet, ratably, somewhat large: but where they are numerous, it is never
so, as to its Annual Growth, in any proportion to their Number: Because their
Tincture, which is Alkaline, will go farther in setting the Parenchymous Parts:
than the Tincture of These, which is Acidulate, will go, in setting Them. P.
2.. 31.


42.. When the Aer-Vessels are more pliable and sequent to the Attraction of
the Aer, and so spread themselves, and the Succiferous together with them, more
abroad; in the manner as has been said; the Root also will grow more in
Breadth; the nutrition of the Parenchymous Parts, Tab. 2, and 7.
to which the Vessels are adjacent, being thus, by the same dimension, Tab. 7,
and 8.
more augmented; as in Turnep, Jerusalem Artichoke, etc. But where these are
not spread abroad, the Root is but slender; as in Asparagus, Dandelion, etc.

43.. If the Aer-Vessels be contracted into, or near the Center, and are
somewhat Large or Numerous; and the Succiferous, also more copiously mixed
with, or surrounding them; the Root grows very Long; Tab. 2, and 17.
as do those of Fenil, Vine, Liquirish, etc. For the Aer-Vessels containing a
more copious Ferment, it will well digest and mature the Sap: Yet the
Succiferous being over proportioned to them; the Sap will not therefore, be so
far volatilized, as to ascend chiefly into the Trunk; but only to subserve a
fuller Growth of their Vessels: which being more numerous, and so more sturdy,
and less sequent to the expansive motion of the Aerial; this their own Growth,
and consequently, that of all the other Parts, cannot be so much in Breadth, as
Length.

44.. Where the same Aerial Vessels are Fewer, or more Contracted, or sheathed
in a Thicker and Closer Barque; the Root is smooth, and less Ramified, Tab. 7,
8.
as in Asparagus, Peony, Dandelion. But where more Numerous, sheathed in a
Thinner Barque, Smaller, or more Dilated; the Root is more Ramified, Tab. 2,
and 7.
or more Stringy, as in Columbine, Clary, Beet, Nicotian. For being, as is
said, by these means, more sequent to the Attraction of the Aer; approaching
still nearer the circumference of the Barque, they at last strike through it,
into the Earth. And the Parenchymous Fibers being wrapped about them, and the
Succiferous Vessels knit to them by those Fibers; P. 1. c. 5.. 12.
therefore they never break forth naked, but always invested with some quantity
of these Parts as their Barque: where by, whatever Constitutive Part is in the
main Body of the Root, the same is also in every Branch or String.

45.. From the same Expansion and Pliability of the Aer-Vessels, the Root
oftentimes puts forth Root-Buds; which gradually shoot up and become so many
Trunks. In the Formation of which Buds, they are pliable and recessive all
kinds of ways; being not only invited Outward, toward the Circumference of the
Root, as in Root-strings, but also spread more Abroad every way, so as to make
a Root-Bud: Where as in the said Root-strings; they are always more Contracted.
Tab. 6.
Which, in respect of the Disposition of the Parts, is the principal difference
betwixt the Root and the Trunk, as has been said. P. 1. c. 1.. 2, 3. Tab. 11.
Hence, those Roots, chiefly, have Root-Buds, which have the smallest
Aer-Vessels; P. 1. c. 4.. 15.
these, as is said, being the most pliable and Expansive.

46.. But because the expansiveness of the Vessels, depends also, in part,
upon the Fewness of their Braces; therefore the said Buds shoot forth
differently, in diverse Roots. Where the Braces are fewer, the Buds shoot forth
beyond the Circumference of the Root, as in Jerusalem Artichoke; Tab. 6.
where more close, as in Potato's, the Buds lie a little absconded beneath it;
the Aer-Vessels being here, by their Braces, somewhat checked and curbed in,
while the Barque continues to swell into a fuller Growth.

47.. If the Aer-Vessels are all along more equally sized, the Root is so also,
or Cylindrical; as are those of Eryngo, Horseradish, Marshmallow, Liquirish,
etc. But if unequal, growing still wider toward the bottom of the Root; then
the Root is unequal also: But grows, as is observable, quite contrarily to
the Aer-Vessels; not Greater, as They do; but still smaller, or pyramidally; as
in Fenil, Borage, Nettle, Patience, Thorn-Apple, etc. is apparent. For the
Aer-Vessels peing considerably wider about the bottom of these Roots; they
there contein a more Copious Ferment: Whereby the Sap is there also more
volatilized, and plentifully advanced to the Upper Parts. Withal, thus
receiving into themselves, and so trasmitting to the upper Parts, a more
plentiful Vapor, they hereby rob the Parenchymous Parts of their Aliment, and
so stint them in their Growth.

48.. FROM THE different Proportions and Situation of the Parts, How Roots are
dissently Moved.
the Motions of Roots are also various. For where the Are-Vessels are spread
abroad and invested with a thinner Barque; the Root runs or lies Level, Tab. 8.
as in the level-Roots of Primrose, Bishops-weed, Anemone, etc. may be seen. So
that these Roots, as by the Perpendicular Strings, which shoot from them into
the Earth, and wherein the Aer-Vessels are contracted into their Center, they
are Plucked down P. 1. c. 1.. 15.
: So by the Aer-Vessels, which stand nearer the Aer, and more under its
Attractive Power P. 2.. 36.
they are invited upwards; whereby they have neither ascent nor descent, but
keep level, betwixt both.

49.. But if these Vessels are Contracted, standing either in, or near the
Center, and are invested with a Barque proportionably Thick; the Root strikes
down perpendicularly, as does that of Dandelion, Tab. 7, 8.
Bugloss, Parsnep, etc. And therefore the said Vessels, although they are
spread abroad in the level Roots, yet in the perpendicular ones of the same
Plant, they are always contracted; as by comparing the Level and Downright
Roots of Ammi, Primrose, Jerusalem Artichoke, Cowslip, and others, is manifest.

50.. If the Aer-Vessels are Contracted, and Environed with a greater number of
Succiferous, the Root grows deep; that is, perpendicular and long. P. 1. c. 1..
9.
Perpendicular, from the Contraction of the Aer-Vessels; P. 2.. 49.
and long, from the Predominion of the Succiferous, which in their growth, are
extended only by that Dimension, as in Liquirish, Eryngo, etc.

51.. If the Succiferous are over proportioned to the Parenchymous Parts, but
under to the Aer-Vessels; the Root is perpendicular still, but grows shallow:
The Succiferous being sturdy enough to keep it perpendicular; But the
Aer-Vessels having a predominion to keep it from growing deep; Tab. 7.
as in Stramonium, Nicotian, Beet, etc.

52.. If, on the contrary, the Parenchymous Parts are predominant to the Aer
Vessels; and that, both in the Root and Trunk; then the whole Root changes
place, or descends. P. 1. c. 1.. 10. Lib. 1. c. 2.. 25, and 4. Append.. 10. P.
2.. 36.
For the said Aer-Vessels, having neither in the Trunck, nor in the Root, a
sufficient Power to Draw it upwards; it therefore gradually yields to the
Motion of its String-Roots; which, as they strike into the Soil, Pluck it down
after them. And because the old Strings annually rot off, and new ones
successively shoot down into the Ground, it therefore annually still descends
lower; as in Tulip, Lily, etc. may be observed.

53.. Where the Aer-Vessels are much spread abroad, and also numerous, the Root
oftentimes, as to its several parts, descends and ascends both at once. So
Radishes and Turnips, at the same time, in which their nether parts descend;
their upper, (where the said Vessels are more loosely braced, Tab. 2.
and spread more abroad than in the lower parts) do ascend, or make their
Growth upward. Hence also, the upper part of most young Roots from Seed,
ascends: Because the first Leaves, being proportionably large, and standing in
a free Aer, the Aer-Vessels therein, have a dominion over the young Root; and
so themselves yielding to the solicitation of the Aer, upwards; they draw the
Root, in part, after them.

54.. BY THE Situation and Proportion of the Parts, How Roots are differently
Aged.
the Age of the Root is also varied. For if the Sap-Vessels have the greatest
Proportion, the Root, is Perennial, and that to the farthest extent, as in
Trees and Shrubs. Because these Vessels containing a more copious Oil; P. 2..
21.
and their several Principles being more closely Concentred, they are less
subject to a Resolution, that is, a Corruption or Mortification by the Aer.

55.. If the Parenchymous Parts have much the greatest, the Root seldom lives
beyond Two Years; but afterward perishes either in whole, or in part; as do
diverse bulbous, tuberous, and other Roots; whether they are more Porous and
Succulent, or more Close and Dry. If Porous, all the Liquid Principles standing
herein more abundant, either by a stronger Fermentation, or otherwise, Resolve
the fixed ones of the Organical Parts; whence the whole Root, rots; as in
Potato's. So also Parsneps, and some other Roots, which, in a hard and barren
Soil, will live several years, in another more rank, will quickly rot. If the
Parenchyma be Close, then the Aer, chiefly, entering in and filling it up, thus
mortifies the Root; not by Rotting the Parts, but over Drying them; as in
Satyrion, Rape-Crowfoot, Monkshood, etc. P. 1. c. 1.. 13, 16. and P. 2.. 28.


56.. But if the Aer-Vessels have the greatest Proportion, and especially if
they are more large, and withal, are spread more abroad: the Root is Annual,
Tab. 9.
as in Thorn-Apple, Nicotian, Carduus Ben. etc. And of the same Kindred, if
any, those are Annual, which have the most Aer-Vessels. So Endive and Sonchus,
which have store of Aer-Vessels, are both Annual: whereas Cichory, in which
they are fewer, is a Perennial Root. For hereby a more copious Aer being
Transfused into all the other Parts; P. 2.. 25, 26.
they are thus, by degrees, hardened, and become sticky; and so impervious to
the Sap, which ought to have a free and universal Transition from Part to Part.
As Bones, by Precipitations from the Blood, at length, cease to grow. Or the
same more abundant Aer, so far volatilizeth the Liquors in the Root, that they
are wholly advanced into the Trunk, and so the Root is starved. Whence also the
Aer-Vessels of the Trunk; where they are numerous, and over proportioned to the
Bulk of the Root, as in Corn; they so far promote the advance of the Sap, as to
exhaust the Root, sucking it into a Consumption and Death.

57.. FROM THE Principles of the Parts, How the Contents of the several Parts
are made.
their Contents and the several Qualities hereof are also various; Id^a,. 54.
the Fluid of each Organical Part, being made, chiefly, by Filtration through
the sides thereof; such of the Principles in the Sap, being admitted into, and
transmitted through them, as are aptest thereunto. In the like manner, as when
Oil and Water, being poured upon a Paper, the Water passes through, the Oil
sticks: or as the Chyle is strained through the Coats of the Guts, into the
Lacteal Vessels: or as Water in Purgations, is strained through the Glands of
the same Guts, from the Mesenterical.

58.. The Principles therefore of the Parenchymous Fibers being spirituous,
acid, and aerial, they will also admit the like into them; excluding those
chiefly which are Alkaline and Oleous. P. 2.. 19.
And as by the Conjugation of such Principles in the Fibers, the like are
capable of admittance into their Body: so the Proportion and Union of the same
Principles, regulates the transmission hereof into their Concave. Wherefore,
the predominant Principles of the Fibers being chiefly acid, next spirituous,
and aerie, the more aerie ones will be transmitted. For if more of them should
fix they must do so by similitude and adhesion: But where there are fewer
similary parts to adhere to, fewer must adhere. The Fibers therefore contain so
many parts of Aer, as to admit many more into their Body; but not to fix them;
which therefore must needs, upon admission, pass through into their Concave;
where, together with some other more spirituous parts, they make an Aetherial
Fluid. And because some aqueous or vaporous parts will also strain through with
them; hence it is, that as more and more of these enter, they by degrees still
thrust out the aerie ones; which quitting the more succulent Fibers of the
Parenchyma, are forced to betake themselves to the dryer ones, scil. all those,
whereof the Diametral Portions do consist. For the same reason the Aerie parts
being gradually excluded the succulent Fibers of the Barque; they are forced to
recede and transmigrate into those of the Pith. And the Fibers of the Pith
themselves being filled, and the Aerie parts still forced into them; they at
length also strain through the Fibers into the Bladders: whence it comes to
pass, that while the Barque is succulent, the Pith is often times filled with
Aer.

59.. The Lymphaeducts being more earthy, P. 2.. 21.
Salinous; oleous, and aqueous, will both admit and copiously fix the like
Principles, as their proper Aliment. The Water being more perfluent than the
rest, will therefore strain, with a lighter Tincture of them, into their
Concave. Especially the Oleous parts of these being rampant, and less apt to
fix and seize the aqueous, upon their entrance, than the saline.

60.. The Lactiferous, appearing to be made, chiefly, by the Constipation of
the Parenchymous Parts all round about their Sides; the Liquor contained in
those Parts, although it may easily enough be transfused into the Hollow of
these Vessels; yet seems it not, with equal facility, to be refunded thence: So
that the thinner and more aqueous Portion only, passing off; the remainder, is,
as it were, an Oleous Elixyr, or extract, in the form of a Milk.

61.. The Fluid Ferment contained in the Aer-Vessels, is also in part,
dependent on the Principles of those Vessels, being in their percolation
tinctured therewith. But because the percolation is not made through the Body
of the Fibers whereof the Vessels are composed, but only betwixt them;
therefore the transient Principles more promiscuosly, yet with an over
porportion of dryer Particles, pass into the Concaves of these Vessels, and so
are herein all immersed in a Body of Aer. P. 2.. 24.
The Fibers themselves, in the mean time, as those of the Parenchyma, admitting
and containing a more Aerie and Aetherial Fluid.

62.. The Contents are varied, not only by the Nature, but also the Proportion
and Situation of the Parts, whereby the said Contents are with different
Facility and Quantity, communicated one to another. Hence it is, partly, that a
Vine, or that Corn, has so little Oil: sc. Because their Aer-Vessels, in
proportion with the other Parts, are so Great and Numerous: in Corn, the Stalk
being also very hollow, and so becoming as it were, one Great Aer-Vessel. For
the Oily parts of the Sap, are so exceedingly attenuated P. 2.. 25, and 56.
by the Aerie Ferment contained in these Vessels; that they are, for the most
part, so far immersed in the Spirit, or mixed therewith, as not, by being
collected in any considerable Body, to be distinguishable from it. And the
affinity that is betwixt Spirits and Oils, especially Essential, is manifest:
Both are very inflammable; Both will burn all away; The Odors, which we call
the Spirits of Plants, are lodged in their essential Oil; Both, being duly
Rectified, will mix as easily together, as Water and Wine. So that, although
Oil, by the separation of its earthy and Saline parts, which give it its
sensibly oleous Body, may not be so far attenuated, as to produce a Spirit; yet
that it may so far be attenuated, and so be mixed therewith, as not to be
discerned from it, as in the forementioned Plants, will be granted.

63.. Hence it is, that the Lactiferous standing more remote from the
Aer-Vessels, and the Succiferous interposing; Tab. 9. and 16.
the Liquor, therefore, contained in them, is not so much under the government
of the Aerial Ferment, and is thence, partly, more Oily. For the same reason,
all Roots which are Milky, so far as I have observed, have an under-proportion
of Aer-Vessels, these being either Fewer or Smaller.

64.. FROM what has been said, How the Odours of Plants are made.
we may receive some information, likewise, of the Odours, Colors, and Tastes
of Plants. And for Odours, I suppose, That the chief Matter of them, is the
Aerial Ferment contained in the Aer-Vessels. Not but that the other Parts do
also yield their smell; but that these yield the strongest and the best, and
immediately perceptible in fresh, undryed and unbruised Plants. For the Aer
entering into, and passing through the Root, and carrying a Tincture, from the
several Organical and Contained Parts, along with it, and at last entering also
the Concaves of the Aer-Vessels; it there exists the most Compounded and
Volatile Fluid, of all others in the Plant, and so the fittest matter of Odor:
and such an Odor, as answers to that of all the Odorous parts of the Plant. P.
2.. 24.
Wherefore the Organical Parts, being well cleansed of their Contents, smell not
at all; Because the Principles hereof are, as has been said, so far fixed and
concentred together. Hence also the Contained Parts themselves, or any other
Bodies, as their Principles are any way more fixed, they are less Odorous: So
is Rosin, less than Turpentine, and Pitch, than Tar; and many the self same
Bodies, when they are coagulated, less than when they are melted. So also Musk,
which is not so liquid as Civet, is not so strong; nor Ambergreece, as Musk:
For although it has a more excellent smell, than Musk has, yet yields it
not so easily; since it is a more fixed Body, and requires some Art to be
opened. Hence also the Leaves of many Plants lose their Odor upon rubbing:
Because the Aer-Vessels being thereby broken, all their contained odorous Fluid
vanishes at once: which before, was only strained gradually through the Skin.
Yet the fixed Parts themselves, upon drying, are so far altered by the Sun and
Aer, as to become resoluble, and volatile, and thence odorous.

65.. SO ALSO of their Colors. How their Colors.
As whence the Colors of the Skins are varied* For diverse of the Sap-Vessels,
together with the Parenchymous Parts successively falling off from the Barque
into the Skin P. 1. c. 2.. 2, 4.
by their proximity to the Earth and Aer, their Sulphurous or Oleous Principle
is more or less resolved, and so produces diverse Colors. So those Roots which
turn purple any where within, have usually a blacker Skin; the one of those two
Colors being, by a resolution and corruption of parts, easily convertible into
the other, as in Cumfry, Thistle, etc, So the Milk of Scorzonera, contained in
the Vessels of the Barque, upon drying, turns into a brown Color: Wherefore
the Skin, in which there are diverse of those Vessels, is of the same. So both
the Milk and Skin of Lovage is of a brownish yellow. But Parsnep has a clearer
Sap in all its Vessels, and a whiter Skin. So Potato's, being cut traverse,
after some time out of ground, have diverse red specks up and down where the
Vessels stand, and their Skin is accordingly red.

66.. The reason, I say of these Colors, is the resolution or reservation of
the Principles of the several Parts, chiefly, by the Aer, and a lighter mixture
of them consequent thereupon: whereby the Sulphurous or Oily Parts, which were
before concentred, are now more or less rampant, discovering themselves in
diverse Colors, according as they are diversely mixed with the other Principles.
Hence these Colors are observable, according to the nature of the Parts
wherein they are, or whereunto they are adjacent: So where the Lympheducts do
run, there is a Red, or some other Sulphurous Color; the Oleous Principles
being, as is said, P. 2.. 21.
more copious in these Vessels; as in the Bark of Peony, the inward parts of
Potato's, etc. may be seen. But the Parenchymous Parts, where more remote from
the said Vessels, they are usually White, or but Yellow: the Sulphurous
Principle of these Parts, being, as has been said, but sparing. P. 2.. 20.
The same is seen in those Roots which show both Red and Yellow: those Parts,
principally, where the Succiferous Vessels run, being Red; but those Parts,
where only the Aer-Vessels are mixed with the Parenchymous, being Yellow; as in
Patience. So likewise the pithy part of a Carrot, where the Aer-Vessels have
very few Succiferous mixed with them, is Yellow; but the Barque, where the
Succiferous are very numerous, is Red. For the same reason, many Roots, which
are Whiter in their upper parts, are Purple or Reddish in their inferior, as
Avens, Strawberry, etc. Because those lower parts, having lain longer P. ^.. 13.
under ground (these being descending Roots) their Principles are, thereby,
somewhat more resolved, and so the Oleous, ramp and spread all over the rest in
that Color.

67. And that the Resolution of the Sulphurous and other Principles is partly
effected by the Aer, appears, In that, where the Aer has a free access to the
Succiferous Vessels, the Colors are there, chiefly produced, or are more
conspicuous. So in Potato's, where the Succiferous Vessels are either next to
the external Aer, as in the Skin; or contiguous with the Aer-Vessels, as in the
Ring within the Barque; there, they produce a Red: but where more remote from
both, as in the middle of the Barque, and Center of the Root, there they
produce none. Hence also it is, that the Leaves and Flowers of some Plants, as
Bloodwort, Wood Sorrel, Radish, Jacea, etc. although Green or White in the
greatest portion of their Parenchymous Part; yet where the Succiferous and
Aer-Vessels run together, they are of Red, Blue, and other Colors; the Oleous
parts of the one, being unlocked and opened, by the aerie of the other.

68.. AND LASTLY, How their Tastes.
of their Tastes. Most Roots which are acres or bitting, have a very copious
Parenchyma in proportion with the Succiferous Vessels, as of Arum, Dragon, and
others: Because the Saline and other Principles are not so much hot, by any
sufficient quantity of Sulphurous, from those Vessels, in which the Sulphur,
as is said, is more abundant; P. 2.. 21.
but rendered rather pungent, from some Spirit and Aer. But diverse Umbelliferous
Roots, especially which abound with Lactiferous Vessels, are hot; as Fenil,
Lovage, Angelica, etc. Yet is it not their Oil alone that makes them hot, but
the combination thereof with the Saline Parts: as is manifest, from the nature
of the Seed of these Plants; wherein, as the Oil is most copious; So being held
to a Candle till they burn, constantly spit; which comes to pass, by the
eruption of the Saline Parts: and is the very same effect, with that which
follows upon burning of Serum or Blood. And therefore, as these Seeds are
more hot, they also spit the more; So those of Cumine, which, though fulsom,
yet are not so hot, spit less; Fenil and Dill, which are hotter, more; there
being a greater quantity of volatile Salt contained herein. Hence all Essential
Oils are hot, the Spirit and volatile Salt, being incorporated herewith. And
some of them will shoot, and crystallize as Salts do, as that of Anise; which
argues a mixture of a considerable quantity of volatile Salt. As also does the
Nature of these Oils, in being amicable to the Stomach, Carminative, and
sometimes Anodyne; scil. as they kill some fetid, or corrosive Acid: for
volatile Salts themselves will have the like operation in some cases as these
Oils.

69.. Many Lactiferous Roots, as Taraxacum and others of that kind, are not so
much hot, as bitter. For although by the Lactiferous Vessels they are very
Oily; yet those Vessels being posited in Rings, and not in Rays, and having no
Diametral Portions running through their Barque to the Aer-Vessels; Tab. 13.
the Acido-Aerial Parts do hereby, although not mortify, yet so far refract
the saline, lightly binding up the Oleous therewith, as to produce a bitter
Taste. So, many sweet Bodies, upon burning, become bitter; the Acid Parts, now
becoming rampant, and more copiously mixed with the Oleous.

70. The Roots, or other Parts, of many Umbelliferous Plants, have a sweetish
Taste, as both the Sweet, and Common Chervil; both the Garden, and wild Carrot;
Parsnep, Fenil, etc. the Saline Principles being concentred in the Oily, and
both of a moderate quantity with respect to the rest. For by the Oily, the
Saline is rendered more smooth and amicable; and both being moderate, they are
not therefore hot, as in some other Umbelliferous Roots; but by the predominion
of the other Principles, made mild. Hence it is, that Sugar it self is sweet,
scil. because it is an Oleous Salt; as is manifest, from its being highly
inflammable; its easy dissolution by a moderate, Fire, without the addition of
Water; and in that, being melted with Turpentine, and other Oily Bodies, it
will mix together with them. So also the Acid Parts of Vinegar, being
concentred in the Salino-sulphureous of Lead, produce a Sugar. Hence Barley,
which upon Distillation or Decoction yeildeth only an acid; being turned into
Malt, becomes sweet. Because, being steeped, couched, and so fermented, the
oleous parts are thereby unlocked, and becoming rampant, over the other
Principles, altogether produce that Taste. And the Bile it self, which, next to
Water and Earth, consists most of oily parts, and of many both saline and
acid is a bitter-sweet. Wherein, as some of the Saline and Acid parts, smoothed
by the Oleous, produce a Sweet: So, some of the Oleous, impregnated with the
Saline, and the Acid, do hereby produce a Bitter.

THE ANATOMY OF TRUNKS, With an Account of their VEGETATION. Grounded
thereupon. The Figures hereunto belonging, Presented to the ROYAL SOCIETY in
the Years, 1673 and 1674. The THIRD BOOK.

By NEHEMJAH GREW M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the College of
Physicians.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, 1682.

TO THE Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord Vi-Count BROUNCKER THE PRESIDENT; AND TO
THE Council and Fellows OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY.
MY LORD,
THE Commands I received from Your Lordship, and the Royal Society, To
prosecute the Subject treated of in the Two former Books; have produced This
which follows. And I humbly submit the same to Your Lordships Judgment: which
must needs be Candid and Benign, because it is Great. I have only this to say,
-- (...); Your Lordship will not disapprove the Enterprise, although it falls
short of perfection. It being the result of Your Lordships manifold Virtues and
Abilities, That You know how far to Encourage the meanest Attempts; as well as
rightly to Value and Assist the greatest Performances.

London, August 20. 1675. Iam, My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most
obsequious Servant NEHEMJAH GREW.

THE CONTENTS.
The FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. A Description of several Stalks or Trunks, as they appear to the
Naked Eye. OF the Stalk of Maze,. 1, 2. Of Dandelion, 3, to 6. Of Borage, 7, to
10. Of Colewort, 11, to 16. Of Holyoak, 17, to 20. Of Wild Cucumer, 21, to 23.
Of Scorzonera, 24, to 26. Of Burdock, 27, to 29. Of Endive, 30, 31. Of Vine,
32, to 35. Of Sumach, 36, to 38. Cautions to be had in observing the Parts, 39.
Some Particulars better observed in cutting by the length, 40, 41.
CHAP. II. Of the Barque, as it appears through a good Microscope. FIrst, a
General Description of the several Parts of the Barque, 2, to 9. Next, a
Particular Description of the Barques of 8 several Trunks; sc. Of Holly, Hazel,
Barbery, Apple, Pear, Plum, Elm, Ash; The Vessels of all whose Barques are
Lymphaeducts: and those of two kinds, 10, to 13. Of 3 more, sc. Wallnut, Fig,
and Pine: the Vessels of the Barques of the Two first, being Lymphaeducts and
Lactiferous, Of the next, Lymphaeducts and Resiniferous, 14, to 20. Of 3 more,
sc. Oak, Common Sumach, and Common Wormwood; the Vessels of whose Barques are
of 3 Kinds, 21, to 29. Some further Observations and Conjectures of the
Sap-Vessels, 30, to 37.
CHAP. III. Of the Wood. WHat in all Trunks,. 1. A Description of its Parts, in
the several Trunks aforesaid. Of the Parenchymous Part, or Insertions, 2, to 9.
Of the true Wood, 10, to 15. Of the Aer-Vessels, 16, to 26. Some further
Observations and Conjectures of their Form, 27. Texture, 28, to 32. Nature, 33,
34. And Original, 35.
CHAP. IV. Of the Pith. A Description of the Pith, in General,. 1. In the
several Trunks or Brances aforesaid. As of the Size, 2, 3. Vessels, 4.
Parenchyma and Bladders, 5, to 9. Apertures or Rupturss, 10. Some further
Observations of the Pith. And of all the Pithy and Parenchymous Parts. And
thence of the True Texture of a Plant, 11, to 15.

The SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. Of the Motion and Course of the Sap. CHAP. II. Of the Motion and
Course of the Aer. CHAP. III. Of the Structure of the Parts. CHAP. IV. Of the
Generation of Liquors. CHAP. V. Of the Figuration of Trunks. CHAP. VI. Of the
Motions of Trunks. CHAP. VII. Of the Nature of Trunks, as variously fitted for
Mechanical Use.
THE ANATOMY OF TRUNKS; PROSECUTED With the bare EYE, And with the MICROSCOPE.
PART I.
CHAP. I. The Descriptions of several Trunks, as they appear to the bare Eye.
TO the end we may clearly understand, what the Trunk, Stalk, or Branch of a
Plant, is; I shall by these Figures here before us, Describe the several Parts,
whereof it is compounded.

1.. And for examples sake, I shall in the first place, Describe the Trunks of
some Plants, as being cut tranversly, and accurately observed, they appear to
the naked Eye. And some others, as by the length. Which having done, I shall
next proceed to a more particular Description of diverse other Trunks and
Branches as they appear through a good Microscope. In both showing, not only
what their several Parts are, as generally belonging to a Branch; but also, by
a Comparative Prospect, in what respects they are specifically distinguished
one from another, in the several Sorts of Branches.

2.. I SHALL begin where the Work of Nature appears less Diversified: as in the
Stalk of Maze or Indian Wheat. In which, although there are the same
Parenchymous and Lignous Parts, as in all other Plants; Tab. 18.
yet is there neither Barque, nor Pith; the Vessels being dispersed and mixed
with the Parenchyma, from the Circumference to the Center of the Stalk: Saving,
that in and next the Skin, there seems to be no Aer-Vessels. Every where else,
they run up, like fine Threads, through the length of the Stalk: Each Thread
being also surrounded with Sap^Vessels; which in a Slice cut transversly,
appear in very small and dark colored Rings. The like structure may also be
seen in the Sugar-Cane, and some other Plants.

3.. LET the next Trunk be that of Taraxacum, or Dandelion. In a slice whereof,
being cut transversly, is seen next the Skin, first, a simple, Tab. 18.
white, and close Parenchyma or Barque; made up of Vesicles; but such as are
exceeding small; and hardly visible without a Glass.

4.. Within This, stand Milk-Vessels in seven or eight distinct Colums, of
different size: each Colum being also made up of seven or eight Arched Lines.
Betwixt these Colums, run as many Diametral Portions, derived from the Barque,
into or toward the Pith.

5.. Next within These, stand the Aer-Vessels. Which are likewise divided, by
the said Diametral Portions, into diverse Arched Lines. The size of these
Vessels, as well as their number, is small.

6.. Within These, stands the Pith, consisting of very small Vesicles or
Bladders, as the Barque. It Is very small, the Diameter hereof, being scarce one
fifth, of that of the Pith of Borage. But the Barque of Borage is not half so
thick as this of Dandelion.

7.. FOR a Third Stalk, we may take that of Borage; wherein there is some
further Variety. For in a slice hereof, cut transversly, there appears, first a
Tough, yet Thin and Transparent Skin. Within this Skin, and Continuous
therewith, there is also a Thin Ring of Sap-Vessels: Tab. 18.
which, without being crushed in the least, do yield a Lympha.

8.. Next stands the Parenchyma of the Barque. Which is made up of a great
number of very small Vesicles or Bladders. Upon the inner Verge of this
Parenchyma, stands another Ring of Sap-Vessels: which also yield a Lympha;
and that different, as is probable, from the Lympha in the utmost Ring.
Hitherto goes the Barque.

9.. Adjacent to the Ring of Sap-Vessels, on the inner Verge of Barque, stand
the Aer-Vessels on the outer Verge of the Pith. Not in a Ring; but in several
Parcels; some Parcels or Conjugations, in the figure of little Specks; others,
in little Arched Lines, almost like an V Consonant. And being viewed in a good
Glass, there appears to be within the compass of every larger Speck or Parcel,
about 20 or 30 Aer-Vessels and within the smallest, about 8 or 10.

10.. The Pith, in a well grown Stalk of this Plant; is always hollow. But
originally, it is entire. It is likewise wholly made up of a great number of
Vesicles: of which, through a Glass, some appear Pentangular, others
Sexangular, and Septangular. Most of them are larger than those of the Barque;
so as to be plainly visible to a naked Eye.

11.. A FOURTH Trunk, shall be that of Colewort, which seems likewise, to have
at least, two Sorts of Lymphaeducts. For being cut transversly, as the former,
we may observe, next the Skin, a very close Parenchyma, of a darkish Green.
Wherewith are mixed some few Sap Vessels, which give it that Color.

12.. Within This, stands a scalloped Parenchymous Ring, or a Ring of many
short and slender white Arches. Tab. 18.
Which all round about the Barque, meeting together, run in so many white
Diametral Portions, or extreme small Rays, into the Pith.

13.. Betwixt these white Rays, and next of all to the said white Arches, stand
as many small Parcels of Sap-Vessels, like so many little Half-Ovals. Within
each of which, is included a white Parenchyma.

14.. On the inner Verge of the Barque, stands another Sort of Sap-Vessels, in
one slender and entire Ring. And so far goes the Barque.

15.. Next within this Ring stand the Aer-Vessels, in several Parcels,
diametrically opposite to the said white Parenchymous Parcels next without the
Sap-Ring.

16.. Last of all, and more within the Pith, stand the same kind of
Sap-Vessels, as those of the Half-Ovals. Both these, by small lines, run one
into another; thus, on both sides, hemming in the Aer-Vessels, and so making
altogether, so many little Pyramids.

17.. LET a Fifth be that of Holyoake. In which, the Curiosity of Nature, is
still more copious: presenting us, as it is seems, with Three sorts of
Lymphaeducts; Of which, two yield a Thin; the Third, a Thick Lympha. For being
cut, as before, next to the Skin, stands the Barque; somewhat close, and, in
proportion, Thick.

18.. Toward the inner Verge hereof, stand one sort of Sap-Vessels, postur'd
in short Rays. These Vessels yield a Mucilage. And on the inner Verge of the
Barque, stands a Thin Ring of other Sap-Vessels, which yield a thinner Liquor.
Tab. 18.


19.. Next within the Barque stand the Aer-Vessels, postur'd likewise in short
Rays, diametrically opposite to those in the Barque. In every Ray, there are
about twelve or sixteen Vessels.

20.. Lastly, and more within the Pith, there stand other Sap-Vessels, all in
very Thin or Slender Arched-Lines; thus hemming in the ral Parcels of
Aer-Vessels.

21.. FOR a Sixth, I will take that of Wild Cucumer: Wherein is also found a
Mucilaginous Lympha. For first of all, next to the Skin, there is a Ring of
Sap-Vessels. Which Ring is also radiated, the Rays, all poynting toward, and
most of them terminating on, the Skin. Tab. 18.


22.. Next of all, there is a thick, and simple Parenchymous Ring. On the inner
Verge whereof, there are other Sap-Vessels standing in Parcels, also in a Ring.
So far goes the Barque.

23.. Next within, stand the Aer-Vessels, in as many Parcels, contiguous to
those of the Sap-Vessels aforesaid. To which likewise are adjoined as many more
Parcels of Sap-Vessels within the Pith, opposite to the said Sap-Vessels within
the Barque.

24.. FOR a Seventh, we may, choose that of Scorzonera. In which, the Vessels
are both Lymphaeducts, and Lactiferous. All of them, with the Aer-Vessels, in a
radiated posture. For first next the outer Edg of the Barque, stand the
Lactiferous, in little Specks. Tab. 18.
Next to these, on the inner Edg of the Barque, stand the Lymphaeducts, in the
same form.

25.. Hereunto adjacent, on the outer Edg of the Pith, stand the Aer-Vessels,
some in Specks, and some in extreme short Lines; hardly distinguished, without
a very nice Inspection.

26.. Within These, are placed other Lymphaeducts, opposite to those in the
Barque. And within these Lymphaeducts, still in the same radiated Line, run
more of the Milk-Vessels.

27.. AN EIGHTH, may be that of Burdock; Wherein first, there are a Sort of
Lymphaeducts, which stand in Arched Parcels, round the Trunk, Tab. 18.
adjacent to the Skin.

28.. Within these, about the middle of the Barque, run the Milk-Vessels, in
the form of small round Specks.

29.. Next to these on the inner Edg of the Barque are placed other
Lymphaeducts. Which, together with more of the same in the Pith, and the
Aer-Vessels betwixt them, stand all in Radiated Lines, of several Lengths, and
all sharpning toward the Center.

30.. LET the Ninth, be that of Endive: In which there is also much curious
Work. Tab. 18.
Next to the Skin, there is, first, a thick and simple Parenchyma. Then there
is a kind of Undulated Ring of Milk-Vessels. Within which stand a Sort of
Lymphaeducts, in several Parcels; some, in Arched Half-Ovals; others, in short
slender Rays. Betwixt these Parcels, many of the Milk-Vessels likewise stand.

31.. Next there is an undulated Ring of other Lymphaeducts, parting as in most
Trunks, betwixt the Barque and the Pith. Within which, are the Aer-Vessels. And
within These, more Sap-Vessels. Both of them, in small Specks, answerable, or
opposite to the Rays in the Barque.

32.. I SHALL give also one or two Examples of Trees, Tab. 18.
or Arborescent Plants; the Vine and Common Sumach. In a Slice of the former
cut transversly, next the Skin, there is a Thin Barque. In the inner part
whereof, adjacent to the Wood, stand the Lymphaeducts in several Half-Oval
Parcels, opposite to so many Radiated Pieces of the Wood.

33.. The Wood is divided into the said Pieces, by as many Parenchymous Rays,
inserted from the Barque, and so continuous therewith.

34.. Within these Radiated Pieces of Wood, stand the Aer-Vessels; the largest
of which, especially if held up against the light, are plainly visible to the
bare Eye.

35.. Within the hollow of the Wood, stands the Pith; in the young Growths
always large. In the utmost Verge whereof, adjacent to the Wood, stand a few
more Sap-Vessels of the same Sort with those in the Barque.

36.. IN A like Slice of Common Sumach, contiguous to the hairy Skin, Tab. 18.
there is a Ring of Lymphaeducts. Next to this a Simple Parenchyma. Then
several Arched Parcels of Lymphaeducts. Within these, a Ring of Milk-Vessels.
And then a Ring of other Lymphaeducts. Thus far the Barque.

37.. Within the Barque, stands the Wood, divided into several Portions, by the
Diametral Insertions divided from the Barque. In the Body of the Wood, stand
the Aer-Vessels, very much smaller than in the Vine.

38.. The hollow of the Wood is filled up with the Pith. In the Circumference
of which, stands a Ring of Lymphaedctus, of the same sort with those next to
the Wood without.

39.. All the Parts of these Trunks, may, as I have now described them, be
observed without a Microscope: excepting the Bladders and number of
Aer-Vessels. Yet Three things are hereunto necessary; viz. a good Eye, a clear
Light, and a Rasor, or very keen Knife, wherewith to cut them with a smooth
surface, and so, as not to Dislocate the Parts.

40.. UPON Inspection also by the length, there are some particulars, common,
more or less, to most Plants, yet better observable in some, than in others. As
first, the Reticulation of the Vessels, (formerly described) not only in the
Wood, Tab. 19.
but in the Barque: which is evident in a young Branch of Corin, upon the very
Surface thereof, when some of the Vessels begin to be cast off into the Skin.
And so, by stripping off the Skin, upon the Surface of the Wood.

41.. In cutting by the length, as well as transversly, the young Fibers, which
grow within the Wood in the Edg of the Pith, are also seen. As likewise the
manner of the Derivation of the Parts of the Bud from the Branch or Stalk; as
in Sonchus. There are also many Varieties in the Pith, such as those hereafter
mentioned Chap. 4.
which fall under observation only in cutting by the length.

CHAP. II. Of the Barque, as it appears through a good Microscope.
I NOW proceed to a more particular Description of several Trunks and Branches,
as they appear through good Glasses.

1.. Now the Trunk, or Branch of every Tree, has Three General Parts to be
described; sc. the Barque, the Wood, and the Pith. That likewise of every
Herbaceous Plant, has either the same Three Parts; or else Three Parts
Analogous; sc. the Cortical, the Lignous, and the Pithy Parts.

2.. The Barque consists of two Parts, sc. the outmost or Skin, and the Main
Body. The Skin is generally composed, in part, of very small Vesicles or
Bladders, clustered together. That is, originally it is so; but as the Plant
grows, the Skin dries, and the said Bladders, do very much shrink up and
disappear.

3.. Amongst these Bladders of the Skin, there are usually intermixed a sort of
Lignous Fibers, Tab. 20.
or Vessels, which run through the length of the Skin; as in Mallow, Nettle,
Borage, Thistle, and most Herbs. Which is argued not only from the Toughness of
the Skin by means of the said Vessels; but in some Plants, may be plainly seen,
as in Teasle. In which* the several Fibers, which run by the length of the
Stalk, are also conjoined by other smaller ones, which stand transversly.

4.. Whether they are Aer-Vessels, or Sap-Vessels, is dubious. For, on the one
hand, because they emit no Sap, or bleed not, and also stand adjacent to the
Aer; it is probable that they are Aer-Vessels. On the other hand, they may be
Sap-Vessels; notwithstanding that they bleed not: Because the non-emission of
Sap is not an infallible and concluding argument of an Aer-Vessel. For there
are some Plants which bleed not. Which yet are furnished with Sap-Vessels, as
certainly as any others which bleed. B. 2. P. 1. c. 3.. 22.


5.. The Skin of the Trunk is sometimes visibly porous. But no where more, than
in the better sort of walking Canes; where the Pores are so big, as to be
visible even to the naked Eye: like to those, which are observable in several
parts of the Ball of the Hand, Tab. 20.
and upon the ends of the Fingers and Toes.

6.. THE Main Body of the Barque consists likewise of two Parts, sc.
Parenchyma, and Vessels. The Parenchyma is made up of an innumerable company of
small Bladders clustered together. Differing in nothing from those aforesaid in
the Skin; Tab. 22. and Sequent.
saving, that they are much larger; and generally rounder.

7.. This Parenchyma of the Barque is the same, as to its Substance, both in
the Root and Trunk. Yet as to the Texture of its Parts, in the one, and in the
other, there is This observable difference, viz. That in the Barque of the
Root, cut transversly, the said Parenchyma (as has been showed) is usually,
more or less, disposed into Diametral Rays; Tab. 7, 8, 9.
running through the Barque, after the same manner, as do the the Hour Lines
through the Margin of the Dial-plate of a Clock or Watch: as in Marsh-Mallow,
Lovage, Melilot, and others. Whereas here in the Barque of the Trunk, the said
Parenchyma is rarely thus disposed into Dimetral Rays: Tab. 22. and Seq.
Nor when it is, are those Rays continued to the Circumference of the Barque;
as in the Barque of the Root they frequently are. So in Rhus or Sumach,
although part of the Parenchyma be disposed into Diametral Rays: Tab. 31, 34,
etc.
yet are those Rays extended not half way through the Barque. So also in
Fig Tree, Wormwood, Thistle, and others. What is further observable in the
Texture of the Parenchyma, I shall show in the description of the Pith.

8.. THE Vessels of the Barque, are, as I shall also show, diversifyed many
ways. But there are some Things, wherein, in all Sorts of Plants, they agree.
First, in standing, most numerously, in or near, the inner Margin of the
Barque. Secondly, in being always, and only Sap-Vessels. I have viewed so many,
that at least, I can securely affirm thus much, That if there be any
Heteroclital Plants, wherein they are found otherwise, there is not One, in
Five Hundred. Thirdly, in being always Conjugated or Braced together in the
form of Network. Although the Number and Distances of the Braces, are very
different: as I have already showed in the Anatomy of Roots. Chap. 3. Tab. 6.


9.. THE Properties, whereby the said Vessels of the Barque are specificated
and distinguished one from another, both in the same Plant, and in the several
Species of Plants, are very many. Which Properties, are not Accidental, but
such as show the Constant and Universal Design of Nature. All which shall be
demonstrated by the Description of several Quarters of the Slices, of so many
Kinds of Branches, cut Transversly: and by the several Figures which represent
them.

10.. FIRST then, Tab. 22. and Seq.
for the Eleven first Quarters, the Vessels of the Barque are only of Two
Kinds. And these, in the first Eight, seem to be Roriferous (described also in
the Anatomy of Roots) P. 1. c. 3.. 22.
and those which are common to most, if not to all Plants, sc. the
Lymphaeducts. Yet in all the Eight, they are, in respect both of their
Proportion, and Position, very different. So in Hazel and Ash they are but few.
In Holly and Barberry more. In Apple, Pear, Plum, Elm, still more numerous. And
of those three Fruits, in an Apple, or Plum, more than in a Pear.

11.. Again, as their Proportion, so likewise their Position is diverse. For in
Holly, the Lymphaeducts or inner Vessels next to the Wood, stand in Rays. Tab.
22, 23, 24.
Yet so numerous and close together, as to make one Entire Ring. In Hazel, they
stand more in Oblong Parcels. In Barberry, they stand likewise in Parcels, but
they are so many Half-Ovals, The utmost Vessels or Roriferous of all Three,
make a Ring.

12.. Again, in Apple, Pear, and Plum, the Lymphaeducts are Radiated. Tab. 25,
to 28.
The Roriferous are neither Radiated, nor make an entire Ring; but stand in
Peripherial Parcels. Much after the same manner, they also stand in Elm. Tab.
29.
In Ash, the Vessels make Two Rings; but neither of them Radiated: the inmost
Ring or Lymphaeducts, consisting of Arched Parcels, and the utmost or
Roriferous Vessels, of Round ones. And whereas in all the foregoing, the
Lymphaeducts are still contiguous to the Wood; and the Roriferous more or less,
distant from the Skin: here, on the contrary, the former are distant from the
Wood, and the latter contiguous to the Skin.

13.. And that these Vessels in each Barque of the said Eight Branches, are of
Two distinct Kinds, seems evident, as from some other reasons, so from hence;
In that their Positions are altogether Heterogeneous: Yet in both Constant,
Regular and Uniform. I say, there seems to be no Reason, why the self same Kind
or Species of Vessels, should have a different, yea a contrary Position in one
and the same Plant; and that Contrariety, not Accidental, but Regular and
Constant.

14.. FOR the Three next Quarters sc. the Ninth, Tab. 30, 31, 32.
Tenth and Eleventh, the Vessels of the Barque are also different in Number,
Position, Size and Kind. In Pine, which is the Eleventh, they are fewer. In
Walnut the Ninth, more. In Fig, the Tenth, most numerous.

15.. So for their Position. In Pine, the inmost make a Radiated Ring. The
utmost stand straggling up and down, without any certain order. In Wallnut the
inmost make also a Radiated Ring; The utmost make a Double Ring; not Radiated,
but of Round Parcels. In Fig, the inmost make also a Radiated Ring. But the
utmost make a Double and sometimes Treble Ring, not of Radiated, nor Round, but
Arched Parcels.

16.. Thirdly, they are also different in Kind. Those, I think, of the two
former, Wallnut and Fig, are thus different: those certainly, of the Fig, are
so; being Lymphaeducts and Lacteals. The Lymphaeducts make the inmost Radiated
Ring. The outmost which make the other Rings in Arched Parcels, are the
Lactifers.

17.. That they are distinct Kinds of Vessels, is evident for two Reasons.
First, from their Position in the Barque; which is altogether different, as
has been said. Secondly, from the most apparent Diversity of the Liquors or
Saps, which they contain, and which, upon cutting the Branch transversly, do
distinctly Bleed from them. Which is one way, whereby we do distinguish the
Vessels of Animals themselves. As in the Liver, it were hard to say, which is a
Blood-Vessel, and which is a Bile-Vessel, where they are very small, if it were
not for the Contents of them both.

18.. Those in the Barque of Pine, are likewise of Two Kinds. The inmost are
Lymphaeducts, as in the two former. The utmost are not Milk-Vessels, but
Gum-Vessels, or Resiniferous; which stand straggling, and singly, about the
middle of the Barque. Out of these Vessels all the clear Turpentine, that drops
from the Tree, does issue.

19.. Few, but very great. So that besides the difference of their Number and
Position, and of the Liquors which they contain, and Bleed; there is yet a
Fourth, and that is, their Size. Most of these Turpentine Vessels, being of so
wide a bore, as to be apparent to the naked Eye: and, through a good Glass,
above d of an Inch in Diametre. Whereas that of the Lymphaeducts, can hardly be
discovered by the best Microscope.

20.. The same Turpentine Vessels of Pine, are likewise remarkably bigger, not
only than the Lymphaeducts, but many times, than the Milk-Vessels themselves:
as those of the Fig, which, in comparison, are exceeding small; every Arch, not
being a single Vessel, but a Parcel or Cluster of Vessels; Whereas one single
Gum-Vessel in Pine, is sometimes as big as two whole Arched Clusters, that is,
as some Scores of the Milk Vessels in a Fig Tree. And the said Gum-Vessels of
Pine, being compared with the Lymphaeducts of the same Tree, one Gum-Vessel, by
a moderate estimate, may be reckoned three or four hundred times wider than a
Lymphaeduct. The like prodigious difference may be observed in the Size of the
several Kinds of Vessels of many other Plants.

21.. THE Three next Quarters of Branches, are of Oak, Common Sumach, and
Common Wormwood. In the Barque-Vessels whereof, there is observable some
farther Variety. For in all or in most of the above named, there are only Two
Kinds of Vessels in the Barque. But in Each of these, there are, at least,
Three Kinds.

22.. And first, in that of Oak there are Lymphaeducts, Roriferous, and a Sort
of Resiniferous. The inmost or Lymphaeducts, make a Radiated Ring, Tab. 33.
contiguous to the Wood. The utmost or the Roriferous make also a Ring, but not
Radiated. Those which are a sort of Rosin-Vessels, stand in Round Parcels; the
greater Parcels betwixt the Two Rings of Roriferous and Lymphaeducts; and the
lesser, betwixt the Roriferous and the Skin.

23.. That these last are different Vessels from both the other, seems evident,
from the difference of their Position, as aforesaid. And that they are a sort
of Resiniferous, is argued from hence; In that, not only Galls are very full of
Rosin, but that the Barque of Oak it self is also somewhat Resinous. For the
conveyance of whose Resinous parts, it is most unlikely that any other Vessels
should subserve, but a peculiar Kind; which may therefore be properly called
Resiniferous.

24.. The next is a Branch of Common Sumach. Tab. 34.
In the Barque whereof, there are likewise Three Kinds of Vessels. First of
all, there is a thick Radiated Ring of Lymphaeducts; standing on the inner
Margin of the Barque, contiguous with the Wood. These Vessels exhibit their
Lympha very apparently. A second kind of Vessels, sc. Roriferous, are situate
toward the outer Margin of the Barque, and are composed into distinct Arched
Parcels, all standing in a Ring.

25.. Betwixt these Two Kinds stand the Milk-Vessels. Every single Milk-Vessel
being empaled or hemmed in with an Arch of Roriferous. The Milk-Vessels are
extraordinary large, almost as the Gum-Vessels of Pine; so as distinctly to be
observed without a Microscope; after they are evacuated of their Milk; and
without difficulty will admit a Virginal Wire; being two or three hundred times
as big as a Lymphaeduct. Besides these Three sorts of Vessels, there is also a
Ring, adjacent to the Skin; which seems to be another sort of Roriferous.

26.. The Last, Tab. 3^.
is a Branch of Common Wormwood. In the Barque whereof, there are likewise
Three Kinds of Vessels. First of all, there is a thin Radiated Ring of
Lymphaeducts, contiguous with the Wood or on the inner Margin of the Barque.
Yet the Ring is not entire, but made up of several Parcels; which are
intercepted by as many Parenchymous inserted into the Pith.

27.. A Second Sort of Vessels, which seem to be Roriferous, are situate about
the middle of the Barque: and are composed into Arched Parcels, which likewise
stand all even in a Ring.

28.. Beyond these Arches, and toward the outer Margin of the Barque, stand a
Third Sort of Vessels. Different from the Milk-Vessels in Sumach, both as to
their Situation, Size and Content. For in Sumach, the Milk-Vessels stand within
the Arched Lymphaeducts: whereas these in Wormwood, stand without them.
Likewise, being the Vessels of an Herb, they are far less; sc. about the
compass or width of a small Wheat-Straw. Their Content, is not a Milk, but a
liquid, most Oleous and viscid Gum. Or which, for its pleasant Flavor may be
called an Aromatic Balsom. For it perfectly gives whatever is in the Smell
and Taste of Wormwood: being the Essence of the whole Plant, which nature
treasureth up in these Vessels. So that they are, in all respects, analogous to
the Turpentine Vessels in Pine. There are diverse other Herbs and Trees, which
in the like Vessels, contain a Turpentine, or rather Aromatical Balsom; as
Angelica, Helenium and others; the Vessels being so very large, that they may
be easily traced with a knife, in cutting by the length of a Branch or Saltk.

29.. Whether in some Plants, there are not more Sorts of Vessels, in the
Barque, than have been now mentioned, I cannot say: Though we have not much
reason to doubt of it. Because we see, there is so great variety in the Viscera
of Animals. For what the Viscera are in Animals; the Vessels themselves are in
Plants.

30.. CONCERNING the Form and Texture of the Lymphaeducts, there are some
things, which though they are best observed in the Wood, yet in regard I am now
describing the said Vessels, I shall here therefore add. I have already said,
and showed, in the former Books, That the Lignous and Towy Parts of all Plants,
are Tubulary. And that the Lympha is conveyed, by the length of a Plant,
through an innumerable company of small Tubes or Pipes.

31.. The Question may be yet further put: If the Towy Parts of the Barque are
made of Tubes, What are these Tubes themselves made up of? I answer, That these
Tubes or Lymphaeducts, are not only themselves Organical; but their very Sides
also, seem to be composed of other Parts, which are Organical, sc. of Lignous
or Towy Fibers. Which Fibers, Tab. 40.
standing close or contiguous in a round Figure, they make one Tubulary Body,
which I call the Lymphaeduct of a Plant. And it is probable, That these Fibers
themselves, are also Tubulary. That is, that a Lymphaeduct, is a small Tube,
made up or composed of other, yet much smaller Tubes, set round together in a
Cylindrick Figure. As if we should imagine a company of Straws, which are so
many small Pipes, to be joined and set round together, so as to make another
greater Pipe, answerable to a hollow Cane. The Cane, I say, is as the
Lymphaeduct; and the Straws are as the Fibers whereof it is composed. By which
also appears, the admirable smallness of these Fibers. For there are some
Lymphaeducts, which may be reckoned fifty times smaller than a Horse-Hair.
Allowing therefore but Twenty of the aforesaid Fibers to make a Thread so big as
one Lymphaeduct; then one of the said Fibers, must be a Thousand times smaller
than a Horse-Hair. That these Fibers, whereof the Lymphaeducts are made, are
themselves made up of other Fibers, is not altogether improbable.

32.. These Fibers, although parallel; yet are they not coalescent, but only
contiguous; being contained together in a Tubulary Figure, by the We^tage of
the Cortical Fibers, as in Chapter the Fourth will better be understood.

33.. The first notice I took of the Composition and Texture of these Vessels,
so far as the best Glasses yet known, will admit; was in a very white and clear
piece of Ash-wood torn, with some care, by the length of the Tree, and objected
to a proper Light. They seem also sometimes discernable in some other clear
Woods, as in very white Fir, etc. And having formerly demonstrated, that the
Lignous Part of a Plant, is annually made or augmented out of the inner part of
the Barque, wherein the Lymphaeducts always stand: we may reasonably suppose
the same Lymphaeducts to have the like Conformation in the Barque, as in the
Wood.

34.. And I am the rather induced to believe, that I am not mistaken in this
Description, upon these two Considerations. First, that herein the Analogy
betwixt the Vessels of an Animal and a Plant, is the more clear and proper. For
as the Sanguineous Vessels in an Animal are composed of a number of Fibers, set
round, in a Tubulary Figure, together: so are these Lymphaeducts of a Plant.
Secondly, in that herein, there is a more genuine respondence betwixt these,
and the other Vessels of a Plant it self; sc, the Aer-Vessels; which are made
up of a certain number of Round Fibers, standing collaterally, or side to side
as I have already observed in the Anatomy of Roots. So that it is the less
strange, that the Lymphaeducts should be made up of Fibers, since the
Aer-Vessels are evidently so made. Only with this difference, that whereas in
the Aer-Vessels, the Fibers are postured or continued Spirally: here, in the
Lymphaeducts, they stand and are continued only in straight Lines.

35.. THE STRUCTURE of the Lactiferous and Gum-Vessels, which have a very ample
Bore, is more apparent. And, by the best Glasses I have yet used, Tab. 20.
they seem to be made, chiefly, by the Constipation of the Bladders of the
Barque. That is to say, That they are so many Channels, not made or bounded by
any walls or sides proper to themselves, as a Quil thrust into a Cork, and as
the Aer-Vessels are in the Wood: but only by the Bladders of the Parenchyma;
which are so postured and crowded up together, as to leave certain Cilyndrick
Spaces, which are continued by the length of the Barque.

36.. One difference betwixt the Vessels or Channels now described, and the
Tubulary Hollows and other Apertures in the Pith, is this; That these never
exist originally with the Pith; but are so many Ruptures supervening to it in
its Growth. Caused, partly, by the Stretch or Tenter it suffers from the
Dilatation of the Wood: B. 1. c. 3.. 22, and 23.
and partly, the drying, and so the Shrinking up of its Bladders, and of the
Fibers whereof they are composed. Whereas the said Vessels in the Barque, are
many of them originally formed therewith. And those which are post-nate, not
made by any Rupture, but only such a Disposition of the Parenchymous Fibers,
and Constipation of the Bladders, as is thereunto convenient.

37.. In paring the Barque of a Branch of Pine, Sumach, etc. they appear,
neither parallel, nor any where Inosculated: but run, with some little
obliquities, distinct one from another, through the length of the Branch: and
so, we may believe, through the length of the Tree.

CHAP. III. Of the WOOD.
THE next general Part of a Branch, is the Wood; which lies betwixt the Barque
and the Pith. And this likewise evermore consists of Two General Parts, sc.
of a Parenchymous Part, and that more properly called Lignous. The Parenchymous
Part of the Wood, though much diversifyed, yet in the Trunks of all Trees
whatsoever, has this property, To be disposed into many Rays, or Diametral
Insertions, running betwixt so many Lignous Portions, from the Barque to the
Pith: as in any of the Quarters here before us may appear.

2.. But these Insertions are much diversifyed, according to the several Sorts
of Plants. Tab. 22, to 35.
So in Barberry, Ash, Pine, Wormwood, they are less numerous. In Elm, Wallnut,
Fig, Sumach, they are more. And in Holly, Pear, Plum, Apple, Oak, Hazel, are
most numerous.

3.. The same Insertions, in Barberry, Wormwood, and some in Oak, are very
Thick. In Pine, Fig, Ash, of a middle Size. In Pear, Holly, Ibid*
and most of them in Oak, are exceeding Small. Again, in Barberry, Elm, Ash,
Sumach, Fig, they are of an Equal Size. In Holly, Hazel, Pear, Plum, Oak, they
are very Unequal: some of those in Holly, being Four or Five times thicker than
the rest; in Plum, Six or seven times; and in Oak, Ten times at least.

4.. In some Plants, they are Equidistant; in others, not: in some, the Great
ones are Equidistant; in others, the Lesser; in others, both; in some, neither.
Which Varieties are not accidental; but constant to the Species in which they
are severally found.

5.. They are not always visibly continued from the Circumference to the Center
of the Wood: but in some Branches, as of Sumach; and in most Trunks of many
years growth, declining, in some places, under or over, Tab. 34.
from a Level, are thereby, upon a Transverse Section, in part cut away.

6.. They have yet one more Diversity, which is, That in diverse of the
aforesaid Branches, they run not only through the Wood; but also shoot out
beyond it, into some Part of the Barque, as in Elm, Tab. 28, 34, 35.
Sumach, Wormwood, etc. Whereas in Pine, and some of the rest they either keep
not distinct from the other parts of the Parenchyma of the Barque; Tab. 32.
or are so small, as not to be distinguished there form.

7.. The Texture likewise of these Insertions is somewhat various. For in
Wormwood, Tab. 35.
and most Herbs, they are manifestly composed of small Bladders: differing in
nothing from those of the Barque or Pith, saving, in their being much less. Yet
in Herbs, they are much larger than they are in Trees. And in many Trees, as
Apple, Pear, Plum, Pine, etc. they are either quite lost, Tab. 36, 37.
or so squeezed and pressed together by the hard Wood standing on both sides,
as to be almost undiscernable.

8.. So that although the Parenchyma of the Barque or Pith, and the Insertions
in the Wood, are of the same Specific Nature or Substance: yet there is this
difference betwixt them; That the Fibers of the former, are so Netted together,
as to leave several round Vacuities; or to make a great many little Bladders,
whereas, in the latter, they are usually so far crowded up, as to run (as when
a Net is stretched out) like a Skein of Parallel Threads.

9.. Of these Insertions in the Wood, it is futher observable, That they do not
only run betwixt the Lignous Portions; but that many of their Fibers are
likewise all along distributed to the several Fibers, Tab. 40.
of which the Lignous Portions consist, and are interwoven with them; both
together thus making a piece of Linsy-Woolsy Work, or like many other
Manufactures in which the Warp and the Woof are of different Sorts of Stuff: as
in the end of the Fourth Chapter is further explained.

10.. THE WOOD is likewise compounded of Two Sorts of Bodies; That which is
strictly Woody; and the Aer-Vessels mixed herewith. The true Wood is nothing
else but a mass of antiquated Lymphaeducts, viz. those which were originally
placed on the inner Margin of the Barque. For in that place, there grows, every
year, a new Ring of Lymphaeducts. Which losing its original softness by
degrees, at the latter end of the year, is turned into a dry and hard Ring of
perfect Wood.

11.. So that every year, the Barque of a Tree is divided into Two Parts, and
distributed two contrary ways. The outer Part falls off toward the Skin; and
at length becomes the Skin it self. In like manner, as has been observed of
the Skin of the Root. Or as the Cuticula in Animals, is but the efflorescence
of the Cu^is. I say, that the elder Skin of a Tree, is not originally made a
Skin; but was once, some of the middle part of the Barque it self, which is
annually cast off, and dried into a Skin: even as the very Skin of an Adder,
upon the gradual generation of a new one underneath, in time, becomes a Slough.
The inmost portion of the Barque, is annually distributed and added to the
Wood: the Parenchymous Part thereof making a new addition to the Insertions
within the Wood; and the Lymphaeducts a new addition to the Lignous pieces
betwixt which the Insertions stand. So that a Ring of Lymphaeducts in the
Barque this year, will be a Ring of Wood the next; and so another Ring of
Lymphaeducts, and of Wood, successively, Tab. 25. 24, 34, 28.
from year to year. So the Table, for an Apple-Branch, shows a quarter of a
Slice of a Branch cut transversly, of Three years growth: That of Barbery, of
Two; That of Sumach, of One only; That of Elm, of Five.

12.. Hereby two things may be the better noted. First, the difference betwixt
the degrees of the annual growths of several Trees: three years growth in an
Oak, Tab. 33. 28.
being as thick as five in an Elm. Secondly, the difference betwixt the Annual
growths of the Same Tree; being not of a constant proportion, but varying in
thickness, as it should seem, according to the season of the year: whereby it
may appear, what season, or kind of year, does most of all favor, the
latitudinal growth, or the thickening of any Tree.

13.. The Lymphaeducts thus antiquated or turned into Wood, do rarely, if ever,
Bleed: but only transmit a kind of Dewy or Vaporous Sap. And some of them, as
in the Heart of some Trees, it is probable, That they transmit not any Sap,
either in the form of a Liquor, or a Vapor: and so being gradually deprived of
their Watery Parts, become the Heart.

14.. There is this further variety in the Wood; represented in Walnut, Fig and
Oak. That some certain parcels hereof, make either several small and white
Rings, as in Oak; or else diverse white and crooked Parcels, Tab. 30, 31, 33.
transverse to the Insertions, as in Wallnut and Fig. For it seems, that, at
least, in many Trees, some portion of all the Kinds of Vessels in the Barque,
are not only annually distributed to the Wood, but do likewise therein retain
the same, or somewhat like Position, which they originally had in the Barque.
So that as all those bigger and darker Portions of the Wood, were originally,
the Radiated Lymphaeducts of the Barque: so the little white Circles, or
Parcels of Circles, in the same Wood, were originally another sort of
Sap-Vessels in the Barque, sc. those which have a circular Position therein.

15.. In the Branches of Fir, Pine, and others of the same Kindred, there are
some few Turpentine-Vessels scattered up and down the Wood; Tab. 32.
and represented by the larger Black Spots. Which Vessels are eadem numero, the
self same, which did once appertain to the Barque; and do even here also in the
Wood, contain and yield a liquid Turpentine. Only, being pinched up by the
Wood, they are become much smaller Pipes.

16.. THE Aer-Vessels, with the Insertions, and true Wood, altogether make up
That, which is commonly called, The Wood of a Tree. The Aer-Vessels I so call,
not in that they never contain any Liquor; but, because all the principal time
of the growth of a Plant, when the Vessels of the Barque are filled with
Liquor, these are filled only with a Vegetable Aer.

17.. In almost all Plants, not one in some hundreds excepted, this is proper
to the Aer-Vessels; To have a much more ample Bore or Cavity, than any other in
the Wood. In the Wood, I say; for in the Barque, there are many Sap-Vessels
bigger than the biggest Aer-Vessels that be.

18.. The Varities hereof are very many; in respect both of their Number, Size,
and Position; being, as to these, the same, in no two Sorts of Plants
whatsoever. First in respect of their Number. So in Hazel, Tab. 23, 25, 26. 22,
24, 27. 29, 30, 33. 32.
Apple, Pear, they are very numerous; but in different degrees: and are
represented in the Figures already referred to, by all the black spots in the
Wood. In Holly, Plum, Barberry somewhat numerous. In Oak, Ash, Walnut fewer. In
Pine, and others of that Kindred, very few; sc. fewer than in any other kind of
Plant.

19.. Secondly, in respect of their Size; which from the first or greatest, to
the least, may be computed easily to about Twenty Degrees. Thus, many of those
in Elm, Ash, Wallnut, Fig, Oak, are very large. In Barberry, Tab. 28, 33. 22,
26.
Plum, not so large. In Hazel Sumach, smaller. In Holly, Pear, of a still
smaller Size. So that many of those in Elm, or Oak, are Twenty times bigger,
than those in Holly or Pear.

20.. In an ordinary joynted Cane, they are so wide, that if you take one a
yard, or a yard and long, and putting one end into a Basin of Water, you blow
strongly at the other; your Breath will immediately pass, through the
Aer-Vessels, the length of the Cane, so as to raise up the Water into a great
many Bubbles.

21.. And as they have a different Size in diverse Kinds of Plants; so likewise,
according to the place where they stand, in the self same. So in Holly, Tab.
22, 23, 25. 24, 28, 29. 33.
Hazel, Apple, their Size is more equal throughout the breadth of the Tree. But
in Barberry, Elm, Oak, Ash, very different: Not fortuitously, but always much
after the same manner. For in all the last named Branches, the Aer-Vessels that
stand in the inner margin of each annual Ring, are all vastly bigger, than any
of those that stand in the outer part of the King.

22.. Thirdly, these Aer-Vessels are also different in their Situation. So in
Apple, Tab. 25, 30, 31.
Wallnut, Fig, they are spread all abroad in every annual Ring; not being
posited in any one certain Line. In others, they keep more within the compass
of some Line or Lines; either Diametral, or Peripherial. Tab. 22. 23, 32.
So in Holly they are Radiated, or run in even Diametral Lines betwixt the Pith
and the Barque. So also are some of of them in Hazel; and some few in Wallnut.

23.. Whether they stand Irregularly, or are Radiated, it is to be noted, That
Nature, for the most part, so disposes of them, that many of them may still
stand very near the Insertions. So in Apple, she will rather decline making an
even Line; or in Holly, will rather break that Line into Parcels, than that the
Aer-Vessels shall stand remote from the Insertions. To what end this is done,
shall be said hereafter.

24.. Again, in Ash, the Aer-Vessels are none of them Radiated, but most of
them stand in Circles on the inner Margin of every annual Ring. Tab. 24. 29.
28. 26, 27.
Which Circle is sometimes very thick, as in Ash and Barberry. In others but
thin, the Vessels standing, for the most part, single throughout the Circles;
as in Elm. Sometimes again, they both make a Circle, and are also spread
abroad; as in Pear and Plum.

25.. Those likewise which are spread abroad, are sometimes Regularly posited.
Tab. 24.
So in Barberry, besides those larger, that make the Circle, there are other
smaller ones, that stand, in oblique Lines, athwart one another; almost like a
Bend, or sometimes, an entire or broken Saltyr in an Escutcheon. Tab. 33. 38.
In Oak, they make rather certain Columns, in the posture of the Pale. And in
Elm, they make, as it were, many cross Parcels, in the posture of the Fess.

26.. This great difference in the Size and Position of the Aer-Vessels, in the
same individual Plant, is one ground, for which, I think it probable, That
there are diverse Kinds of Aer-Vessels, as well as of Sap-Vessels. Even as in
Animals, there are diverse Kinds of Organs for Spiration, and the separation of
Aer: Fishes having their Branchiae; Land-Animals their Lungs; and those in
Frogs, etc. being of a somewhat peculiar Kind.

27.. THE Form and Texture of these Vessels, and the various ways whereby they
may be best observed, I have already described and showed in my Anatomy of
Roots. P. 1. c. 4.
As to their Form, one thing remarqued was this; That they are never Ramified,
but distinctly continued from one end of a Plant, small or great, to the other:
as the Nerves are in Animals. A further and easy proof whereof, may be made,
only by holding up a piece of an ordinary Cane, about a foot long, cut very
smooth at both ends, against a full light: whereupon, if you keep it in a
straight Line betwixt the Light, and the cast of your Eye, and then look
steadily, you may see quite through it, that is, through the Aer-Vessels, which
run straight along the Cane from end to end.

28.. As to their Texture; whereas, oftentimes, the Aer-Vessels appear to be
unroaved in the form of a very small Plate, it is to be noted, That it is not
only of different breadth, in diverse Plants, and usually much broader in the
Root, than in the Trunk: but also, that in the Trunk, many times, the said
Vessels are unroaved or resolved, not in the form of a Plate, but of a
Round-Thred. The Causes of which Diversity, are principally Three; viz. The
Weftage of the Fibers of which the Aer-Vessels consist; The deference betwixt
the said Fibers, or betwixt the Warp and the Woof; And the different Kinds of
Woof.

29.. By the Weftage of the Fibers, it is, That the Vessels, oftentimes,
unroave in the form of a Plate. As if we should imagine a piece of fine narrow
Ribband, to be woun'd spirally, and Edg to Edg, round about a Stick; and so,
the Stick being drawn out, the Ribband to be left in the Figure of a Tube,
answerable to an Aer-Vessel. For that which, Tab. 39.
upon the unroaving of the Vessel, seems to be a Plate, or one single Piece,
is, as it were, a Natural Ribband, consisting of several Pieces, that is, a
certain number of Threads of Round Fibers, standing parallel, as the Threads do
in an Artifical Ribband. And as in a Ribband, so here, the Fibers which make
the Warp, and which are Spirally continued; although they run parallel, yet are
not coallescent; but contained together, by other Transverse Fibers in the
place of a Woof.

30.. And as the said Fibers are transversly continued, thereby making a Warp
and Woof: So are they (as in diverse woven Manufactures) of very different Bulk;
those of the Former, being much bigger, and therefore much stronger, than those
of the Latter. By which means, as Cloth or Silk will often Tear one way, and
not another; so here, while the Warp or those Fibers which are Spirally
continued, are usually unroaved without breaking; those smaller ones, by which
they are stitched or woven together, easily tear in sunder all the way.

31. And because the Fibers of the Woof, are themselves also of different Bulk;
therefore it is, That where they are more sturdy, as usually in the Root, they
require a greater quantity of Warp, that is, a broader Plate, to overmatch
them. Whereas, where they are more extreme small, as in the Trunk and Leaves,
one Thread of the Warp, that is, one Spiral Fiber, will be strong enough of it
self, and so, sometimes, be singly unroav'd.

32.. From the extreme Tenuity of these Fibers, it is, That they are very
rarely discerned, and not without the greatest difficulty. As also, from their
great Tenderness; whereby not enduring to be drawn out, they all break off
close to the Sides of the Spiral ones. In the Pith, the like Transverse Fibers
are a little more visible: which first conducted Me to the notice of them here
also.

33.. All the Fibers of the Aer-Vessels, both the Warp and the Woof, are of the
same Substantial Nature with the Pith and the other Parenchymous Parts of a
Plant. From whence it is, That whereas the Towy Parts of a Plant, whereof all
Linen Manufactures are made, are very Strong and Tough; these, as is abovesaid,
are extreme Tender and Brittle, like those of the Pith and all the Pithy Parts.
To which therefore, the Aer-Vessels are to be referred. And the Content of
both, is oftentimes the same.

34.. From whence, we have a further proof of what I have formerly asserted, B.
1. c. 7.. 13, 14.
which is, That in all Plants, there are Two Substantially different Parts, and
no more than Two, viz. the Pithy, and the Towy or Lignous Parts.

35.. From hence also we have some ground to conjecture, That so many of the
Aer-Vessels, at least, which are not formed with the seed, but post-nate, are
originated from the Parenchymous Parts; which seem by some alteration in the
Quality, Position and Texture of the Fibers, to be Transformed into
Aer-Vessels, as Caterpillars are into Flies. And as the Pith it self, by the
Rupture and Shrinking up of several Rows of Bladders, does oftentimes become
Tubulary: So is it also probable, that in the other Parenchymous Parts, one
single Row or File of Bladders evenly and perpendicularly piled; may sometimes,
by the shrinking up of their Horizontal Fibers, all regularly breakone into
another and so make one continued Cavity; or a Tube, whose Diametre is the same
with that of the Bladders, whereof it is composed. All which, will appear more
probable, and what has been said, be yet better understood, when we come, in
the next Chapter, to the Description of the Pith.

CHAP. IV. Of the PITH.
THE Third General Part of a Branch is the Pith. Which though it have a
different name from the Parenchyma in the Barque, and the Insertions in the
Wood; yet, as to its Substance, it is the very same with them both. Whereof
there is a double evidence, sc. their Continuity, and the sameness of their
Texture. Their Texture shall be showed presently. As to their Continuity, it is
to be noted, That as the Skin is continuous with the Parenchyma of the Barque;
and this Parenchyma likewise, with the Insertions in the Wood; so these
Insertions again, running through the Wood, are also continuous with the Pith.
So that the Skin, Parenchyma, Insertions, and Pith, are all One entire piece of
Work; being only filled up, in diverse manners, with the Vessels.

2.. The Size of the Pith is various, being not the same in any two Branches
here represented. Tab. 24, 31, 34, 35. 22, 29, 30, 32. 23, 25, 26, 35. 27. 28.
In Wormwood, Sumach, Fig, Barbery, it is very large; sc. betwixt 5, and 7
Inches Diametre, as it appears through the Microscope. In Pine, Ash, Holly,
Walnut, not so large; from 3 Inches Diameter to 4. In Oak, Apple, Pear, Hazel,
lesser, scarce from 2, to 3. In Damascene, not above an Inch and half. And in
Elm, scarce an Inch Diameter. Note also, that of all Plants, both Herbs, and
Shrubs, have generally the largest Piths, in proportion with the other Parts of
the same Branch, as in Sumach, Fig, Barbery, is manifest.

3.. It is also worth the noting, That whereas, in most Plants, the Barque and
Wood do both grow thicker every year: the Pith, on the contrary, grows more
slender; So that in a Branch of one years growth, it is apparently more ample,
than in one of two; and in a Branch of two, than in one of three; and so on.

4.. The Pith, for the most part, if not always, in the Branch, as well as the
Root, is furnished with a certain number of Sap-Vessels. They are here usually
so postur'd, as to make a Ring on the Margin of the Pith. Where they are more
numerous, or large, they are more evident; Tab. 30, 31, 32.
as in Walnut, Fig, Pine, and others. They are also of diverse Kinds, answerable
to those in the Barque; as in Wallnut, Lymphaeducts; in Fig, Lacteals; in Pine,
Resiniferous.

5.. The Parenchyma of the Pith is composed of Bladders. Which are the very
same with those in the Barque, and oftentimes in the Insertions within the
Wood. Only these in the Pith, are of the largest Size; those in the Barque, of
a lesser; and those of the Insertions least of all: for which reason they are
less obvious than in the Pith.

6.. The Bladders of the Pith, though always comparatively Great; Tab. 24, 31.
yet are of very different Sizes. Being easily distinguished, even as to their
Horizontal Area, to Twenty Degrees. Those of Fig, Barberry, and some others,
are somewhat large. And of many Herbs; as of Thistle, Tab. 39.
Borage, and others, three times as big again; appearing in the Microscope,
like to the largest Cells of an Honeycomb. Those of Plum, Wormwood, Sumach,
less. Of Elm, Apple, Pear, lesser. Of Holly and Oak, Tab. 32.
still less. So that the Bladders of the Pith in Borage or Common Thistle, are
of that Size, as to contain, within the compass only of their Horizontal Area,
about twenty Bladders of the Pith of Oak. Wherefore one whole Bladder in
Thistle, is, at least an hundred times bigger, than another in Oak.

7.. Of the Size of these Bladders of the Pith, it is also to be noted, That it
does not at all follow the Size of the Pith it self; but is still varied,
according as Nature designeth the Pith for various use. Thus, whereas the Pith
of Sumach, is Larger than that of Barberry; it might be thought, that the
Bladders, whereof it is composed, should be likewise Larger: Yet are they Three
times as Small again in Sumach, Tab. 24, 34. 26, 27. 22, 23.
as they are in Barberry. So the Pith of Plum, is far Less, than that of Pear;
yet the Bladders of the former are Four or Five times as big, as those of the
latter. So the Pith of Hazel is almost Three times as Little again, as that of
Holly; yet the Bladders in Hazel, are Ten times bigger, than in Holly.

8.. The Shape of the Bladders has also some Variety. For although, for the
most part, they are more round; yet oftentimes they are angular: as in
Reed-grass, a Water-plant; where they are Gubical; and in Borage, Thistle, and
many others, where they are pentangular, sexangular and septangular.

9.. Of the Texture of the Bladders, it is also to be noted, that many times,
the Sides of the greater Bladders are composed of lesser; as is often seen in
those of Borage, Bulrush, and some other Plants. In the same manner, as the
Sap-Vessels, are but greater Fibers made up of lesser.

10.. The Pith, though always originally composed of Bladders, and so One
Entire Piece; yet in process, as the Plant grows up, it has diverse openings or
Ruptures made in it: oftentimes very regularly, and always for good use, and
with constancy observed in the same Species of Plants. In Sharp-poynted Dock,
many of the Pores are considerably prolonged by the length, like small Pipes.
In Walnut it shrinketh up into transverse Filmes or Membranes; Tab. 19.
as likewse sometimes in Spanish-Broom. Sometimes the Pith is hollow or
Tubulary: either throughot the Trunk, as in Thistle, Endive, Scorzonera,
Marsh-Mallow: or so, as to remain entire at every joint; as in Sonchus, Nettle,
Teasle; in which it is divided as it were into several Stories: and diverse
other ways.

11.. I SHALL conclude this discourse with a further illustration of the
Texture of the Pith, and of the whole Plant, as consequent thereupon. I say
therefore, (and have given some account hereof in the Anatomy of Roots) That as
the Vessels of a Plant, sc. the Aer-Vessels and the Lymphaeducts are made up of
Fibers; according to what I have in this Discourse above said; so the Pith of a
Plant, or the Bladders whereof the Pith consists are likewise made up of
Fibers. Which is true also of the Parenchyma of the Barque. And also of the
Insertions in the Wood. Yea, and of the Fruit, and all other Parenchymous Parts
of a Plant. I say, that the very Pulp of an Apple, Pear, Cucumber, Plum, or any
other Fruit, is nothing else but a Ball of most extreme small transparent
Threads or Fibers, all wrapped and stitched up (though in diverse manners)
together. And even all those Parts of a Plant, which are neither formed into
visible Tubes, nor into Bladders, are yet made up of Fibers. Which, though it
be difficul to observe, in any of those Parts which are closer wrought and
principally in the Insertions of some Trees: yet in the Pith, especially of
some Plants, which consists of more open work, they are more visible. Which
introduces the observation of them in all other Parenchymous Parts. Tab. 38.
So in the Pith of a Bulrush of the Common Thistle, and some other Plants; not
only the Threads of which the Bladders; but also the single Fibers, of which the
Threads are composed; may sometimes with the help of a good Glass, be distinctly
seen. Yet one of these Fibers, may reasonably be computed to be a Thousand
times smaller than an Horse-Hair.

12.. The Fibrosity of the Parenchyma is also visible in some Woods, in which,
it is apparently mixed with the Lignous Parts, not only by Insertions, but per
minimas Parts organicas. That is to say, The Parenchymous Fibers, like smaller
Threads, are either wraped round about both the Lignous and the Aer-Vessels, or
at least interwoven with them, and with every Fiber of every Vessel: Tab. 39.
as in very white Ash or Fir-Wood, with an advantageous posture and light, may
be observed.

13.. WHENCE it follows, that the whole Substance, or all the Parts of a Plant,
so far as Organical, they also consist of Fibers. Of all which Fibers those of
the Lymphaeducts, run only by the Length of the Plant: those of the Pith,
Insertions, and Parenchyma of the Barque, run by the breadth or horizontally:
those of the Aer-Vessels, fetch their Circuit by the Breadth, and continue it
by the Length.

14.. By which means, the said Parenchymous Fibers, in fetching their
horizontal Circles, do thus weave, and make up the Bladders of the Pith, in
Open-Work. And the same Fibers being thence continued; they also weave and make
up the Insertions, but in Close-Work. Betwixt which Insertions, the Vessels
being likewise transversly interjected, some of the same Fibers wrap themselves
also about these; thus tying many of them together, and so making those several
Conjugations and Braces of the Vessels, which I have formerly described. And as
some of these Horizontal Fibers are wraped about the Vessels; so also about the
Fibers, whereof the Vessels are composed. By which means it is, Tab. 40.
that all the Fibers of the Vessels are Tacked or Stitched up close together
into One Coherent Piece. Much after the same manner, as the Perpendicular
Splinters or Twigs of a Basket, are, by those that run in and out Horizontally.
And the same Horizontal Fibers, being still further produced into the Barque;
they there compose the same work over again (only not so open) as in the Pith.

15.. SO THAT the most unfeigned and proper resemblance we can at present, make
of the whole Body of a Plant, is, To a piece of fine Bone-Lace, when the Women
are working it upon the Cushion, For the Pith, Insertions, and Parenchyma of
the Barque, are all extreme Fine and Perfect Lace-Work: the Fibers of the Pith
running Horizontally, as do the Threads in a Piece of Lace; and bounding the
several Bladders of the Pith and Barque, as the Threads do the several Holes of
the Lace; and making up the Insertions without Bladders, or with very small
ones, as the same Threads likewise do the close Parts of the Lace, which they
call the Cloth-Work. And lastly, both the Lignous and Aer-Vessels, stand all
Perpendicular, and so cross to the Horizontal Fibers of all the said
Parenchymous Parts; even as in a Piece of Lace upon the Cushion, the Pins do to
the Threads. The Pins being also conceived to be Tubular, and prolonged to any
length; and the same Lace-Work to be wrought many Thousands of times over and
over again, to any thickness or hight, according to the hight of any Plant. And
this is the true Texture of a Plant: and the general composure, not only of a
Branch, but of all other Parts from the Seed to the Seed.

An Account of the VEGETATION OF TRUNKS Grounded upon the foregoing ANATOMY.
PART II.
HAVING before given the Anatomy of Trunks; I shall next proceed to see, what
Use may be made thereof; and principally, to explicate the manner of their
Vegetation. In doing which, that former Method, which I used in showing the
manner of the Growth of Roots, I shall not exactly follow. For so, in regard
the Organical Parts of the Root and Trunk are the same, and consequently their
Nutrition and Conformation are effected in the same way; I should hereby be
obliged to a nauseous and unprofitable repetition of many things already said.
The Explication therefore of all those Particulars, which more especially
belong to the Trunk, or are more Apparent therein, and not spoken of, or not so
fully, in the former Books, will be my present Task. The chief Heads whereof,
shall be these Seven following, viz.

FIRST, the Motion and Course of the Sap. SECONDLY, The Motion and Course of
the Aer. THIRDLY, The Structure of the Parts. FOURTHLY, The Generation of
Liquors. FIFTHLY, The Figuration of Trunks. SIXTHLY, The Motion of Trunks.
SEVENTHLY, And lastly the Nature of Trunks as variously fitted for Mechanical
Use.
CHAP. I. Of the Motion and Course of the Sap.
FIRST, as to the Course of the Sap, there are Three Parts in which it moves;
sc. the Pith, the Wood, and the Barque First the Pith; in which the Sap moves
the First year, and only the First year. Or, it is Proprium quarto modo, to the
Pith of every Annual Growth, and to the Pith of such a Growth only, To be
succulent. That is, whether of a Sprout from a Seed, or of a Sucker from a
Root, or of a Cyon from a Branch; The Pith is always found the First year full
of Sap. But the Second year, the same individual Pith, always becomes dry, and
so it continues ever after.

2.. One cause whereof is, that the Lymphaeducts in the Barque, being the first
year adjacent to the Pith; they do all that time, transfuse part of their Sap
into it, and so keep it always Succulent. But the same Lymphaeducts, the year
following, are turned into Wood; and the Vessels which are then generated, and
carry the Sap, stand beyond them, in the Barque. So that the Sap being now more
remote from the Pith, and intercepted by the new Wood, it cannot be transfused,
with that sufficient force and plenty as before, into the Pith; which
therefore, from the first year, always continues dry.

3.. THE SECOND Part in which the Sap moves, sub forma liquoris, is the Wood.
Which yet, it does not in all Plants, but only in some; and visibly, in very
few; as in the Vine: In a Vine, I say, the Sap does visibly ascend by the Wood.
And this it does, not only the first year, but every year, so long as the Vine
continues to grow. But although this ascent, in or through the Wood, be every
year; yet it is only in the Spring, for about the space of a Month; sc. in
March and April.

4.. There are many other Trees, besides the Vine, wherein, about the same time
of the year, the Sap ascends, though not so copiously, yet chiefly, in the
Wood. For if we take a Branch of two or three years growth, suppose of Sallow,
and having first cut the same transversely; if the Barque be then also
transversely, and with some force, pressed with the back of the knife, near the
newly cut end; the Sap will very plainly rise up out of the utmost Ring of
Wood. And if it be pressed in the same manner, or a little more strongly, about
an Inch lower, the Sap will ascend out of every Ring of Wood to the Center. Yet
at the same time, which is to be noted, there arises no Sap at all out of the
Barque.

5.. Whence appears the Error of that so Common Opinion, That the Sap always
rises betwixt the Wood and the Barque. The contrary whereunto is most true,
That it never does. For the greater part of the year, it rises in the Barque,
sc. in the inner Margin adjacent to the Wood, and in Spring, in or through the
Wood it self, and there only.

6.. THE THIRD Part in which the Sap ascends, is the Barque, as was above
hinted, and may be observed in almost any Branch, if cut cross, in the late
Spring and in Summer; either as the Sap issues spontaneously, or upon
pressing, as aforesaid. So that when the Sap cease to ascend, sub forma
liquoris, by the Wood, then it begins to ascend by the Barque.

7.. Besides the difference of Time, the Organical Parts likewise, in which
these two Saps ascend, are diverse. For in the Barque, it ascends visibly,
only in the Succiferous, whereas in the Wood, it ascends only by the
Aer-Vessels.

8.. FROM what has been said, we may understand, what is meant by the Bleeding
of Plants. If we take it generally, it properly enough expresses, The eruption
of the Sap out of any Vessels. And so, almost all Plants, in Summer time, do
Bleed, that is, from Sap-Vessels, either in the Barque, or in the Margin of the
Pith: the Saps they Bleed, having either a Sower, Sweet, Hot, Bitter, or other
Taste. At which time, the Vessels also, in the Barque of a Vine-Branch, do Bleed
a Sower Sap.

9.. But that which is vulgarly called Bleeding, as in a Vine, is quite another
thing; both as to the Liquor which issues, and the Place where it issues: that
is to say, it is neither a Sweet, nor Sower, but Tasteless Sap; issuing, not
from any Vessels in the Barque, but from the Aer-Vessels in the Wood. So that
there is as much difference betwixt Bleeding in a Vine, or the Rising of the
Sap in any other Tree, in March, and in July; as there is betwixt Salivation
and an Haemorrhage; or betwixt the Course of the Chyle in the Lactiferous
Vessels, and the Circulation of the Blood in the Arteries and Veins.

10.. NOW the Cause from whence it comes to pass, that the early Spring-Sap of
a Vine, and other Trees, ascends by the Wood, is, In that the Generation of
the young Sap-Vessels in the Barque, by which the Sap ascends all the Summer;
is, in the beginning of Spring, but newly attempted. So that the Sap having not
yet these Vessels to receive it, it therefore (pro hac vice) runs up the
Aer-Vessels in the Wood. But so soon as the said Vessels in the Barque begin to
be considerably increased, the Sap, declining the Aer-Vessels, betakes it self
to These, as its most proper Receptacles.

11.. THE CAUSE also, why the Vessels of almost all Plants, upon cutting, do
yield Sap, or Bleed; is the Pressure which the Parenchyma makes upon them. For
the Pith and other Parenchymous Parts of a Plant, upon the reception of Liquor,
have always a Conatus to dilate themselves. As is manifest from Sponges, which
are a Substance of the same Nature, and have a somewhat like structure. As also
from Cork, which is but the Parenchyma or Barque of a Tree. I say therefore,
that the Parenchyma being filled and swelled with Sap, has thereby a continual
Conatus to dilate it self; and in the same degree, to press together or
contract the Vessels which it surroundeth. And the said Vessels being cut,
their actual Contraction and the Eruption of the Sap, do both immediately
follow.

12.. IT may be also noted, That the Trunk or Branch of any Plant being cut, it
always bleeds at both ends, or upwards and downwards, alike freely. Which, as
well as diverse other Experiments plainly shows, That in the Sap-Vessels of a
Plant, there are no Valves.

13.. FROM what we have now above, and elsewhere formerly said, we may also
understand the manner of the Ascent of the Sap. As to which, I say, First, That
considering to what height and plenty, the Sap sometimes ascends; it is not
intelligible, how it should thus ascend, by virtue of any one Part of a Plant,
alone; that is neither by virtue of the Parenchyma, nor by virtue of the
Vessels, alone. Not by the Parenchyma alone. For this, as it has the Nature of
a Sponge or Filtre, to suck up the Sap; so likewise, to suck it up but to a
certain height, as perhaps, about an Inch, or two, and no more.

14.. Nor by the Vessels alone, for the same reason. For allthough we see, that
small Glass-Pipes immersed in Water, will give it an ascent for some Inches;
yet there is a certain period, according to the bore of the Pipe, beyond which
it will not rise. We must therefore join the Vessels and the Parenchyma both
together in this Service; which we may conceive performed by them in the manner
following.

15.. Let A B be the Vessel of a Plant. Let C E D F be the Bladders of the
Parenchyma, wherewith, as with so many little Cisterns, it is surrounded. Tab.
39.
I say then, that the Sap, in the Pipe B A, would, of it self, rise but a few
Inches; as suppose, from D to L. But the Bladders D P, which surround it, being
swelled up and turgid with Sap, do hereby press upon it; and so not only a
little contract its bore, but also transfuse or strain some Portion of their
Sap thereinto: by both which means, the Sap will be forced to rise higher
therein. And the said Pipe or Vessel being all along surrounded by the like
Bladders; the Sap therein, is still forced higher and higher: the Bladders of
the Parenchyma being, as is said, so many Cisterns of Liquor, which transfuse
their repeated Supplies throughout the length of the Pipe. So that by the
supply and pressure of the Cisterns or Bladders F D, the the Sap rises to L;
by the Bladders Q L, it rises to M; by the Bladders N M, it rises to I; by the
Bladders O I, it rises to K; by the Bladders PK, it rises to E; and so to the
top of the Tree. And thus far of the Motion of the Sap.

CHAP. II. Of the Motion and Course of the Aer
THE NEXT enquiry to be made, is, into the Motion and Course of the Aer. Where
this question will first of all be asked; sc. Which way the Aer first enters
the Plant; whether at the Trunk, Leaves, and other Parts above ground; or at
the Root? I answer, That it enters in part, at them all. For the Reception, as
well as Extramission whereof, the Pores are so very large, in the Trunks of
some Plants, as in the better sort of thick walking Canes, that they are
visible, to a good Eye, without a Glass; Tab. 19.
but with a Glass, the Cane seems, as if it were stuck top full of holes with
great Pins: being so large, as very well to resemble the Pores of the Skin in
the end of the Fingers and Ball of the Hand.

2.. In the Leaves of Pine, they are likewise through a Glass, a very Elegant
Show; standing all most exactly, in rank and file, throughout the length of the
Leaves. The Figure whereof shall be given hereafter, when we come to the
Anatomy of the Leaf.

3.. But although the Aer enters, in part, at the Trunk and other Parts,
especially in some Plants; yet its chief entrance, is at the Root. Even as some
Parts of Aer, may continually pass into the Body and Blood, by the Habit, or
Pores of the Skin; but the chief entrance hereof, is at the Mouth. And what the
Mouth is, to an Animal; that the Root is to a Plant.

4.. Again, if the chief entrance of the Aer, were at the Trunk; then, before
it could be mixed with the Sap in the Root, it must descend; and so move not
only contrary to its own Nature, but likewise in a contrary Course to the Sap,
throughout the Plant. Whereas, by its Reception at the Root, and so its
Transition from thence; it has a more natural and easy motion of Ascent. For
while the Sap ascends, that the Aer, in the same Plant, should continually
descend, cannot reasonably be supposed.

5.. The same is further argued, From the fewness and smallness of the
Diametral Portions in the Trunk in comparison with those in the Root. In which
Nature has plainly designed the same, for the Separation of the Aer from the
Sap, after they are both together received thereinto. So that the Reception and
Course of the Aer, is made on this manner following.

6.. THE Aer being a Springy Body, it insinuates into all the Holes and Cranies
of the Earth; and so is plentifully mixed therewith. Whereupon, as the Sap
enters the Root, more or less Aer still intrudes it self together with it. The
Liquid Portion of the Sap, swells and fills up the Succulent Parts of the
Barque. The Aerie Part, is, as was said, separated from the Liquid, into the
Diametral Portions. Which running from the Barque toward the Center of the
Root, and so passing along betwixt the Aer-Vessels; do hereby convey the Aerie
Part of the Sap from the Barque, into the same.

7.. Being thus received into the Aer-Vessels, and the Reception thereof, by
the same means continued; it is by them advanced into the Trunk. In which
advance, it is again, more or less, disbursed into all the Parts of the Trunk,
as it goes. Partly, inwards to the Pith. From whence, the Pith is always, at
length, filled with Aer. Partly, into the Insertions; by which it is conveyed
outward into the Barque. Wherein, it is in some part, transfused through the
Sap: and so the rest, with part of the Sap, remitted, in perspirations, back
again into the Aer.

8.. So that, whereas the Diametral Portions in the Root, do serve to convey
the Aer from the Sap in the Barque, into the Aer-Vessels, in the Wood: on the
contrary, the Insertions here in the Trunk, serve to convey the Aer from the
Aer-Vessels in the Wood, into the Sap, in the Barque. Wherefore, as the
Aer-Vessels advance the Aer, or the Aerie Part of the Sap, and so convey it by
the length of the Trunk; so the Insertions filter it, and convey it by the
breadth.

9.. AND that the Insertions have this Office or Subservience unto both Kinds
of Vessels; does yet further appear, if we consider, That the Aer-Vessels are
always so postured, as to touch upon the said Insertions, or at least to stand
very near them. For either they are large, and so do frequently touch upon them
on both sides; as in Elm, Tab. 28.
Ash, Wallnut, etc. Or if they are small; then they either run along in even
lines collateral and oftentimes contiguous with the said Insertions, 29.
as in Holly: 22.
or at least, are reciprocally, some on one side, and some on another, inclined
to them; as in Apple. By all which means, 25.
the Aer is more readily conveyed from the Vessels into the Insertions.

10.. A further evidence hereof is this, That generally, the bigger and the
more numerous the Aer-Vessels be; the bigger, or at least, the more numerous
also are the Insertions: Especially, if the comparison be made (as in all other
cases it ought to be, as well as here) betwixt the several Species of the same
Kind. So Corin, which has small Aer-Vessels, Tab. 17.
has also very small Insertions. But the Vine, has both very large: and so
for others.

11. Wherefore, the Insertions minister betwixt the Aer-Vessels, and the
Succiferous; in the same manner, as the Vesiculae of the Lungs, do betwixt the
Bronchiae and the Arteries. That is to say, as in an Animal, the Bronchiae
deposite the Aer into the Vesiculae of the Lungs; which administer it to the
Arteries: so in a Plant, the Aer-Vessels deposit the Aer into the Insertions,
that is into the Vesiculae of the Insertions; by which it is gradually filtred
off into the Barque and the Sap-Vessels therein.

CHAP. III. Of the Structure of the Parts.
A THIRD enquiry, is into the Generation and Structure of Parts. The manner
whereof I have already endeavored to explicate Lib. 2. P. 2.
from the Anatomy of the Root, throughout all particulars. Some whereof I shall
yet further clear.

1.. As First, the Union of the Barque to the Body of the Tree, Contrary to the
common Opinion, That they are not continuous; but that the Barque only
surrounds the Body, as a Scabbard does a Sword, or a Glove the Hand. As also
seems to be proved, by the easy Slipping of the Barque of Willow, and most
other Trees, when full of Sap, from the Wood.

2.. But, notwithstanding this, they are as truly continuous, as the Skin of
the Body is with the Flesh: sc. by means of the Parenchyma; which is one entire
Body, Tab. 19.
running from the Barque into the Wood, and so uniting both together; as in a
Branch of Vine or Corin-Tree, when the Barque is stripped off, is apparent; the
Spaces between the several Parts of the Wood, being silled up with the
Parenchymous, inserted from the Barque.

3.. Now the reason why the Barque nevertheless slips so easily from the Wood,
is plain, viz. Because most of the young Vessels and Parenchymous Parts, are
there every year successively formed; that is, betwixt the Wood and Barque:
where the said Parts newly formed, are as tender, as the tenderest Vessels in
Animals. And we may imagine, how easy it were at once to tear or break a
thousand Vessels or Fibers of an Embrio, of a Womb or Egg.

4.. THE same Vessels of the Barque being always braced, and gradually falling
off, Tab. 19.
together with the Parenchyma, into the utmost Rind: Hence it is, that the
Barques of many Trees, are as it were, latticed with several Cracks of diverse
Sizes, and sometimes in the Figure of Rombs: the said Fissures representing the
Position and Tract of the Vessels in their Braces. Hence also it is, that the
Barque of some Trees, as of Corin, Cherry, etc. falls off in Rings, sc.
because the Sap-Vessels are posited in the same manner in the Barque.

5.. The Sap-Vessels, as they are generated at the inner Verge of the Barque:
so likewise, in a small quantity, at the utmost Verge of the Pith. These being
not only fed with a more vigorous Sap, but with great caution, secured within
the Wood, for the propagation of the succeeding Buds.

6.. Hence also it is, that is, by the annual accretion of these Vessels, Tab.
18.
that the Pith is sometimes less in the Trunk, than in the Branches; and less
in the elder Branches, than in the youuger; and sometimes it is almost wholly
filled up. By which means, as the Branches carry every year a greater burden;
so they become still more sturdy the better to support it.

7.. SOMETIMES also the Pith breaks and shrinks up, thus making the Trunk a
Pipe. The cause whereof, is either the Largeness of its Pores, or the Thinness
of the Sides of the said Pores; upon both which accounts, the Pith does more
easily tear, and upon tearing shrink up, and so become hollow: as in Cichory,
Lampsana, Sonchus, Teasel, Brownwort, and others; wherein the Pores of the Pith
are Large, and the Sides of the Pores, Thin. Whereas, upon contrary accounts,
the Piths of most Trees, remain perpetually entire.

8.. THE Reason why Plants are made thus to become hollow, is partly, for the
ripening of the Fruit or Seed; which is the better effected by a more plentiful
supply of Aer continually received into their hollow Trunks. For by means of
that Aer, part of the Sap, is dried up, and the remaining part of it made
warmer, and so sooner matured.

9.. Partly, for the better determining the due Age of the Plant. Hence it is,
that the greater part of Annual Trunks, are hollow: the Aer contained in that
hollow, drying up the Sap, and shrinking up the Sap-Vessels so far, as to
hinder the free motion of the Sap therein; from whence the Plant must needs
perish. So that as the Content of the Aer-Vessels, is a kind of Vegetable Aer,
whose Office is to Attenuate, and Ferment the Juyces of Plants: so the Content
of these Cavities, comes nearer to a more common Aer, designed chiefly, so
soon as it is convenient, to dry them up.

10.. AGAIN, as to the Aer-Vessels, diverse questions may be asked. As how it
comes to pass, that they are generally less in the Trunk of the same Plant,
than in the Root? The Cause whereof is, that here in the Trunk they are more
under the power of the Aer; both that which enters in at the Trunk, and that
which of its own Nature ascends up into it from the Root. For the Aer, as we
have elsewhere said, is the Mould of the Aer-Vessels; to whose crooked or at
least, Acid Parts, the Saline, and other Principles concurring to their
generation, do conform. To which they do best, the smaller they are: the Fibers
of the larger Aer-Vessels making greater Circles, and so coming nearer to a
right Line, answerable to the Figure of the Particles, not of the Aerial, but
of the Saline Principle.

11.. Wherefore as the Aer-Vessels may be observed still to be dilated or
widened toward the lower parts of the Root; the Aerial Principle being there
less predominant, and the Saline more: So toward the upper part of the Trunk,
to be contracted or grow smaller; the Aerial Principle being here more
predominant, and the Saline less.

12.. FOR the same cause it may be observed, That the Aer-Vessels of the Second
years Growth, and the several years succeeding, are usually nearer of one Size,
than those of the Second and First; all being under a less power of the Aer,
than the First. For the first year the Pith being full of Liquor, the
Aer-Vessels themselves, are the only Repositories of the Aer. Whereas after the
first year, the Pith becoming dry, or another great Repository for the Aer; the
Aer-Vesseles are henceforth filled with a moister or more Vaporous and Saline
Aer, and so made to grow wider.

13.. Hence the very Size of the Pith, has much influence upon the
Aer-Vessels, and the manner of Nutrition, and the Generation of Liquors in
Plants.

14.. BUT for the most part, the Aer-Vessels are somewhat, more or less,
amplified in every new Annual Ring; or at least to a certain number of years.
Probably, because in the elder Branches, the Spiral Fibers, of which the
Vessels consist, are more bulky; and so make a Vessel of a wider, as a more
agreeable bore. Nature obtaining hereby, that the Quantity of Aer, shall always
be answerable to the Growth of the Plant, or at least, be sufficient to
maintain its Vegetable Life and Vigor.

15.. And therefore, as is above hinted, it seems likely, That after a certain
number of years, the Aer-Vessels are no longer amplified, but stand at a stay,
and perhaps may grow smaller, according as the Tree is less or more Longaeve;
and that after this period, it is some way or other in its Declining State.

16.. LASTLY, from the Content and Governing Principle of the Aer-Vessels, the
Time, when they begin every year to be formed, or to appear, is always later;
at least with respect to the season of the Tree. So that whereas the
Sap-Vessels begin to be formed in Spring: these, not till the latter end of
Summer, or there about; at least not till about that time to appear. That is,
when the Sap begins to decrease, and to grow more Aerie; and so more fit matter
for the Generation of the said Aer-Vessels.

CHAP. IV. Of the Generation of Liquors.
UPON the Structure and Formation of the Parts, depends the Generation of
Liquors, as was lately intimated. The manner whereof I have formerly showed, in
discoursing of the Root. Yet some things I shall here further explicate. And
First, what we have formerly asserted, sc. That the concurrence of two
specifically distinct Fluids, is as necessary to Nutrition in Plants, as in
Animals. Which appears, as from diverse other considerations, so from the very
Structure of a Plant: where in all the Organical Parts, or the Parenchyma and
the Vessels, are every where mixed together per minima, that is, per minimas
parts organicas, or Fiber with Fiber of several Kinds. Every small part of a
Tree, or of the Barque of a Tree, being as I may say, a sort of Linsy-Woolsey.
So that there is not the least part of the Sap, which is not impregnate with
diverse Essential Tinctures, as it is continually filtred from the Fibers of one
Kind, to those of another; standing every where woun'd and stitched up together
for the same purpose.

2.. FROM the special Nature and Structure of the Parts, the Liquors of Plants
are likewise specified. The Vessels being the chief Viscera of a Plant. For all
Liquors in a Plant, are certainly made by that Plant. And since the Plant has
no Viscera (so called) I would then know, what its several Liquors are made by?
If in the Parenchyma, surely by that Parenchyma. If in the Vessels, by the
Vessels. And if of diverse Kinds by diverse Kinds of Vessels. So that what the
Viscera are in Animals, the Vessels themselves are in Plants. That is to say,
as the Viscera of an Animal, are but Vessels conglomerated: so the Vessels of a
Plant, are Viscera drawn out at length.

3.. AGAIN, as the specifying of the Sap depends chiefly on the special
Nature of the Parts: so partly, upon the Structure of the Whole. Whereby every
Part is still better accomodated with its own Juice. Thus the Aer-Vessels are
necessary, not only and barely for a supply of Aer; but also by their Number,
Size, and Position to adjust the quantity of that Aer, to the government of
Nutrition, and the Generation of the Specific Liquors of every Plant. Which is
evident from hence, in that they do not follow the Size of the Plant; but are
great and many, in some small Plants; and small and few, in some others that
are large. So Vines, and Corn, as we have formerly observed, have
proportionably a great number of Aer-Vessels, and those very large. By which
means the Sap is attenuated and less Oily, and more copiously impregnated with
a Subtle, Volatile and Winy Spirit.

4.. For the same reason, the Stalk of Maze or of Indian Wheat, which when it
is Green yields a very sweet Juice; and the Canes, whereof Sugar (which
abounds with a volatile and inflammable Spirit) is made; these, I say, obtain
the like over proportion of Aer-Vessels, to what we see in most other Plants.
Hence also it is, that none of the said Plants have any considerable Barque;
that so the attenuating and subtilizing Aer, may have a more easy and
plentiful admission at the Trunk also. For which reason likewise the Pores of
the Skin of some Canes are, as has been said, remarkably wide.

5.. Hence also it is observable, that of the same Species or Kindred, those
Plants which have the most, and especially the largest Aer-Vessels; have also
the greatest abundance either of a sweet, or of a winy Liquor. So in Apple;
they are larger than in Crab; In Warden, larger than in Qnince; and in
Pear Tree, larger than in Warden. So also in Corin, larger than in Gooseberrey;
and in Vine, larger than in Corin: and so in others.

6.. AND as the Aer-Vessels, by their Multitude and Largeness, are accommodated
to the better making of a Winy Sap: so by their fewness and smallness, of an
Oily. As is remarkably seen in Fir, and other Resiniferous Trees: these
having, if not the smallest, yet the fewest Aer-Vessels of all other Trees.

7.. IF it be asked, how a Plant comes to have any Oil at all in any Part?
Since we see, that the Sap by which the Root is fed, seems to be nothing else
but Water* and that many Plants which yield a great deal of stillatitious Oil,
as Mint, Rue, and others, will yet grow in Water: I say, if it be enquired how
this Water, is made Wine or Oil? I answer, that there is no such matter. But
that the Oil, and all other Vegetable Principles are actually existent in, and
mixed per minima, though in an extraordinary small proportion, with the Water.
Even as we see the distilled Waters of Anise Seeds, Penyroyal, and the like to
be impregnated with their own Oils, which give the Taste and Smell to such
Waters.

8.. Wherefore, as a certain quantity of any Salt may be dissolved in Water;
beyond which, it will not mix therewith, but remains under its own Form: So is
there a certain proportion of Oil, though far less, which may also be perfectly
mixed with Water; and is certainly so, more or less, with all the Water in the
world. But if that proportion, or degree of impregnation be once exceeded; the
particles of Oil do then, and not till then, gather into a body, and appear
under their own Form.

9.. I say therefore, that all kinds of Vegetable Principles, are either in or
together with the Water, with less difference first received into a Plant. But
when they are once therein; they are then separated, that is to say, filtred,
some from others, in very different Proportions and Conjunctions by the several
Parts; the Watery by one Part, the Aerie by another, the Oily by another, and so
the rest: and so every Part is the Receptacle of a Liquor, become peculiar, not
by any Transformation, but only the Percolation of Parts out of the common Mass
or Stock of Sap. And so all those parts of the Sap, which are superflous to any
kind of Plant, are at the same time, discharged back by Perspirations, into the
Aer.

10.. AND, that Nature, in the various Percolations and Sepations of the Sap,
may still the better answer her end; hence, it is, that she carefully sees,
not only to the special Nature and Proportion of the Organs, by which she does
her work; but likewise to their very Position. Thus it is observable, That
whereas the Lymphaeducts, which carry a more Watery Liquor, are still placed on
the inner Verge of the Barque, next to the Aer-Vessels: the Lactiferous and
Resiniferous Vessels of Plants, to whose Oily Liquor a mixture of much Aer is
incongruous; do usually stand, neither on the inner, nor the outer verge of the
Barque; but in the middle. By which means, they are at the greatest distance,
and so most secure, from the Aer; either that which enters the Barque at the
Circumference, or from the Wood and Pith.

11.. AND because the Resinous Liquors of Plants are more Oily, than their
Milky; their security therefore, from the approach of the Aer, is yet further
contrived. In that in Pine, and other Resinous Trees, the Diametral Insertions
are never found; or at least, not visible: which yet in other Trees, are
conspicuous; being those Parts, whose office it is, to introduce the Aer from
the Aer-Vessels into the Barque.

12.. AGAIN, the Milky Liquors of Plants being thinner than the Resinous, and
having a considerable quantity of Water mixed with their Oil; hence it is, that
in Milky Plants, as in Rhus, there are a greater number of Lymphaeducts; and
those standing nearer to the Milky Vessels, than they do in Pine and the like,
to the Resinous. By which means they are better fitted to affuse their Aqueous
Parts more plentifully to the said Milky Liquor.

13.. FROM the Mixture of Watery Parts with the Oily, it comes to pass, that
whereas all Lympha's, Mucilages, and Rosins are transparent; the Aquae-oleous
Liquors of Plants are Milky or white* or otherwise Opacous. For the same thing
is the cause of the whiteness of Vegetable, as of Animal-Milk: that is to say,
a more copious mixture of Watery and Oily Parts per minima, or into one Body.
For even the Serous and Oily Parts of Animal Milk, when thoroughly separated
one from the other, they become very transparent. So the Stillatitious Oil of
Anise Seeds, is most transparent and limpid, even as Water it self: yet there
is a known sort of White Anise-Seed Water, as it is commonly called: that it is
to say, wherein the Oil, in distillation, arises and is mixed more plentifully
with the Water. And the Water, wherein the stillatitious Oil of any Vegetable
is dissolved, becomes a perfect white Milk; as in this Honorable and Learned
Presence, I have formerly had occasion to show the Experiment. See the
Discourse of Mixture


14.. AND that the Milky Liquors of all Vegetables whatsoever, are more Oily
than their Lympha's, is most certain. For all those Gums, which dissolve either
in Oil or in Water, as Galbanum, and the like, are originally the Milky Juyces
of Plants. And if you take the Milk of any Plant, as for instance, the Milk of
common Sumach, or of any Taste, Bitter, Astringent, Hot, Cold, or any other
whatsoever; and having well dried it, and then fired it at a candle; it will
thereupon burn with a very bright and durable flame, even like that of Tar or
Turpentine it self.

15.. FROM what has been said, we may likewise gather the most genuine import
of the word Gum, and the distinction thereof both from a Rosin and a Mucilage.
First, a Rosin, is originally a Turpentine, or Acidoleous Liquor, having an
exceeding small quantity of Watery Parts mixed therewith; and which, for that
reason, will not be dissolved in Water, but only in Oil. Of this kind are
Mastick, Benzoine, Ta^camahacca, and diverse others, commonly, in our Bills to
Apothecaries, called Gums. Yet in strict speaking they are all so many Rosins.

16.. Secondly, a Gum, and every Oily Gum, is originally a Milky Liquor,
having a greater quantity of Water mixed with its Oily Parts; and which for
that reason, will be made to dissolve either in Water or Oil. Of this kind are
Sagapen, Opopanax, Ammoniac, and others.

17.. The third sort of Gum, is that which is Unoylie, and which therefore
dissolveth only in Water, as Gum-arabick, the Gum of Cherry-Tree, and others
such like. This Gum, though commonly so called, yet is properly but a dried
Mucilage: being originally nothing else but the Mucilaginous Lympha issuing
from the Vessels of the Tree. In like manner, as it does from Cumfry, Mallow,
and diverse other Plants: and even from the Cucumer. The Vessels whereof, upon
cutting cross, yield a Lympha, which is plainly Mucilaginous, and which being
well dried, at length becomes a kind of Gum, or rather a hardened Mucilage. In
like manner, the Gums of Plum-tree, Cherry-tree and the like, are nothing else
but dried Mucilages. Or, if we will take the word in its widest sense, then all
Gums are originally, either a Terebinth, or a Milk, or a Mucilage.

18.. I have likewise made diverse Observations of the Tastes, Smells, and
Colors of Plants, and of their Contents, since those I last published: and
that both for the finding out the true Causes of their Generation, and also the
applying of them unto Medical and other Uses. Of which hereafter.

CHAP. V. Of the Figuration of Trunks.
THE Fifth Head, shall be, of the Figuration of Trunks. Which also, as well as
the making of Liquors, depends upon the Structure of the Parts. As First,
almost all Shrubs (caeteris paribus) have a greater number of Aer-Vessels; and
those of a smaller Size; and consequently much spread abroad, as most easily
yielding to the magnetic Power of the Aer, according as we have more fully
demonstrated, in speaking of the Vegetation of Roots: as in Elder, Hazel, Fig,
Sumach, and the like. By which spreading, the said Aer-Vessels do sooner, and
more easily strike into the Barque, and so produce collateral Buds and
Branches, and that upon the first rising of the Body from the Root: that is,
the Plant becomes a Shrub.

2.. BUT if the said Aer-Vessels are very large, they will not yield so easily
to shoot out collaterally; and so the Trunk grows up taller and more entire: as
in Oak, Wallnut, Elm, etc. wherein they are exceeding large, is seen. Hence
also the Vine, if supported, will grow to a prodigious length. And Hops and
Bryony, are some of the tallest, amongst all Annual Growths: the Aer-Vessels of
all which, are very large. Whereas Borage, and many other like Plants, although
the Pores of their Parenchyma, are vastly wide, and silled with Sap; yet
because their Aer-Vessels are small, they are therefore but Dwarf-Plants.
Wherefore the tallness or advancement of a Plant or Tree, depends not upon
the Plenty of Sap, how great soever, but on the Largeness of the Aer-Vessels.

3.. AGAIN, as a Plant or Tree grows either Shrubby, or Tall and Entire,
according to the Size of the said Vessels: so from their Position, does it grow
Slender or Thick. So, where they keep more within the compass of a Ring, as in
Elm, and Ash, the Tree, in proportion, usually grows taller, and less thick.
But where the said Vessels are spread more abroad, and especially are postured
in Rays, as they are in Oak, the Tree grows very thick. Because the said
Vessels thus standing all along nearer to the Insertions, there is a more ready
and copious passage of the Aer out of the one into the other; and so the
Diametral growth of the Wood is more promoted.

4.. LASTLY, from the same general cause it is, That the Trunks of Vegetables
are either Round or Angular. Those of all Trees are Round. Because the Barque,
being here thicker, and the Aer-Vessels bound up with a greater quantity of
Wood; the Aer has not sufficient power to move them, and the Barque with them,
into those various Positions or Figurations, as the Trunks of Herbs do yield to.

5.. Yet the cause of the various shapes of the Trunk, is not the Aer alone;
but partly, the Principles of the Plants themselves, in conjuction therewith;
according to the predominion whereof, and chiefly of some certain kind of Salt
or Salts, as I shall hereafter B. 4. P. 1. Chapter 6.
more particularly explicate) the Trunk is Square, Triangular, Pentangular, or
otherwise Figured. And thus much in general of the Figuration of Trunks.

CHAP. VI. Of the Motions of Trunks.
THE Motions also of Trunks are various. Principally Four; sc. Ascending,
Descending, Horizontal, and Spiral. The cause of the Ascent of a Plant, is a
certain Magnetic Correspendence betwixt the Aer and the Aer-Vessels of a
Plant; the Motion and Tendency whereof, the whole Plant follows. This I have
asserted, and I think, clearly demonstrated in my First and Second Books of the
Anatomy of Plants. I will here add this plain Experiment.

2.. Take a Box of Moulds, with a hole bored in the bottom, wide enough to
admit the Stalk of a Plant, and set it upon stilts half a yard or more above
ground. Then lodge in the Mould some Plant, for Example a Bean, in such sort,
that the Root of the Bean standing in the Moulds may point upwards, the Stalk
toward the ground. As the Plant grows, it will follow, that at length the
Stalk will rise upward, and the Root, on the contrary, arch it self downward.
Which evidently shows, That it is not sufficient, that the Root has Earth to
shoot into, or that its Motion is only an Appetite of being therein lodged,
which way soever that be: but that its nature is, though within the Earth
already, yet to change its Position, and to move Downwards. And so likewise of
the Trunk, that it rises, when a Seed sprouts, out of the Ground, not merely
because it has an Appetite of being in the open Aer; for in this Experiment it
is so already; yet now makes a new Motion upwards.

3.. BUT although the Natural Motion of the Trunk be to Ascend; yet is it
forced oftentimes to Descend. For the Trunk-Roots growing out of some Plants
near the ground, and shrinking thereinto, like so many Ropes, do pluck the
Trunk annually lower and lower into the ground together with them; as may be
seen in Scrophularia, Jacobaea, and many other Plants.

4.. IF these Trunk-Roots break out only about the bottom of the Trunk, as in
the aforesaid Plants, then the Trunk gradually Descends into the Earth, and is
turned into a Root. But if it be very slender, and the Trunk-Roots break forth
all along it, then it Creeps horizontally; the said Roots tethering it, as it
trails along, to the ground; as in Strawberry, Cinquefoyl, Mint, Scordium, etc.

5.. AS to their Spiral Motion, it is to be noted; That the Wood of all
Convolvula's or Winders, stands more close and round together in or near the
Center, thereby making a round, and slender Trunk. To the end, it may be more
tractable, to the power of the external Motor, what ever that be: and also more
secure from breaking by its winding Motion.

6.. Wherefore, Convolvula's do not wind by any peculiar Nature or Genius,
which other Trunks have not; but because their Parts are disposed so, as to
render them more sequaceous to the external Motor. Even as the Claspers of a
Vine, having the like Structure, have also a Motion of Convolution: whereas the
Branches themselves upon a contrary account, move in a straight Line.

7.. The Convolution of Plants, has been observed only in those that Climb.
But it seems probable, that many others do also wind; in which, B. 2. P. 1* Chapter
1.
the main Stalk, is as the Axis to the Branches round about. Of which number, I
conceive, are all those whose Roots are twisted; a Motion we observed in
speaking of the Root. Whether it be so, or not the Experiment may easily be
made by tying a Thread upon any of the Branches; setting down the respect it
then has to any Quarter in the Heavens: for, if it shall appear in two or
three Months, to have changed its Situation toward some other Quarter; it is a
certain proof hereof. And that hereby the Roots of many Plants become twisted;
the Motion beginning in the Stalk, and ending at the bottom of the Root, which
stands always fixed in the same place.

8.. The Convolution of Trunks, is made not one, but diverse ways; some moving
by South from East to West; and others from West to East. Wherefore it seems,
that as the Efficient Cause of Convolution, is not within the Plant, but
external: so also, that it is not One, but that there are Two Great Efficients
of this Motion; sc. the Sun and the Moon. Some winding together with the Sun,
in its Diurnal Motion, (or, if the the Earth moves, then, Inclining to the Sun)
by South from East to West. And others winding with the Moon, in its Monthly
Motion, from West to East.

9.. This possibly, may also be one sensible way of distinguishing betwixt
Solar, and Lunar Plants. Thus far, in general, of the Motions of Trunks.

CHAP. VII. Of the Nature of Timber or Trunks, as they serve for Mechanic Use.
THE last thing I purposed to speak of, is, Those several Qualities of Timber
or of Trunks, by which they are fitted for Mechanical Use. As Hardness,
Softness, Fastness, Clevesomeness, Toughness, Brittleness, Durableness, or any
of the same Qualities compounded. The Visible Causes whereof are observable,
Partly, in the Structure of the several Parts; sc. the Insertions, Sap-Vessels
and Aer-Vessels; as to the Number, Size, or Position of any of them. And
partly, in the Nature of the Parts; I mean such as is manifest to sense.
According to our clear and distinct observing of all which Causes, we may
understand, Wherefore any Wood is made use of for any certain purpose. And
also, wherein fitly to apply it to further Use. In order to which, a complete
History of the Mechanical Uses of Vegetables would very much conduce. I shall
for the present give some Instances.

2.. AS First, some Woods are soft, as Deal, and Sallow. Yet from different
Causes. Deal, from the great Porosity of the Wood it self, or the large Pores
amongst the Sap-Vessels. But Sallow, from the great number of Aer-Vessels
spread all over it. And therefore, though they are both soft, yet will not
serve for the same purposes; Sallow being well wrought upon, which way soever
you cut it: but Deal, especially the white Deal, if it be cut cross, it tears,
and will never polish or work smooth.

3.. Again, in Sallow, by the equal spreading of the Aer-Vessels, the Softness
is equal or alike in all Parts. For which cause it makes an excellent Coal for
Painters Scribets. Because it does not only make a light Stroke, but every
where certain; and so does not disturb the even Motion of the Hand. For the
same cause, Shoomakers also make use of it for their Carving-boards. Because
being every where equally soft, it turns not the edge of their Knives, Which
Deal would presently do; because though very soft in some places, yet in others
'its hard; that is to say, on the inner Verge of every annual Ring of Wood,
where the old Sap-Vessels grow much more compact and close together.

4.. AGAIN, some Woods are soft, but not fast; others are both, as Linn: its
Softness, depending on the numerousness and equal spreading of the Aer-Vessels:
its Fastness, on the closeness of the true Wood, and the shortness, and
smallness of the Insertions. For which cause, it is of excellent use for many
purposes; and particularly, for small Sculpture: such as may sometimes be seen
for the Frames of Looking-Glasses, or of smaller Pictures in Watercolors.

5.. SOME Woods, again, are fast, and hard, as Elm. Its hardness depending upon
the closeness of the Wood. Its fastness, Partly, upon the same cause; and
partly, on the smalness of the Insertions; as also on the fewness of the
Aer-Vessels in proportion with the Wood; and on the thwart and cross Position
of many of them. Hence it is, that Elm, of all others, is the most
Cross-grained Timber; that is, cleaves so unevenly, to and fro, according to
the cross Position of the said Vessels.

6.. Hence also it cleaves the most Difficultly. Even then, when it is without
any Knots. For which reason it is always used, as best for the Hub of a great
Wheel. As also for Water-Pipes, and for Pumps. Not because it is the most
durable Wood; but because it will not split or crack, either in the working, or
afterward. For the very same reason, it is used for Coffins; that is, because,
it will not split in working: not because it will endure longest under ground;
for Pales are always made of Oak. So also the Ladles and Soles of a Mill-wheel
are always made of Elm; as also the Keel of a Boat, sc. lest they should split:
but the other Parts are made of Oak.

7.. It may here also be noted, That the Planks commonly called
Groaning-Boards, lately exposed, as a kind of Prodigy, to the view and hearing
of many People, were of Elm. The Aer-Vessels of this Wood, being, though not
more numerous, yet more ample, than in any other Timber. So that upon the
application of the Red-hot-Iron, (...) was usual, and thereby the Rarifaction
of the Aer and Watery Parts (...) the Timber; every Vessel became, as it were a
little Windpipe for their Expiration. And as a great many Drops falling
together in a shower of Rain; so a great many of these Pipes playing together,
might make a kind of big or groaning noise.

8.. AS Elm, of all Woods, is one of the fastest; So, on the contrary, of all
hard Woods, Oak is the most Cleavesome, or splitteth the most easily. The cause
whereof is, partly, the Largeness of the Insertions; and partly, the Diametral
or Radiated Position of most of the Aer-Vessels: upon both which accounts,
wherever a crack is once begun, it is easily continued throughout the Diameter
of the Trunk.

9.. AGAIN, some Woods are hard, fast, and tough. So is Ash, and especially
Beech. Hard and fast, from some of the same Causes, as Elm. Tough not from the
Structure, but from the Nature of the Parts; whose Principles are united in a
more exact proportion. Wherefore London-Cars have the Rings of their Wheels of
Beech; because it tears more difficulty than even Ash it self. Whence also for
large Screws, there is no Wood like it. But for Small Screws, of about an Inch
Diameter, Birch is the best; as being, though not so hard, yet more tough.

10.. THE more Brittle a Wood is, it is likewise usually the more durable. So
Oak, which, with respect to its hardness, is not a tough, but very brittle
Wood, is almost as durable as any. Whereas Beech, Birch, and the like, although
very tough; yet for Duration, are of no service; for there are no Woods will
rot sooner: and therefore, though strong enough, yet unfit to make any Standing
Parts of Building, or of Furniture; especially in wet and moist places.
Because, these Woods, having a less proportion of Oil, than there is in Oak;
they are apter to imbibe the moisture even of a dank Aer; by which moisture,
they either Rot, or breed Worms, which destroy them.

11.. HENCE it is, that what we call the Heart of Timber, as it is more
brittle, so also more durable; sc. Because more Oily. So that which is called
the Sap of Oak, is much more tough than the Heart, although the Heart be more
durable. That is to say, the older the Wood is, the Watery Parts are the more
evapourated, whilst the Oily still remain, as a kind of Tincture or Extract
in the Wood. Even as we see, that the older Seeds of any one Kind, are more
Oily than those that are green and young. So that the Oily or Rosinous Parts
of the Sap, are a kind of Embalming to the Heart, or older Part of a Tree,
securing it from the destructive impressions of the Aer. For which Cause it is,
that Oak, Yew, Cocus, Guajacum, etc. which are Oily Woods, have always much
Heart, whereas Birch, Alder, Beech, Maple, which are very Unoylie, have never
any Heart.

12.. FROM hence likewise we may understand the Cause of the Toughness of Flax:
what we call Flax, being only the Sap-Vessels, or Lignous Fibers of the Barque.
And generally, the Barque of any Tree, as of Willow (whereof are usually made a
sort of Ropes) is very tough. The Vessels being here younger, and less Oily
than in the Wood. So likewise Hemp, is nothing else but the Sap-Vessels of the
Barque of the Plant so called. And Scotch-Cloath, is only the Housewifery of
the same Parts of the Barque of Nettle.

13.. WHENCE it is very probable, that there are many other Plants, as well as
the above named, whereof might be made good Tow. And of some, espcially in some
respects, better than of Flax it self. Because that even Hemp, although it will
not make so fine a Staple, as Flax (for all our fine Hollands are made of Flax)
yet Flax, which is but of the same fineness as Hemp, will never, by all the Art
yet known, be made so white as Hemp is made. The Qualities therefore of the
best Tow, that can be in Nature, are that the Staple be long, small, tough, and
white. So that if in the Barque of any Plant, we can find these Qualities, or
any of them, to excel; we may be sure, it will be of better use, in some
respects, for the making of Cloth, or other purpose, than Flax it self.

14.. I WILL conclude with one Instance more, and that is as to Grafting. The
good and happy success whereof, does certainly depend upon the suitableness or
respondence betwixt the several Parts of the Stock and Cyon; as the Barque,
Wood, and Pith; and that both as to the Number, Size, and Position of the said
Parts, and of their several Pores or Vessels: according to the degrees whereof,
the Conjunction (caeteris paribus) will be more or less prosperous. So that of
all such Conjunctions as are found to be apt and taking, and which some have
learned not without long Practice and Experience; another, only by comparing
the Branches of Trees together, may with little trouble, and in much less time,
inform himself. By the same means, some Conjunctions which seem to be strange,
as Quince and Pear, White Thorn and Medlar, etc. do yet, by the respondence of
their Parts, as well as by Experience, appear to be good. And there is no
doubt, but that many Conjunctions not yet tried, or not known to have been so,
may upon the same ground, be tried with good success.

15.. The chief Use of Grafting and Inoculation, is, That they Accelerate the
growth of Good Fruit. The Cause whereof, is the Knot, which is always made in
the Conjunction. By means of which, all the Sap is strained, and so ascends
up into the Graff or Bud, both Purer and in less Quantity; and is therefore
better and sooner concocted. Hence, the smaller the Fruit of any Tree, though
it be not the best, yet the Sap being there, in less Quantity, is the sooner
ripe. On the contrary, where the Sap ascends too freely, it does not only
retard the growth of the Fruit, but produces Barrenness; as is seen in those
luxuriant Branches, where it runs all up to Leaves. Hence also Vines, by
Bleeding, become more Fruitful: that is, by the Effusion of Part of the Sap,
there is a more easier melioration of that which remains. Even as Phlebotomy
does oftentimes produce a more healthful and better Habit of our own Bodies. To
conclude, the lessening the Quantity, and thereby the melioriation of the
ascending Sap, by Knots, is Natures own contrivance; as is seen in Sugar-Cane,
Corn, and other Plants.

THE ANATOMY OF LEAVES, FLOWERS, FRUITS and SEEDS. In Four Parts. The FOURTH
BOOK.

By NEHEMJAH GREW M. D. Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY, and of the COLLEGE of
PHYSICIANS.

LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, 1682.

THE CONTENTS. OF THE First Part.
CHAP. I. Of the Protections and Folds of Leaves. CHAP. II. Of those Things
which appear upon the Surface of the Leaf. CHAP. III. Of the Figures of Leaves;
and the Apparent Position of the Fibers. CHAP. IV. Of the Parts and Texture of
the Leaf. CHAP. V. Of the Duration of Leaves, and the Time of their Generation.
CHAP. VI. Of the Manner of the Generation of the Leaf. Where also, that of the
Two General Parts of a Plant, sc. the Lignous and Parenchymous, is further
explained.
To the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire
SIR,
AFTER I had ^inished the foregoing Books, In which, I conceive, as far as
Glasses will yet lead us, I have clearly Described and Delineated the Structure
of a Plant; and have endeavored, in some part, to Unfold the Reason and Scope
of Nature therein: I was willing to sit down, and leave what remained, to the
Improvements of the Present and Succeeding Ages.

But in Discourse upon this Subject, You have been pleased frequently to
insist, That I should by no means omit, to give likewise, some Examples of the
Mechanisme of Nature in all the other Parts. The Performance whereof therefore,
next to the Obedience I owe to the Royal Society, is to be looked upon, as a
Due to the Authority which Your Judgment has over me.

This I have said, that, if what is herein done, shall prove acceptable unto
Learned Men; they may know, To whom they are oncemore to give their Thanks:
After they have so often done it, upon (a better score) the Publishing of Your
own Excellent Works. In which, there seems to be a Question, Whether Your
Continual Endeavors, to enlarge the Bounds of Natural Knowledge, or Your
Successes therein, have been the Greater. So that, whereas Nobility in some,
does only serve to lift them, like Jupiter's Satellits, out of sight: You, by
giving a greater Light, have drawn all Men's Eyes upon You. And whilst there
are many, in all Ages, fond of Preheminency in the Conduct of Popular Affairs;
who yet rarely hit the Mark they aim at; or aim at That they pretend: You have
though fit, rather to separate Your Self, to that more Innocent, and more Noble
Sort of Wisdom, which lies, not in the Arts of Conceiling, but in Discovering,
the Truth of Things.

That we may have many to imitate You herein, cannot but be heartily wished by
all, who regard the Honor of their own Country; as it is, with much Zeal, by

Sir, Your most obedient Servant NEHEMIAH GREW.

THE ANATOMY OF LEAVES, PROSECUTED With the bare EYE, And with the MICROSCOPE.
Read before the Royal Society, October. 26. 1676. PART I.
CHAP. I. Of the Protections and Folds of Leaves.
IN THE General Anatomy of Plants, I have assigned one whole Chapter Lib. 1.
Chapter 4.
to the Germen and Leaf. Since then, I have occasionally made diverse Remarques
of the same; both with the Naked Eye, as there, and also with the Microscope.
The Principal whereof, I shall here set down; without repeating any from
thence; or obliging my self strictly to the Order there used.

2.. That which in a Germen, first occurs to the Eye, is the Protection of the
Leaves, or the various Methods which Nature takes to preserve them from the
Injuries both of the Ground, and of the Weather. To the Instances formerly
given, I shall add these that follow.

3.. AND First, it is observable of the young Buds of Ammi, that lest they
should be bruised, or starved, upon their first Eruption from under the Ground;
they are couched, as Firn is rolled, inward; each Bud, against the Base of the
Stalk of the foregoing Leaves, and most exactly laid up within the Membranes
thence produced: Just as the Child in the Womb, lie^ with his Head against his
Knees; or as it is afterward embraced with the Arms of the Nurse. And it is a
general Rule of Nature, where the Stalks of the Leaves are so long, that they
cannot lap one over another, and where no other special Protection is provided;
for the bottoms of the Stalks to be produced into broad Membranes, as Blankets
to the succeeding Buds; as in Crowfoot, Dovesfoot, Claver, Cransbill,
Strawberry, Yarrow, and others. And sometimes instead of two Skins lapped one
over another, there is one entire Skin, produced from the Stalk, in which as
within a Secundine, the Bud is safely shrouded; and which, in its Growth, it
gradually breaks open.

4.. THE same is also observable in Dock, Sorrel, Bistort, and all other Plants
of this Kindred; with this difference, That every Veil or Secundine is not here
produced from the Stalk of the Leaf; but has its Original Distinct from it.
And whereas in the former, every Bud has only one to it self: in these Plants,
every lesser Leaf, together with its own proper Veil, Tab. 41.
is always enclosed, with the next greater Leaf, in another Veil common to them
both; and both these with the next, in another; and so on to the greatest.
These Veils are extreme thin, and have very few Vessels; being so many meet
transparent Skins. For which reason, there is always found a Mucilage or clear
Gelly, between every Leaf, and its Veil, and between Veil and Veil. The one,
thus preserving the other, (as do the Humors and Membranes of the Eye) from
drying and shrinking up, and thereby from becoming useless for the Protection
of the Plant.

5.. THE Orchis, and other Plants of this kindred, because they Spring and
Flower early, when the mornings are cold, have a double Sheath, or Blanket over
all. The Buds of some Herbs (as of Plantain) having no Hairs growing on them,
are covered with Hairy Thrums. And the Nettle has Bastard-Leaves, or
Interfoyls between Leaf and Leaf, for the preservation of its Stings.

6.. ANOTHER Sort of Protection is seen in Wild Clary, White Archangel, and
other Plants of a like Shape. In which, the greater Leaves do still cover and
enclose the lesser, not by being lapped over them, Tab. 41.
as where the Leaves are more numerous, is usual; but by a Double Fore-Curl at
the bottom of every two greater Leaves; by which the little Under-Bud is
embraced, and so kept safe and warm.

7.. THE Leaves of Onions are all Pipes one within another. These Pipes are
every where entire, saving about the middle, where they have a small Aperture;
Tab. 42.
common to all of them, even the most minute in the Center: not being a forced
Crack, but a Door originally formed, for the issuing of every lesser Pipe, out
of a greater.

8.. THE LAST I shall give, is that which is remarkable in Common Sumach. The
Buds whereof, being exceeding tender, Nature appears sollicitous in a peculiar
manner, Tab. 41.
for their preservation. For whereas in other Plants, they are well enough
secured only by standing behind the Stalks of the elder Leaves: here they are
lodged within the very Body of the Stalk; as entirely, as a Kernel is within an
Apple, or a Foetus in the Womb. From whence it comes to pass that the Basis of
every Stalk is extremely swelled, as going Great with a Bud.

9.. UPON THE removal of those Parts, which are contrived for the Protection;
the Foulds and Composture of the Leaves do next appear: all which are most
aptly suited both to the Number and Shape of the Leaves, and also their
Position upon the Branch. In the First Book Chapter 4.
I have given Examples of these Eight Sorts, se. the Plain Lap, the Plicature,
the Duplicature, the Multiplicature, the Single Roll, Tab. 42.
the Double Back-Roll, the Double Fore-Role, and the Treble-Roll. To which I
shall add Four or Five more.

10.. And First, in some Plants, as Ground Ivy, St. John's Wort, and diverse
others, where the Leaves are small, pretty numerous, and grow by pairs, they
have no Fould, but stand Flat and Tangent, like a pair of Battledores clapped
together.

11.. They have the like Posture in Baum; saving, that here the Edges of the
Leaves are a little curled backward. Not Rolled, a Curl being but the beginning
of a Roll. So the several Labels of a Grounsel-Leaf are all laid in a Back-Curl.

12.. The Leaves of some Plants, as Horehound, White Lamium, Nettle, and
others, are likewise only Tangent, but are set with a Fore-Curle. And the
several Labels or Scallops of the Leaf of Common Crowfoot, are all Curled
Inward. But those of Hepatica aured, are composed into Double Fore-Rolls.

13.. THE Leaves of Sage, Scabious, Red Lamium, Lychinis Sylvestris, and
others, are neither couched one over another, as in the Bow-Lap; nor plated, as
in the Flat Lap; but being loosely foulded, of every pair of Leaves, the half
of one is reciprocally received between the two halfs of another, Tab. 42.
and may therefore be called the Cleep. A Position very well suited to the
Smalness of their Number, and the Equality of their Size, not so well agreeing
with the Bow-Lap; and the somewhat inward Posture of the Fibers, not allowing
the Flat Lap. Sometimes, as in Syringa, where the Leaves are broader, the Cleep
is joined with a Fore-Curle.

14.. THE last I shall mention, is the Plaite-Roll, as in the Lapathum Alpinum,
which some call English Rhubarb. The Leaves whereof are so very large, and the
Fibers so prominent; that besides and under the two Back-Rolls, they are also
laid in several Plaits, and under those Plaits, again with lesser ones, all
most exquisitely Tucked up between the said Fibers: So, as neither to bruise
the same, nor yet to leave any Vacuity: whereby every Leaf, and the whole Bud,
lie close and round within their Veils.

CHAP. II. Of those things which appear upon the Surface of the Leaf.
THESE are Globular Excrescences, Spots, Hairs, Thorns and Prickles: of all
which, except Spots, I have spoken in the Appendix to the Chapter of Leaves in
the First Book.

2.. Of the Globulets, it may here be further noted, That those which are
white, and lie sometimes like a fine Powder upon the Leaf, were once
transparent, as in Bears-Eear; their clear Liquor being now evaporated to an
Extract or White Flowers. This, if licked off, will give you the Taste of the
more Essential Content of the Plant; Tab. 43.
different from that perceived in chewing the Leaf.

3.. For the observing of them, it may also be noted, That although they often
grow on both sides the Leaf alike; yet sometimes, as in Ground Ivy, only or
chiefly on the Backside. And that in many Plants, where the elder Leaves have
none; on the young Buds they are very numerous; as in Corin Tree, Sorrel, and
others.

4.. AS for Spots, the smaller ones are observable not only in St. Johns-worts,
(in which Plant only they are commonly taken notice of) but also in Rue, Tab.
43.
Ground Ivy, Pympernel or Anagallis, and diverse other Plants, when held up
against the Light. The original whereof seems to be, at least in some, from the
Globulets above mentioned; that is, when they break and dry away. So the Spots
of Rue-Leaves, which in the Reflection of Light look black, but upon the
Trajection thereof are transparent, are so many little Holes, pounced half way
through the thickness of the Leaf, and seem as made, by the breaking and drying
away of as many Globulets. Whence also, as the Globulets are best seen in the
younger Leaves, so these Spots in the elder.

5.. BESIDES these, and some others (as those in Ladies-Thistle) which are
Natural to the Leaf; there are also some Spots, or rather Streaks, which are
Adventitious; as those in the Leaves of Sonchus. Tab. 43.
The Cause whereof, is a small flat Insect, of a gray Color, and about ^th of
an Inch long. Which neither ranging in breadth, nor striking deep into the Leaf;
eats so much only as lies just before it, and so runs scudding along betwixt
the Skin and the Pulp of the Leaf; leaving a whitish Streak behind it, where
the Skin is now loose, as the measure of its Voyage.

6.. THE Original and several kinds of Thorns, I have described in the above
said Appendix. I only add, that the very Leaves of some Plants, if they stand
till the second year, are changed into so many Thorns, as in the Furz.

7.. They are of Use, not only for the Protection of the Bud; but likewise, for
the support of the Plant; as is observable in those Climbers, which are neither
strong enough to stand of themselves; nor yet, from their fragility, are
capable of winding about another, without being torn all to pieces. For which
end also, these Thorns grow not like Buds, erected; Tab. 43.
but point all downwards, like so many Tenters or Hanging-hooks: as in the
Bramble, chiefly on the Stalks; and in Clivers, also on the Leaves themselves;
whereby they catch at any Thing that stands next them; and so, although such
slim and feeble Plants, yet easily climb to a very great hight.

8.. OF THE several Figures of Hairs, B. 1. Chapter 4.
and their Use, I have also spoken. Tab. 43.
As to one Use, sc. the Protection they give to the Leaf, I shall here further
note, That the design of Nature, is the more evident if we consider, That all
Leaves are not alike Hairy, nor at all times, nor in every part: but
differently, according to their Age, Substance, Texture, and Foulding up. Their
Age; for there are many young Buds covered with a thick warm Hair, which
afterward dries up and disappears, as useless; as those of the Vine, Golden
Liverwort, etc* Their Substance; so those Buds which are tenderest, and would
sooner feel the cold, if naked, have the fullest Hair; as of Thistle, Mullen,
Burdock, and others. Their Structure; therefore those Leaves, whose Fibers
stand more prominent or above their Surface, lest the cold should nip them, are
covered with greater Store of Hair; as in Moth-Mullen, Garden-Clary, and the
like. And their Fould; it being observable, That those Leaves which are solded
up inward, have little or no Hair on their inner, but only on their Back-Sides,
which are open to the Aer; as is visible in Corin, Warden, Golden Liverwort,
and others.

9.. Add hereto, That where there is Store of Hair, Nature is the less
sollicitous for other Covers; and where there is not, she is more. So the
Leaves of Beans and Peasen, of Nettle, Plantain, etc. not being Hairy, have
each a Surfoyl, or else certain Hairy Thrums, to protect them. And those Plants
which have neither, are such as have a Hotter Juice, and so less subject to the
impressions of Cold, as Speerwort, Scurvygrass, Watercress, Fenil, and most of
the Umbelliferous Kind.

10.. Hair is of use to preserve young Buds, not only, from the cold Aer, but
also from too much Wet; which, if it were contiguous, especially in Winter,
would often rot and destroy them. But being made to stand off in drops at the
ends of the Hair, does not hurt, but refresh them. Thus does Nature make the
meanest Things sometimes subserve to the best Ends.

CHAP. III. Of the Figure of the Leaf; and the Apparent Position of the Fibers.
THAT which in the Leaf offers it self next to be observed, is its Figure. This
is infinitely varied with the several Kinds of Plants: and there are some,
which have Leaves (besides the two first Dissimilar ones) of Two Kinds or Two
distinct Figures; as the Bitter-Sweet, the common Little Bell, Valerian,
Lady-Smocks, and others. For the Under Leaves of Bitter-Sweet, are Entire; the
Upper, with two Lobes: the Under Leaves of the Little Bell, like those of
Pancy; the Upper, like those of Carnation, or of Sweet-William. And in some
Plants, Nature assecteth a Kind of Irregularity; the Leaves whereof are of no
one certain Figure; as in Dragon, Peony, Bishops-Weed, etc.

2.. BUT the Leaves of most Plants, have a Regular Figure; and this Regularity,
both in Length and Circuit, always defineable. In Length; by the Proportion
between the several Leaves upon one Stalk, Tab. 46.
or between the several Lobes upon one Leaf. So the Leaves of Clematis Sylv.
major, which stand by Ternaries, shorten by equal Proportions, that is to say,
if, the chief Fiber of each, be divided into equal Parts; their several Lengths
are not as Ten, Eight, and Four; but as Ten, Eight, and Six. So the Lobes and
Fibers of Clematis Virginiana Hederae folio, of Artenuisa, etc. shorten in like
manner by equal Proportions. The same is observable in measuring, upon a
Gooseberry-Leaf, from the Point of the first Lobe, Tab. 46.
to the first Angle; from thence, to the second Point; from thence, to the
second Angle; and from thence to the third Point.

3.. But in many, the Proportion is different. So in the Leaves of the Lesser
Maple; the shortning of the smaller Lobes, with respect to the middelmost; is
not Equal, but Double to that of the middlemost, with respect to the Greater.
For if their chief Fibers be divided into Equal Parts, they are as Eleven,
Nine, and Five. On the contrary, in the Leaves of Althaea fruticosa
Pentaphylloidea, the middlemost Lobes shorten by a greater Proportion than the
Least; all three being as Ten, Fourteen, and Twenty.

4.. WITH respect to the Circumserence, the Figure of most Leaves is very
Complex. Yet Two things are evident. First, that all Regular Leaves, are
desined or measured out by Circles; that is, by the Arches or Segments of
several Circles, having either the same, or diverse Centers and Diameters.
Secondly, That the Length of the Leaf, or of the chief Fiber thereof, is the
Standard Measure for the Diameters of these Circles: these being either its
full Length, or certain equal parts subtracted, or multiplied; as half its
Length, or its Length and half, etc.

5.. TO make this appear, I shall give several Instances: of some, where both
the Edges are of one Measure; and of others, where they are different. And of
both kinds, where they are measured by fewer, and where by more Circles.

6.. The Leaf of Lagopus major fol. pennat. is measured by One Circle, the same
on both Edges, whose Diametre is Thrice the Length of the Leaf.

7.. That of Syderitis Salvia^ fol. by Two Circles: the Diameter of the Lower,
Tab. 44.
being Twice the Length of the Leaf; of the upper, the Length and half. In both
these the Circles are drawn Outward; that is, with their Centers some where
upon the middlemost or chief Fiber of the Leaf.

8.. That of Orange-Tree, is also measured by Two Circles: but one of them
repeated with Opposite Centers. That next the Cone of the Leaf, is drawn
Inward; that is, with the Center no where upon the Leaf, Tab. 44.
but without it. The Diameter hereof is just the Length of the Leaf. The middle
part of the Edge is measured by the same Circle, only drawn Outward. The lower
Circle next the Stalk, is drawn Inward, as the upper; and its Diameter Three
times the Length of the Leaf.

9.. The Leaf of the Venetian Vetch, is measured by Three Circles. That next
the Cone, Tab. 44.
drawn Inward; the Diameter whereof, is Twice the Length of the Leaf; the next
is drawn Outward; whereof the Diameter, is just the Length. The third or
lowermost, is drawn also Outward; and its Diameter, half the Length. So that
they all lessen by an Equal Proportion.

10.. The Leaf of Great Laserwort, is also measured by Three Circles; all drawn
Outward, and one of them Repeated. The Diameter of that next the Cone, Tab. 45.
is Half the Length of the Leaf; of the next, Thrice the Length; of the Third,
just the Length; the lowermost, is the same with the First.

11.. That of Broad Leaved Laserwort, is also measured with Three Circles; and
one of them repeated with Opposite Centers. The Diameter of the First, Tab. 44.
is Half the Length of the Leaf; of the Second, Twice the Length; of the Third,
just the Length: all of them drawn Outward. That next the Stalk, is the same
with the First; only drawn Inward.

12.. The Figure of the Leaf of the Cornelian Cherry, is exactly that of the
foregoing, Tab. 44.
Inverted: the same measure there beginning at the Base, and ending at the
Cone; which here begins at the Cone, and ends at the Base: as by comparing
their Draughts together may be observed.

13.. IN ALL, the foregoing Examples, both the Edges of the Leaves have the
same Measure. But they have oftentimes, different ones; as in these that follow.

14.. The Leaf of Althaea fruticosa, is measured by Three Circles. The left
Edge (as the Leaf lies with the backside upward) by One Circle, but Twice
repeated. Tab. 45.
For the Diameter of the First, is the Length of the Leaf; the Second is the
same, but drawn upon another Center; the Third also the same, but drawn Inward.
The right Edg, is measured by Two Circles: the Diameter of the First, being the
Length of the Leaf; of the Second, Half the Length.

15.. That of Black Poplar, by Three; and each Edge by Three repeated. On the
left, the Diameter of the First, is the Length of the Leaf; Tab. 45.
of the Second, Half the length; of the Third, the Length and Half. The Measure
of the right Edge, is that of the left, Inverted: the same Measure there
beginning at the Base, and ending at the Cone; which here begins at the Cone,
and ends at the Base.

16.. That of Doronicum, is measured by Three Circles, whereof, one is repeated
Once; and another Thrice. The right Edge by Two, and One repeated. For the
Diameter of the First or that next the Cone; is the Length of the Leaf; the
next is the same, but drawn Outward; the Diameter of the Third, Tab. 45.
is Half the Length. The left Edge, by Three Circles; whereof One is repeated
on the same Edge, and Two, the same, as on the other. For the Diameter of the
first, is the Length of the Leaf; of the Second, Four times the Length; the
Third, the same as the First; and of the Fourth, Half the Length.

17.. Lastly, that of Mountain Calamint is measured by Four Circles. Tab. 45.
The left Edge, by Three Circles, of which, the lowermost is once repeated: the
right Edge also by Two; whereof the nether is likewise once repeated.

18.. It may seem, even from these Instances, no very unobvious Conclusion;
That all Crooked Lines, Spiral, Helick, Elliptick, Hyperbolick, Regular, or
Irregular; are made up of the Arches of Circles, having either the same, or
diverse Centers and Diameters. And, as otherwise, so from the Contemplation of
Plants, men might first be invited to Mathematical Enquirys.

19. TOGETHER with the Figure of the Leaf, the Position of the Fibers, as it is
apparent before Diffection, is observable; especially on the back of the Leaf.
Whereof I shall add, to what I have said in the First Book, the following
Remarques.

20.. First, that there are some Leaves, in which the first Collateral Fibers
make Right Angles with the Great one in the middle: as the Great-Maple, the
Great Celandine, Chondrilla, and the rest, or many, of the Intybous Kind; with
some few others. But that generally all the chief Fibers of a Leaf, make Accute
Angles together: both where they stand collateral with the middle Fiber, as in
Strawberry; and where they all part at the Stalk, as in Mallow.

21.. Again, that of these, there are some few, any two of whose Defining
Fibers making two Rays of equal Length, Tab. 46, and 47.
take in One Eighth Part of a Circle, as in Mallow; and in some one Tenth: but
in most they take in either one Twelfth part, as in Holy-Oak; or one Sixth, as
in Sirynga. So that where the Fibers stand Collateral with one in the the
middle, if you suppose them to be drawn out at Opposite Angles; or where the
chief Fibers part at the Stalk, you only take in the Stalk; you will thereby
divide a Circle into Eight, Twelve, or Six equal Parts; as in Sirynga, the Vine
and others. And so likewise, where there are several Sprigs upon one Stem, Tab.
46, 47.
as in Fenil, Hemlock, and the like: as will best be understood by the Figures.

CHAP. IV. Of the Parts and Texture of the Leaf.
I COME next to observe the several Parts, whereof the Leaf is composed: and
first the Skin. This being stripped off the Leaf, although to the bare Eye it
looks no otherwise than a skin of Isinglass: yet being viewed through a good
Glass, with a clear and true Light, and in an advantageous Position; it appears
to consist not only of Organical Parts, as do the Skins of Animals; but these
also Regularly mixed together; that is, of Parenchymous and Lignous Fibers, all
very curionsly interwoven as it were, Tab. 48,
into a piece of admirably sine white Sarcenet: as in Flag, Tulip, and the like.

2.. From hence, it is easy to conceive how the Skins of all Plants, as well as
those of Animals, are perspirable; sc. between the several Fibers of which they
consist. But as the Skins of Animals, especially in some Parts, are made with
certain open Pores or Orifices, either for the Reception, or the Elimination of
something for the benefit of the Body: so likewise the Skins, of at least many
Plants, are formed with several Orifices or Pass-ports, either for the better
Avolation of Superfluous Sap, or the Admission of Aer.

3.. THESE Orifices are not in all Leaves alike; but varied in Bigness, Number,
Shape, and Position: Serving to the different Nature of the Plant, or Leaf; and
giving the Leaf, as it were, a different Grain. Princes Feather, i. e. a Sort
of Sanicle, they stand only on the Edges of the Leaf; but are very ample. In
the White Lily, they are Oval, very white, and each surrounded with a slender
white Border. They stand about a 6th or 8th part of an Inch distant, Tab. 48.
as they appear through a good Glass, all over the Leaf, but not in any regular
Order. These Orifices are the cause of the Greyish Gloss on the upper side the
Leaf: for the Backside, in which there are none of them, is of a dark
Seagreen.

4.. In the Leaf of Pine, they are also Oval, and about the same Bigness and
Number, as in that of a Lily; yet without a Border. But their Position is very
Elegant, Tab. 48.
standing all, most exactly, in Rank and File from one end of the Leaf to the
other.

5.. NEXT TO the Skin, lies the Pulpy part of the Leaf; which by the same
latitude, as Use has taught us in many other Words, I call the Parenchyma.
This Parenchyma or Pulp of the Leaf, like the Pith, and all other Parenchymous
Parts of a Plant is made up of incomparably small Cylindrick Fibers: and these
Fibers, in most Leaves, woven and woun'd up into little Bladders.

6.. The Bladders are here of several Sizes, as in the Pith: but generally more
visible in the Stalk, than in the Body of the Leaf. Tab. 4^,
Varied, as in the Pith, so here, not according to the Size, but the Nature of
the Leaf. So in Common Dock, and Moth Mullein, both Great Leaves, they are
Small; in Wild Clary, a Lesser Leaf, they are very Large. Tab. 50.
In the Body of the Leaf, sometimes the Sides of the greater Bladders, are made
up of lesser ones; as in Borage.

7.. In some Leaves, these Parenchymous Fibers are all drawn close up together.
In the Former, they are as the Threads in the Open-work of Bone-Lace; in These,
as the same Threads, in the Cloth-work.

8.. The Pithy Part, in the Stalk, and almost up to the Top of the chief Fiber,
in many Leaves, is Tubular; even whilst they are yet Young and Sappy: as in
Sweet Chervil, Hemlock, Endive, Cichory, Lampsana, Dandelion, Burdock, Daisye,
Scorzonera, and others. And sometimes the said Pithy Part is opened into
several little Pipes, like so many Aer-Vessels, above ^ a Foot long; as in the
Common Dock and the Little Spurge, by some called Wart-Wort.

9.. THE Strings of the Leaf, or those Fibers which are visible to the bare
Eye, are composed of Vessels of the Two General Kinds, sc, for Sap, and for
Aer. They are jointly distributed throughout the Leaf: Yet not so, as to run
merely parallel; as in Animals, every Artery has its Vein: but the Aer-Vessels
are every where Enclosed, or as it were sheathed in the Sap-Vessels.

10.. THEIR Position is various and regular, not only in the Body of the Leaf,
as is above showed; but likewise in the Stalk: of which also I have given
several Instances in the First Book. I shall here note, and more particularly
describe, One or Two more. In the Stalk of a Mallow-Leaf, they stand in Six
Oblong Parcels of equal Size, and in a Ring near the Circuit. Tab. 49.
Whereby the Stalk is stronger, the Growth hereof, before and behind, more
equal, and so the posture of the Leaf more erect.

11.. In Dandelyon, they stand in Five Parcels: of which the Greater stands a
little behind the Center of the Stalk; figured into a very small Half Moon or
Semi-Tube, whose Diametre, through a Glass, is not above ^th of an Inch. The
other Four, are extreme small Cylinders. Altogether make an Angle, Tab. 49.
twice as big as that of a V Consonant. Whereby, although the Stalk be strong
enough to support the younger Leaves; yet those which are grown longer, and so
not only by their Bulk, but their farther Extension from the Center of Gravity,
are become more weighty; commonly lie flat on the Ground.

12.. In Wild Clary, they stand also in Five Parcels, the Greater stands not
behind, but before the Center; making an Arch, whose Chord in a Glass, is above
^ an Inch long; and belongs to a Circle, whose Diameter is an Inch and half.
Tab. 49.
The other Four, are small Cylinders, also different from those in Dandelion;
the two bigger, there standing hindmost; but here, the two Less, and the two
Bigger, within the two round Ridges of the Stalk.

13.. From hence it is, that the Leaves of this Plant have not only a Prone or
Horizontal Posture, but also make that Forceable Pressure on the Ground, which
can by no means be imputed to their Weight. For the Great Arched-Fibre standing
before the Center of the Stalk, and the two Longer Round ones being uppermost,
in the Ridges of the Stalk; they put on the upper parts thereof to a more full
and forward Growth, and so to bow the Leaf back-ward. And the Fibrous Arch
being, though broad, yet almost flat, does hereby the more easily yield to that
Motion.

14.. In Borage, Tab. 40.
and Moth-Mullen, they stand also in Five Parcels. In the former, the largest
makes still a more bulky Arch, than that of Clary; being thicker, as broad,
and of a lesser Circle or more bowed. But in Mullein, it makes almost an
entire Oval.

15.. By means of this Figuration, a sufficient number of Vessels for such
large Leaves, are not only more conveniently Distributed into them; but also
stand more safely in the Stalk. For were the Arch contracted into a solid
Cylinder, it could not so presently be resolved into small Fibers. And were it
laid into a flat Plate, or straight out, either the Figure of the Stalk, and so
of the Leaf, must be altered; or else, the two ends of the Plate, would come
too near the Circumference of the Stalk, and so be more liable to the
Impressions of the Weather: as may be observed in cutting the Stalk
transversly, and by the Figures.

16.. IN the Body of the Leaf, besides the Positions of the Fibrous Strings or
Threads; above expessed, there is one Thread, bigger or less, which in all
Plants, runs round the Edge of the Leaf, and hems in all the rest; but can
hardly be well observed in any, without stripping off the Skin of the Leaf.
Tab. 50.
When the Fibers of the Leaf, are bigger, or less tender, as in Holly, the Skin
and the Pulp are sometimes found either rotted off, or eaten away with Insects;
whereby, both the said surrounding Fiber, and the rest, are all very fairly
visible.

17.. THE Vessels seem to be continued, in the Leaf, by being Ramified out of
Greater into Less, as Veins or Arteries are in Animals. But if the Skin and
Pulp of the Leaf, as suppose a Borage-Leaf be taken off, and the Vessels laid
bare; by the help of a good Glass, it will appear; Tab. 50.
That they are all of the same Size, every where in the Leaf; and also
continued throughout the same, all several and distinct Pipes one from another,
as the Threads in a Skein of Silk. And that therefore the Distribution of the
Threads which the Vessels compose, is not the Ramifying of Greater Pipes into
Less; but the dividing a greater Cluster of Pipes, into several lesser
Clusters, till at last they come to be single; as in the Distribution of the
Nerves.

18.. The Vessels seem also to be Inosculated, not only side to side, but the
ends of some into the Sides of others. But neither is this ever really done:
Tab. 50.
the lesser Threads, being only so far diducted, as sometimes to stand at
Right-Angles with the greater. So that they are Inosculated only End to End or
Mouth to Mouth, after they are come at last to their final distribution.

19.. The Aer-Vessels, are not only, as is said, Existent in the Leaves of all
Plants; but are herein also discoverable without the help of Glasses: For upon
breaking the Stalk or chief Fibers of a Leaf; the likeness of a sine Woolly
Substance, or rather of curious small Cobwebs, may be seen to hang at both the
broken Ends. This is taken notice of, only in some few Plants, Tab. 51, and 52.
as in Scabious, where it is more visible. But may also be seen more or less,
in most other Plants, if the Leaves be very tenderly broken: as I have noted
near twenty years since; and thence conjectured them a Sort of Vessel common to
Plants. Now this fine Wool, is really a Skein of Aer-Vessels, or rather of the
Fibers of the Aer-Vessels, unroaved from their Spiral Position, and so drawn
out in Length. As they appear thus unroaved and drawn out at Length, both to
the bare Eye, and through a good Microscope, I have represented in two
Exemples, the one a Scabious Leaf, the other that of a Vine.

20.. THE Weftage of the Strings and Parenchymous Fibers together, is here made
in the same manner, as has been described in the Anatomy of the Root, and
Trunk: the former being in some Sort as the Warp, the latter as the Woof of the
Leaf.

21.. And one Example we have (it may be more than one) wherein Nature shows,
though not a greater, yet a different Art; and that is the Palm-Net. For
whereas in other Plants, the Webb is made betwixt the Lignous-Strings and the
Fibers of the Parenchyma, only visible through a Microscope: here the said
Strings themselves are Interwoven, and the Weftage apparent to the bare Eye. Of
these Palm-Nets or Sacks, there are several Sorts. One of them is composed in
this manner. It has a Fivefold Series of Lignous Strings or Fibers. The
greatest whereof swell out above the rest; and like so many Ribs, are obliquely
produced on both hands, so as to encompass the Sack. Along each of these Ribs,
on the inside the Sack, runs a small Whitish Line; being a Thread of
Aer-Vessels growing thereto. Betwixt these Ribs or larger Strings, there are
others much less, Two or Three betwixt Rib and Rib, Parallelly interjected. On
the inside, there is a Third Series, which is also obliquely produced; but
transversly to the former. The Fourth and Fifth, consist of the smallest
Strings; not only Transversly produced, but also Alternately, from the outside
to the inside of the Sack, and vice versa. By these two last, all the rest are
most elaborately woven into one entire and strong piece of Work.

CHAP. V. Of the Duration of Leaves, and the Time of their Generation.
AN Evergreen, is one degree above a Plant which is simply Perennial: of This,
only the Trunk and Buds live all the Winter; of That, also the Expanded Leaves.
And an Evergrow, is a degree above an Evergreen: here, the Buds and young
Sprigs, do only live; there, they grow and are put forth.

2.. An Evergreen, is made such, either by the Toughness of the Skin, and
Closeness or Density of the Parenchyma, whereby the Leaf is better able to
endure Cold; as in Holly: or by the extreme Smalness or Fewness of the
Aer-Vessels, whereby the Sap is less dried up, and so sufficient, even in
Winter, for the Nourishment of the Leaf; as in Box, and Yew, as also Fir, and
all Resiniferous Plants.

3.. The perpetual Growth of a Plant, seems to depend chiefly on the Nature
of the Sap. For all Juyces will not ferment alike, nor with the same degree of
Heat. So that whereas many Plants require a greater Heat, as that of Summer,
for the fermenting and distribution of their Juyces, and so their growth; the
Warmth of Spring is sufficient for many others; and for some few, that of
Winter it self.

4.. AS TO the Time wherein the Leaves are formed; First, it is very probable,
That in those Plants which have Leaves (besides the Dissimilar) of Two distinct
Figures, as has the Little Common Bell, and some others; the Under-Leaves,
which differ in Shape from the rest, are all at first formed in the Plume,
before it begins to sprout; and the rest afterward; That is to say, that the
former Leaves, are all formed (out of Sap from the Trunk) with the Seed it
self, and so compose one Principal Part thereof, sc. the Plume: the latter, not
till after the Seed is sow'n, and so the Plume supplied with Sap immediately
from the Root. Which Sap, it seems, is so far different from the former, as
sometimes to produce a different Sort of Leaves.

5.. SECONDLY, of the Buds of all Trees, and of Perenni-Stalks, it appears,
That they consist of a great number of Leaves, all perfectly formed to the
Center; where, notwithstanding, they are sometimes, not half so big as a
Cheese-Mite. So that all the Leaves which stand upon a Branch or Cien of one
whole Years Growth, were actually existent in the Bud. It is also very
observable, That although these Buds begin to be expanded not till Spring, yet
are they entirely Formed, as to all their Integral Parts, in the Autumn
foregoing. So that the whole Stock of Leaves which grow upon a Tree, or any
Perennial Stalk, this year; were made, or actually in being, the last year. A
greater Heat, more subtilized Aer, and better concocted Juice, being requisite
for their Generation, than for their bare Expansion and Growth.

6.. LASTLY, of all Annual Plants, in which there are several Successive
Generations of Buds, one under another in one year; although I have not made
the Remarque, yet am apt to believe, That as the Leaves in every Bud are all
formed together, as in other Plants: so likewise, that the Successive
Generations of the Under-Buds, begin at certain stated Terms: as in some
Plants, at every New Moon; in others, at the Full Moon; and in some perhaps;
with both, or every Fourt'night.

CHAP. VI. Of the Manner of the Generation of the Leaf. Where also, that of the
Two General Parts of a Plant, sc. the Lignous and Parenchymous, is further
explained.
THE Visible Causes of the Figures of Leaves, B. 1. Chapter 4.
have been formerly mentioned. It may here be further noted, That the greater
Fibers of the Leaf, being never Braced in the Stalk; it is a good preparative
for their better spreading in the Leaf. As also, that the same is much
favored, by the extreme smalness of the Aer-Vessels herein: whereby they are
more easily divaricated, in the lesser Fibers, and so the Leaf dilated.

2.. BUT these and the like are to be reckoned a secondary Ord^r of Causes;
which serve rather to carry on and improve, that which Nature has once begun.
Idea,. 53.
And therefore, we must not only consider the visible Mechanism of the Parts;
but also the Principles of which they are composed; wherewith, Nature seems to
draw her first Strokes.

3.. Now of these, I have formerly, and as I conceive upon good ground, Lib. 2.
P. 2.. 31, etc.
supposed, the chief Governing Principle, to be the Saline, whether Alkaline,
Acid, or of any other Kind: being in some sort as the Mold of a Button, to
which the other Principles, as its Attire, do all conform. Or the Salts are, as
it were, the Bones; the other Principles, as the Flesh which covers them.

4.. A further Argument hereof may be deduced from the Cuticular and other
Concretions, commonly called Mothers, in Distilled Waters, Vinegar, and other
Liquors. For in these Concretions, there is allways a tendence to Vegetation;
and many of them are true Vegetables in their Kind; as shall hereafter be seen.
Now the Liquors, in which these are generated, do always, wholly or in part,
lose their Taste and Smell, and so become Vapid. The more sensible Principles
therein having made their Transit from the Fluid, into the Concrete Parts. So,
I have known, sometimes, Vinegar it self, to become by these Concretions,
almost as Tastless as Common Water. Whereby it seems evident, That of Vegetable
Principles, there are some, more Masterly than others: and that of these, the
Saline is the chief. The same is likewise argued, from the frequent Experiment
of many good Husbandmen; that most Bodies which abound with Salt, are the
greatest Nourishers of Plants.

5.. This Saline Principle, as is above hinted, is to be understood, a Generik
Name, under which diverse Species are comprehended; and of some whereof, it is
always compounded, as in other Bodies, so in Plants. As shall be made to
appear, by diverse Experiments, when we come, hereafter, to speak of Vegetable
Salts. Whereby we are conducted, yet further to enquire, What are the
Princinples of this Principle?

6.. NOW these seem to be Four; a Nitrous, an Acid, an Alkaline, and a Marine.
The Admixture of the First, is argued from the Place, which Nature has
assigned for the Generation and Growth of most Plants, sc. neither in Caverns
under Ground, as for Minerals; nor above it, as for Animals; but the Surface of
the Earth, where this Sort of Salt is copiously bred. And does therefore prove,
not only a Mixture, but a good Proportion hereof with the other Principles of a
Plant. Hence it is, that Dew or Water on Windows or Plain and Smooth Tables, by
virtue of a Nitro-Aerial Salt, is often frozen into the resemblance of little
Shrubs. And the like Figure I have often seen in a well filtred Solution of the
Salt of any of our Purging Waters, as of Epsom, etc. being set to shoot.
Produced, as I conceive, by the Nitre, which with the Rain or other Waters, is
washed down from the Surface of the Earth, and so mixed with the Mineral Salts.

7.. The other Three Salts are exhibited, by the several ways of Resolving the
Principles of a Plant. Many Plants, even in their Natural Estate, do yield an
Acid Juice. And the Juyces of many more, by Fermentation, will become Acid. And
most, by Distillation in a Sand-Furnace, yield an Accid Liquor.

8.. By Calcination, all Sorts of Plants, yield more or less, both of a Fixed
and a Volatile Alkaly: the former, in the Ashes; the latter, in the Soot. And,
at least the generality, by Fermentation also, yield a Volatile one; or such a
kind of Salt, which, whether we call an Urinous, or otherwise, has the like
Odor and Taste with that of Urine, Hartshorn, Soot, and the like.

9.. The Marine, is obtained no other way, that I know of, but from a Solution
of the Alkaline, upon its being exposed to the Aer. The process whereof, I shall
particularly set down in a following Discourse. Of these Salts, mixed in a
certain proportion, together, and also Impregnated with some of the other
Active Principles of a Plant, and not without an Admixture of some Parts from
the Aer; I suppose, that which I call the Essential, is produced: of which, I
shall also give an account in the same Discourse.

10.. ALL THE Four Salts above mentioned, seem in their Order, to have a share
in the Formation of a Leaf, or other Part of a Plant: And first of all, the
Marine. For all Generations are made in some Fluid: But in every Fluid there is
a perpetual Intestive Motion of Parts. So that the first Intention of Nature
is, That some of those Parts be disposed to Rest. Now of all the Principles of
a Plant, there are none hereunto more disposed, than their Salts; whose
Particles, being figu'rd with plain Sides, as often as they touch Side to Side,
like two Marbles exquisitely polished, they will adhere together. And the
Particles of Marine Salt, being Cubick; and so, with respect to their Figure,
of greater Bulk than those of any other Salt; they will hereby, be most and
first of all disposed to Rest; and so become, as it were, the Foundation of the
following Superstructure.

11. THE Second Intention of Nature is, That the Particles be brought to Rest,
in a certain Position, agreeable to the Figure of the Parts which are to be
formed. And therefore in the next place, all those Parts of a Plant which are
truly Lignous, by the Marine Salt, with the assistance of the Alkaline, but
especially of the Nitrous, are made to shoot out in Length, Tab. 53.
or into an innumerable company of small Cylindrick Fibers: these Salts being,
altogether, sturdy enough to resist those Impulses which might incline them to
conform to any other Figure.

12.. THE next Intention is, That these Fibers, at the same time in which they
are formed, may likewise receive such a Posture as will best answer the
indented Shape of the Leaf. Which Posture, although in the Growth of the Leaf
it is much Governed by the Aer-Vessels; yet in the Generation hereof, seems to
be first determined by the forementioned Salts, according to their several
Angles, whereby they are differently applicable one to another.

13.. Now all the Sides of the Marine Salt, and the Sides and the Ends of the
Nitrous, properly so called, stand at Right Angles. And it is very probable,
from the Figure of the Crystalls in Spirit of Blood, and some other Bodies,
Tab. 53.
that the Particles of the Alkaline are Square at one End, and Poynted at the
other. And those of the Acid, at both; And that, withal, they are Shorter and
more Slender.

14.. It should therefore seem, That where the Alkaline Salt is any way
predominant, and that the Particles thereof are placed End to End; Tab. 53.
there the Lignous Fibers (as the larger ones in many Leaves) declining their
parallel Growth, begin to shoot out obliquely, or at Angles one with another,
and those Acute.

15.. If the same Salt be predominant, and some of its Particles placed, with
the Pointed End of one, to the Side of another, or the Square End of one, Tab.
53.
to the Poynted End of another; there the said Fibers begin to shoot at Angles
less Acute.

16.. But if either the Marine or Nitrous Salt is predominant; or some
Particles of the Alkaline, are placed with the Square End of one, to the Side
of another; Tab. 53.
there the Fibers begin to make, not Acute, but Right Angles; as do the greater
Fibers, in some Leaves; and the smaller, in all.

17.. IN the same manner, the Fiber in the Circumference of the Leaf is also
governed; the Particles of the said Salt, being reduceable, not only to any
Angle, but also to any Circle, or other Crooked Line, as they are variously
applied. For if the major part be applied End to End, Tab. 53.
and only every Third or Fourth applied End to Side, they produce a great
Circle. But if the Poynted End of each, be set to the Side of another, they
make a less. And if the Application be the same, but to the contrary Side, they
thence begin a new Circle with the same Diameter, but with another Center,
answerable to the intended Shape of the Leaf.

18.. AFTER the same manner, the Aer-Vessels may be formed by the Particles of
the Acid Salt. Which, without being supposed to be crooked (as those of the
Aer, at least the compounded ones, probably be) only by applying the lesser
Side of one, to the greater Side of another, will also be reduced to any either
Circular or Spiral Line. And so, Tab. 53.
likewise, for the production of the winding Fibers, which compose the Bladders
of the Pith and other Parenchymous Parts of a Plant.

19.. Thus does Nature every where (...). For what She appears in Her Works,
She must needs be also in their Causes.

THE ANATOMY OF FLOWERS, PROSECUTED With the bare EYE, And with the MICROSCOPE.
Read before the Royal Society, November. 9. 1676. The SECOND PART.

By NEHEMJAH GREW M. D. Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY, and of the COLLEGE of
PHYSICIANS.

LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, 1682.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Second Part.
CHAP. I. Of the EMPALEMENT. CHAP. II. Of the FOLIATURE. CHAP. III. Of the
ATTIRE SEMINIFORM. CHAP. IV. Of the FLORID ATTIRE. CHAP. V. Of the USE of the
ATTIRE. CHAP. VI. Of the TIME of the Generation of the Flower. The Appendix.
Being a METHOD proposed, for the ready finding, by the Leaf and Flower, to what
Sort any Plant belongs.
THE ANATOMY OF FLOWERS. PART II.
CHAP. I. Of the EMPALEMENT.
I NEXT proceed to the Flower. Where I intend not to repeat those things, which
have been by Me already noted in the First Book. Chapter ^.
And the foregoing Discourse of Leaves, will excuse me from diverse particulars,
common to These and the Flower. I shall here therefore remarque some things not
before mentioned, or but in transitu, and such as are moreparticular to the
Flower.

2.. And First, it may be noted; That where the Leaves of the Flower are few;
those of the Empalement or Green Border, are either of the same Number, or just
half as many, whether even, or odd. So in Leucanthenum and Chickweed, there are
Five Leaves; in the former Five Empalers; in the latter, Ten. In Great
Celandine, there are Four Leaves, and but Two Empalers; and so in Poppy. The
Arithmetic of Nature being every where suitable to Her Geometry.

3,. Of this Part of the Flower it is likewise observable, That it is rarely,
if ever, entire or one piece, but parted into diverse little Leasy Pales,
especially in all Flowers with the Florid Attire, as of Marigold, Daisy and the
like; being so numerous, as to make a Double, and often a Treble, Quadruple or
Quintuple Border. Whereby they are aptly designed, not only to protect the
Leaves of the Flower in the Bud; and after their Expansion, to keep them tite:
but also, by receding* Bredthways, one from another, and so making a greater
Circle, gradually to give way for the full Growth and safe spreading of the
Attire. Which, in regard it consists of Parts so exquisitely tender, were it
pinched up too close, would be killed or spoiled before it came to the Birth.
As Teeming Women, gradually slaken their Laces; or as Tailors use to split
their Stomachers into several Lappets, to spread, as their Belly rises.

4.. Nor is the Posture of the Parts in the Empalement less suitable: not being
filed one just over another, but alternately. Whereby the Pales or Pannciles of
every Under-Order, serve to stop up the gaps made by the Recess of the Upper.
And so, notwithstanding they all make more room, yet all conspire to keep the
Aer out.

5.. It is also worth the notice, That, for the same purpose, the Edges at
least, of the several Pales, are neither Fibrous, nor Pulpy; but so many
extreme fine transparent Skins, as in Chamemile. Whereby they close so exactly
one over another, that it is impossible for any Aer to creep in, or any Steams
useful to the Attire or Seed, over hastily to perspire. As we use, when we have
put a Cork into a Bottle, to tie a Bladder over it.

CHAP. II. Of the FOLIATURE.
THE Leaves of the Flower are folded up in such Sort, Tab. 54.
as is most agreeable to their own Shape, and that of their enclosed Attire:
whereof I have given Instances in the Fist Book. Chapter 5.
I shall here add some further Remarques.

2.. The Leaves of the Flower of Blattaria, although of different Size and
Shape; are so lapped one over another, Tab. 54.
as to make an Equilateral Pentangle.

3.. The Spiral Fold, which is proper to the Flower, and never seen in the
Green Leaves; Tab. 54.
as it is it self immediately visible on the Surface, so by cutting off the top
of the Flower before it is expanded, seems also to make a Helix; as in
Perwincle, the larger Convolvulus, etc.

4.. In some Flowers, where the Attire is lofty or spreading, as in Holioak,
together with the Spiral Fold, the Leaves are all at the top tacked down a
little; thereby making a blunter Cone, and so a more ample Pyramid for the
enclosed Attire.

5.. In Poppy, although the Leaves are extraodinary broad, yet being but few,
and enclosing a small Attire; they could not be well reduced to any regular
Fold, Tab. 54.
without leaving such a Vacuity, as by being filled with Aer, might be
prejudicial to the Seed. For which reason, they are cramb'd up within the
Empalement by hundreds of little Wrinckles or Puckers; as if Three or Four fine
Cambrick Handcherchifs were thrust into ones Pocket.

6.. In Ladies-Bower, the Leaves are neither laped one over another, as is most
usual, Tab. 54.
nor set Edge to Edge, as sometimes, but Side to Side, answerable to their
Shape, and the Distribution of their Fibers. Their broad Tops being also rolled
up so as to make a Cone. In Ladys-Looking-Glass, they stand also Side to Side,
but in a different manner: in the Former with the Sides standing inward, but
here, bearing outward.

7.. In the Marvel of Peru, Tab. 54.
the Fold is likewise very peculiar. For, besides the several Plates, about
Six, whereby the Flower is gathered in the Middle; the Top of it is also
gathered up by as many distinct Plates, underneath the former; and these rolled
or wreathed up together so exactly, that the like could hardly be imitated by a
very dextrous Hand.

8.. OF the Hairs upon Flowers and their Use to the Attire, Chapter 5.
I have also spoken in the First Book. I shall here add, That they are likewise
of Use to the Leaves themselves, that is, for their closer and faster
Conjunction. For of some Flowers it is observable, That they are all over
smooth, saving on their Edges, which are bordered with Fringes of Hair; Tab. 55.
as of Spa^ish Broom, Dulcamara, and others: In which, the Hairs on the Edge
of one Leaf, are so complicated, or at least indented, with those of another,
that all the Leaves seem to be but one piece. Nature seeing it fit, by this
meanss to tie them together, lest they should be expanded before it be due time.

9.. Many Flowers instead of Hairs, are beset round about, with a great Number
of small Parts, not ending in a Point, but having a Head. Sometimes oval, as in
Snap-Dragon, like the Horns of a Butterfly, or a Plummers Sodering-Iron. But
usually Globular, as in Deadly Nightshade, like so many little Mushrooms
sprouting out of the Flower.

10.. Out of these Heads, does sometimes issue a Gummy or Balsamic Juice. From
whence proceeds that Clamminess of some Flowers, whereby, being handled they
stick to our Fingers, as do those of Blataria, and of Marigold; and those of
Colus Jovis, where the said Heads are so soft and succulent, that they resemble
so many little Drops of Balsame. The Clamminess which is felt upon fresh
Carduus, may perhaps proceed from the like Cause.

11.. THE Number of the Leaves of the Flower has been noted by the Learned Sir
Thomas Brown, Treat. of the Quinc.
to be usually Five. And this Nature so far affects, that many times where
the Leaves of the same Flower are of a different Size, Tab. 54.
yet they keep to this Number, as in Blattaria.

12.. I also add, That even those Flowers, which are not properly parted into
Leaves, have yet their Tops usually divided into Five great Scallops; as those
of Toad-Flax, Snap-Dragon, Coded-Arsmart, Clary, Broom, and others. And when
the Flower has more than Five, even many times Five Leaves; yet the Top of
each Leaf is indented into Five Parts; Tab. 54.
as in Scorzonera, Cichory, and all the Intybous Kind, with many others.

13.. From whence and other like Instances, it may seem, That there is some
certain Species of Salt in Nature, and that in most Plants, of whose Agency
there are still some Footsteps or other in the Flower.

14.. The Number of the Leaves, as has been said, is commonly Five. Yet some
Flowers have fewer, and some more, and that with Constancy, in diverse Numbers,
from One to One and Twenty; perhaps in all, so far. The Flower of Acanthus
Syriacus, is in a manner one single Leaf, that of Monks-Rubarb, Three-Leav'd;
of Poppy, Crosswort, Radish, and many others, Four-Leav'd; the greater Number
of Flowers, Five-Leav'd; of White Hellebore, Tulip, Onion, and most Plants with
Bulbous Roots, Six-Leav'd; of Wild-Crowfoot, Seven-Leav'd; of French Marigold,
commonly Eight-Leav'd; of Flower-deluce, Nine-Leav'd; of Chickweed,
Ladies-Mantle, Ten-Leav'd; of St. James's Wort, Thirteen-Leav'd; and I think of
Febrifuga, Cotula, Ageratum, Corn-Marigold, with others; and of Chamemile,
Buphthalmum, and some few more, the Leaves are commonly One and Twenty. In that
of St. James's Wort, the Number is so constant that there is scarce One Flower
in Forty, Tab. 55.
wherein the Leaves are more or fewer than Thirteen, Diverse of which Numbers,
seem also to have some relation to the Number 5. For 9, is Twice; 13, Thrice;
and 25, Five times 5 running into it self.

15.. THE Constituent Parts of the Flower are the same as those of the Leaf,
sc. the Parenchyma or Pulp, and the Vessels. But in the Basis or bottom of the
Flower, the Parenchyma is commonly much more spongy and dry, than in the
Leaves; containing, after the Flower is opened, little or no Sap, but only a
dry and warm Aer. Which standing continually under the Seed, hastens the
Maturation or due Exiccation thereof: as we use to dry Maulted Barley over a
warm Killn.

16.. The Vessels of the Flower, are both for Sap and for Aer, as well as in
other Parts. And both of them sometimes, even in the Skin of the Flower; as may
be argued from its being stained with diverse Colors; B. 2. P. 2.. 65, 66, 67.
produced as has formerly been showed, by the mixed Tinctures of the said
Vessels. These Colors, in many Flowers, as Tulips, as they are in the Skin it
self, so therein only; the Pulp of the Leaf being white.

17.. The Lignous or Sap-Vessels are fewer, and the Aer-Vessels smaller in the
Flower, than in the Leaf. And therefore it is very difficult to observe the
latter by Glasses; especially the Proportion which they hold to the other
Parts. But if you break the Leaves of some Flowers, with very great gentleness;
they may hereby be Unroaved or drawn out, as in the Green Leaves, to some
visible length; and their different Number in diverse Flowers may be discerned.

18.. THE Use of the Flower or of the Foliature whereof we are speaking, B. 1.
Chapter 5.
is various; as has formerly been showed. I now only add, That one Use hereof
seems to be, for the Separation of the more Volatile and stronger Sulphur of
the Plant. That so the Seed, which lies within or next it, may be so much the
milder, and the Principles thereof more fixed and concentred. And this, both
for its better Duration till the time of Sowing; and also, that its
Fermentation, when it is sow'n, may not be too hot and precipitate; but
suitable to so slow and equal a motion, as is the Vegetation of a Seed.

19.. And that this Sulphur is separated and discharged by the Flower, seems
evident, not only from the Strength of its Odeur, above that of the other
Parts; but likewise, in that many times where there is no Flower, or that very
small, the Seed, that is its Cover, is in the Umbelliferous Kind, is the more
odorous. And therefore also, the Vine has no Flower, partly, that the most
Volatile Spirit and Sulphur might all run into the Fruit.

20.. THE Figure of the Flower, although it is often much more complex, than
that of the Leaf: yet there is no doubt, but that the Measure hereof may be
defined in some way, answerable to that exemplisied in the foregoing Part. The
difference is only this, That whereas the Green Leaves, and the Plain Leaves
also of the Flower, are all measured by the parts of several Circles: those
Flowers which are Bellyed, and those Leaves of the Flower which are not Plain,
but Unequal, are all measured by the parts of several Spheres. And as the
Diametres of those Circles, bear a certain proportion to the middle Stemm of the
Leaf; so the Axes of these Spheres, to an imaginary one in the Center of the
Flower.

21.. NOW the reason why the Figure of the Flower is more multiplex, than that
of the Leaf; may be, partly, because it is under the Command and Government of
those Salts, which are here more refined and depurate, than in the Leaf; and so
more free to lay the Foundation of any kind of Figure, for which, of their own
Nature, they are adapted. Partly, for that as the Nitrous and Alkaline Salts
are chiefly regnant in the Leaf; so in the Flower, in which the Parenchymous
Part has a greater. 17.
proportion than in the Leaf; it is most reasonable, to assign the Predominion
to the Acid Idea,. 52.
the Particles whereof, both as they are less, and also poynted at both ends,
P. 1. Chapter 6.. 13.
seem to be more easily applicable one to another for the making of any Sort of
Line or Figure.

CHAP. III. Of the Attire, and first of that sort which may be called
Seminiform.
WITHIN the Foliature stands the Attire; which is of Two general Kinds, every
where Various and Elegant; according to the Description I have given of them in
the First Book. Chapter 5.
I shall here add some further Remarques.

2.. And first, of that Sort of Attire, which may be called Seminiform; being
usually, as it were, a little Sheaf of Seed-like Particles; standing on so many
Pedicills, as the Ear does upon the End of the Straw.

3.. Of their Color it is observable, That for the most part, they are White
or Yellow; sometimes Blew; but never Red, let the Flower or Foliature be of
what Color it will. Neither does their Color allways follow that of the
Foliature, although that be not Red. Whereby it appears, how very Curious and
Critical Nature is, in the Separation of the Juyces in Plants: that such small
Parts as these of the Attire, and so near the Leaves of the Flower, should yet
receive a different Tincture.

4.. These Parts differ also in their Position; standing sometimes double upon
each Pedicil, Tab. 55.
as in Toad-flax, Snapdragon, and some others; but usually single, as in
Blattaria, Clematis Austriaca, etc. Sometimes fastened to their Pedicils at
their middle, stooping down after the manner of Poppy and other hanging
Flowers; as in Spanish-Broom, Hysop, Scabeous, Behen, etc. Sometimes they stand
erected, as in Clematis Austriaca, Ladyes-Looking-Glass, Rape-Crowfoot, etc.
Those of Coded Arsmart have no Pedicils, but stand upon a large Base.

5.. Of the Pedicils themselves, it is to be noted, That they are rarely
fastened to the Top of the Repository or Case of the Seed, but round about the
Bottom. Partly, That hereby they may the better intercept and separate the
Incongruous Parts of the Sap from the Seed. Yet in the Coded Arsmart they stand
at the Top. Which is not the only thing peculiar in that Plant; it being the
property thereof, to ejaculate its Seed, upon the least touch. Which property
seems to depend, partly, upon the Position of the said Pedicils, as shall be
showed in speaking of the Seed.

6.. These Seed-like Parts are also of different Number. In Great Celandine,
Rose, Rape-Crowfoot, numerous; in Great Plantaine, and some other Herbs, much
more conspicous than the Foliature it self. In Germander-Chickweed, they are
always Two, and no more. Sometimes they follow the number of the Leaves,
especially in the number 5; as in Blattaria, Black Henbean, etc. In Stichwort
and Lychnis Sylvestris, they are 10, just double to the number of the Leaves.

7.. They differ also in their Bigness, being in some smaller Flowers, large;
as in Borage, Ladys-Looking-Glass, and others: and in some larger Flowers,
less; as in the Rose.

8.. But especially in their Shape, which is always very Elegant, and with much
Variety. In Borage, like the point of a Spear. In Blattaria, like a
Horse-shooe. In Clematis Austriaca, like the Spatula, wherewith Apothecaries
make their Mixtures. In Mallow, like a Head-Roll. In Hysop, they have one Cleft
before; in Blattaria, one round about; in Water Bettony, one at the Top; in
Scabious, they have a double Cleft, one on each side; Tab. 56.
and so in St. John's Wort, Hyoscyamus, and others; before they open, in the
Shape of a double Purse.

9.. These Parts, are all hollow; each being the Theca or Case of a great many
extreme small Particles, either Globular, or otherwise Unequal; but always
regularly figured. They are all crowded together, and fastened in close Ranks,
without any Pedicils, to the Insides of the Theca, like other lesser Seeds
within a greater; or after the same manner as in Hyoscyamus and some other
Plants, the true Seeds themselves grow all round about close to the Bed of the
Case; Tab. 55, 56.
as in Clary, and the Figures now referred to, may be seen. And when they are
ripe, the Case also opens and admits them to the Aer, as the Seed-Case does the
Seed. The whole Attire, together with the Foliature and Seed-Case, See in one
Example, Tab. 57.
amongst the Figures.

10.. The Color of these small Particles contained in the Theca, is also
different. But as That is usually White or Yellow, so are These: sometimes
Bluish; but never Red. And sometimes not of the same Color with that of the
Theca. Which further shows how scrupulous Nature, is, in differencing the
Tinctures of the several Parts.

11.. They are also of different Bigness and Figure. Those in Snap-dragon, are
of the smallest Size I have seen; Tab. 58.
being no bigger through a good Microscope, than the least Cheese-Mite to the
naked Eye. In Plantain, also through a Glass, like a Scurvy-grass-seed. In
Bears-foot, like a Mustard Seed. In Carnation, like a Turnep-Seed. In Bindweed,
like a Peper-Corn. In all these of a Globular Figure.

12. In Devils-bit, they are also Round, but depressed, like the Seed of
Goos-grass, or a Holland Cheese. In the Bean and all sorts of Pulls, and
Trefoyls, Tab. 58.
as also in Blew-bottle, etc. they are Cylindrick. In Orange Lilly, Oval, one
5th of an Inch long, like an Ants-Egg. In Deadly-Night-shade, also Oval, but
smaller at both Ends. And those of Pancy, Cubick. In all these and the former,
they are Smooth.

13.. But in Mallow, Holyoak, and all of that kind, they are beset round about
with little Thorns; whereby each looks like the Seed-Ball of Roman Nettle,
Tab. 58.
or like the Fruit of Thorn-Apple, or the Fish called Piscis orbis minor, or
the Murices, used anciently in Wars. They are also very great, showing, through
a Glass, of the bigness of a large White Pease; being 200 or 300 times biger
than those in Snapdragon; of which there are about a Thousand in each Theca,
that is, in the space of about 1000th Cubical Part of an Inch.

15.. In some Plants, as in Deadly Nightshade, where these Partiales are
White, they seem, by a very good Glass and advantageous Position, to be
composed of Parenchymous and Lignous Fibers, stitched up together, as in the
other Parts.

15.. In Colocynthis, (and with some Analogy in Wild Cucumer, and I suppose all
of that kind) the Attire is very peculiar, not consisting of several little
Thecae, upon so many Pedicils, as is described; but is all one entire Part,
like a thick Columna in the midst of the Flower; having several little Ridges,
and Furrows winding from the Top to the Bottom round about. In the middle of
each Ridge runs a Line, where the Skin, after sometime, opens into two Lips,
presenting the Globular Particles contained in the hollow of every Ridge.

16.. Where the Attire consists of several Seed-like Parts, as is described;
there, another Part distinct, like a little Columna or Pinnacle, stands on the
Top of the Uterus or true Seed-Case. Which is also regularly and variously
Figured. In Bindweed, it has a round Head, Tab. 56, 57.
like that of a great Pin. In the Common Bell, St. John's wort, it is divided
into Three Parts. In Gerarium, into Five; In Asarum, into Six. Sometimes, the
Head is Smooth, and sometimes beset with little Thorns, as in Hyoscyamus. Of
the Use of these Parts, anon.

CHAP. IV. Of the FLORID ATTIRE.
IN THIS Attire there is also much Elegant Variety, according to the
Description we have given of it in the First Book. It always consists of
several Suits; Ten, Twenty, Forty, a Hundred, or more, according to the
Bigness of the Flower. And every Suit most commonly, of three distinct Parts,
all of a Regular, but Different Figure. The utmost Part, is always like a
little Flower with Five Leaves and a Tubular Base, like that of Cowslip. So
that every Flower with the Florid Attire, Tab. 59.
Embosomes, or is, a Posy of perfect Flowers.

2.. In some Flowers, every one of these Florets, is encompassed with an Hedge
of Hairs; and every Hair branched on both sides almost like a Sprig of Fir;
Tab. 59.
as in Aster Atticus, Golden-Rod, and others.

3.. The Base of the Floret is usually Cylindrick, but sometimes Square, as in
French Marigold. And the Leaves hereof which, for the most part, Tab. 60.
are Smooth on the Inside, in the same Flower are all over Hairy. And the Edges
of these little Flowers, are frequently Ridged, or as it were, He m'd, like the
Edge of a Band.

4.. The midlemost of the Three Parts, B. 1. Chapter 5.
which I call the Sheath, is usually fastened toward the Top, Tab. 60, 61, 62.
or else at the Bottom of the Floret. This is rather indented, than parted into
Leaves. The Surface seldom Plain or Even, but wrought with Five Ridges, and as
many Gutters running almost Parallel from the Top to the Bottom.

5.. The Inmost Part, B. 1. Chapter 5.
which I call the Blade, runs through the hollow of the Two Former, and so is
fastened, with the Floret, to the unequal of the Seed-Case. The Head and Sides of
this Part, is always beset round about with Globulets, commonly through a
Glass, as big as a Turnep-seed, or a great Pins-Head. In some Plants growing
close to the Blade, Tab. 60, 61, 62.
as in the common Marigold; in the French, and others, upon Pedicils or little
slender Stalks. These, as the Blade springs up from within the Sheath, are
still rubed off, and so stand like a Powder on them both. And sometimes, as in
Cichory, they seem to grow on the Inside the Sheath, if it be split with a
small Pin: as also in Knapweed, in which they are numerous. Yet in the
Seed-like Attire, always more numerous, than in the Florid.

6.. The Head of the Blade is always divided into Two, Tab. 58, etc.
and sometimes into Three Parts, as in Cichory; which, by degrees, curl
outward, after the manner of Scorpion-Grass.

7.. The Description now given, agrees principally to the Corymbiferous Kind,
as Tansy, Chamemile, and the like. But in Scorgonera, as also Cichory,
Hawk-Weed, Mousear and all the Intybous Kind, with many more, the Attire is not
separate from the Foliature, so as to stand within that in one entire Posy; but
every Leaf of the Flower has its own Attire apart. For the sake of which, the
Basis of every Leaf is formd into a little Tube or Pipe, Tab. 62.
whereby it embosomes its own Attire within it self. Consisting commonly of Two
Parts, a Sheath and a Blade: the Leaf it self answering to the Floret in other
Flowers.

8.. In some Plants, besides the Attire or Posy in the middle of the Flower;
Tab. 61.
the Leaves also have each their own to themselves, as in Marigold: yet this,
as I take it, consisting only of one single Part, which answers to the Blade;
the Leaf it self being as the Sheath.

9.. In many Plants, this Florid Attire is very large; so that not only the
Suits, Tab. 61.
but also the several Parts whereof every Suit consists, being thoroughly ripe
and well blown open, are all visible to the bare Eye, as in Knapweed, and all
the Thistle Kind. This Attire is all the Flower, that this sort of Plants have;
being, though Empal'd, yet without any Foliature.

10.. And sometimes, there is little or no Flower besides this Attire, although
extreme small, as in Golden Rod, Wormwood and others. Where it may be noted,
That the Medicine called Wormseed or Semen Santonici, is no Sort of Seed, but
the Buds of small Flowers, or of the Florid Attire of that Plant.

CHAP. V. Of the Use of the Attire.
OF the Secundary Use hereof, I have spoken in the First Book; Chapter 5.
and particularly, of the Globulets or small Particles within the Thecae of the
Seed-like Attire, and upon the Blades of the Florid, I have conjectured, That
they are that Body which Bees gather and carry upon their Thighs, and is
commonly called their Bread. For the Wax they carry in little Flakes in their
Chaps: but the Bread is a Kind of Powder; yet somewhat moist, as are the said
little Particles of the Attire.

2.. But the Primary and chief Use of the Attire is such, as has respect to
the Plant it self; and so appears to be very great and necessary. Because, even
those Plants which have no Flower or Foliature, are yet some way or other
Attired; either with the Seminiform, or the Florid Attire. So that it seems to
perform its service to the Seed, as the Foliature, to the Fruit.

3.. In discourse hereof with our Learned Savilian Professor Sir Thomas
Millington, he told me, he conceived, That the Attire does serve, as the Male,
for the Generation of the Seed.

4.. I immediately replied, That I was of the same Opinion; and gave him some
reasons for it, and answered some Objections, which might oppose them. But
withal, in regard every Plant is (...) or Male and Female, that I was also of
Opinion, That it serves for the Separation of some Parts, as well as the
Affusion of others. The sum therefore of my Thoughts concerning this Matter, is
as follows.

5.. And First, it seems, That the Attire serves to discharge some redundant
Part of the Sap, as a Work preparatory to the Generation of the Seed. In
particular, that as the Foliature serves to carry off the Volatile Saline
Sulphur: So the Attire, to minorate and adjust the Aereal; to the end, the Seed
may become the more Oily, and its Principles, the better fixed. And therefore
the Foliature generally has a much stronger Odor, than the Attire: because
the Saline Sulphur is stronger, than an Aerial, which is too subtle to affect
the Sense. Hence also it is, that the Color of the Parts of the Attire, is
usually White, or Yellow, never Red: the former, depending upon a greater
participation of Aer; the latter, of Sulphur. I add further, That the most
Volatile and Aerial Sulphur; being by means of these Parts much discharged; it
may hereby come to pass, not only that the Seed is more Oily, and its
Principles more fixed; but also, that the Body or Parenchyma thereof, is so
compact and close: For although it consists of Bladders, yet such, as are
Twenty times smaller than in any other Part of a Plant of the like bigness.
Whereas, were the Aer copiously mixed with the Sap here, as in the Pith, Fruit,
and other Parenchymous Parts; it would give so quick a Ferment to the Sap, as
to dilate and amplify the Bladders of the Seed, beyond its present compact and
durable Texture; and so expose it, either to a precipitant Growth, or sudden
Rot. Wherefore, as the Seed-Case is the Womb; so the Attire (which always
stands upon or round about it) and those Parts of the Sap herinto discharged;
are, as it were, the Menses or Flowers, by which the Sap in the Womb, is duly
qualified, for the approaching Generation of the Seed.

6.. And as the young and early Attire before it opens, answers to the Menses
in the Femal: so is it probable, that afterward when it opens or cracks, it
performs the Office of the Male. This is hinted from the Shape of the Parts.
For in the Florid Attire, the Blade does not unaptly resemble a small Penis,
with the Sheath upon it, as its Praeputium. And in the Seed-like Attire, the
several Thecae, are like so many little Testicles. And the Globulets and other
small Particles upon the Blade or Penis, and in the Thecae, are as the
Vegetable Sperme. Which, so soon as the Penis is exerted, or the Testicles come
to break, falls down upon the Seed-Case or Womb, and so Touches it with a
Prolifick Virtue.

7.. Consentaneous hereto it is also observable, That those Herbs generally
have the Seed-like Attire, which either produce a greater Quantity of Seed, or
a Perennial Root: and that there is no Tree, with the Florid Attire. As if the
other, because it contains a far greater Proportion of the abovesaid Particles,
that is, of Sperm; it is able to beget a more Numerous, Vivaceous, or Gigantick
Birth.

8.. That the same Plant is both Male and Female, may the rather be believed,
in that Snails, and some other Animals, are such. And the Parts which imitate
the Menses, and the Sperm, are not precisely the same: the former, being the
External Parts of the Attire, and the Sap, which feeds them; the latter, the
small Particles or moist Powder which the External enclose.

9.. And that these Particles, only by falling on the Uterus, should
communicate to it or to the Sap therein, a Prolifick Virtue; it may seem the
more credible, from the manner wherein Coition is made by some Animals; as by
many Birds, where there is no Intromission, but only an Adosculation of Parts:
And so in many Fishes. Neither in others, does the Penis ever enter any further
than the Neck of the Womb. Nor does perhaps the Semen it self: or if it does,
it can by no means be thought, bodily or as to its gross Substance, to enter
the Membranes, in which every Conception, or the Liquor intended for it, before
any Coitiou, is involved; but only some subtle and vivifick Effluvia, to which
the visible Body of the Semen, is but a Vehicle. And the like Effluvia may be
very easily transfused from the above said Particles into the Seed-Case or Womb
of a Plant.

10.. If any one shall require the Similitude to hold in every Thing; he would
not have a Plant to resemble, but to be, an Animal.

CHAP. VI. Of the Time of the Generation of the Flower.
THE Time in which the Flower is Generated or Formed is a Providence in Nature,
whereof, I do a little wonder, that no one, amongst so many observers of
Plants, has ever yet taken any notice. It is therefore to be remarked, That
all Flowers are formed or perfectly finished, in all their Parts, long before
they appear in sight; usually Three or Four Months, and sometimes half a year,
or more. And that in all Perennial Plants, those Flowers which appear and are
called the Flowers of any one year; are not formed in that year; but were
actually in Being, and entirely formed in all Parts, the year before; as in
many Herbs, and in all Shrubs and Trees.

2.. This will best be seen by some Instances. So the Flower of Mezereon, which
opens in January, is entirely formed about the middle of August in the year
foregoing. At which time, the Green Leaves of the Bud being cautiously removed,
Tab. 63.
the Leaves of the Flower, and the Thecae Seminiformes or Seed-like Attire,
encompassing the Seed-Case, through an indifferent Glass, are all distinctly
visible.

3.. The like may be seen in Sirynga, and other Shrubs, and in Trees. In as
many of which, as are Frugiferous, the Fruit also, which answers to the
Seed-Case in other Plants, is about the same time entirely formed.

4.. And so in Herbs; as the Flower of Asarum, which appears in April or May,
is entirely formed in August or July of the foregoing year. For there are here,
Tab. 64.
as well as in Trees, Two Sorts of Buds; some which are composed only of Green
Leaves; and some which also contein a Flower and the Seed-Case. So in
Bears-foot, by some called the January Rose, the Flower-Buds, which open in
January are all formed in or before the Month of August in the year preceding.

5.. The same may also be seen about the end of August or the beginning of
September in a Tulip-Root. Tab. 63.
In which, the Two Inmost Shells dryer than the rest, stand hollow, with the
little young Flower (which appears in March or April following) enclosed now in
their Center. Being thus kept warm and dry, lest it should either perish, or be
precipitated upon the Winter, by sprouting too soon.

6.. From hence it is plain, That although the Flower appears before the Seed;
yet if the comparison be made betwixt the Flower and Seed of the same year; the
Seed is first formed, and afterward the Flower. That is, the Seed, for which
Nature chooses the Firstborn Sap, is formed in the fore part of the year:
which work being finished, out of the less foecund part of the Sap, the Flowers
intended for the Sire and Matrix of the next years Seed; is afterward produced.

7.. THE true Time of the Generation of the Flower being known, it may also be
an Inducement to make Trial, for the bringing of many Flowers to grow fairly in
Winter, which are used to grow, that is, to appear, only in the Spring and
Summer: sc. by keeping the Plants warm, and thereby enticing the young lurking
Flowers to come abroad.

The Appendix. Being a Method proposed, for the ready finding, by the Leaf and
Flower, to what Sort any Plant belongs.
ALTHOUGH many have bestowed extraordinary Care and Industry upon the searching
out, and Description of Plants; and for the reducing of them to their several
Tribes: yet I will take leave, here to propose a short Method whereby Learners,
seeing a Plant they know not, may be informed to what Sort it belongs, and so
be directed where to find it described and discoursed of. For, except they have
a Master to conduct them, which few have; they must needs, by seeking at
random, lose a great deal of time, which by a regular Enquiry might be saved.
Besides, that what is learned by their own Observation, will abide much longer
on their mind, than what they are only Poynted to, by another.

2.. Now the most Philosophic way of distinguishing or sorting of Plants, were
by the Characteristick Properties in all Parts, both Compounded, Constituents,
and Contents. But of the Compounded, the Seeds, and some other Parts, are
oftentimes very minute: and the Roots always lie hid. As also the Constituent
Parts, every where, without cuting and the use of Glasses. Nor can the Contents
be accurately observed otherwise. So that for the Use here intended, those
Properties are the fitest to be insisted upon, which are the most Conspicuous,
and in those Parts, where the Learner may the most readily and without any
difficulty take notice of them; as in the Flower and Leaf. The Flower has
Varieties enough of it self. But in regard it is often wanting, when the Green
Leaf is not; it is therefore convenient, that he be assisted by both, and that
the Varieties of both be distinctly reduced unto Tables. Which may be done,
after the following, or some other like manner.

3.. And First for the Leaves. The most obvious Varieties of which, are in
their Position, Size or Shape.

4.. Leaves are fastened with, or without a Stalk. Without, only close to the
Branch, as in Southistle; or surrounding it, as in Thorow-Wax.

5.. Both these ways, they stand either singly, that is, but one at the same
height; or more together.

6.. More together, in Even or Odd Numbers. In Even Numbers, commonly Two and
Two, as in Sage, Polium; Sometimes Four, as in Cross-wort, Madder, Herb
True-Love, Pomum Majae; or more, as, I think, in Woodrofe, etc. In Odd Numbers,
Three, as in all Trefoyls, Strawberries; Five, in Pentaphil, Castanea Equina;
Seven, in Tormentil.

7.. The Sizes of Leaves are innumerable. It is therefore necessary to reduce
them to a Standard. And so, they may be reckoned, Three; Small, Mean and Great:
with respect to the Length of the Leaf, the Breadth, or both. From one Inch and
under, all Leaves may be accounted Small; from one Inch and over, to five
Inches, Mean: from five and over, Great.

8.. The Shapes of Leaves are also numberless. But the most obvious
distinctions which they admit of, are such as these;

9.. Leaves are Membraneous, as the greater part; Squameous, as Abies, or
Filamentous. Which are solid, as in Fenil, Meum; Buphthalmum, Chamemile,
Groundpine; or hollow, as in Onion.

10.. Membraneous, have all their main Fibers produced either from the Stalk,
as in Holyoak; or from the middle Stem of the Leaf, as in most. From the middle
Stem, reciprocally, as in Scabious, or oppositely, that is, one over against
another, as in Rose: and both ways, at Acute Angles, as in most; or Right, as
in Dandelion.

11.. Again, they are different with respect to the Top, the Bottom, and the
Sides. The Top is Thorny, as in Furz; or Unarmed. Unarmed, either Produced,
that is, Poynted, or at least, Roundish, as in Lamium, Ironwort; or else
Reduced, as in Woodsorrel. And so the Bottom, is either Reduced toward the
Top, as in Ground Ivy; or Produced upon the Stalk, as in Poplar, Bay, etc.

12.. The Sides or Edges of the Leaf, are either of one and the same Measure,
as commonly; or of diverse, as in Doronicum. Both ways they are Even, as in
Syringa, Mous-ear; or Uneven. The Uneven, are Prickly, as Holly, Eryngium,
Thistle; or Unarmed. Unarmed, are Insected, or Resected. Insected deeply, that
is, Lobed, as Golden Liverwort, Clematis Peregrina; or with shallow Insections,
as in most. And so, Indented, or Scallopped: the former, when the Angle is made
with Straight Lines, as in Dandelion; the latter, with Crooked, as in
Thalictrum. Resected, that is, both Lobed, and Insected, or when upon the
greater Insections, there are other lesser ones, as in Wild-Clary, Lovage,
Masterwort.

13.. THE most Conspicuous Varieties of Flowers, are in their Position, Size,
Shape, and Color.

14.. Most are fastened with Stalks; but many without. Sometimes, they are
placed round about the Branch, that is, Coronated, as in Pulegium; and
sometimes, all on one side; either in Ranks only, as in Bawm; or in Rank and
File, as in Foxglove. In Saxifraga Aurea, they grow on the Leaf.

15.. Again, they either stand Singly, as in Corn Marigold; or Clustur'd. And
so, either all upon one Branch, or on several little Ramificated Sprigs. On one
Branch, prolonged like a Tail, as in Blattaria; or Contracted. And so, either
without Stalks, that is, Capitated, as in Scabious; or with Stalks, that is,
Umbellated, as Fenil, etc. On several Sprigs, as in Tanacetum, Yarrow.

16.. The Sizes of Flowers, as of the Leaves, may be reduced to Three. From an
Inch and under, in Diameter or Length, may be accounted Small. From an Inch and
over to an Inch and may go for Mean. And from an Inch and and over, Great.

17. In respect of the Shape, Flowers are Open or Bellied, Open have both
Leaves and Attire, as most; or else are all Attire, as of Burdock, Beta Cretica.

18.. The Open, consist of a Certain Number of Leaves, One, Two, Three, Four,
Five, Six, Seven, Eight, Nine, Ten, Thirteen, or One and Twenty. Uncertain,
commonly called Double. Those of a Certain Number, either Uniform, that is, all
of a certain Size and Shape, as usually; or Biform, or Triform, as in Iris,
Blattaria. And these again, Even Edged or Notched; with Three Points, as in
Marigold; or Five, in Cichory.

19.. The Bellied, are either so in whole; or in Part, that is, with the Top
divided into Leaves, and the Bottom, Hollow: The former, are also Even Edged,
as in Convolvulus; or Notched, as in Trachelium. The latter have their Leaves
distinguished as before. Their Bottom or Base, either fastened to the Seed-Case,
as in Snap-dragon; or standing below it. And so, either Straight, as I think in
Toad-flax; or Crooked, as in Violet, Lark-heel.

20.. In all these, the Attire is either Seminiform, or Florid. And both,
Clustur'd, or Divided; as in Mallow, St. John's wort; Starwort, Hawkweed.

21.. The Colors of the Flower, are White, as in Water-Crowfoot; Red, as
Lychnis; Blew, as Borage; Purple, as Stock-July-Flower; Black, as in some
Anemones; Yellow, in Wall-Flower; Tawny, in Colus Jovis; Green, in Laureola.
Which are either Single, or Mixed: Two together, as in Butyr-Bur, White and
Red; in White Hellibore, White and Green; in Monks Rubarb, Red and Green; etc.
Or Three together, as in Pancy, Yellow, Blew, and Black, i. e. atro-purpurcus.

22.. How far these, and some other like Distinctions, being reduced to Tables,
would serve for the finding out of any Sort of Plant, may be conceived, if we
consider, how great a Variety, a few Bells, in the ringing of Changes, will
produce. And the search will be easy, and successful, if in every foregoing
Table, reference be made to those that follow; and in the Tables containing the
last Divisions, the Names of the Plants therein poynted out, be expressed.

THE ANATOMY OF FRUITS, PROSECUTED With the bare EYE, And with the MICROSCOPE.
Read before the Royal Society, in the Year 1677. The THIRD PART.

By NEHEMJAH GREW M. D. Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY, and of the COLLEGE of
PHYSICIANS.

LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, 1682.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Third Part.
CHAP. I. Of the APPLE; and of the LIMON, and CUCUMER, the Fruits of Plants
vulgarly called POMIFEROUS. CHAP. II. Of the PEAR and QUINCE. CHAP. III. Of the
PLUM, and some other Fruits of the same Kindred CHAP. IV. Of the GRAPE, and
HAZEL-NUT; with some other Fruits analogous to each of them. CHAP. V. Of the
SEED-CASE or MEMBRANEOUS UTERUS. CHAP. VI. Of the USE of the Parts to the
Fruit. CHAP. VII. Of the USE of the Parts to the Seed. And the TIME, in which,
the Uterus or Fruit and Seed-Case are formed.
THE ANATOMY OF FRUITS. PART III.
CHAP. I. Of the APPLE; and of the LIMON, and CUCUMER, the Fruits of Plants
vulgarly called POMIFEROUS.
THE Description and Use of Leaves and Flowers, together with the Figures
thereto belonging, were presented to this Honorable Society, the last year. I
shall conclude this Subject with Fruits and Seeds; beginning with Fruits, which
will take up the present Discourse.

2.. And First, I shall describe the Compounding Parts of some, more generally
known. Which having done, I shall next observe the Uses of the same; either for
the Fruit it self, or for the Seed. Some of the Descriptions, the Reader may be
pleased to compare with those in the First Book, Chapter 6.
I begin with the Apple; to which I shall subjoyn the Limon, and Cucumer,
commonly reduced to the Pome Kind.

3.. AN APPLE, besides the Skin, consists of a Parenchyma, Vessels, and Coar.
The Parenchyma or Pulp, is the same with that of the Barque of the Tree. As is
apparent, not only from the visible continuation thereof from the one, through
the Stalk, into the other: but also from the Structure common to them both;
being both composed of Bladders. In which, notwithstanding, there is this
difference, That whereas in the Barque, they are spherical, and very small,
most of them, through a good Glass, not exceeding 1/10th of an Inch in
Diametre, and some of them, less: here, they are oblong and very large, most of
them about ^d of an Inch in Length, Tab. 65.
or more, according to the largeness and tenderness of the Fruit; being all
uniformly tenter'd or stretched out, by the arching of the Vessels, from the
Coar toward the Circumference of the Apple.

4.. The Vessels, as in the other Parts of a Plant, are Succiferous, and for
Aer. Both the Branches of the former, and the single Vessels of the latter, are
extreme small. They run every where together, not collateral, Tab. 65.
as Veins and Arteries do in Animals; but the latter, sheathed in the former.

5.. They are distributed into Twenty principal Branches. The Ten outmost, a
little within the Apple, are diverted from a straight Line, into so many great
Arches; from which a few small Fibers are without any order dispearsed through
the Apple. The Five middlemost, and the Five inmost, run in a straight Line as
far as the Coar, and are there diverted into as many lesser Arches; Tab. 65.
the former, at the outer, and the latter at the iner Angles of the Coar. Upon
these Five inmost hang all the Seeds.

6.. These Ten, and the other Ten abovesaid, do all meet together at the top of
the Apple, where originally, they all ran into the Flower. Tab. 65.
But betwixt them, there are scarce any intercurrent Fibers; so that they
appear every where disjunct from the bottom to the top of the Apple.

7.. A LIMON has a Threefold Parenchyma; which seem to be derived one from
another: the Texture, upon every derivation, being somewhat altered, Tab. 66.
and so made more close and elaborate. The utmost, called the Rind, has the
most open, and the coursest Texture; being composed of the largest Threads, and
those Threads woven up into larger Bladders. Those little Cells, which contein
the Essential Oil of the Fruit, and stand near the Surface of the Rind, are
some of the said Bladders much more dilated.

8.. From this utmost Parenchyma. Nine or Ten Insertions or Lamells are
produced, betwixt as many Portions of the Pulpy Part, toward the Center, where
they all unite into one Body, answerable to the Pith in the Trunk or Root of a
Tree; and is a conspicuous demonstration, of the communion betwixt the Barque
and the Pith; which there, Tab. 66.
is much more obscure and difficult to observe. At the bottom, but especially
the top of the Fruit, the Pith is so far expanded, as without the mediation of
any Lamels, to be joined to the Rind.

9.. Throughout this Parenchyma, the Vessels are dispearsed. But the chief
Branches stand on the iner Edge of the Rind, and the outer Edge of the Pith,
Tab. 66.
just at the two extremities of every Lamel. From those Branches on the Edge of
the Pith, other little and very short ones shoot into the Pulp of the Fruit,
upon which the Seeds are appendant. In the Center of the Pith, are Eight or
Nine, in a Ring, which run through the Fruit up to the Flower.

10.. Between the Rind and the Pith and those several Lamels, which join them
together, stands the second Sort of Parenchyma, different from the former, in
being somewhat closer, and finer wrought Divided, by the Lamels, into several
distinct Bodies; every one of them a great and entire Bag.

11.. Within every great Bag, is contained a Third Parenchyma, which is also a
Cluster of other little Bags, about the bigness of an Oate, Tab. 66.
all disjoined one from another, and having their distinct Stalks, of several
Lengths, by which they are all fastened to the utmost Side of the great Bag,
wherein they are contained. Within each of these lesser Bags are contained many
hundreds of Bladders, consisting of most extreme fine Threads woven up together
into that Figure. Within these Bladders lies the Acid Juice of the Limon.

12.. A CUCUMER, has also a Threefold Parenchyma. The Utmost, is derived, from
the Barque. In this, being exposed for some time to dry, and then cut
transversly with a Rasor; not only the Bladders, but also the Threads whereof
the Bladders consist, through a good Microscope, are apparent.

13.. Throughout this Parenchyma the Sap-Vessels are dispersed; near the
Circumference, Tab. 66.
in Ten or Twelve very large Branches. Each of these larger Branches, embosoms
another of Aer-Vessels in its Center. Adjacent to the Middle Parenchyma, they
stand in Clustres of much smaller Branches, but more numerous.

14.. Out of all these Sap-Vessels, issues a transparent and viscous Mucilage;
which being dried, becomes as hard and tough as Gum Tragacanth. Analogous to
which, I suppose, is the truly purgative part of Elaterium.

15.. The Middle Parenchyma is derived from the Pith; and divided into Three
Colums, Tab. 66.
standing triangularly, and having each of them a Triangular Figure. Within
these Colums stand a distinct Sort of Sap-Vessels: from whence, several small
and short Fibers shoot into the Inmost Parenchyma, whereupon the Seeds do hang.
So that these Columns are as it were the Beds on which the Seeds grow. With
each of the Seed-Branchs or Fibers, goes some part of the said Parenchyma or
Colum, out of which, the Covers of the Seed are formed.

16.. The Inmost Parenchyma wherein the Seeds lie, and which answers to the
Pulp of a Limon, Tab. 66.
seems likewise to be derived from the Colums, that is, to be originally thence
produced upon the Seed-Fibres, and afterward spread and augmented into a Pulp.
By Three Insertions from the Colums, and as many from the Utmost Parenchyma,
and these re-inserted; it is divided into Six Triangular Bodies; and every
Triangle, into Three Ovals.

17.. A near resemblance betwixt the Garden and Wild Cucumer, with respect to
the Inward Structure, Tab. 66.
as well as the Outward Figure, may be observed: Both of them having a
Threefold Parenchyma. Yet with this difference, That the Three White Triangular
Bodies or Colums in the one, is answered by a White Ring or Tube in the other.

CHAP. II. Of the PEAR and QUINCE.
APEAR, besides the Skin, consists of a Twofold Parenchyma, of Vessels,
Tartareous Knots or Grains, and a Coar. The Skin is lined with a great number
of the said Tartareous Grains, through a Glass, about the bigness of small
Shot: whereby it looks withinside, like the Skin of the Scate and some other
Fishes. Tab. 67.
Besides those which grow to the Skin, there are also many more standing near
adjacent to it all round about the Fruit: altogether about ^d of an Inch in
thickness, through a Microscope; as in a Slice of a Pear cut transversly is
apparent. Somewhat more or less, as I take it, according to the Delicacy or
Harshness of the Fruit; as more in a Burgamy, or other soft and sweet Pear,
than in those which are called Strangulatoria. As all Vinous Liquors, and those
especially which are the most Tartareous, become more soft and sweet, according
as they cast off their Tartar, in a greater quantity, upon the Sides of the
Vessel.

2.. The Outer Parenchyma, is of the same Original, and general Structure, as
in an Apple. But the Bladders, answerable to the Shape of this Fruit, not
altogether so long, with respect to their Breadth. Throughout this Parenchyma,
Tab. 67.
are also dispersed many small Tartareous Grains; most of them somewhat round,
as those next the Skin, and of a like Size; but nothing near so numerous.

3.. The Bladders here, have also a different Position from that they have in
an Apple: there, they are all so stretched out, as to have respect to one
common Center, which is that of the Apple it self. But here, Tab. 67.
they every where bear a respect to the said Tartareous Grains, every Grain
being the Center of a certain Number of Bladders; like a Star, in the middle of
its Vortex. Whereby, so many of the Tartareous parts of the Sap, as cannot well
be thrown off upon the Skin, are more commodiously discharged, upon every
little Knot or Grain, nearer hand.

4.. Throughout this Parenchyma, the Vessels likewise are dispersed. Of the Two
general Kinds, for Sap, and for Aer. The Aer-Vessels, are here extreme small,
as well as in an Apple; yet one degree, larger. They are both together
distributed into Fifteen principal Branches. Tab. 67.
The Five Utmost make as many Arches, but commonly not near so deep as in an
Apple. From these, some small Fibers, yet a little more numerously than in an
Apple, are dispersed throughout the Parenchyma. The Ten Inmost run along to the
Seed, and from thence, with the other Five, to the Flower.

5.. Next the Coar, stands the Inner Parenchyma, in diverse respects different
from the Outer. The Bladders of the latter, as has been said, large and long;
of the former, small and round, answerable to those of the Pith, of which it
seems to be derived. Throughout that, the Vessels and Tartareous Grains are
dispersed; in this, there are neither. Tab. 67.
The Effect whereof is, that is sweet, this sower; for which reason, I have
taken leave to name it, the Acetary.

6.. Betwixt this and the outer Parenchyma, the said Tartareous Grains begin,
first to stand nearer together, to grow biger, and of a more unequal Surface;
Tab. 67.
and by degrees, to unite into a Body, in some Pears, and especially toward
the Cork, almost as hard as a Plum-Stone; which I have thereupon, B. 1. Chapter 6.
named the Calculary. So that a Pear, is Natures Preface or Introduction to a
Plum.

7.. This Tartareous Body, B. 1. Chapter 6.
and those small Grains above said, I have formerly supposed, to be
precipitated out of the Sap, by virtue of the Vessels. Which is not only argued
from their growing, where the Vessels, only in the outer Parenchyma: but in
that the very Bounds or Figure of the Calculary, Tab. 67.
is determined by the Situation of the chief of those Vessels; as in cuting a
Pear smoothly through the Center and by the Length, is apparent.

8.. The Coar as well as the Acetary, seems to be derived from the Pith. And is
therefore lesser here, than in an Apple, where the whole Pith of the Stalk,
goes to the making of the Coar only.

9.. In most Pears, at the bottom of the Coar, and a little below the Center of
the Fruit, Tab. 67.
there is a kind of small Umbelical Knot; from whence is extended a straight
Chanel or Ductus, which opens at the middle of the Cork or Stool of the Flower,
scarce wide enough to admit the smallest Pin. Made for the Use hereafter
mentioned.

10.. A QUINCE, is nearly allied to a Pear. The differences betwixt them are
these; In the Quince, the outer Parenchyma is more close, Tab. 67.
that is, the Bladders are smaller. The Vessels more numerous, and more deeply
enarched; the Calculary greater, and more spread; according to the Shape of the
Fruit: but the Acetary, less: The Coar stands higher or nearer to the Cork;
divided, not into Five, but Four Cells. And the Ductus from the bottom of the
Coar to the top of the Fruit, much more open and observable.

CHAP. III. Of the PLUM, and some other Fruits of the same Kindred.
A PLUM consists of a Parenchyma, the Two general Kinds of Vessels, and a
Stone. All which I have already described in the First Book. Chapter 6.
I shall here add, and further clear some things. And First, it is to be noted,
That, in Proportion to the Bulk of the Fruit, there are more Vessels in a Plum,
than in an Apple, Pear, or Quince. As also, That in Plums, all the Vessels are
braced together into one Uniform Piece of Network, every where terminating at
an equal distance from the Circumference, Tab. 68.
sc. ^th of an Inch or thereabout. And as for the Bore of the Aer-Vessels,
although the Glass I used, when I examined this Fruit, would not reach it; yet
is it to be presumed, that they bear a just Proportion to those in the Trunk of
the same Tree; and that therefore they are here larger, than in an Apple or
Pear. The Skin likewise of a Plum, is more fibrous, thick, and tough, than in
those Fruits. The Ends of these Diversities, we shall presently speak of.

2.. Of the Stone, amongst other particulars wherein the contrivance of Nature
is very admirable, B. 1. Chapter 6.
I have formerly showed, That it is composed of Two or rather Three distinct
Bodies. One of them, the Lining; which answers to the Coar in a Pear. And is
originated from the Parenchyma, which the Seed-Branch brings along with it,
through the Chanel in the Side, and at last into the Hollow, of the Stone; and
is there spread all over it: as when a small Glass-Pipe, is blown and expanded
into a Bubble. Or as if a Bladder, being stretchout, and put through the Neck
of a Bottle; Tab. 68.
were then blown up, so as to be every where contiguous to the Sides, and
become, as it were, the Lining of the Bottle.

3.. The Foundation or Ground of the Outer and more Bulky Part of the Stone, is
the Iner Part of the Parenchyma; and answers to the Acetary in a Pear. Tab. 68.
As the Fruit grows, the Tartareous Parts of the Sap, being continually
precipitated upon this Parenchyma, it is hereby petrified. As will best be
seen, by comparing the several Ages of the same Fruit together. And in some
Stones; on the Surface whereof, Tab. 68.
some of the said Tartareous Parts appear in distinct Grains. So that whereas
in a Pear, the Calculary and the Acetary are distinct, here in a Plum, they are
thrown one into the other. Or, as some Mineral Waters only make a Crust about a
Stick or other Bodies immersed in them; but others, by sinking into these
Bodies, do hereby petrify them: So in a Pear, the Tartareous Parts of the Sap,
only make a Crust about the Acetary; but in a Plum, they sink into the Body
thereof, or that Part of the Parenchyma, which stands in the place of it,
whereby it is converted into a Stone. The Figures of Stones shall hereafter be
spoken of, when I come in the next Part, to the Covers of the Seed.

4.. AN APRECOCK is of the Plum-Kind. But some things are herein better
observed. As first, the Position of the Bladders of the Parenchyma. For the
Tartareous Parts of the Sap not being here dispersed, in little Grains,
throughout the Fruit, as in a Pear; but all thrown off into the Stone: the
Bladders therefore are so disposed, as not to have respect to several Centres,
Tab. 68.
as in a Pear; but only the Stone, to which they all do most exactly radiate;
thereto conveying the feculent Sap, in so many little Streams. This is best
seen, when the Fruit is full ripe.

5.. In this Fruit, while it is young, the gradual transmutation of the Inner
Part of the Parenchyma into a Stone, is also more apparent. And so are the
Three Coats, which serve for the Generation of the Seed; being now all very
distinct; and remarkable, not only for their Bulk; but also, the Analogy which
they bear to the Three Membranes in many Viviparous Animals. Whereof I shall
give a more particular Description, when I come, in the following Part, to the
Covers of the Seed.

6.. A PEACH has a much bigger Stone, than either a Plum, or an Aprecock: and
has therefore, when full ripe, and especially in hot Countries, a more
defecated or better fined Juice. For the reason why the Stone is so great, is
because the Vessels run so very numerously through the Body of it; and so cause
a more copious precipitation of the Lees of the Sap thereinto.

7.. A CHEERY is likewise near related to a Plum. But the Bracement or
Reticulation of the Vessels, Tab. 69.
is here carried out further, so as to be all round about contiguous to the
Skin. And as the Aer-Vessels in the Branch of a Cherry-Tree, are larger than
those of an Apple-Branch, but less than those of a Plum-Branch; so may they be
presumed, to bear the same Proportion here in the Fruit,

8.. A WALNUT, is a Nuciprune; or betwixt a Plum and a Nut, as a Bat is betwixt
a Beast and a Bird. For the Rind, answers to the Pulp; and the Shell, as the
Stone, is also lined. But the Seed-Vessels, which in a Plum run through a
Chanel made on purpose in the Stone; do here enter, as in a Nut, at the Center
of the Shell. By which means, they are invested with a more fair Parenchyma;
which Nature has provided, as her Cloth, for the making of the Coats wide
enough for so vast a Kernel.

CHAP. IV. Of the GRAPE, and HAZEL-NUT; with some other Fruits, analogous to
each of them.
A GRAPE, is a Plum with two Stones; for their thickness, Tab. 69.
as hard as any other. The Distribution of the Vessels is also somewhat
different. For the principal Fibers running up directly betwixt the Stones; and
the smaller, making only one single Net, near the Circumference; they all meet
together at the Top of the Grape. It is also to be noted, That many Lignous
Fibers are visibly mixed with the Skin it self: whereby it becomes very thick
and tough. And as the Aer-Vessels in the Trunk of a Vine, are greater than in
that of an Apple, Pear, or Plum: So is it to be presumed, that in a Grape, they
are greater than in the Fruits of those Trees.

2.. The Parenchyma or Pulp of a Grape, seems to be derived, not from the
Barque, as in an Apple; nor partly from the Barque, and partly from the Pith,
as in a Goosberry: but wholly from the Pith; at least, as far as the
Reticulation of the Fibers; and the Skin only from the Barque; whereby the Pulp
becomes so tender and delicate a Meat.

3.. A GOOSBERRY, has a Threefold Parenchyma. The Utmost is derived from the
Barque; of a Greener Color, and very Sappy. The midlemost, from the Pith;
somewhat white, and more dry, as the Diametral Insertions in some Roots. In
both of them, the Bladders are very conspicuous, Tab. 69.
above what they are in any Fruit, I at present think of; so as to be visible
to a good Eye without a Glass.

4.. Betwixt these Two Parenchymas, do run most of the principal Fibers, Tab.
69.
or Vascular Threads. From which several smaller ones are branched into the
Inmost Parenchyma; upon which, the Seeds do hang.

5.. Each of these smaller Branches is invested with some part of the middle or
white Parenchyma. Serving partly to make the Covers of the Seed; and partly,
the Pulp, that is, the Inmost and finest Parenchyma of the Berry, in which the
Seed lies.

A White CORIN, without taking off the Skin, shows not unpleasantly how the
Seeds are fastened. For as the Trunk of the Tree continues not to any
considerable Length, entire, as in a Plum, but is presently divided into
several Boughs; nor are the Edges of the Leaf entire, as also in a Plum, but
slit into several Lobes; and the Fruit, into a great many Corins in a Bunch: So
again, the Seeds do hang upon the Fibers, like Two other Bunches, in every
Corin. As by Refraction, Objects of all Sizes are represented on the Walls of
the Eye. The Operations of Nature being every where Uniform: and sometimes the
same in small, transcribed from a greater Copy.

7.. A NUT, is a Plum inverted, or turned inside outward. For the Shell,
standing naked, includes the Parenchyma: the bearded Cap, not precisely
answering to that, but to the Empalement of the Flower; Tab. 69.
which likewise in many other Plants, out-lives the Foliature and Embosomes the
Uterus of the Seed. And whereas the Stone of a Plum is not Faced, but Lined
with a Parenchyma derived at second hand from the Pith: The Shell of a Nut is
not Lined, but Faced with the iner Skin of the Cap.

8.. AN AKERN, is the Nut of an Oak. Yet with this difference; That besides the
Cup, it stands in, it has only a Leathern or Parchment Cover instead of a
Shell. From whence it come to pass, that whereas the Kernel of a Nut is sweet;
that of an Akern, is of a very rough Taste: the Austere Parts of the Sap, which
in a Nut are drained off into the Shell, being here imbibed by the Kernel it
self.

CHAP. V. Of the SEED-CASE or MEMBRANEOUS UTERUS.
TO the forementioned Fruits, I shall subjoyne, in some Examples, the
Description of the Seed-Case, which is analogous to the Fruit. For the Fruit,
strictly so called, is, A Fleshy Uterus, which grows more moist and Pulpy, as
the Seed ripens. But the Seed-Case, whether it be called a Cod, Pod, or by any
other name, is, A Membraneous Uterus, which as the Seed ripens, still grows the
more dry and hard: as in most Plants.

2.. THE SEED-CASE, is either originally open; Or only when the Seed is ripe;
Or never opens at all, till the Seed be sown. Of the first Sort, is that of
Luteola; as also of Clary, Sage, Hysop, and the like: wherein one and the same
Part, is both the Empalement of the Flower, and when that is gone, survives as
the Case of the Seed.

3.. Of the Last, is that of Myagrum Monspermon, Lithosperme, all the Stones of
Fruits, with diverse others. And some Cases, which are soft, as, I think, that
of Garden Radish. The former, by cleaving in some part or other; these only by
roting under Ground.

4.. THAT of Garden Radish, is a Light and Spongy or Pithy Body; originally,
every where entire. But, as it ripens, breaks within, Tab. 70.
into several White and Dry Membranes round about the Seed. By the Length and
about th of an Inch distant from the Sides of the Case, do run a pair of little
Vascular Ropes. Some smaller Fibers are from these transmitted to the Sides of
the Case; by which they are kept tite and steady. Upon diverse others produced
toward the Center, hang the Seeds, like Two Ropes of Onions.

5.. Of those which open so soon as the Seed is ripe; some are made to open at
the Top, as Popy Heads; Some on the Side, as most Cods; and some at the Bottom,
as that of Coded Arsmart.

6.. THE Popy-Head, is a little Dove Coat; divided by Eight or Ten Partitions,
Tab. 70.
into so many Stalls. On both Sides the Partitions, hangs a most numerous Brood
of Seeds. The Partitions and Sides of the Head, are made of the Barque, and
Lined with the Pith. While young, they are very thick and spongy; and together
with the Seeds, do then fill all up. The Head is then also every where entire;
but as it dries, it gradually opens at the Top, into several Windows, one for
every Stall: which are all covered with a very fair Canopy. A Fabric designed
for several purposes, as shall hearafter be said.

7.. Of those which open on the Side; some are made to open, only on One Side;
some, on both Sides; some, with Three Sides; some, with more; and some
horizontally or round about.

8.. THE COD of Garden Bean (and so the rest of the Leguminous kind) opens on
one Side. It has a Twofold Parenchyma. The Utmost derived from the Barque:
Tab. 70.
in which stand all the Vessels, in several Parcels; one whereof, at the Back
of the Cod, is much larger than the rest, shaped like a Copula used in Schemes;
from whence shoot those lesser Fibers upon which the Beans do grow.

9.. The Inner Parenchyma is derived from the Pith. Upon its Nativity, and for
some time afterward, entire and wholly composed of Bladders, as the Outer.
From the Base of the Cod they are gradually enlarged, so as to compose this
Parenchyma into a very soft and delicate Sponge. Tab. 70.
In which (the Cod being well grown) the very Threads whereof the Bladders were
woven, are many of them so loose and ample, as easily to be drawn out (as in
the uroaving of Knit-work) to a considerable Length, fairly visible through an
ordinary Glass.

10.. This may further confirm all that I have formerly said of the Fibrous
Texture of the Pith, B. 2. P. 1. Chapter 5. and B. 3. P. 1. Chapter 4.
and of all the other Parenchymous Parts of Plants.

11.. THE Seed-Case of Medica, is a Cod wound up: in the Echinata, Spirally; in
the Tornata, by an Helix. Not finished all together; but, upon the fall of the
Flower, beginning to wind, continues its Circles, till it be come to its full
Growth.

12.. THE Seed-Case of Yellow Henbean opens on both Sides. On the Top, Tab. 70.
is erected a Colum, about an Inch long; which, as the Case swells, gwrosless,
and at last falls off. On the Sides of the Uterus or Case, Two Vascular Fibers
run oppositely from the bottom to the top, and so into the Colum. Along the
Tract of these Fibers, the Case, as it ages, gradually cleaves on both Sides
asunder.

13.. The Case is lined with a dry and thin Parchment, as smooth as Glass. In
the Center of the Case, stands a great Parenchymous Boss, Tab. 70.
which is, as it were, the Bed or Placentula of the Seeds; which lie all over
it, as in a Strawberry. And so in many other Plants. Throughout this Bed, the
Vessels for the Generation and Nourishment of the Seeds, are distributed; one
very small Fiber, shooting, from the direct ones, obliquely into each Seed.

14.. THE Seed-Case of Tulip, opens with Three Sides; being, when young, a
Prism or long Triangle. From the middle of each Side, a Partition or Board is
produced; all three meeting in the Center of the Case; Tab. 71.
and so parting it into Six Stalls for the Seed. The insides hereof, are, lined
with a thin smooth and glossy Parchment, like that in Hen-bean; derived from
the Pith; as the outside, from the Barque: and so in many other Seed-Cases.

15.. The Vessels, after they rise above the Stalk, are disposed with great
artifice. For first, they are divided into Three principal Branches, which run
a long the Three Angles of the Case; where the Three Sides, Tab. 71.
as it ages, gradually cleave asunder. From these chief Branches, at the Three
Angles, diverse lesser ones run horizontally, and meet at the middle of each
Side. From whence again, many yet smaller ones are produced through the breadth
of each Partition to their Edges in the Center of the Case. Where, once more,
they are distributed into very fine and short Threads, whereupon hang the Seeds.

16.. THE Seed-Case of Stramonium or Thorn Apple, is divided into Four Closets:
Not open one into another, as in Poppy, Tulip, etc. but so many distinct
Enclosures. Tab. 71.
In the midst of each Closet stands a Colum, joined to the Side of the Closet
by a Wall or Lamine. Through the Length of the Colums run several greater and
lesser Branches of Vessels, from whence others are obliquely produced, upon
which the Seeds grow.

17.. THE Seed-Case of Anagallis or Pimpernel, is a little Globe; which opens
not by its Meridian or Vertically, as do the former; but by its Horizon. Tab.
71.
For diverse very small Fibers, being produced from the Stalk to the middle of
the Case; do there fetch a Circle, and so divide it exactly into Two
Hemispheres: the Uppermost of which, when the Seeds are ripe, falls off; and
so the wind sowes them.

18.. THE Seed-Case of Coded Arsmart, neither opens at the Top, nor on the
Sides, as do all the former; but at the Bottom. It is composed of Four Sides:
the Outer Part of which, is softer and more succulent; Tab. 71.
the Inner a tite and strong Membrane. In the Center of the Case, is erected a
Pole or Colum upon which the Seeds do all hang very loosely.

19.. From this Mechanism, the manner of that violent and surprising
Ejaculation of the Seeds, is intelligible. Which is not a motion originally in
the Seeds themselves; but contrived by the Structure of the Case. For the Seeds
hanging very loose, and not on the Sides of the Case, as sometimes, but on the
Pole, in the Center, with their thicker end downward, they stand ready for a
discharge: and the Sides of the Case being lined with a strong and Tensed
Membrane, they hereby perform the office of so many little Bows: which,
remaining fast at the Top, and (contrary to what we see in other Plants)
opening or being let off at the Bottom, forceably curle upward, and so drive
all the Seeds before them.

CHAP. VI. Of the USE of the Parts to the Fruit.
IN the forgoing Descriptions, I have already mentioned the Use of the Parts in
some particulars. I shall now a little further explain the manner of their
service, both to the Fruit, and to the Seed.

2.. And first, the Vessels serve for the Figuration of the Fruit. So in an
Apple, the Ten great and utmost Branches serve not only to nourish and feed it;
but also, by the Arched Lines they draw, to direct and govern the Growth
thereof into an orbicular Figure. The Dilatation of these Vessels, not being
hindered by any Braces or Conjunction with the Interior ones. By the Slenderness
of the Aer-Vessels, as in the Root, so here in the Fruit, much promoted. And by
their Saline Principle, first begun.

3.. The Five midlemost and the Five Inmost serve together, to figure the Coar;
the former bounding the Outer, the Latter, the Iner Angles. For were they only
Five, or were all Ten in the same Circle, they would only make a round Cavity
like that of a hollow Pith. Hence it is that Apples, in which some small Threads
of the Vessels strike out into the Circumference, are very Uneven with diverse
Knobs and Ridges. But Plums, Cherries, etc. where the Vessels all terminate at
an Equal distance from the Skin, are Even all round about.

4.. The Bulk of the Fruit depends also on the Braces of the Vessels. For in
Plums and Cherries, they are more numerous; but in Apples and Pears they are
very loose one from another, and so have liberty left them to spread abroad.

5.. As also on their Size; that is, on the Size of the Aer-Vessels. Which, the
less they are themselves, they serve to make a bigger Fruit. As the less they
are in any Root, they serve to make it the more ample. For the less they are,
the more pliable to the Attraction of the Aer: and in their Growth must make so
many more spiral Rings: by both which means, they make the greater Arches. And
therefore a Pear is commonly a smaller Fruit than an Apple; a Plum than a Pear;
and a Grape, than a Plum; in all which the Aer-Vessels are still greater and
greater.

6.. From the same Cause, it is also most agreeable, That the Fruit should not
come before the Leaves or Flower, but last of all. For the Aer-Vessels, as has
been often noted, are not exactly Cylindrick, but tapered; that is, not only
the Fibers consisting of diverse of these Vessels, but the Vessels themselves,
as they ascend into the Trunck, Branches, Leaves, Flower, and Fruit, grow still
more and more slender. So that the smallest coming last, and being the most
pliable; they are also best accommodated for the Expansion of the Parenchyma
into that we call the Fruit.

7.. It is likewise a proper Question to be asked, How it comes to pass, That
some Plants bear a Fruit, and not all? I answer, That as the Size of the
Aer-Vessels conduces to the Bulk of the Fruit, and the Order of its Growth: So
the Number of them, to their being, or not being, any Fruit at all. For the
Fruit, as we have already defined it, is an Uterus, which grows moyster and
softer, as the Seed ripens. The reason therefore, why the Uterus in some
Plants, continues moist and soft after the Seed is ripe; and in some, dries up;
is, Because in the former, there is a smaller, in the latter, a greater Quanty
of the Aer-Vessels in proportion to the other Parts of the Uterus, and so a
greater quantity of Aer. Which as in the Pith of most Plants, so here, by
degrees excludes the Sap, or rendering it more evaporable, comes in the room of
it; and so the Uterus is dried up: that is, there is no Fruit produced, but
only a Seed-Case.

8.. From the Size, Number, and Position of all the Vessels in Fruits a reason
also may be given, for the diversity of their Tastes. Some Instances have before
been given; to which I shall add one or two more. So the Rind of an Orange, is
bitter; the Pulp, sower. Because the former is furnished with many Lignous
Vessels, the Sulphurous or Oily Tincture whereof, being copiously mixed with
the Acid of the Parenchyma, produce that Taste. Whereas the Pulp, which is very
sower, is void of all manner of Vessels. But if the Sap-Vessels are either less
numerous or less Sulphurous; they give so mild a Tincture to the Parenchyma,
as not to produce a bitter, but a sweet or soft Taste; as in Apples, Grapes,
Goosberries, etc. And of a Goosberry, it is particularly to be noted, that
whereas, in a Limon, the Pulp only is sower, as being void of Vessels: here, on
the contrary, the Pulp only is sweet, whereinto all the Vessels strike, and the
Rind sower.

9.. The diversities of the Skin it self, have their Use. And therefore, the
more tender and delicate the Fruit is; the Skin, on the contrary, is thicker
and more tough. So Apples have a thicker Skin, than Pears; Plums, than Apples;
and Grapes than Plums; those having as it were, only a Coat of Kid, but this of
good thick Buff. And therefore some Fruits, although tender, yet either not
having so rich a Juice, or coming early, and so not being exposed to excessive
heats, have a very thin Skin, as Mulberries, Strawberries, etc.

CHAP. VII. Of the USE of the Parts to the Seed. And the TIME, in which the
Uterus or Fruit and Seed-Case are formed.
AND first, for example, in an Apple, the Five Inmost Branches, do best serve
for the Generation of the Seed; these running into the Attire of the Flower,
and so carrying off the most Aerial Spirit from the Seed; by which means, it
becomes a more compact and denser Body, than the Fruit, and so more accommodate
to the process of Vegetation; P. 2. Chapter 5.. 5.
as has formerly been showed.

2.. The Elongation likewise of the Seed-Vessels, in the Fruit and Case,
sometimes directly, as in Plums and Nuts, and sometimes by several Ambages
before they shoot into the Seeds, as in Tulip; shows a design for the highest
refining and maturation of the Seminal Sap.

3.. Chiefly by means of the Inmost Vessels, is made that Chanel in some Pears,
and especially in Quinces. For these perishing with the Flower, the
circumjacent Parenchyma shrinks up, leaving the said Chanel in the midst.
Designed for an inlet to the Aer, for the better drying of the Seeds; which
here stand the more in need of it, because encompassed with a Mucilage.

4.. For the better drying of the Seed, and the disbursing or sowing of it in
due time, the opening of the Case is, in the same manner, also contrived:
either at the Top, as in Popy; o^ on the Sides, as in Tulip, Pimpernel; or at
the Bottom, as in Codded Arsmart. All which openings are effected by the
running of the Aer-Vessels along those places: for by drying the Parenchyma
next adjacent, they cause it to chop and cleave asunder.

5.. Of the Seed-Case of Poppy, it is particularly to be noted, That as the
several Windows, serve to let in Aer, for the drying of the Seeds, after their
full Growth: So the Canopy over them, serves to keep out Rain. For here, the
Case not cleaving down the Side, as it usually does; should the Rain get in, it
would stand in it, as in a Pot, and so rot the Seeds. And as the Canopy serves
to preserve the Seeds; so the several Partitions or Walls, for their better
Stowage. For by an easy survey of this little piece of Ground, it is plain,
that as they stand on both Sides every Wall, there is as much more Ground for
them to stand upon, as if there were no parting Walls, but the Seeds stuck all
round about upon the Ambit or Sides of the Case; or upon a great Bed or
Placenta within it, as in Hyoscyamus, Anagallis, etc. where there is a less
numerous Brood.

6.. The Coar likewise, by standing betwixt the moist Parenchyma and the Seed,
and being hollow and so silled with Aer; does much conduce to the ripening and
drying of the Seed, and its greater fitness both for keeping, and sowing. So
the Parchment Lining of the Seed-Case, as in Hyoscyamus, etc. is answerable to
a Coar.

7.. The Parenchyma serves, amongst other purposes, for the Generation of the
Covers of the Seed; as in some instances has been showed. For which intent,
sometimes the Exterior Parenchyma, as in a Limon; sometimes the midlemost, as
in a Goosberry or Cucumer, is subservient; both of them, in those Fruits, being
more white and dry, than the rest, and so fiter to make the Covers of the Seed.

8.. The Parenchyma is also of use for the warmth of the Seed; as in the
Seed-Case of Garden Radish. Wherein, as it ripens the Parenchyma gradually
drys, breaks, and shrinks up into several soft Membranes, in which the Seeds,
in the Center of the Case, lie swadled, as in so many sine Calico Clouts.

9. I SHALL conclude with observing the Time of the Generation of the Fruit and
Seed-Case. This has hitherto been thought to be initiated upon the opening, I
say not, the forming, but the opening of the Flower, or not long before.
Notwithstanding which, what I have formerly said of the Flower; I now do the
like, of the Uterus it self; sc. That in very many Plants, it is formed, with
the Flower, the year before it appears and comes to its full Growth. As for
instance, in Azarum, not only all the Parts of the Flower, Tab. 71.
but the Uterus it self, and there in also the outer Cover of the Seed of any
one year, are perfectly formed in August or September of the year foregoing.
The like may be seen in Tulip, Mezereon, Corin, and many other Perennial Plants.

THE ANATOMY OF SEEDS, PROSECUTED With the bare EYE, And with the MICROSCOPE.
The Figures presented to the Royal Society, in the Year 1677. The FOURTH PART.

By NEHEMJAH GREW M. D. Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY, and of the COLLEGE of
PHYSICIANS.

LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, 1682.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Fourth Part.
CHAP. I. Of the FIGURES of Seeds. CHAP. II. Of the NUMBER and MOTIONS of
Seeds. CHAP. III. Of the several COVERS of Seeds, and of the VITELLUM. CHAP.
IV. Of the FOETUS or true SEED: and first of the RADICLE and LOBES. CHAP. V. Of
the BUDS of Seeds. And of the PARTS of which these, the Radicle and Lobes are
compounded. CHAP. VI. Of the GENERATION of the Seed.
THE ANATOMY OF SEEDS. PART IV.
CHAP. I. Of the FIGURES of Seeds.
THE Figures of Seeds, or rather of their outward Covers, are made suitable,
Partly to their Collocation in the Uterus, as the End. So those of Mallow,
standing like a Coronet round the Stalk, are of a wedged Figure; whereby their
sharp Edges do all meet together in one Center. Partly, to the various
distribution of the Vessels or Fibers, as one Cause: by which the Measures and
Surface of Seeds, as well as of the Leaves of Plants, are diversified. And
partly, to the Nature of the Saline and other Principles regent in a Plant, as
another principal Cause. And therefore the more stony, brittle, or full of Salt
the Covers of any Seeds are, they are generally more angular, and their Figure,
whether angular or not, more constantly observed. So the Tartarcous Stone of a
Plum, is not only more angular, but also more regular than the Husk of the
Kernel of a Pear or Apple.

2.. For all Stones are measured by several Circles, whose Diametres hold a
certain proportion to the Length of the Stone; in the same manner as has been
showed in the description of the Leaf. P. 1. Chapter 3.
So the Stone of the Pease-Cod-Plum, is measured by two Circles. That of the
Turkey-Plum with Four. Tab. 72.
That of the Aprecok-Plum, with Two repeated oppositely; being perfectly
Rhomboid. To which, those also of the Wheat-Plum, Damasceen, and some others,
allude. And some are measured be four Circles, and one repeated.

3.. The Figures, not only of the larger sort of Seeds, but even of the
smallest, have much and elegant variety. We will take the pleasure of comparing
these which follow.

4.. And first of all, some are perfectly Spherick, and with an even Surface;
Tab. 73.
as that of little Century. That of Spergula is also Spherick; but has a
knobed Surface, and is encompassed with a Membraneous Rimm, like the Horizon of
a Globe. That of little Celandine is Circular, but compressed like a Cheese.

5.. Others are Nephroideous, or as it were Hemispherick. Of which Figure, and
hereunto approaching, there are a greater number than of any other; as that
which agrees with the more frequent Shape and Fold of the Lobes and Radicle of
the Seed, as shall be seen. Yet with some difference, as to their Shape and
Surface. So, that of Lychnis Sylvestris is figured just like the kidney of a
Cat; Tab. 73.
and has a knobed Surface. That of Poppey comes near it in Shape; but has a
surface exactly like that part of the Paunch of a Sheep, called the Hony-Coome.
That of great Celandine, is a little more oblong; and so, like the Kidney, not
of a Cat, but of a Sheep: chequered with parallel Rings and other short Lines
placed alternately betwixt them.

6.. Where, by the way, we may see, as well by the Seed, as by the other Parts,
of how different kinds, the Great and Little Celandine, notwithstanding their
Names, are to be esteemed.

7.. The Seed also of Ben or spatling Poppey is somewhat like a Kidney: Tab. 73.
but has its Circumference raised up into a double Ridg: to which several
small Ridges do in some sort also radiate from one Center sc. the Base of the
Seed.

8.. The Seed of Chickweed, Tab. 73.
is partly like a Kidney, and partly like a little Retort. As also that of
Pentaphil. fragiferum. But the former is rough cast with small pieces having as
it were feet on each side, like little Insects. With which, the Seed of
Leuchanthem^m (which may be called, the Giant-Chickweed) does much agree. The
latter, has several Fibrous Ridges, resembling the Fibers in the Auricles of
the Heart; or running from the nose to the Circumference, somewhat like the
Azymuth Lines on a Quadrant.

9.. Some are Oval; Tab. 73.
as that of the little Bell, and rough cast with Fibers almost parallel and
produced by the Length of the Seed. In which latter respect, the Seeds also of
Trachelium and some other like Plants, are agreeable. That of Brooklime, is
also Oval, but encompassed with a thick Rimm, narrowing all the way to the Base
of the Seed.

10.. The Seed of Dovesfoot has an oval Cone, and a flat Base. Its Surface
favous, like that of Poppy, Toad-flax, and some other Seeds. That of Sedum
minus aestivum luteum, Tab. 73.
is in a manner the Figure of the former inverted, being flat, not at the Base,
but on the Top. And whereas that rises with a blunt Angle, this has only a
Ridg, raised above the Surface of the Seed.

11.. The Seeds of diverse sorts of Grass, are more Conick, as particularly of
that, which for the likeness its Seed has to a Barley Corn, may be called
Barley-Grass. And I little doubt, but that among the several sorts of Grass,
there are some which answer to all the kinds of Esculent Grains, Tab. 73.
as Oat-Grass, Rice-Grass, Wheat-Grass, Rye-Grass. And accordingly, that they
may be more profitably sown in one Ground, than in another; and used with
distinction, for the higher, or more wholesome feeding of Cattle. A Rush, though
it seems an imperfect Plant, yet besides its Flower, has also a plentiful
brood of Seeds of a Conick Figure.

12.. Some Seeds are Cylindrick, as that of St. John's Wort, as also of Tutsan,
Tab. 73.
and some other like Plants, with some little diversity in the Shape or Surface
of the Seed. That of Vervain, is in a manner, half a Cylinder: the true Seed
lying in the Covers, like a Child, in a Cradle without an head.

13.. Others are rather Conico-Cylindrick, Tab. 73.
as that of Jacobaea; having a Coronet on the top, and several furrows by the
Length round about. Answerable to which, is that of Erygerum; in Shape not
unlike to a Rowling-pin.

14.. Some are Plani-Conick, as that of Nettle, which is shaped somewhat like
the end of a Speer. That of Eyebright is more Eliptick; with several Ridges
running by the Length; and joined together with short pieces transversly, Tab.
74.
as in the looping of Lace. That of Wormwood not very unlike a little slat
Essence-Glass: in which, the Fibers are produced by the Length, as the Ridges
are in Eyebright. And so in Yarrow, which is also encompassed with a
Membraneous Rimm. That of Dandelyon, is Plani-Conick toward the Base. And so
those of Lettice, Sonchus, and some others. To which, those also of Hieraceum,
Tragopogon, Scorzonera, etc. with respect to their Surface, do all allude.

15.. And some are Conico-Triangular. Of which, that of Sorrel is Conick at
both ends; the sides equal; and upon every Angle, has a narrow and sharp Rimm.
Tab. 74.
As also that of Anagallis; but the Sides are Spheri-conick, and so the ends
are blunt. They are also pounced with many little round Cavities. But have no
Rimm upon the Angles.

16.. The Seed of Nigella is Triangular, and Conick only at the Top. On every
Angle, has a narrow Rimm; the three Sides equal, and Spheri-conick; Tab. 74.
surrounded with seven or eight Ridges by the girth, joined together in some
places with others transversly. That of Arsmart, is also Triangular and Conick
at the Top. But one of the Sides is almost equal to the other two; which stand
low. That of Knot-Grass has three Sides, one less than another; being as 5, 3,
and 2, or thereabout.

17.. The next (which I take to be the Seed of a sort of Bugloss) is very oddly
figured. The Base, oval; the Top, conick; the Back, Tab. 74.
swelling and round as an Egg; the Belly also swelling, but rising up into an
obtuse Angle highest in the middle, somewhat like a Breastpiece of Armor: and
is encompassed with a Rimm sloaped upward.

18.. That of Moldavian Bawm, is Triangular, and Conick only at the Base. The
place where it is fastened, shaped like the Beard of a Dart. Tab. 74.
Two of the Sides are Plani-conick, the Third Sphericonick, and near as big as
both the other two. The Head flat, with a Rimm erected upon each Side, so as to
make a Spherical Triangle. Approahing to this, are those of Sage, Horehound,
Clary, etc.

19.. That also of Bellis Tanaceti folio, has two Sides Planiconick, Tab. 74.
and a third Sphericonick. The two first have several Ridges running to the
Base. Which is not perfectly conick, but a little dilated into two obtuse
Angles. The Head Triangular, with one Side unequal, the other Two straight, a
little hollowd, and having a small pinnacle in the Center.

20.. That of Staechas Arabica, as the former, saving, that the Head is oval,
and the Base sloaped into a little Triangle. That of Wartwort or Sun-Spurge,
has a very complex Figure. The Belly consists of two Planiconick Sides, Tab.
74.
as the former; the Back, Sphericonick. The whole Seed, in a manner,
Conick-oval. Yet the Base and Head both flat. In the middle of the former, a Peg
by which the Seed is fastened; and of the latter, a poynted Knob. The middle of
the Belly-Sides, hollowed, so as to make a flat Rimm of equal Breadth; and the
hollows filled up with Bladders like those in all the Parenchymus Parts of a
Plant.

21.. Lastly, there are some Seeds which are square. Whereof some are straight,
Tab. 74.
as that of Fox-glove; which has also an even Surface: And that of Blattaria,
in which there are several little hollows in even Rows. And so in Brounwort.

22.. And some Unequal, as that of Chrysanthemum Americ. It Is Quadrati-conick,
or square and sharp at the Base, and big at the Head. Tab. 74.
The Sides all plain; and a thin Rimm erected upon every Angle. As also on the
four Sides of the Head, which is flat, with a little Pinnacle in the middle.

23.. The Seed also of Tansey, is a Conick and bended square not with the Angle
forward, Tab. 74.
as the former, but the Side. And in the place of every Rimm, has a round
Ridge. Somewhat like to this, are those of Febrifuga, Mayweed, and some others.
Thus far of the Figures of Seeds.

CHAP. II. Of the NUMBER and MOTIONS of Seeds.
NATURE has secured the Propagation of Plants several ways, but chiefly by the
Seed: for the Production of which, the Root, Leaves, Flower, and Fruit, do all
officiate, as has been showed. And according as the Plant, or the Seed it
bears, is more liable to be destroyed, Provision is made for Propogation,
either by a greater number of Seeds, or other ways. So the Seeds of Strawberry,
being gathered, or eaten by Vermin, with the Fruit; the Plant is therefore
easily propagated by Trunk-Roots. So Poppy, being an annual Plant, is highly
prolifick: for instance, the White Poppy; which commonly bears about four
mature Heads, in each of which, there are at least ten Partitions, on both
sides whereof, the Seeds grow; and upon 1/4th part of one side, about 100
Seeds; that is, 800 on one Partition: which being multiplied by 10 (the number
of Partitions) makes 8000; and 8000 again by 4 (the number of Heads) makes
32000 Seeds, the yearly product of that Plant.

2.. So in Typha major, the Seeds being blow'n off and low'n (as the Eggs of
many Fishes spawned) with great hazard, they are strangely numerous. For as
they stand altogether upon the Spike, they make a Cylinder at least six Inches
long, and near 5/8ths of an Inch in Diametre, or an Inch and 3/4 about. Now 9
of these Seeds, set side to side, as they stand on the Spike, make but 1/8th of
an Inch; so that 72 make a line of an Inch in Length. But because upon the
Spike, the Hairs belonging to the Seeds come between them; we will abate 10,
and count but 62. To which 3/4ths of 62, that is (without the Fraction) 46,
being added, makes 108 for the Circuit of the Cylinder. And the Cylinder being
six Inches long, there are six times 62, that is, 372, for a Line the length of
the Cylinder. Which number being multiplied by 108, produces 40176 the number
of Seeds which stand upon one Stalk; and so, upon three Stalks, which one Plant
commonly bears, there are in one year, above a hundred and twenty Thousand
Seeds.

3.. SO SOON as the Seed is ripe, Nature takes several Methods for its being
duly sow'n: not only in the opening of the Uterus, as in some Instances P. 3.
Chapter 5. Tab. 70, and 71.
has already been seen; but also in the make of the Seed it self. For First,
the Seeds of many Plants, which affect a peculiar Soil or Seat, as of Arum,
Poppy, etc. are heavy and small enough, without further care, to fall directly
down into the Ground: and so to grow in the same place where themselves had
their Birth.

4.. But if they are so large and light, as to be exposed to the wind, they are
often furnished with one or more Hooks; To stay them from straying over far
from their proper place, till by the fall of Leaves or otherwise, they are
safely lodged. So the Seeds of Avens have one single Hook, Tab. 72.
those of Agrimony and Goose-grass, many; both the former, loving a Bank for
warmth, the latter, a Hedge for its support.

5.. On the contrary, many Seeds are furnished with Wings or Feathers. Partly,
with the help of the Wind to carry them, when they are ripe, from off the
Plant, as those of Ash, Maple, Orach, etc. least staying thereon too long, they
should either be corrupted, or miss their season. And partly, to enable them to
make their slight, more or less, abroad: that so they may not, by falling
together, come up too thick; and that if one should miss a good Soil or Bed,
another may hit. So the Kernels of Pine have wings not unlike to those of some
Insects; Tab. 72.
yet very short, in respect of the weight of the Seed; whereby they fly not in
the Aer, but like domestic Fowls, only flutter upon the Ground. But those of
Typha, Dandelion and most of the Pappous kind, with many more, have very long
and numerous Feathers, by which they are wafted every way, and to any distance
necessary for the aforesaid purposes.

6.. Again, there are some Seeds, which are scattered not by flying abroad, but
by being either Spurted, or Slung away. ^ The first are those of Woodsorrel;
which having a running Root, Nature sees it fit to sow the Seeds at some
distance. The doing of which is effected by a white thick and sturdy Cover of a
Tendinous or Springy Nature, Tab. 72.
in which the Seed lies within the Case. This Cover, so soon as it begins to
dry, bursts open on one side, in an instant, and is violently turned inside
outward, as you would turn the Gizard of a Fowl; and so smartly throws off the
Seed.

7.. The Seeds of Hart's-tongue, and of all that Tribe, are Slung or Shot away.
The doing of which is performed by the curious contrivance of the Seed-Case; as
in Codded Arsmart, and some other like Plants. Only there, the Spring moves and
curles up inward; but here it moves outward. I shall describe it, as well as
the Weather (which when I observed it was cloudy) would permit. Every
Seed-Case, as it appears through a good Glass, Tab. 72.
stands upon a Pedicle from 1/2 an Inch to an Inch or more in Length; at the
bottom about as thick again as a Horse-hair, and a little thicker at the Top,
on which stands the Case, of a Silver Color; about the bigness of a
Cherry-stone, of a Spherick Figure, and girded about with a sturdy Tendon or
Spring, of the Color of Gold: the whole Machine looking not much unlike a
little Padlock. The Surface of the Spring resembles a fine Screw, or some of
the Aer-Vessels in the Wood of a Plant. So soon as by the Innate Aer of the
Plant, or otherwise, this Spring is become stark enough, it suddenly breaks the
Case into two halfs, like two little Cups, and so slings the Seed.

8.. These Cases grow in oblique Furrows or Trenches on the back side the Leaf,
Tab. 72.
from 1/4 of an Inch to an Inch in Length, and about ^th of an Inch broad. In
one of these Trenches an Inch long are more than 300 of the Cases above
described; and allowing but 10 Seeds to every Case, above 3000 Seeds. Which
being multiplied by the number of Furrows in one Leaf, with allowance for the
lesser Furrows; and that sum by the number of Leaves commonly growing upon one
Root, comes to above Ten Hundred Thousand Seeds, the annual product of this
Plant. The Seed is of a Tawny Color, through a good Glass about 1/12th of an
Inch long, flat, and somewhat oval. Of these, ten Thousand are not so big as a
white Pepper Corn.

CHAP. III. Of the several COVERS of Seeds, and of the VITELLUM.
THE next step of Natures Managery, relates chiefly to the Growth of the Seed
when it is sow'n. For which purpose, the outer Covers are somewhere furnished
with Apertures sufficient for the reception of Alimental Moyster from the
Ground; and Divisions, for the shooting forth of the young Root into it. As in
the Seed of a Gourd, at the Bottom; in a Bean, on the Side; and in a Chestnut,
at the Top: Tab. 72.
in which places the Radicle or young Root always lies and puts forth, in the
said several Seeds. And the Seed of Palma Christi; Tab. 72.
which falls to the Ground not only in the usual Covers, but also in the
Seed-Case, for the more plentiful admission of Aliment, has a double Aperture.
Not much unlike to this, is that found sometimes in larger parcels of
Euphorbium; for which Cause, I suspect it to be the Gumm of a Plant of the
Tithymal kind.

2.. If the Cover of the Seed be stony and very hard, it is also distinguished
into several Pieces; whereby they easily cleave asunder without much resistance
to the eruption of the Root. So the Shell of a Hazel-nut easily cleavs on the
edg; and the cleft begins best at the point, Tab. 75.
where the Root stands and shoots forth. The Shell of some Walnuts cleavs into
three Parts; and the Stone of the Bellerick Myrobalan into five: that so, being
very thick and hard, if one piece should not yield, another may not fail to do
it. And the Covers or Husks of some sorts of Grain, as of Millet, are only
folded or laped one over another, the better to give way to their tender
Sprouts.

3.. Besides the Kernels of Plums and some other Fruits, there are very many
Seeds, even of the smaller sort, which have also stony Covers; as of Carthamum,
Myagrum monospermon, Beet, Borage, Lithosperme, Amaranthus, Violet, etc.
Sometimes, for the reception of the harsher and less matured Principles from
the Seed, in its Generation, as in Borage. Commonly, to keep it warmer before
and after its sow'n. For which purpose, the outer Covers of some Seeds, are as
it were Lined with Fur: in that of Great Maple, Short; of Gossipium, Long. And
if the Seed requires a longer stay under ground, the hardness of the Cover
serves to stint the Aliment; lest too much, should either rot it, or cause it
to germinate, before its proper season, or full time for a more Masculine
Growth.

4.. On the contrary, many Seeds, as those of Clary, Garden^ Cress, and others
of that Tribe, have their upper Covers faced with a Mucilage: which being
easily receptive of any Moisture in the Ground, gradually swells, till it lies
like a Gelly round about the Seed. Either for a more plentiful supply of
Aliment; or at least, to soften the Covers, the better to accelerate the Growth
of the Seed.

5.. The process of Nature in the several steps of the Vegetation of the Seed,
has formerly been explained. B. 1. Chapter 1.


6.. THE COVERS of all, or at least the far greater number of Seeds, are Three;
some way or other derived from the Pith: as shall hereafter be seen. And
sometimes, Four: even those of stoned Fruits, have Three, besides the Stone. In
that of Gossipium, there are Two Coats under that lined with the Cotton. The
Seeds of Cucumer, Goats-beard, Tab. 75.
Broom, Scabious, Lettice, etc. although so small, have plainly Three Coats.
But in some of these, and many more, there are only Two distinctly visible,
except in the State of Generation.

7.. In the Upper Coat, the Seed-Vessels are disseminated. The Second, is first
a mere Pulp; but afterward shrinks up and sticks close to the upper. The Third
or Inmost is more dense; and if it be thin, for the most part, Tab. 76.
transparent; whereby the Seed seems sometimes to be naked while it lies
therein; as in Almonds, Cucumers, and the like. For this sticks not to the
middle Coat, as that does to the outer; but commonly, remains entire, after
those are stripped off, being as it were, the Smock of the Seed.

8.. In Melissa and some other small Seeds, it comes finely off upon soaking in
warm Water or on the Tongue. In Fenugreek, it is soft, and of an Amber-Colour;
and being moystened, looks almost like fine Glue. But commonly, it is a pretty
tough Membrane, and often with some thickness, as in Plums, Borage, Scabious.
Yet always extreme thin at the Tip of the Radicle; the more easily to break and
yield to it, as the Secundine to the Foetus, when it first shoots into the
Ground. And sometimes, as in the Seeds of an Orange, it has at one end, the
resemblance of a Placenta. Tab. 75.
But of this, and the two upper Coats, I shall give a further Description in
the last Chapter.

9.. AS ALL Seeds are ex Ovo; so there are many with thin Covers, as of Orach,
Spinach, Beet, and the rest of that Tribe, etc. which besides the Albumen or
clear Liquor out of which they are bred; have also, a Vitellum, or a Body
thereunto Analogus: being neither part of the Seed, nor part of the Covers, but
distinct from them both. With respect to the Bulk of the Seed, very large, as
white as Starch, and pretty friable, Tab. 75.
like good Rice or Barley: of a roundish Figure, and grooved on the Girth, so
as to have a double Edge; Whereby the Seed, which is long and slender, lies
round it, as a Sack of Corn upon a Pack-Saddle or a Rope upon a Pully-wheel.
Upon my first notice hereof, it seemed to answer to a Placenta. But upon
further consideration, the Analogy does not hold betwixt them. For the Placenta
lies without the Membranes in which the Foetus is contained: whereas this body
lies within the Covers contiguous to the Seed, and so becomes its first and
finest Aliment, as the Yelk does to the Chick. For which purpose, as in the
Generation of the Seed, it is a pure Milky Chyle; So in its Vegetation, it is
converted into the like again.

10.. The same Body for Sustance, is observable in the Seeds of Rhapontick,
Tab. 75.
Dock, Sorrel, and the rest of that kindred, with this difference; That whereas
in Orach, etc. the Seed only lies upon it; here, the main Body or Lobes of the
Seed are immersed therein, the Radicle standing naked or above it. So that the
said Lobes, and therein the Seminal-Root are beded herein, as in a Tub of Meal
or a little pot of pure refined Mould, necessary for the first Vegetation of
the Radicle.

11.. BY THESE middle Steps, Nature proceeds from the Thiner Covers of Seeds; or
those, which after the Generation of the Seed is finished, shrink up; to the
Bulky Kind, or those which keep their Bulk after they are dry. Wherein, not
only the Lobes, as in Dock, but the whole Seed is immediately lodged. Different
in Substance, Shape and Bulk; but always many times biger than the true Seed
within it: for which it is commonly mistaken; but is no more the Seed, than is
the Stone of a Plum, the Kernel.

12.. In the Barbado Nut, it is White, Soft, Conick-oval, and taking all its
Dimentions, 8 or 10 times bigger than the Seed within it. In Ashen Keys, it is
of a sad Color, hard, yet somewhat Oily, Oval and flat, and of the same
Bigness as in the Barbado Nut, with respect to the Seed. Tab. 76.
In the Fruit commonly called Nux Vomica Officinarum, it is of the Color and
Hardness of a Cows-Horne; and makes almost the whole Body of the Fruit, being
about 14 or 15 times the Bulk of the Seed. In Goosgrass or Cliver it is of the
like Horny Substance, but shaped somewhat like a Bonet with the Rimm tuckt in.
Tab. 77.
And so in a Coffee-Berry; but rolled or foulded up into a kind of Oval Figure,
with a Notch or Rima through the Length, where the two Ends meet. With other
diversities which will best be understood, when I come presently to the
Description of the Seed herein contained.

13.. With respect to the use of this Cover, it is observable, that where there
is a Stone or Shell over it, as in the Barbado Nut, it is soft; but where there
is none, as in Nux Vomica, Ash, etc. it is hard; and so it self instead of a
Stone. As also, That it becomes hard, only by the proper Nature of its
Parenchyma, and the exquisite smallness of the Bladders of which it consists.
Whereas a Stone, is also hardened by the Less or Tartar of the Sap which sinks
into it, and thereby petrifies it P. 3. Chapter 3.
as has been said. So that whereas a Stone, as it lies in the Ground, only
cleavs in certain Places, but continues hard: This Cover, like some Horns, upon
the due accession of Moisture, does gradually become soft. Whereby, as while it
is hard, it performs the Office of a Stone, in guarding the Seed til the proper
Season for its Growth: So afterward when it is soft, it answers, as in Orach
or Dock, Chapter 3.. 8, 9.
to a Vitellum, from whence the Seed receives its first and purest Aliment.

CHAP. IV. Of the FOETUS or true SEED: and first of the RADICLE and LOBES.
HAVING discoursed of the Covers, I come next to the Seed or Foetus it self. Of
the Shape and Posture whereof, I shall give some Examples, first, among those
with the thinner sort of Covers; and then, of those with the Bulky one: where I
shall speak only of the Lobes, or Main Body, and the Radicle. Next, I shall
describe the several sorts of Nodes or Buds of Seeds. And lastly, the several
Parts, of which the Lobes, Radicle, and Buds are compounded.

2.. Among Seeds with the Thinner Covers, are those of all sorts of Corn and
Grass* Of a different make, from that of most other Seeds: The Main Body being
not divided into Lobes, but one entire Piece, doubled in the form of a Pair of
Lips. And whereas commonly, the whole Seed is very Soft and Oily; here, only
those two minute Parts, which become the Root and Stalk, are so: The Main Body
being of a different Substance; when the Corn is ripe, hard and friable; but
when it is sown, easily colliquable into a kind of Milk or Chyle, so that, in
some respects, it has a near Analogy to a Vitellum. For as that is gradually
melted into a sort of Chyle, and by the Branches of the Ductus Intestinalis
carried into the Bowels of the Chick: So is this, into a like Substance, and by
the Branches of the Seminal Root (formerly described) conveyed to those Parts,
B. 1. Chapter 1.
which become the future Plant.

3.. Of Relation to this Kind, the Seeds of Dates, and of some other like
Plants, may be esteemed. For that which is commonly called the Stone, seems
indeed to be the Main Body of the Seed, doubled or folded up in the same manner
as in Corn. To which that Part which becomes the Plant, Tab. 75.
is annexed. But whereas in Corn, it is placed at the Bottom of the Main Body;
here it lies in a small round Cavity in the middle of the Back. The Stone, or
Main Body, where this Part grows to it, is not so hard, as more remote from it:
and is therefore probably in some part dissolved, by lying in the Ground, as in
Corn.

4.. But for the most part, the Main Body is divided, as has been said, into
two Lobes; and those in Substance Homogeneous to the other Part or Parts, Tab.
75.
plainly distinguished in most Kernels and other large Seeds; and not
difficultly in many lesser ones, as in that of Viola Lunaris, Scabious,
Doves-Foot, etc. if slipped out of their Covers before they are full ripe.

5.. In Hounds-Tongue, they are of a circular figure, and very large in
Proportion to the Radicle. In Cucumer, oblong, with some visible Branches of
the Seminal Root; and the Radicle somewhat bigger. But in Scorzonera, Tab. 75.
very long, like the Legs of a Pair of Compasses: and the two first, or
dissimular Leaves of the Plant into which they are converted, are of the same
Shape. Of these and many more, the Radicle is short and pointed; and lies in
one straight Line with the Lobes.

6.. In Viola Lunaria, they are very large; and the Branches of the Seminal
Root, fairly apparent, so as to resemble a Pair of Leaves. The Radicle pretty
long, equally thick from end to end, and couched down upon the two Lobes, Tab.
75.
each of them having a little Shoulder for it to lie upon. In Woad, where it
has the like Posture and Shape, as also in Chamaelina, Eruca, and many others,
it is very Bulky, being bigger than both the Lobes put together.

7.. Of this Part, I think it may be observed, That commonly those Seeds,
wherein it is very small with respect to the Lobes, produce a Perennial Plant:
And so, vice versa, where it is very large, an Annual one. In the latter, the
Seminal Virtue being more vigorous, and so tending more hastily to the Business
of Generation, followed with the Death of the Plant.

8.. IN THE former Seeds, the Lobes lie flat one against another. But in
Garden-Radish, Tab. 75.
they are folded up, so as to receive the Radicle into their Bosom: as when a
Chicken tucks his Head under his Wing.

9.. In Holyoak, Tab. 75.
the Lobes are plated upwards, and re-plated down again. Being most agreeably
composed to the Shape of the Covers, as those are to their Posture on the
Plant. In Maple, they are plated one over another, and so rouled up.

10.. In the Cotton-Seed, which consists almost wholly of two very broad and
thin Lobes or Leaves, Tab. 75.
the Folds are yet more numerous; all curiously reduced to an exact and solid
Oval.

11.. It happens now and then, that instead of two, there are three Lobes, as
in the Kernels of Plums, Apples, and other Fruits, and the smaller sorts of
Seeds, will spring up sometimes with more than two dissimilar Leaves,
originally the Lobes of the Seed. These are observed by some, more frequently
to produce a double Flower, which may be, because the seminal Virtue in such
Seeds, is increased by a third Part.

12.. IN many Seeds, the Radicle is of one and the same Color from end to end.
But in others, as in the Lupine, it is observable, That the upper and greater
hald, is White; the Lower to the Point, has a kind of Horny Gloss, Tab. 75.
and seems to be of a somewhat different make. Whereby it comes to pass, that
after the Radicle is shot forth a little way, only this lower half descends and
becomes the Root: The upper half is produced or raised above ground, as a
Pillar upon which the Lobes, or dissimilar Leaves are erected.

13.. This Seed, on the out side of each Lobe, and near the Radicle, has a
very small and round Node, like a Navel; whereof, in the first Book: Chapter 7.
the whole Seed looking not much unlike a Pigeons Head; the Radicle resembling
the Bill, and the Navel the Eye.

14.. IN the Seed of Garden-Orach, Tab. 75.
both the Radicle and Lobes are very long and slender, and lie almost in a
complete Circle round about the Vitellum before described. The Lobes of
Rhapontick are shaped like the Bitt of a Spade; Chapter 3.
and the Radicle stands erected above them like the Handle.

15.. OF SEEDS also with the Bulky Cover, there are many not divided into
Lobes; being in a manner, all one Piece; as all of the Bulbous-Kind. In some of
which, though the inmost Cover be thin; yet compared either with the other
Covers, or with the Seed it self, it may very well be accounted of the
Bulky-Kind.

16.. In Flag, it is above twenty times bigger than the Seed within it.
Consisting of Bladders all Radiated toward the Seat of the Seed. The Seed it
self is shaped somewhat like a Penknife. Tab. 76.
The lower Part which becoms the Bulb, as the Haft, is thick, and comes near
to a Cylindrick Figure, and the end, round. The upper Part which becomes the
first years Leaf, as the Blade, is rather flat, double edged, and pointed, and
the Point a little bent. The Fibers and Bladders of which it consists, are all
disposed into Parallel Lines running by the length. In Lily, where this Cover
is thinner and more Transparent, without being cut, but only held up against
the Light, the Seed may be seen within it.

17.. BUT THE greater number of Seeds also with the Bulky Cover, are divided
into two Lobes; which, for the most part, resemble a pair of little Leaves. In
the Purging Nut of Angola, the Shell being taken off, Tab. 76.
the upper Covers (dried and shrunk up) seem to be but one. In these, the
Spermatick Vessels are Branched. Under these, lies the Thick and Inmost Cover;
which being cut down the middle, exhibits the true Seed: Consisting of a couple
of fair Leaves, Veined, and as white as Milk, joined together with the Radicle
at their Base; and let into a Hollow, made in the Cover, of an answerable
shape. The like is observable in the Barbado-Nut, Ricinus Americanus, and some
other Indian Fruits; with some little difference in the Shape of the Root and
Leaves.

18.. IN the foregoing Fruits, the Bulky Cover is very soft. But in the Nux
Vomica Officinarum, Tab. 76.
it is near as hard as a Date-stone. In this, besides the hollow made for the
reception of the Seed, or the two Leaves and Root; the Sides are separated or
distinct almost to the Edge of the Cover round about, especially toward the
Root: So that it may not unaptly be compared to a little Pouch with the Sides
clapped together.

19.. IN this and the Nuts above mentioned, the Seeds are all very large. But
in some other Plants, they are extreme small, so as to be hardly visible
without a Glass; Tab. 77.
as in Staphisagria, Peony, etc. In Staphisagria, the Thick or Inmost Cover, is
commonly a Spherical Triangle, conick toward the Base. At the point of which,
there is a little Cavity, in which the Seed, about as big as a small pins head,
is lodged. The Root whereof is a little poynted, and the two Lobes rounded at
the Top.

20.. In Peony, the same Cover is Soft, White, and of an Oval Figure; the part
used in Medicine. Tab. 77.
Usually thought to be the Seed it self. But is near two hundred times biger
than the true Seed, which is almost invisible. It lies in a little Cavity near
the bottom of the Cover; with a thick and blunt Root, and two poynted Lobes or
Leaves.

23.. IN the Coffee-Berry, the Seed lies in the Inner or Cartilaginous Cover
(formerly described) where one would not expect to find it, Chapter 3. Tab. 77.
sc. near the Top or Surface of the Back. The Lobes of the Seed are veined like
two very minute Leaves, and joined to a long Root like a Stalk. The end of
which comes just to the bottom of the Cover, ready for its exit into the Ground.

22.. In Goosgrass, where the Inner Cover is also Cartilaginous or Horney, Tab.
77.
the Seed is postured in much a like manner, and looks just like a couple of
poynted Leaves with a very long Stalk.

23.. THE Seed of Stramonium, is also enclosed in a Bulky Cover. Which being
soaked in warm water, and very warily cut about the edges, Tab. 77.
with a Rasor, the Seed may be taken out of it entire. Shaped like that of
Orach, but much longer. For the Reception whereof, the Cover is formed with a
hollow, which runs round about it near the Edge; where in the Seed lies like a
little winding Snake.

CHAP. V. Of the BUDS of Seeds. And of the PARTS, of which these, the Radicle,
and Lobes are compounded.
FROM between the two Lobes, rises up the Stalk of the Plant. The original
whereof, either to the naked Eye, or by a good Glass, is always visible in the
Seed.

2.. In many Plants, Nature sees fit only to lay the foundation hereof in a
small round Node; where upon the Leaves, in the Vegetation of the Seed, are
superstructed: as in Viola Lunaria, and others.

3.. But in the greater number of Seeds, is formed a true Bud, consisting of
perfect Leaves; different from those, which grow upon the Stalk, only in
Bigness; and so far in Shape, as the same Parts of an Animal Foetus, in its
several ages in the Womb. In many Seeds, as well small as great, and as well of
Herbs as Trees, it is very apparent. But oftentimes lies so deep between the
Lobes as to be almost undiscernable, as in Maple.

4.. The Leaves of the Bud, in different Plants, are of a different Number; in
some, Two; in others, Four, Six, and sometimes more. In the Bay-Berry, they are
only two; very small, but thick or fat, and finely veined. Tab. 78.
In the Seed of Card^^s Benedictus, they are also Two; almost invisible; broad
at the Bottom, poynted at the Top, thick or fat, yet plated inward, and
postured a little distant one from the other; for the two next to rise up
between them. The like may be seen in Carthamum; and so, I suppose, in all the
Carduus Kind.

5.. In some Herbs, although the Bud consists but of two perfect Leaves, Tab.
78.
yet they are very conspicuous. Not only in larger Seeds, as in the Phaseolus
or French Bean; but in those which are small, as in the Seed of Hemp. In this,
the two Leaves are both plated, and so set Edge to Edge, with mutual
Undulations. Of that Length, as to be extended beyond a third part of the Lobes.

6.. In the Seed of Sena, Tab. 78.
the Bud consists of Four Leaves; of which, the greater pair is the outer,
and guards the less. Shaped not much unlike those in the Seed of Carduus; but
are a little more visible.

7.. In the Bud of an Almond, we may easily count six, or eight Leaves, Tab. 78.
and sometimes more; the Inermost being laid bare by a dexterous Separation of
the Outer. These are by much the greatest, doubled Inward, and so laped one
over another; whereby they embosome all the rest, as a Hen spreads her Wings
over her Chickens. The like is observable in many other large Kernels, as also
in the Garden Bean, and some other Plants. With respect to which, I have taken
leave B. 1. Chapter 1.
to call this Part the Plume.

8.. THE LOBES of the Seed, and so likewise the Radicle and Bud consist of a
Skin, Parenchyma, and Branched Vessels: all which I have formerly described. B.
1. Chapter 1.
I shall now add the following Remarques.

9.. And first of the Skin, which in some Seeds, as the French-Bean may easily
be separated from the Parenchyma: especially if the Bean be soaked in water for
some days; for then it will slip off, like the Skin in any part of ones Body
where it is blistered. It Is woven into Bladders, Tab. 79.
as the Parenchyma; but into smaller ones, and upon the Lobes of a Garden Bean,
all radiated toward the Center. With these Bladders, there are also mixed a
sort of Lignous Fibers, incomparably small, which give a Toughness to the Skin,
and by which the Bladders are directed into Rays.

10.. The Bladders of the Parenchyma, as is said, are much larger than those of
the Skin, especially in the Lobes. In those of a Garden Bean, Tab. 79.
somewhat oval, about (...) of an Inch Diametre by their Breadth, and directed
toward the Branches of the Seminal Root. In the Radicle, they are twenty times
smaller, than in the Lobes: and so in the Plume.

11.. Throughout the Parenchyma run the Branched Vessels, Tab. 79.
which in the Lobes make the Seminal Root; in the Radicle and Plume, the Wood
of the Root and Stalk. In all of them, distributed as has been B. 1. Chapter 1.
formerly showed.

12.. I shall here further note, That the utmost divisions are no where
extended to the Circumference of the Lobes, Tab. 79.
but are all inosculated together at a considerable distance from it, as in the
Leaves of some Plants.

13.. In the Lobes they all meet in one solid Nerve. But in the Radicle, are
dilated into a hollow Trunk, filled up with a Pith; composed of Bladders
somewhat bigger than those which make, Tab. 79.
as it were, the Barque of the Radicle. In the Radicle of a French Bean, the
Pith is very conspicuous.

14.. The Vessels are of two kinds, as in the other Parts of a Plant; for Sap,
and for Aer. Not running collateral, as Arteries and Veins; but the latter
every where sheathed in the former. From the Aer-Vessels it is, that if a Bean
be steeped in water, and then the Radicle cut transversly and pressed, it will
yield Bubles as well as Liquor. These Vessels are admirably small, yet through
a very good Glass become visible. Tab. 79.


15.. The Liquor contained in the Seed, when full ripe is chiefly Oil;
generally, found in a greater proportion here, than in any other part of a
Plant. Being as the Pickle, in which the Seminal Virtues, i. e. the more
volatile and active Principles of the Seed, are immersed for their
Preservation: and to curb them from too great a Luxuriance in the Vegetation of
the Seed.

CHAP. VI. Of the GENERATION of the SEED.
AS I made choice of a Garden-Bean, to show the manner of the Vegetation of the
Seed: so I shall take an Aprecock, as very apt and convenient, to observe and
represent the Method which Nature takes in its Generation.

2.. In order to this, the first thing that is to be done, is to make a fit
Uterus. Both to keep the Membranes of the Foetus warm, and succulent, till it
be formed: and to preserve and secure the Foetus it self afterward, till it
comes to be born into the Ground.

3.. For this purpose, the Pulp and Stone of the Fruit are both necessary; but
primarily the Stone: the Meat or Pulp being no otherwise necessary, but because
the Stone cannot be made without it; the petrifying of that Parenchyma which is
the Ground of the Stone, being effected, by the sinking of the Tartar from the
Pulp thereinto.

4.. And that, at the first, the Ground of the Stone, is a distinct, but soft
Parenchyma; is evident in the cuting of a young Aprecock. Of which, also a
slice cut off, with a Rasor, and viewed through a good Glass, Tab. 82.
shows it to be composed of Bladders, as the Pulp it self. Only, whereas many
of those of the Pulp are large, now about as big as a white Pepper-Corn: these
are no bigger than a Mustard Seed. But as the Parenchyma hardens into a Stone,
these Bladders are all gradually filled up, and disappear.

5.. This Parenchyma is derived immediately from the Pith, as the Pulp is from
the Barque; and makes the far greater part of the Stone. It Is covered all over
within, with a very thin Lining; derived, not from the Pith but the Parenchyma
which covers the Seed-Branch, upon its first entrance within the hollow of the
Stone. This Lining is of a close substance; yet composed of Bladders,
exquisitely small and hardly visible. By which means, Tab. 80.
it soon becomes a very hard and dry Body; and is hereby fitted, both to
promote the induration of the rest of the Stone; and the seasonable drying, and
so, the shrinking up, of the Covers of the Seed, to make room for its Growth.

6.. The Stone being made hard and dry; it could never be so sufficiently
softened by lying under ground, but that, it would keep the Seed a perpetual
prisoner, unless it were also made pretty easily to cleave in two. Tab. 80.
For which purpose, the Skin of the Fruit does observably conduce. For in a
Slice of a young Aprecock cut transversly with a very sharp knife, it may be
seen, especially with the help of a Glass, to be doubled inward from the two
Lips of the Fruit, and so to be continued, not only through the Pulp, but also
through the Stone it self, into the hollow of the same, where it meets, and is
united with the Lining thereof. Whereby, as it further helps to the drying and
hardening of the Stone; so also renders it cleavable in that part, where it runs
through it. And therefore, whereas toward the Stalk, it goes no farther than
to the Seed-Branch, and so but half way through the Stone: toward the Top of
the Fruit, where the Radicle stands, and where the Stone begins to cleave, it
runs quite through it.

7.. Nature having thus provided a convenient Uterus, She next takes care
about the Membranes of the Foetus. These are Three apparently distinct, and in
many respects different one from another.

8.. The outer Membrane is derived from the Parenchyma which surrounds the
Seed-Branch; which, upon its entry into the hollow of the Stone, is expanded,
as it were, into two Bladders, one within another; Tab. 80.
whereof, one becomes the Lining of the Stone; the other, this outer Membrane:
as is best seen by cuting a young Aprecock, when it is about half an Inch long,
down through the middle, or from the Seat of the Flower to the Stalk, between
the two Lips.

9.. This outer Membrane, at this age, has a good full and frim Body, about
1/12th of an Inch thick, or through an ordinary Glass, half an Inch, where it
is thickest, as at the Sides and the greater end: the Point being thinner, for
the more easy eruption of the Radicle into the Earth. Tab. 80.
Composed of Bladders, through an ordinary Glass, about as big, as a
Colewort-Seed.

10.. Throughout this Membrane, the Vessels contained in the Seed-Branch are
distributed. Beginning a little below the smaller end of the Coat or Membrane,
they thence fetch their circuit both ways round about, just beneath the Surface
of the Membrane, and at last, meet in the middle of the greater end, where they
are all inosculated, so as to make a kind of umbilical Node. Tab. 80.
From whence they strike deeper into it, and at last, into the middle Membrane,
in which they presently become invisible. By these Vessels, the Sap is brought
and spewed into the middle Membrane. So that the outer Membrane seems, in some
respects, to be answerable to the Placenta in Animals.

11.. The middle Membrane, is derived from the bottom of the Outer. From whence
especially, but also round about, the Bladders hereof (all angular) are more
and more amplified toward the Center; most of them being at least two hundred
times biger, Tab* 80.
than those of the Outer Membrane: whereby it looks, through a Glass, not
unlike a Coome full of Honey; or in regard of their great transparency, like a
company of little Crystal Pans full of a pure Lympha.

12.. This Middle Membrane, is properly so called, from the state and condition
it has, upon the Augmentation of the Seed, at which time, it obteins the
nature of an Involucrum. But originally, it is every where entire, without any
Hollow, filling up the Cavity of the Outer Membrane, like a soft and delicate
Pulp. After a short time, there appears in it a small Ductus or Chanel; which
runs from the bottom to the top, Tab. 81.
like an Axis, through the middle of it. At first, no wider than to receive the
Hair of a Man's Head; not visible, except in a slice hereof cut transversly, and
viewed in a Glass. Being grown a little wider, it may be seen, if the Membrane
be dexterously cut by the length. At which time, it is also dilated into two
Oval Cavities, one at each end: which are as two little Cisterns, whereinto a
most pure Lympha continually owzeth, and is therein reserved for the
nourishment of the Seed; and through the Chanel which runs between the Cisterns
is emptied out of one Cistern into another, according as the Seed or the Inmost
Membrane has need of it; i. e. as the Weather and other Circumstances do more
or less accelerate their Growth, and so render the Lympha useful to them.

13.. A few days after this, the Innermost Membrane begins to appear; growing,
like a soft Node or Bud, out of the upper Cistern; to the lower end of which it
is joined by a short and tender Stalk, Tab. 81.
from whence it is produced into a Conick-oval Figure, answerable to that of
the Cistern.

14.. This Membrane, though soft and full of Sap, yet being compared with the
midlemost, is a close and compact Body, composed of Bladders above 300 times
smaller than they are in that. Whereby, as the Seed is so well guarded, as not
to be supplied with any part of the Lympha, but the purest: so neither with any
more of this, than will suffice, without the danger of making an Inundation out
of so great a Lake.

15.. This Membrane, if it be pulled with a most steady hand, and very gently,
upwards, it will draw a small transparent String after it to the bottom of the
Middle Membrane: The said String though for the greater part, Parenchymous, yet
being strengthened with the admixture of some Lignous Fibers; no otherwise
visible in either of these two Membranes. So that they seem, to be a small
portion of those which are inosculated at the bottom of the Outer Membrane,
and thence produced through the midlemost, underneath the Chanel, till at last
they break forth into the upper Cistern, where they form this Inner Membrane: a
piece of close-wrought Work, suitable to the incomparable fineness of all the
Stuff out of which it is made.

16.. The same Membrane is originally entire, as the Midlemost: but being grown
to about the bigness of a Carvi-Seed, Tab. 81.
becomes a little hollow near the Cone. And the Lignous Fibers abovesaid,
fetching their compass from the Base, shoot forth into the Cone; and so make a
very small Node therein, for the first Essay toward the Generation of the
Seed. The said Fibers being thus spun out, to the utmost degree of fineness for
this purpose.

17.. This Node, being grown about 1/5th part as big as a Cheese-Mite; Tab. 81*
it begins next to be divided by a little indenture at the Top. which growing
by degrees still deeper, the Node is hereby at length distinguished into two
Lobes or thick Leaves.

18.. So soon as these are finished, their Basis begins afterward to be
contracted, Tab. 81.
and so to be formed into a Radicle or that part of the Seed which becomes the
Root. As the Stalks of Fruits do grow lesser, while the Fruits themselves are
expanded. So that in this estate, the Radicle is, as it were, the Stalk of the
Seed.

19.. At this time, the Seed being extreme small, the Lobes are not so
manageable as to be separated one from the other. But it is most reasonable to
suppose that so soon as the Radicle is finished, the next step, is the pushing
forth of another Node, between the Lobes, in order to the making of a Bud, and
so the perfection of the Seed.

20.. This being done or in doing, the Radicle or Stalk of the Seed,
contracting still more and more at the bottom, hangs at the Inner Membrane,
only by an extreme small and short Ligament or Navel-String. Which at last,
also breaks; and so the Seed, as Fruits when they are ripe, Tab. 81.
falls off and lies loose in the Iner Membrane; this gradually shrinking up and
so becoming more hollow, to make room for the further Growth of the Seed.

Several LECTURES Read before the ROYAL SOCIETY.

By NEHEMJAH GREW M. D. Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY, and of the COLLEGE of
PHYSICIANS.

LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, 1682.

THE TITLES Of the following LECTURES.
I. OF the Nature, Causes, and Power of MIXTURE. The second Edition. II. Of the
LUCTATION arising upon the Mixture of several Menstruum's with all sorts of
Bodies. The second Edition. III. An Essay, Of the various Proportions, wherein
LIXIVIAL SALTS are found in Plants. IV. Of the ESSENTIAL and MARINE SALTS of
Plants. V. Of the COLORS of Plants. VI. Of the Diversities and Causes of
TASTES; chiefly in Plants. With an Appendix, Of the ODOURS of Plants. VII.
Experiments in Consort, upon the SOLUTION of SALTS in Water.
TO THE Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord Vi-Count BROUNCKER, PRESIDENT OF THE
Royal Society.
MY LORD,
ONE Reason why I Dedicate the following Discourses to Your Lordship, is, For
that by Your great and undeserved Respects, You have obliged me to do no less.

Another, my Lord, is, Because I could not but Publicly return Your Lordship
Thanks, for minding the Royal Society of so good a Way, they are lately
resolved upon, for the Management of a great part of their Business. Wherein,
my Lord, I do more than presume, that I also speak the Sense of the whole
Society; I think, not any one excepted.

I may with the same Confidence intimate, my Lord, how happy they account
themselves, in having a Person so fit to prefide their Affairs, as Your
Lordship. The Largeness of your Knowledge, the Exactness of Your Judgment, the
Evenness of Your Comport; being some of those necessary Qualifications, which
His Majesty had in His Eye (as right well understanding what He did) when He
fixed His Choice upon Your Lordship.

I know, my Lord, that there are some men, who have just so much Understanding,
as only to teach them how to be Ambitious: The Flattering of whom, is somewhat
like the Tickling of Children, till they fall a Dancing. But I also know, that
Your Lordship unconcerneth Your self as much, in what I even now spoke; as
Caesar did himself, when his Soldiers began to style him King. For as he said,
Non Rex, sed Caesar: So let Your Lordship be but once named, and all that
follows, is but a Tautology to what You are already known to be. Your being
President of the Royal Society, Your being the First that was Chosen, and
Chosen by so Knowing a Prince; becomes so real a Panegyric to Your Lordship,
as leaves Verbal ones without any sound.

Whence, my Lord, I have a third Reason most naturally emergent, which is, That
I dare to submit my self, as to what I have hereafter said, to Your Lordships
Censure. You being so able and just an Arbiter betwixt the same and all those
Persons therein concerned; that You can neither be deceived, nor corrupted, to
make a Judgment in any Point, to the Injury of either.

And truly, my Lord, were it only from a Principle of self-Interest, yet I
could not desire it should be otherwise. For the World, if it lives, will
certainly grow as much more knowing than it is; as it is now more, than it was
heretofore. So that we have as little Reason to despise Antiquity; as we can
have willingness, that we our selves should be despised by Posterity.

Yet some difference there is to be made; viz. betwixt those of all Ages, who
have been modestly ignorant; and those who have thought, or pretended, that
they were Omniscient. Or if knowing and acknowledging that they were Ignorant;
have yet not been contented to be so; unless, with as good manners, as sense,
they did conjure all Mankind not to offer at the knowing any more than
themselves.

Upon the whole, my Lord, I desire not You should be a Patron, any further than
You are a Judge. For if this small Essay has deserved the least acceptance, I
am sure, that in being one, You will be both. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful and Obedient Servant, NEHEMJAH GREW.

A DISCOURSE Read before the ROYAL SOCIETY December. 10. 1674. Concerning the
NATURE, CAUSES, and POWER OF MIXTURE.
HAVING the honor to perform the Task of this day; I shall endeavor to
conform to the Philosophy, which this Society does profess; which is, Reasoning
grounded upon Experiment, and the Common Notions of Sense. The former being,
without the latter, too subtle and intangible; the latter without the former,
too gross and unmanageable: but both together, bearing a true analogy to our
selves; who are neither Angels, nor mere Animals, but Men.

The Subject I have chosen to speak of, is Mixture. Whereof, that our Discourse
may be the more consistent, and the better intelligible; all I have to say,
shall be ranged into this Method; viz.

1. First, I shall give a brief account of the received Doctrine of Mixture.

2. Next, lay down some Propositions of the Principles whereof all Mixed Bodies
consist.

3. Then, open the true Nature of Mixture; or say, What it is.

4. And then enumerate the Causes of Mixture; or say, How it is made.

5. Lastly, I shall show the Power of Mixture; or, What it can do.

CHAP. I. Of the received Doctrine of Mixture.
FIRST, As to the received Doctrine of Mixture; not to trouble you with tedious
quotations of what Aristotle, Galen, Fernelius, Scaliger, Sennertus, Riverius,
and other Learned men say hereof; we may suppose the whole summed up in that
Definition which Aristotle himself has given of it, and which the greater
number of his Followers, have almost religiously adhered to; viz. that it is,
(...). that it is, Miscibilium alteratorum unio. Lib. 1. de Generat. and
Corrupt. Cap. ult.
Which Definition, as it is usually explicated, is both Unintelligible, and
Unuseful.

2.. Two things are unintelligible; what they mean by Alteration; and what by
Union. In this Alteration, they say, That the very Forms of the Elements are
altered. And therefore lay it down for an Axiom, Quod in Mixto, Formae
Elementares tantum sint in potentia, But let us see the consequence. For if in
a mixed body, the Forms of the Elements are but in potentia; then the Elements
themselves are but in potentia: for we all say, Forma dat esse. And if the
Compounding Elements, are only in poteutia; then the Compounded Body it self
can be only in potentia: yet to say it is no more, is most absurd.

3.. As for the Union of Elements in a mixed Body; they make it such, as brings
them at last to assert, the Penetration of Bodies, and that the Union of mixed
Bodies is nothing else. For they say it is made in such sort, that every
particle of the mixed Body, partaketh of the Nature of the whole. Which Nature,
arises from the contemperated Qualities of the four Elements. Whence they
conclude, That every particle of the mixed Body, contains in it self all the
four Elements. Which is plainly to assert a penetration of Bodies. For every
Element is, at least, one particle; if therefore every particle of the mixed
Body, contains four Elements; then four particles are but one. I conclude
then, That the received Doctrine of Mixture is Unintelligible.

4.. Whence it follows, That it is also Barren and Unuseful. For who can make
any use of that which he understands not? And the experience of so many
years, wherein it has been ventilated by the disputes of men, proves as much:
Scarce any of them, except the Learned Sennertus, daring to venture upon
Experiment, for fear they should come to understand themselves.

5.. It is confessed, that many gallant things have been found out by
artificial Mixture. But no thanks to this Definition of it. For as an Ignorant
Man may make bad Work, and a good Rule be never the worse; so one that is
Iugenious may make good Work, and a bad Rule be never the better. The question
is not, what have men done? but what have they done upon this foundation, Quod
Mixitio sit mis^ibilium alteratorum unio. Had this ever taught them to do any
thing, even so much as to make the Ink wherewith they have wrote, all their
Disputes; I confess, they would have had something to show for it. But the
truth is, their notions of Mixture, have been so far from doing us any good,
that they have done us much harm: being, through their seeming subtlety, but
real absurdity, as so many fantastic Spectrums, serving only to assright men
from coming near them, or the Subject whereof they treat.

. 6. I shall therefore endeavor to open the true Nature of Mixture. And I
shall build my Doctrine upon the Common Notions of Sense: which none can deny;
and every one may conceive of. In order to which, I shall take leave to lay
down some Propositions, of the Principles of all mixed Bodies.

CHAP. II. Of the Principles of Bodies.
AND first, by Principles, I mean Atoms, or certain Sorts of Atoms, or of the
simplest of Bodies. For otherwise they would not be Principles; for a
compounded Principle, in strict speaking, is a Contradiction. Even as Fives,
Threes, or Two's are not the Principles of Number, but Unites.

2.. Whence, secondly, it follows, that they are also Indivisible. Not
Mathematically; for the Atoms of every Principle have their Dimensions. But
Physically; and so, what is but one, cannot be made two. If it be asked,
Whether a Stick cut with a Knife, be not of one, made two? I say, that a Stick,
is not one Body, but many millions of Bodies; that is, of Atoms; not any one
whereof is divided within it self, but only they are separated one from
another, where the Knife forces its way. As in the drawing of a man's Finger
through a Heap of Corn; there is no Division made in any one Grain, but only a
separation of them one from another, all remaining still in themselves entire.
I say, therefore, that what is Physically one, is also most firm, and
Indivisible, that is, Impenetrable: for Penetration is but the Separation, not
the Division of Atoms.

3.. Hence, thirdly, they are also Immutable. For that which cannot be divided,
cannot be changed. So that of the whole World of Atoms, not any one has ever
suffered, or can suffer the least mutation. Hereupon is grounded the Constancy
of Causes and Effects. So that, in all Generations, it is not less certain,
that the self same Principle is still propagated from the same; than, that Man
is from Man. Wherefore, compounded Bodies are generated; but Principles are
not, but only propagated; that is, in every Generation, they pass, in
themselves unaltered, from one Body, into another.

4.. If Principles, or Atoms are all Immutable; it again follows. That they
are of Diverse Kinds. For one and the same Principle, or Kind of Atoms, will
still make the Same Thing, and have the same Effect: so that all Generations
would then be the Same. Wherefore, since they are Immutable, they must be
Diverse.

5.. This Diversity, for the same reason, is not small, but very Numerous. For
as the World, taken together, is Natures Shop; so the Principles of Things are
her Tools, and her Materials. Wherefore, as it speaks the goodness of a Shop;
so the Perfection of the Universe, That it is furnished with many Tools
wherewith, and many Materials whereupon to work. And consequently, that
Philosophy bears best its own name; which does not strain all to two or three
Principles, like two or three Bells in a Steeple, making a pitiful Chime: but
tries to rise up to Natures own Number, and so to ring all the Changes in the
World.

6.. Yet does not this vast Diversity take away the Regiment and Subordination
of Principles. There being a certain lesser number of them, which either by
their greater quantity, or other ways, have Rule and Dominion, in their several
Orders, over all the rest. For wherever the Subject is Multitude, Order is
part of its Perfection. For Order is Proportion. And how can Nature be imagined
to hold Proportion in all things else, and not here? Wherefore, as certainly,
as Order and Government are in all the Parts of the Rational; so certainly, of
the Material World. Whence it is, That although the Species of Principles be
very numerous; yet the Principles called Galenical, Chemical, or any others,
which do any way fall under the notice of Sense, are notwithstanding reduceable
to a smaller number: viz. according to the number of Predominant Principles in
Nature; or, rather in this part of the Universe which is near and round about
us. To the Power and Empire whereof, all other Principles do submit. Which
Submission, is not the quitting of their own Nature; but only their appearance
under the external Face or Habit of the said Predominant Principles.

7.. As there can be no Order of Principles, without Diversity; so no
Diversity, but what is originally made by these two ways; sc. by Size and
Figure. By these they may be exceeding different: and all other Properties
besides, whereby they differ, must be dependent upon these Two.

8.. Nor therefore, can they be of any other Figures, than what are Regular.
For Regularity, is a Similitude continued. Since therefore all kinds of Atoms
are diverse only by their Size and Figure; if the self same Size and Figure
were not common to a certain number of Atoms, they could not be said to be of
any one kind: and consequently, if there were no Similitude of Atoms, there
could be no Distinction of Principles.

9.. Hence also, these two Modes of Atoms, viz. their Size and Figure, are the
true, and only original Qualities of Atoms. That is, an Atome is such or such,
because it is of such a certain Size and Figure.

10.. Lastly, As these two Modes, taken severally, are the Qualities of an
Atome: so considered together, they are its Form. A substantial Form of a Body,
being an unintelligible thing. I say of a Body; for although the Rational Soul
be a substantial Form, yet is it the Form of a Man, and not of a Body. For the
Form of a Body, we can conceive of no otherwise, than as of the Modification of
a Body, or a Complexion of all the Modes of a Body. Which also agrees with that
Definition of a Form, which amongst the Peripatetick Philosophers is well
enough accepted, viz. Quod sit, Ratio ejus Essentiae, quae cuique Rei competit.
Which Ratio, if it be referred to a Body, what is it, but the Modification of
that Body? Having thus proposed a Summary of my Thoughts about Principles; I
shall next proceed to show what their Mixture is.

CHAP. III. Of the NATURE of Mixture.
AND first of all, from the Premises, we arrive at this Conclusion; sc. That
the Formation and Transformation of all Bodies, can be nothing else, but the
Mixture of Bodies. Chapter 2.. 3.
For all Principles are immutable; as we have above proved: and therefore not
generable, formable, or transformable. And the Forms of Principles, Chapter 2.. 10.
being but their Modes, are also immutable. So that the whole Business of the
Material World, is nothing else, but Mixture.

2.. Again, as Nature works every where only by Mixture; so is this Mixture
every where but one thing, and can be but one. For whether it be the Mixture of
great Bodies, or of small; of Compounds, or of Atoms; Chapter 2.. 2.
it is every where Mixture, and the Mixture of Bodies. Wherefore, Mixture is
either an intelligible Affection of all Bodies, or of none; which later, no man
will say. As many ways therefore, as we can see, or conceive the Mixture of any
gross Bodies, which we hold in our hand; so many ways, we may, of the subtilest
Mixtures which Nature makes, or of Atoms themselves; and no other ways.

3.. Now all the ways we can distinguish Mixture by, are, in general, these
Two; either in respect of the Bodies Mixed, or else of the Modes of the Mixture
it self.

4.. In respect of the Bodies Mixed, Mixture is distinguished also two ways;
viz. by Conjugation, and by Proportion.

5.. By Conjugation, I mean, a Mixture of some certain Principles, and not of
others. Which is threefold. First, As to Number: as when one Body may be
compounded of two Principles, another of three, a third of four, a fourth of
five, and so on. Secondly, As to Kind: where, though there be a conjunction of
the same Number, yet not of the same Kind. Thirdly, When they differ from one
another both in Number and Kind. So many ways the Principles of Bodies may be
conceived to be Conjugated; and therefore are: for here, that which may be, is.
The Consequence is clear. For first, Chapter 2.. 5.
Nature has various Materials wherewith to make these Mixtures; as we have
showed. Secondly, By these Mixtures she may, and without the concurrence of any
imaginary Forms, must produce all the varieties in the material World; Ch 3.. 1.
as likewise has been said. Wherefore, since all imaginable Mixtures may be
made, and that to some purpose; if they should not be so, Nature would be
Imperfect: because we our selves can think, how she might put her Materials to
further use, then so she would do. To think therefore, that all Kinds of
Principles, or all Elements go to make up every Compounded Body, as by the
Peripatetick Philosophy we are taught; is a conceit, no more to be credited,
than one that should tell us, all Kind of Wheels and other parts of a Watch,
were put into a Clock; or that there were no other Materials wherewith to build
an House, then for a Tent or a Ship. For why should Nature, the great Artificer
by which all perfect Works are made, be feigned to cram and ram all things into
one, which we our selves look upon as absurd?

6.. Secondly, The Mixture of Principles is diversifi'd, as by Conjugation, so
also by Proportion. That is, by the diverse Quantities, of the several
Principles or Parts mixed together. As if the Quantity of one, were as five to
ten; of a second, as five to fifteen; of a third, as five to twenty, etc. Or if
that of one, be as five to six; of a second, as six to seven; of a third, as
seven to eight. By which, and by other Proportions, Mixture may be varied
innumerable ways.

7.. Again, As Mixture is varied with respect to the Bodies Mixed; so likewise
in respect of the Mixture it self, which I call the Location of Principles, or
the Modes of their Conjunction. Which may be various, as well as their
Conjugation and Proportion. Yet are they all reduceable unto two general Modes:
all Bodies, and therefore all Principles, Chapter 2.. 2.
being mixed either by Mediation, or by Contact.

8.. Now all Contact, whether of Compounds, or of Atoms, can be no other way,
than such as is answerable to their Figures. Whereof, therefore, we can
conceive but three general ways, viz.

First, by Contract in a Point, or some smaller part: as when two Atoms meet,
which are globular or otherwise gibbose. Secondly, By Contact in a Plain: as in
the conjunction of the sides of Triangular or Quadrangular Atoms, or otherwise
flat. Thirdly, By Contact in a Concave: as when one Atome is admitted into the
Concave or hole of another; as a Spigot is into a Fosset. The first may be
called, Apposition; the second, Application; the third, Reception or Intrusion.

9.. In the two last ways, Atoms may be joined by Mediation; but best of all
the last. As when the two extremes of one Atome are received into the Concaves
or the holes of two others.

10.. And these are all the general ways, whereby we can conceive Bodies to be
Mixed together; sc. by their various Conjugation, Proportion and Location. So
that the Composition of Atoms, in Bodies; is like that of Letters, in Words.
What a Thunderclap would such a Word be, wherein all the four and twenty
Letters were packed up? One therefore is compounded of more, another of fewer:
this of some, and that of others: and both the Conjugation, Proportion, and
Location of Letters is varied in every Word: whereby, we have many thousands of
differing Words, without any alteration at all, in the Letters themselves; and
might have ten times as many more. In like manner, therefore, or in the self
same analogous way, as the Letters of the Alphabet, are the Principles of
Words; so Principles, are the Alphabet of Things.

11.. What we have said of Principles; and of Mixture as consequent thereupon;
may be a foundation for an intelligible account, of the Nature and Cause of
most of the Intrinsic Properties, and Qualities of Bodies: as of Gravity,
Levity, Fixity, Fluidity, Angularity, Roundness, Heat, Cold, Blackness,
Whiteness, Sowerness, Sweetness, Fragrancy, Fetidness, and very many more. I
say an intelligible account; sc. such as is grounded upon the Notions of Sense,
and made out Mechanically. But the exemplification hereof, being too large a
field for this, or any one Lecture, I shall, before I come to the Causes of
Mixture, only deduce from the Premises, these following Corollaries.

12.. First, That there is no alteration of Principles or of Elements, in the
most perfect Mixture of Bodies. It cannot be; for Principles are Immutable, Chapter
2.. 3.
as we have said. And if it could be, yet it needs not to be: for they are
also many, and compoundable infinite ways; as has been showed. Chapter 2.. 5.
So that we have no need to perplex our selves with any of those difficulties,
Chapter 3.. 10.
that arise from the Doctrine of the Alteration of Elements. The ground of
which conceit, is that, of three being but four Elements, and all in every
particle of the mixed Body. And so men being puzeled, how from thence to make
out the infinite variety of Bodies, they feigned them to be alterable, and
altered, upon every perfect Mixture. Not considering, that if their four
Elements be alterable; as few as they are, no fewer then three of them may be
spared: for one Element, if alterable, may be made any.

13., Hence, Secondly, may be solved that great Dispute, Whether such as we
call Lixivial Salts, are made by the fire? For first, No Principle is made by
the fire: Chapter 2.. 3.
all Principles being unalterable; and therefore unmakable. Secondly, We must
therefore distinguish betwixt the Principle, and its various Mixture with other
Principles; from whence it may receive different Shapes and Names. Wherefore, a
Lixivial Salt, qua Lixivial, is certainly made by the fire. But quatenus Salt,
it is not: that Principle being extractable out of most Bodies; and by diverse
other ways, then by the fire. For whether you Calcine a body, or else Ferment
it, (after the manner showed by the curious Improver of Chimical Knowledge, Dr.
Daniel Cox) or putrify it under ground, or drown it in the Sea; it still
yields some kind of Salt. All which Salts are made, not by making the Saline
Principle; but only by its being differently Mixed, by those several ways of
the Solution of Bodies) with other Principles: from which its different
Mixture, it receives the various Denominations, of Marine, Nitrous, Volatile,
or Lixivial.

14.. Hence, Thirdly, the most perfect Mixture of Bodies, can go no higher than
Contact. Chapter 2.. 3.
For all Principles are unalterable; and all Matter is impenetrable; Chapter 3.. 2.
as has been said. In the most visible and laxe Mixture, there is Contact; and
in the most subtle and perfect, as in Generation it self, there is nothing
more.

15.. Hence, Fourthly, we easily understand, how diverse of the same Principles,
belonging both to Vegetables and many other Bodies, are also actually existent
in the Body of Man Because even in Generation or Transmutation, the Principles
which are translated from one Body to another, as from a Vegetable to an
Animal, are not in the least altered in themselves; but only their Mixture,
that is, their Conjugation, Proportion and Location, is varied.

16.. Hence also the difference of Mixture, arising from the difference of
Contact, is intelligible; sc. as to those three degrees, Congregation, Union,
and Concentration.

Congregation, and Inconsistent Mixture, is when the several Atoms touch but
in a Point, Chapter 3.. 8
or smaller part. In which manner, I have diverse arguments, inducing me to
believe the Atoms of all Fluid Bodies, qua Fluid, do touch; and in no other.

Union, Chapter 3.. 8.
is when they touch in a Plain. As in the Crystals and Shootings of all Salts,
and other like Bodies. For if we pursue their divided and subdivided parts,
with our eye, as far as we can; they still terminate, on every side, in Plains.
Wherefore, it is intelligible, That their very Atoms do also terminate, and
therefore touch, in Plain.

Concentration, is when two, or more Atoms touch by Reception and Intrusion of
one into another: Chapter 3.. 8.
which is the closest, and firmest Mixture of all; as in any fixed unodorable,
or untastable Body: the Atoms of such Bodies, being not able to make any Smell
or Taste, unless they were first dissolved; that is to say, unpin'd one from
another.

17.. Hence, Sixthly, we understand, how in some cases, there seems to be a
Penetration of Bodies; and in what sense it may be admitted: viz. if we will
mean no more by Penetration, but Intrusion. For the Intrusion of one Atome into
the Concave or hole of another, is a kind of Penetration; whereby they take up
less room in the mixed Body, then they would do by any other way of Contact. As
a naked knife and its sheath, take up almost double room, to what they do, when
the knife is sheathed. Whence we may assign the reason, Why many Liquors being
mixed; take up less room or space, then they did apart; as the Ingenious Mr.
Hook has made it to appear by Experiment, that they do. I say the plain reason
hereof, or at least one reason, is the Intrusion of many of their Atoms into
one another. Which yet is not a Penetration of Bodies strictly so called.

18.. Seventhly, If all that Nature makes, be but Mixture; and all this
Mixture be but Contact it is then evident, Chapter 3.. 1.
That Natural and Artificial Mixture, Chapter 3.. 14.
are the same. And all those seeming subtilties whereby Philosophers have gone
about to distinguish them; have been but so many Scarcrows to affright Men from
the Imitation of Nature.

19.. Eighthly, Hence it follows, That Art it self may go far in doing what
Nature does. And who can say, how far? For we have nothing to Make; but only to
mix those Materials, which are already made to our hands. Even Nature her self,
as has been said, Makes nothing new; Chapter 3.. 1.
but only mixeth all things. So far, therefore, as we can govern Mixture, we
may do what Nature does.

20.. Which that we may still the better understand; let us before, and in the
next place, see the Causes of Mixture. For since Natural and Artificial Mixture
are the same; Chapter 3.. 18.
the immediate Causes of both, are and must be the same.

CHAP. IV. Of the CAUSES of Mixture.
NOW all the Causes of Mixture we can conceive of, must, I think, be reduced to
these six in general; viz. Congruity, Weight, Compression, Solution, Digestion,
and Agitation.

1.. Congruity, or aptitude and respondence betwixt the Sizes and Figures of
Parts to be mixed: whereby Bodies may be truly called the Instrumental Causes
of their own Mixture. As when a Plain answers to a Plain, a Square to a Square,
a Unequal to a Concave, or a Less to a Greater or an Equal, etc. according to
which Respondencies in the parts of Bodies, they are more or less easily
mingleable.

2.. Weight, by means whereof all Fluid Bodies, upon supposition of the
Congruity of their parts, must unavoidably mingle.

3.. Compression; which either by the Air, or any other Body, added to Weight,
must, in some degree, further Mixture. Because, that Weight it self, is but
Pression. For further Proof of all the said Causes, I made this Experiment; Let
Oil of Aniseeds, and Oil of Vitriol be put apart into the Receiver of an
Air-Pump. And, having exhausted it of the Air, let the two said Oils be then
affused one upon the other. Whereupon, First, It is visible, that they here mix
and coagulate together; that is, their parts are wedged and intruded one into
another, without the usual compression of the Air; for that is exhausted, and
therefore only by the Congruity of their receiving and intruding parts; and by
their Weight; by which alone they are so compressed, as to make that Intrusion.
Secondly, It is also evident, That although they do Coagulate; yet not
altogether so much, as when poured together in the same manner, and quantity,
in the open Air. Wherefore, Compression, whether made by the Air, or any thing
else, as it does further the Dissolution of some Bodies, so the Mixture of
others, and the greater the Compression, the more.

4.. Solution; For all Bodies mix best, in Forma fluida. And that for two
reasons. First, Because the parts of a Body are not then in a state of Union,
but of Separation; and therefore, in a more capable state, for their Mixture
and Union with the parts of another Body. Secondly, because then they are also
in a state of Motion, more or less; and therefore, in a continual tendency
toward Mixture; all Mixture being made by Motion. Wherefore all Generations,
and most perfect Mixtures in Nature, are made by Fluids; whether Animal,
Vegetable, or Mineral. Which is also agreeable to the Doctrine of the
Honorable Mr. Boil, in his Excellent Treatise of the Nature and Virtues of
Gems. And it is well known, That Bodies are ordinarily petrified, or Stones
made, out of Water. That is, out of petrifying parts dissolved per minima in
Water, as both their Menstruum and their Vehicle. Wherefore, if we will talk of
making Gold; it must not be by the Philosophers Stone, but by the Philosophers
Liquor.

5.. Digestion. For which there is the same reason, as for Mixture, by
Solution. For, First, All heat does attenuate, that is, still further separate
the parts of a Body; and so render them more mingleable with the parts of
another. And therefore, Secondly, Does also add more Motion to them, in order
to their Mixture.

6.. Agitation. Which I am induced to believe a great and effectual means of
Mixture, upon diverse Considerations. As, First, That the making of Blood in the
Bodies of Animals, and the mixing of the Chyle therewith, is very much promoted
by the same means; sc. by the Agitation of the parts of the Blood and Chyle, in
their continual Circulation. Again, from the making of Butter out of Milk, by
the same means: whereby alone is made a separation of the oleous parts from the
Whey, and Conjunction of the Oleous together. Moreover, From the great Effects
of Digestion; well known to all that are conversant in Chemical Preparations.
Which Digestion it self, is but a kind of insensible agitation of the parts of
digested Bodies. It Is also a known Experiment, That the readiest way to
dissolve Sugar in Wine or other Liquor; is to give the Vessel a hasty turn,
together with a smart knock, against any hard and steady Body: whereby all the
parts of the Sugar and Liquor, are put into a vehement Agitation, and so the
Sugar immediately dissolved, and mixed with the Liquor. And I remember, that
having (with intent, to make Mr. Matthews's Pill) put some Oil of Turpentine
and Salt of Tartar together in a Bottle, and sent it up hither out of the
Country; I found, that the continual Agitation upon the Road, for three or four
days, had done more toward their Mixture; than a far greater time of Digestion
alone had done before. And it is certain, That a vehement Agitation,
especially, if continued, or joined with Digestion; will accelerate the Mixture
of some Bodies, ten times more, than any bare Digestion alone; as may be proved
by many Experiments. I will instance in this one. Let some Oil of Turpentine
and good Spirit of Nitre be stopped up together in a Bottle, and the Bottle held
to the Fire, till the Liquors be a little heated, and begin to bubble. Then
having removed it, and the Bubbles by degrees increasing more and more; the two
Liquors will of themselves, at last fall into so impetuous an Ebullition, as to
make a kind of Explosion; sending forth a smoke for the space of almost two
yards high. Whereupon, the parts of both the Liquors, being violently agitated,
they are, in a great portion, incorporated into a thick Balsam in a moment: and
that without any intense heat, as may be felt by the Bottle. And thus much for
the Causes of Mixture.

CHAP. V. Of the POWER and USE of Mixture.
HAVING enumerated the general Causes, we shall, lastly, enquire into the Power
and Use of Mixture; or, into what it can Do and Teach. And I shall Instance in
six particulars. First, to Render all Bodies Sociable, whatsoever they be.
Secondly, To Make Artificial Bodies in Imitation of those of Natures own
production. Thirdly, to make or imitate the sensible Qualities of Bodies; as
Smells, and Tastes. Fourthly, To make, or imitate their Faculties. Fifthly, It
is a Key, to discover the Nature of Bodies. Sixthly, To discover their Use, and
the Manner of their Medicinal Operation.

INSTANCE I.
FIRST, To render all Bodies Sociable or Mingleable: as Water with Oil, Salt
with Spirit, and the like. Chapter 3. 18;
For Natural and Artificial Mixture, are the same; as we have before proved. If
therefore Nature can do it, as we see in the Generation of Bodies she does,
it is likewise in the Power of Art to do it.

2.. And for the doing of it, two general Rules result from the Premises, sc.
The Application of Causes, and the Choice of Materials. As for the Causes, Chapter
4.
they are such as I have now instanced in. And for the Application of them, I
shall give these two Rules.

3.. First, That we tread in Natures steps as near as we can; not only in the
Application of such a Cause, as may be most proper for such a Mixture; but also
in allowing it sufficient time for its effect. For so we see Nature her self,
for her more perfect Mixtures, usually does. She makes not a Flower, or an
Apple, a Horse, or a Man, in a moment; but all things by degrees; and for her
more perfect and elaborate Mixtures, for the most part, she requires more
time. Because all such Mixtures are made and carried on per minima; and
therefore require a greater time for the completing of them.

4.. A second Rule is, Not only to make a due Application of the Causes; but
sometimes to Accumulate them. By which means, we may not only, imitate Nature,
but in some cases go beyond her. For as by adding a Graft or Bud to the Stock,
we may produce Fruit sooner, and sometimes better, than Nature by the Stock
alone would do: So here, by accumulating the Causes of Mixture, that is, by
joining two, three, or more together; or by applying more in some Cases, where
Nature applies fewer; we may be able to make, if not a more perfect, yet a far
more speedy Mixture, than Nature does. As by joining Compression, Heat, and
violent Agitation, and so continuing them all together, by some means contrived
for the purpose, for the space of a Week, or Month, or longer, without
cessation. Which may probably produce, not only strange, but useful Effects, in
the Solution of some, and the Mixture of other Bodies. And may serve to mix
such Bodies, as through the small number of their congruous parts, are hardly
mingleable any other way. Agitation being, as carrying the Key to and fro, till
it hit the Lock; or within the Lock, till it hit the Wards.

5.. Secondly, For the Choice of materials, if they are not immediately, that
is, of themselves, mingleable; we are then to turn one Species of Mixture into
a Rule; Chapter 3.. 9.
which is, To mix them by mediation of some third, whether more simple or
compounded Body, which may be congruous in part to them both: as Sulphurous
Salts are to Water and Oil; and are for that reason mingieable with either of
them. Or, By any two congruous Bodies, which are also, in part, congruous to
two others: and other like ways. Whereby the parts of Bodies, though never so
heterogeneous, may yet be all bound and locked up together. Even as twenty Keys
may be united, only by uniting the two Rings whereon they hang.

6.. The Consideration of these things, have put me upon making several
Experiments, for the mingling of heterogeneous Bodies. I shall give two
Examples of Trial; the one upon Fluid, the other upon consistent Bodies.

7.. For the first, I took Oil of Aniseeds, and pouring it upon another Body; I
so ordered it, that it was thereby turned into a perfect milk-white Balsam, or
Butyr. By which means the said Oil became mingleable with any Winy, or Watery
Liquor; easily, and instantaneously dissolving therein, in the form of a Milk.
And note, That this is done, without the least alteration of the Smell, Taste,
Nature, or Operation of the said Oil. By somewhat the like means, not only Oil
of Aniseeds, but any other stillatitious Oil, may be transformed into a
milk-white Butyr; and in like manner be mingled with Water or any other Liquor.
Which is of various use in Medicine; and what I find oftentimes very convenient
and advantageous to be done.

8.. Again, not only Fluid but consistent Bodies, which of themselves will mix
only with Oil; by due mixture with other Bodies, may be rendered easily
dissoluble in Water; as may Rosin, and all resinous and friable Gums. As also
Wax: and this without changing much of their Color, Taste, or Smell. Whereof
likewise, whatsoever others may do, the Physician may make a manifold Use.

INSTANCE II.
BY Mixture also, we may be taught to Imitate the Productions of Nature. As to
which, from what we have before said of Mixture, we may conclude; That there is
no Generation of Bodies unorganical, but what is in the Power of Mixture to
imitate. As of Animals, to Imitate Blood, Fat, Chyle, Spittle, Phlegm, Bile,
etc. Of Vegetables, to Imitate a Milk, Mucilage, Rosin, Gum, or Salt. Of
Minerals, to Imitate Vitriol, Allom, and other Salts; as also Metals, and the
like.

2.. I do not say, I can do all this: yet if, upon good Premises, we can
conclude this possible to be done; it is one step to the doing of it. But I
will also give an Instance of somewhat that may be done in every kind. And,

3.. First, For the Imitation of an Animal Body, I will instance in Fat. Which
may be made thus; Take Oil Olive, and pour it upon high Spirit of Nitre. Then
digest them for some days. By degrees, the Oil becomes of the color of Marrow;
and at last, is congealed, or hardened into a white Fat or Butter, which
dissolveth only by the fire, as that of Animals. In converting Oil thus into
Fat, it is to be noted, That it hardens most upon the exhalation of some of the
more Sulphurous parts of the Spirit of Nitre. Which I effected, well enough
for my purpose, by unstopping the glass after some time of digestion; and so
suffering the Oil to dissolve and thicken diverse times by successive heat and
cold. Hence, The true Congealing Principle, is a Spirit of Nitre separated from
its Sulphur. For the better doing whereof, the Aer is a most commodious
Menstruum to the said Spirit of Nitre. Whence also, if we could procure such a
Spirit of Nitre, we might congeal Water in the midst of Summer. We might also
refrigerate Rooms herewith Artificially. And might Imitate all frosty Meteors.
For the making of Fat, is but the Durable Congelation of Oil: which may be done
without frost, as I have showed how.

Hence also it appears, That Animal Fat it self, is but the Curdling of the
Oily parts of the Blood; either by some of its own Saline parts; or by the
Nitrous parts of the Aer mingled therewith.

Hence likewise it is, That some Animals, as Conies, and Fieldfares, grow
fatter in frosty weather: the oily parts of the blood, being then more than
ordinarily coagulated with a greater abundance of nitrous parts received from
the Aer into their bodies.

For the same reason it is, That the Fat of Land-Animals is hard; whereas that
of Fishes is very soft, and runs all to Oil, sc. Because the Water, wherein
they live, and which they have instead of breath, has but very few nitrous
parts in it, in comparison of what the Aer has.

4.. Secondly, For the Imitation of a Vegetable Body, I will give three
Instances; In Rosin, Gum, and a Lixivial Salt. The first may be made thus; Take
good Oil of Vitriol, and drop it upon Oil of Aniseseeds; and they will
forthwith incorporate together; and by degrees, will harden into a perfect
Rosin; with the general and defining Properties of a truly Natural Resinous
Gum. Being not at all dissoluble in Water; or at least, not any more, then any
natural Rosin or Gum: yet very easily by fire: as also higly inflamable: and
exceeding friable. Although this Artificial Rosin, be the result of two
Liquors, both which very strongly affect the Sense: yet being well washed from
the unincorporated parts, (which is to be done with some care) it has scarce
any Taste or Smell.

The Concentration of these two Liquors, is likewise so universal; that the
Rosin is not made by Precipitation, but almost a total Combination of the said
Liquors; and that with scarce so much, as any visible fumes.

5.. Again, Having taken a certain Powder and a Saline Liquor, and mixed them
together in a bottle, and so digested them for some time; the Powder was at
last transmuted to a perfect Oily Gum; which will also dissolve either in Oil
or in Water; in the self same manner, as Galbanum, Ammoniac, and the like will
do.

6.. And Lastly, A Lixivial Salt may be imitated thus; Take Nitre, Oil of
Vitriol, and high Spirit of Wine, of each a like quantity. Of these three
Bodies, not any two being put together, that is to say neither the Nitre with
the Oil, nor the Oil with the Spirit, nor the Nitre with the Spirit, will make
the least Ebullition: yet all three mingled together, make a very conspicuous
one. The Spirit of Wine being as the Sulphur; and so that, and the Nitre
together, standing, as it were, in the stead of an Alkalizate, that is, a
Sulphurious Salt, against the Oil of Vitriol. Diverse other Experiments may be
shown of the like Nature.

7.. In the last place, for the Imitation of a Mineral Body, I will instance in
two, sc. Nitre and Marine Salt; if I may have leave to reckon them amongst
Mineral Bodies. As for Nitre, by mixing of four Liquors together, and then
setting them to shoot; I have obtained Chrystals of true and perfect Salt;
which have had much of a nitrous taste; and would be melted with a gentle Heat,
as Nitre is; and even as easily as Butyr it self: I mean not, by the addition
of any sort of Liquor, or any other Body, to dissolve it; but only by the fire.

8.. And as for a Sea Salt, that I might Imitate Nature for the making thereof,
I considered, That the said Salt is nothing else but that of Animals and
Vegetables, freed from its true Spirit and Sulphur, and some Saline particles,
specifically Animal or Vegetable, together with them. For both Animal and
Vegetable Bodies being continually carried by all Rivers into the Sea; and many
likewise by Shipwreck, and diverse other ways immersed therein: they are at last
corrupted, that is, their Compounding parts are opened and resolved. Yet the
Resolution being in the Water, is not made precipitately, as it is in the Air;
but by degrees, and very gently; whence the Sulphurious and other Volatile
parts, in their Avolation, make not so much haste, as to carry the more fixed
Saline parts along with them; but leaves them behind in the Water, which
imbibeth them as their proper Menstruum.

And the Imitation of Nature herein, may be performed thus; Put as much of a
Lixivial Salt as you please, into a wide-mouthed Bottle, and with fair Water
make a strong Solution of it; so as some part thereof may remain unresolved at
the bottom of the Bottle. Let the Bottle stand thus for the space of about half
or three quarters of a year, all the time unstopped. In which time, many of the
Sulphurious and other Volatile parts gradually flying away; the top of the
unresolved Salt will be incrustate, or as it were frosted over, with many small
and hard Concretions, which, in their nature, are become a true Sea Salt.
Whereof there is a double Proof; First, In that most of the said Concretions
are of a Cubical, or very like Figure. Especially on their upper parts; because
having a fixed Body for their Basis, their under parts, therefore, contiguous
thereto, are less regular. Whereas the parts of the Salt in the Sea, being
environed on all sides with a Fluid; their Figure is on all sides regular.
Secondly, In that a strong Acid Spirit or Oil being poured upon a full body'd
Solution hereof; yet it makes herewith no Ebullition, which is also the
property of Sea Salt. And thus much for the more General Imitation of Bodies.

INSTANCE. III, and IV.
FROM the aforesaid Premises, and by the aforesaid Means, there is no doubt to
be made, but that also the other sensible Qualities of Bodies may be Imitated,
as their Odors, and Tastes. And that not only the general ones, as Fragrant, or
Astringent: but also those which are specifical and proper to such a species of
Bodies.

2.. Thus for Example, by mixing Spirit of Nitre or Vitriol with rectified Oil
of Turpentine, and some other Vegetable Oils, severally, and in a due
Proportion and Time, I have Imitated the Smells of diverse Vegetables; as of
Tansy, of Lignum Rhodium, and others. And I conclude it feasible, To Imitate
the Taste or Smell of Musk* or Ambergreece, or any other body in the world.

3.. Hence also we may be Taught, How to Imitate the Faculties, as well as
other Qualities of Bodies. The reason is, because even these have no dependence
upon any substantial Form: but are the mere result of Mixture; effected by the
same Causes, whether in Nature or Art; Id.. 55. Chapter 2.. 10. Chapter 3.. 10.
as I think I have made to appear in the foregoing Idea. And as in the
Premises of this Discourse has been showed.

INSTANCE V.
FROM whence, again, it is likewise a Key to Discover the Nature of Bodies. For
how far soever we can attain to Mingle, or to Make them, we may also know what
they are.

2.. For Bodies are mingleable, either of themselves, or by some Third. As to
those which mingle of themselves, we may certainly conclude, That there is a
congruity betwixt them, in some respect or other. So upon various Trials I
find, That Essential Oils do more easily imbibe an Acid, then an Alkaly. Whence
it is evident, That there is some Congruity and Similitude betwixt Essentian
Oils, and an Acid, which there is not betwixt the said Oils and an Alkaly.

3.. As to those that mingle only be some third; we may also certainly
conclude, That though the two extremes are unlike; yet that they have both of
them some congruity with that third, by which they are united.

4.. Moreover, We may make a Judgment from the manner or Degree of Mixture.
Thus the Acid Spirit of Nitre, as is said, will coagulate Oyl-Olive, and render
it consistent. Whence it might be thought, That any other strong Acid will do
the like; and that therefore, there is no great difference in the Nature of the
said Acid Liquors. But the contrary hereunto, is proved by Experiment. For
having digested the same Oil in the same manner, and for a much longer time,
with strong Oil of Sulphur; although it thence acquired some change of Color,
yet not any Consistence.

5.. Again, Because the said Spirit of Nitre coagulates Oyl-Olive; it might be
expected, it should have the same effect upon Oil of Aniseeds; or, at least,
that if other Acids will Coagulate Oil of Aniseeds, that this should do it
best. But Experiment proves the contrary. For of all I have tried, Oil of
Vitriol is the only Acid that does it instantaneously. Oil of Sulphur, if very
strong, will do it; but not so soon, nor so much Aqua fortis, and Spirit of
Salt, for the present, do not at all touch it. And Spirit of Nitre it self will
not coagulate it, under eight or ten hours at least.

INSTANCE VI.
LASTLY, and consequently, It is a Key To Discover the Medicinal Use and
Operation of Bodies. Thus, for Example, by the Imitation of Rosins and Resinous
Gums, we certainly know what all of them are, and when, and wherefore to be
used. For what are Mastick, Frankincense, Olibanum, Benzoin, and other like
Rosins, or Resinous Gums, for their principle and predominant parts, that is,
qua Rosins; but Bodies resulting from Natural, in like manner, as I have
showed, they may be made to result, from Artificial Mixture? That is to say,
the Oleous, and Acid parts of Vegetables, being both affused and mingled
together, per minima, in some one sort of Vessels in a Plant, they thus
incorporate into one consistent and friable Body, which we call Rosin.

2.. Now from hence it is, That the said Rosins, and Resinous Gums; as also
Amber and Sulphur for the same Reasons; are of so great and effectual Use
against most thin and salt Rheums; sc. as they are Acidoleous Bodies. For by
their Acid parts, which in all these Bodies are exceeding copious, they
mortify and refract those Salt ones, which feed the Rheum. And by their oleous
parts, the same Salt ones are also Imbibed. Whence, they are all, in some
degree, incorporated together; that is, The Rheum is thickened: which is the
desired effect.

3.. Whereas, on the contrary, if the Cough proceed not from a thin, and
specially a Salt Rheum, but from a Viscous Phlegm; the use of many other Bodies
which are also more oleous, and abound not so much with an Acid as these do,
espescially some of them, is more proper: such as these, in this Case, proving
sometimes not only ineffectual, but prejudicial. Since the very Cause of the
said Viscousness of Phlegm, is chiefly some great Acidity in the Blood, or in
some other part, as may be proved by diverse Arguments.

4.. Many more Instances might be hereunto subjoyned: and may hereafter be
offered to the acceptance of such, who are inquisitive into matters of this
Nature. If I shall not herein anticipate, or reiterate the Thoughts and
Observations, of those two Accurate and Learned Persons Dr. Willis, and Dr.
Walter Needham, as to what the one has already published, and both have put us
in Expectation of. But the Instances already given, are sufficient to evidence
what I have said. And, I hope, this present Discourse to prove, in some
measure, thus much; That Experiment, and the Common Notions of Sense are
prolifick. and that nothing is Barren, but Fancy and Imagination.

An Appendix to the precedent discourse of Mixture.
HAVING, Chapter 5. Inst. 1.. 8.
in the first Edition of the foregoing Discourse, made mention of the
preparation of Essential Oils, so as to become easily mingleable with any
unoyly Liquor. I shall here acquaint the Reader, That this may be done, by
digesting any of the said Oils with about an equal quantity of the Yelk of an
Egg, with a very soft heat, like that of the Meridian Sun in Summer, continued
for the space of three Weeks or a Month; and in the mean time, to be now and
then stirred a little together. The Yelk will by degrees, imbibe the Oil, and
at length be incorporated with it, and become a Balsam, as white as Milk,
easily dissoluble in any watery or winy Liquor.

2.. I confess, that it will be very difficult to prepare any good quantity for
use, this way. But this being a sufficient proof of the possibility of such a
Mixture; I considered, whether the application of some other forementioned
Cause of Mixture, might not supply the defect of this: and hereupon, have made
several successful trials; not only for the mixing of the said Oils, but
likewise of all sorts of Rosins and Gums with any winy or watery Liquor, in
great quantities, in a short time, and without much trouble. But for the mixing
of some of them, the Yelk of an Egg alone will not serve, without the
intervening of some other sociable Body, Chapter 5. Inst. 1.. 6.
according to one of the Rules given in the foregoing Discourse.

3.. In the same Discourse, upon certain premises, I have laid down this
following conclusion. Chapter 5.. ^.


-- By accumulating the Causes of Mixture, that is, by joining two or three or
more together; or by applying more in some cases, where Nature applies fewer;
we may be able to make, if not a more perfect, yet a far more speedy Mixture,
than Nature does. As by joining COMPRESSION, Heat, and violent Agitation, and
so continuing them altogether, by some means contrived for the purpose, for the
space of a Week or Month, or longer without Cessation. Which may probably
produce, not only strange, but useful effects, in the SOLUTION of some, and the
Mixture of other Bodies.

4.. For the proof whereof, and that I had thoroughly weighed what I have said,
Mr. Pappin has since given us an ingenious Instance, in his new Digester.
Which is, a Balneum Mariae clausum: all Infusions and Digestions made with
Double Vessels, having hitherto been made with the outer Vessel, open. So that
whereas by the old way of Digestion, their is no other Power made use of but
that of Heat: in this way, that also of Compression is joined therewith.

EXPERIMENTS IN CONSORT OF THE LUCTATION Arising from the Affusion of several
MENSTRUUMS Upon all sorts of BODIES, Exhibited to the Royal Society, April 13.
and June 1. 1676.
THE intent of the following Experiments is twofold. The one, to be as a
Demonstration of the Truth of one, amongst other Propositions, laid down in the
precedent Discourse of Mixture, sc. That it would be a Key to let us easily
into the knowledge of the Nature of Bodies. Chapter 5. Inst. 5.


The other, and that consequently, To be as a Specimen of a Natural History of
the Materia Medica: that is to say, a multifarious Scrutiny into the intrinsic
Properties of all those Materials, which have been, or may be used in Medicine:
for the performance whereof, the following Method is exibited as one, amongst
others, necessary to be insisted upon. For what Dominion a Prince has over the
Moral, that a Physician has, as one of God Almighty's Viceroys, over the
Corporeal World. Whom therefore nothing can more import, than a particular
knowledge of the Genius of all his Subjects, those several Tribes of Matter,
supposed to be under his Command.

There are some known Observations of this nature: but there is no Author, I
think, who has given us a Systeme of Experiments upon the Subject: The
performance whereof is here intended.

The Experiments may seem too numerous to be of one make. But no less a number
would have answered the design of an Universal Survey; which, though less
pleasing, proves the more instructive in the end: not being like angling with a
single Hook; but like casting a Net against a shole: with assurance of drawing
up something. Besides the advantage of comparing many together; which being
thus joined, do oftentimes, like Figures, signify ten times more, then
standing alone, they would have done.

How far the Corollaries all along subjoyned have made this good, is left to
the Reader to judge. And also, to add to them, so many more, as he pleases: for
I make my own Thoughts no man's Measure.

CHAP. I. What is generally to be observed upon the Affusion of the Menstruum;
and what, particularly of Vegetable Bodies.
THE Bodies whereupon I made trial, were of all kinds, Animal, Vegetable, and
Mineral. Amongst Vegetables, such as these, scil. Date-stones, Ginger,
Colocynthis, Pyrethrum, Hawthorn-stones, Staphisagria, Euphorbium, the Arenulae
in Pears, Semen Milli Solis, Tartar, Spirit of Scurvygrass, Spirit of Wine, etc.

2.. Amongst Minerals, several sorts of Earths, Stones, Ores, Metals, Sulphurs,
and Salts.

3.. Amongst Animals; such as these, scil. Hairs, Hoofs, Horns, Shells, and
shelly Insects, Bones, Flesh, and the several Viscera, Silk, Blood, Whites and
Yelks of Eggs, Sperma Ceti, Civet, Musk, Castor, Gall, Urine, Dungs, animal
Salts and Stones.

4.. The Liquors which I poured hereupon severally, were these, sc. Spirit of
Salt Ammoniac, Spirit of Hartshorn, Spirit of Nitre, Aqua fortis, Oil of Salt,
Oil of Sulphur, and Oil of Vitriol; commonly so called.

5.. In the Mixture of these Bodies, two things, in general, are all along to
be observed, viz. First, which they are, that make any, or no Luctation. For,
as some which seem to promise it, make none: So, many, contrary to expectation,
make a considerable one.

6.. Next, the manner wherein the Luctation is made; being with much variety in
these five sensible Effects. 1. Bullition; when the Bodies mixed produce only a
certain quantity of froth or bubbles. 2. Elevation; when, like Paste in baking,
or Barm in the working of Beer, they swell and huff up. 3. Crepitation; when,
they make a kind of hissing and sometimes a crackling noise. 4. Effervescence;
then only and properly so called, when they produce some degree of heat. 5.
Exhalation; when not only fumes, but visible steams are produced.

7.. Of all these, sometime one only happens, sometimes two or more are
concomitant. Sometimes the Luctation begins presently upon mixture, and
sometimes not till after some intermission. In some bodies, it continues a
great while; in others, is almost instantaneous: Examples of all which I shall
now produce; beginning with Vegetables, as affording the least variety.

8.. And first, if we take Spirit or Oil of Salt, Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of
Nitre, or Aqua fortis, and pour them severally upon the several parts of
Vegetables, as Roots, Woods, Stones, etc. we shall find, that they are,
generally far less apt to make a Luctation, than either Animal, or subterraneal
Bodies. Whence, as from one argument, it seems evident, That in most
Vegetables, and in most of their parts, the predominant Salt is an Acid. But
that, on the contrary, the predominant Salt in most Minerals, and parts of
Animals, is an Alkaly: in the former, usually a fixed; in the latter, a
volatile Alkaly.

9.. Again, although the Luctation which most Vegetables, and most of their
parts make with Acids, be but small, yet some they make; especially with some
Acids, as with Spirit of Nitre and Aqua fortis. Whence it seems plain, That
there is an Alkaline Salt existent in many Vegetables, even in their natural
estate; and that it is not made Alkaline, but only Lixivial, by the fire. Or,
there is some quantity of a Salt, call it what we will, in the said Bodies,
which is so far different from an Acid, as to make a Luctation therewith. But
to give particular instances of the several Proportions, or manner of Mixture,
wherein it appears to be in several Plants.

10.. And first, of all vegetable Bodies, Date-stones are amongst the least apt
to make a Luctation with Acids, if they may be said to make any at all. Hence
they are not so potent Nephriticks, as many other Stones, which make a more
sensible Luctation.

11.. Ginger makes a small Bullition with Aqua fortis, only observable by a
Glass. Hence the pungency of Ginger lies in a sulphurous and volatile Salt,
which yet is very little Alkalizate.

12.. Scurvygrass-seeds make a very small Bullition with Aqua fortis, like that
of Ginger. So does also the Seed of Purslane. Hence, although there is much
more of a certain kind of volatile Salt in Ginger or Scurvygrass, than in
Purslane; yet there is little more of an Alkaly in any one, than in an other.

13.. The Pulp of Colocynthis, Fruit-Stones, the stony Covers of the Seeds of
Elder, of white Bryony, of Violets, and others, with Aqua fortis make a
Bullition just perceivable without a Glass. Hence it appears, That the great
Cathartick power of Colocynthis lies not so much in an Alkaly, as an Acid; as
making a much less Bullition, than some other vegetable Bodies, which are less
Cathartick. For which reason likewise it is, That the best Correctors, or
Refractors of the force of Colocynthis, are some kinds of Alkalies, as
particularly that of Urine, as Riverius has somewhere observed.

14.. The Root of Pyrethrum, with Aqua fortis, makes a Bullition and huff, in a
short time. Hence, the Cause of a durable Heat, upon the Tongue, is an
Alkalizate Sulphur. For the Heat of Ginger, though greater; yet abides nothing
near so long as that of Pyrethrum; which, as is said, makes also a more
sensible Bullition with Acids.

15.. Kermes-berries, commonly, but ignorantly, so called, with the said
Liquor, huff up to an equal height, but in a somewhat longer time. Hence they
are gently astringent; scil, as their Alkaly binds in with some preternatural
Acid in the stomach.

16.. Hawthorn-stones, with Aqua fortis, huff up equally with the former Body;
but the Bullition is not so visible. The like is also observable of
Medlar-stones. Hence, as they contain a middle quantity of an Alkaly, they are
not insignificantly used against the Stone.

17.. Seeds of Staphisagria, with Aqua fortis, make a Bullition still more
visible. But it quickly ends. This confirms what was said before, sc. That the
cause of a durable Heat is an Alkaline Sulphur; these Seeds producing a durable
Heat, as does the Root of Pyrethrum.

18.. The Seeds also of red Roses, Borage, and Comfrey do all with Aqua fortis
make a considerable Bullition and huff; and that very quickly. So that amongst
all Shells and Stones, those generally make the greatest Bullition, which are
the hardest and the brittlest, and so the fullest of Salt.

19.. Euphorbium makes a Bullition yet more considerable, with much froth, and
very quickly. From which Experiment, compared with two of the former, it
appears, That Euphorbium is not an Acid, but an Alkaline Gum. As also, that the
cause of its so very durable Heat, is an alkaline Sulphur, as of Pyrethrum and
Staphisagria has been said. It seems also hence evident, that the power of all
great Sternutatories lies not in their Acid, but their Alkalies.

20.. The Arenulae or little stones in Pears, clustered round about the Coar,
with Aqua fortis, presently huff up, and make a great Bullition and
Effervescence, much greater than do any of the Bodies abovenamed. Whence,
although, so far as I know, they have never yet been used in Medicine; yet it
is probable, that they are a more potent and effectual Nephritick, than any of
the Bodies aforsaid, some of which are usually prescribed. It is hence also
manifest, That, according to what I have elsewere said, for the sweetning of
the Fruit and Seed, Anat. of Plants, B. 1. Chapter 6.
the Tartareous and Alkaline parts of the Sap, are precipitated into their
Stones, stony parts, and Shells.

21.. The last Instance shall be in the shells of the Seeds of Milium Solis;
which not only with Aqua fortis, but some other Acids, make a greater and
quicker Bullition and Effervescence, than any other vegetable Body, upon which
I have yet made trial, in its natural estate. Hence, as well as from diverse of
the last foregoing Instances, we have a clear confirmation of what I have,
toward the beginning of this Discourse, asserted; sc. That there is some kind
of Alkaline Salt in Plants, even in their natural estate. As also, that they
are as significantly used against the Stone, quatenus alkalizate, as
Millipedes, Egg-shells, or any other testaceous Bodies of the same strength. To
these I shall subjoyn one or two Examples of Vegetable Bodies which are more or
less altered from their natural estate.

22.. Neither Crystals of Tartar, nor Tartar it self (although they have some
store of alkaline mixed with their acid parts) make any Effervescence with
Acids, but only with Alkalites, as Spirit of Hartshorn, etc. Hence the
calculous sediment or Arenulae in Urine, may not so properly be called the
Tartareous part of the Urine; the events following the mixture hereof with the
aforesaid Salts, being quite contrary; as will be seen in the Last Chapter.

23.. Spirit of Scurvy Grass makes no Luctation with any Acid. Hence (as from
a former Experiment was above-noted) it seems, That there may be a kind of
volatile Salt, which is neither acid, nor alkaline; such as this of Scurvygrass
and other like Plants seems to be: yet contrary to an acid; as experience shows
in their efficacy against the acid Scurvy.

24.. Rectified Spirit of Wine, both with Spirit of Nitre, and with Oil of
Vitriol, severally, makes a little Luctation. Which argues, that there is
contained, even in this Spirit, some portion of a volatile Alkaly.

25.. Spirit of Wine, and double Aqua fortis, as the strongest is called, make
an effervescence so vehement, as plainly to boil.

26.. Besides the vehemence hereof, there is another surprising circumstance.
For whereas all other Liquors which make an Effervescence together, will do it
in any proportion assigned, although but one drop to a thousand: these two, sc,
rectified Spirit of Wine and Aqua fortis, require a certain proportion the one
to the other. For if, suppose, into six drops of Spirit of Wine you put but two
or three of Aqua fortis, they stir no more than if you put in so much Water:
but drop in about seven or eight drops of Aqua fortis, and they presently boil
up with very great vehemence. Hence we may conceive the reason of the sudden
access of an acute Disease, and of its Crisis. These not beginning gradually
with the Cause; but then, when the Cause is arrived unto such an (...), or such
a certain Proportion, as is necessary to bring Nature to the contest. And these
may serve for Examples upon Vegetables.

CHAP. II. What may be observed of MINERALS.
HAVING given several Instances of trial upon Vegetables; I next proceed to
Minerals, which, for some orders sake, I shall distribute into five or six
sorts, sc. Earths, Stones Ores and Metals, Sulphurs, and Salts.

2.. First for Earths. Oil of Vitriol upon Fullers Earth, does not stir it, or
cause the least Bullition. Nor upon yellow Oker. Nor upon the Oker which falls
from green Vitriol. The same Oil of Vitriol and Spirit of Hartshorn poured
severally upon Bolus Armena of two kinds, and upon one kind of Terra sigillata,
stir none of them. Hence Bolus' s are the Beds, or as it were, the Materia
prima, both of opacous Stones, and Metals; into which the said Bolus' s are
transmuted, by being concentred with diverse kinds of Salts and Sulphurs, which
successively flow in upon them.

3.. Aqua fortis, and Oil of Vitriol being poured severally upon another sealed
Earth, which was vended by the name of Terra Lemnia; they both made a very
considerable Effervescence herewith. Whence it appears, That there is no small
difference in the nature, and therefore the operation of Bolus Armena and Terra
Lemnia. As also, betwixt the sealed Earths themselves, one making a great
Effervescence, another none at all. Whereto those that use them, are to have
regard.

4.. Next for Stones. And first, Irish Slat, with Spirit of Hartshorn, makes a
small, yet visible Bullition: and it presently cease. So that it seems to be
nothing else but a Vitriolick Bole. As is also argued from its taste, which is
plainly acid, and somewhat rough. Whence also it is with good reason given upon
any inward Bruises. Because by coagulating the Blood, it prohibits its too
copious afflux into the affected part. Yet being but gently astringent, and so
the Coagulations it makes, not great; they are likewise well enough carried off
from the same part in the Circulation; by both which means an Inflammation may
be either prevented, or the better overruled.

5.. Lapis Haematites makes no Effervescence at all either with Alkalies or
Acids.

6.. Powder of the green part of a Magnet with Oil of Vitriol makes some few
bubbles, yet not visible without a Glass. But the powder of the black part of a
Magnet, which is the said stone fully perfect, stirs not with any acid.
Neither does the calcined Magnet. Hence there is some considerable difference
betwixt Iron and the Magnet.

7.. Lapis Lazuli, with Oil of Vitriol, and especially with Spirit of Nitre,
makes a conspicuous Bullition. Hence its Cathartick virtue lies in an Alkaly.
For which reason it is also appropriate, in like manner as Steel, to the cure
of Hypochondriacal Affections; originated from some kind of fermenting Acid.

8. Osteocolla, with Spirit of Nitre makes yet a greater Effervescence. How it
comes to be so great a knitter of broken Bones, as it is reputed, is obscure.
It seems, that upon its solution by a Nitrous Acid in the body; it is
precipitated upon the broken part, and so becomes a kind of Cement thereto.

9.. Lapis Tuthiae, with Spirit of Nitre, makes an Effervescence much alike.
And with Oil of Vitriol very considerably. But Lapis Calaminaris with Oil of
Vitriol grows stark; as the powder of Alabaster does with water. With Spirit of
Nitre it makes a little Bullition, and quickly. But with Aqua fortis, a great
one; beyond any of the Stones above named. Hence both Tufty and Calamy are
Ophthalmicks from their Alkaly. Which is also consirmed, from the efficacy of
some Alkalies of the like use. Hence also Calamy seems to partake somewhat of
the nature of Silver: as by trial made upon that also, will hereafter better
appear.

10.. Chalk and Oil of Sulphur or Vitriol make as strong an Effervescence as
any of the rest. Whence it is sometimes well used against a Cardialgia.

11.. Whiting makes as great an Effervescence as Chalk. So that it seems the
saline parts are not washed away with the water, wherein the Chalk, for the
making of Whiting, is dissolved.

12.. Talk will not stir in the least either with Spirit of Nitre, or Oil of
Vitriol. But the Lead-Spar makes a considerable Effervescence with both of
them severally. Hence, however this be also called English Talk, yet there is
no small difference betwixt this, and true Talk.

13.. To these Stones may be added petrified bodies. As petrified wood; which
(that upon which I made trial) no acid stirs in the least. Petrified shells;
upon four or five several sorts whereof, Oil of Vitriol being poured, preduceth
a great Effervescence. The Root or rougher part of the Stone called
Glossopetra, with Spirit of Nitre, makes a conspicuous Bullition. Asteria, the
Stone so called, and found in some places in England, with Oil of Vitriol,
makes an Effervescence at the same degree. So does the Belemnites, or
Thunder-Stone, both the larger and the lesser kinds. So that none of these are
acid, or vitriolick, but alkalizate Stones.

14.. Coraline, with Oil of Vitriol, makes a conspicuous Bullition, yet mild
and gentle; that is, with very little, if any heat, and without any visible
Fumes. And red and white Coral do the like. Hence they are all of a very gentle
operation, and fit for Children, as the case requires.

15.. Magistery of Coral (prepared the ordinary way) stirs not in the least,
either with Alkalies or Acids. Whence it is evident, That its active Principles
are in its preparation destroyed and washed away: that is to say, It is an
elaborate Medicine good for nothing. And thus far of Stones.

16.. I next come to Metals and Ores. And first for Lead; upon which Spirit of
Salt Spirit of Nitre, or Aqua fortis being dropped, it stirs not in the
least with any of them: but with Oil of Sulphur, and especially with Oil of
Vitriol it makes a slow Bullition and froth. Hence it seems to be the most
alkalizate Metal. Which is also confirmed by a foregoing Experiment upon the
Lead-Spar, which makes a considerable Effervescence with any sort of acid. And
which likewise, being calcined, yields a good quantity of Lixivial Salt.

17.. Lead-Ore stirs not at all with Aqua fortis or Oil of Vitriol. But
Spirit of Salt makes it bubble, and Spirit of Nitre makes it boil. Hence there
is a considerable difference betwixt the perfect Metal and the Ore.

18.. Burnt Lead and red Lead, make a very small Bullition with Oil of Vitriol,
with Spirit of Nitre a far greater.

19.. Mercury, with Oil of Vitriol, will not stir, nor with Oil of Sulphur. But
with Spirit of Nitre presently boyls up. Hence Mercury is a subacid Metal;
Spirit of Nitre being a subalkaline Acid.

20.. The filings of Iron or Steel, with Oil of Vitriol, make a fair Bullition,
like that of Minium. But Spirit of Nitre makes them boil with much c^lerity.
Hence Iron is likewise a subacid Metal.

21.. Steel prepared with Sulphur makes a far less Effervescence with the same
Spirit of Nitre, than do the filings. Hence there is a great difference in
their strength. So that ten grains of the filings unprepared, will go as far as
fifteen grains or more of those which are prepared, as abovesaid. Yet in some
cases the weaker and milder may be the better.

22.. There is one Circumstance in the mixture of Steel and Aqua fortis, which
is surprising; and that is this, That strong Aqua fortis, dropped upon Steel,
will not, of it self, make the least Bullition: but if hereto you only add a
drop or two of Water, they presently boil up with very great vehemence. The
Cause is obscure; yet it is well known, that Water it self will dissolve Iron:
so that it appeas, as well by this, as by some other Experiments, that even in
common Water, as mild as it is, there is some kind of corrosive Principle.

23.. Antimony with Spirit of Nitre, and Aqua fortis severally, makes an
Effervescence; somewhat lower than Iron. With Oil of Vitriol the Bullition is
so small, as difficulty to be perceived with a Glass. Hence it seems to be of
a very compounded nature; if I may so call it, a subacid-alkaline Metal.

24.. Antimonium Diaphoreticum, with Spirit of Nitre and Oil of Vitriol
severally, makes a considerable Effervescence. Wherefore it is not an useless
Preparation; as from the Calcination and Ablution used therein, some have
thought.

25.. Bezoardicum Minerale, (that upon which I made trial) stirs not at all
either with Alkalies or Acids. To which, let those who make use of it, have
regard.

26.. Tin, with Spirit of Nitre, makes so hot and vehement an Effervescence,
that it turns presently, as it were, into a Coal. It makes also a fair
Bullition with Oil of Vitriol. And a gentle one with Spirit of Salt. Wherefore,
it has something of the nature both of Iron, Lead, and Copper.

27.. The like remarkable circumstance is seen in the mixture of Aqua fortis
with Tin, as with Iron. For Tin and strong Aqua fortis of themselves will not
stir; but add a few drops of water to them, and they boil up with the greatest
vehemence.

28.. Copper, with Spirit of Salt, and Oil of Vitriol severally, stirs not at
all. Spirit of Nitre, and Aqua fortis, both boil it up vehemently. Neither
Spirit of Hartshorn, nor Spirit of Salt Ammoniac makes any Bullition
therewith. But both of them, by a gentle solution, that is, gently separating
its Sulphur from its Salts, turn it blue. Hence Copper has a greater
proportion of acid than any of the formentioned Metals.

29.. Silver, neither with Spirit of Salt, nor Oil of Vitriol makes any
Bullition. With Spirit of Nitre it makes one, but it is soon over: and then
continues to dissolve slowly into white Coagulations. It also makes with
Spirit of Hartshorn, or of Salt Ammoniac, a full and deep blue. Hence there is
a greater proportion of acid in Silver, than in Lead, Mercury, Iron, Antimony,
Tin, or Copper.

30.. Litharge of Silver makes the greatest Effervescence with Oil of Vitriol.
Yet some with Spirit of Nitre. And with Spirit of Salt Ammoniac makes some
little huff or elevation. And being mixed with Spirit of Nitre and Spirit of
Salt Ammoniac both together, produces a faint blue. Hence, although the far
greater part of this Litharge be but Lead; yet, it seems, it has some small
mixture of Silver. But that of Gold seems, for contrary reasons, not to have
any Gold.

31.. Gold makes no Effervescence with any single Salt I know of. But it is
commonly dissolved with Aqua Regis, which is known to be an alkaline Liquor.
Whence it seems, That as Lead is the most alkalizate, so Gold the most acid
of Metals.

32.. These things considered, and other observations added hereunto, may
possibly give some directions, not only for the ordering and using, but even
for the making, imitating and transmuting of Metals. Thus far of Metals.

33.. I will next give one or two Instances of trial upon Sulphurs. And first
Sulphur vive, with Aqua fortis, makes an apparent Bullition, but it is some
time, before it begins. But the factitious or common Brimstene, makes scarce
any, if any at all. So that there is no small difference betwixt them.

34.. White and yellow Arsenick make no Bullition either with Alkalies or
Acids. Wherefore the strength of its operation on the Body, lies more in a
Sulphur than a Salt; or in a Salt drowned in its Sulphur.

35.. The ashes either of Pit-Coal, or Sea-Coal, make no Effervescence with
Alkalies or Acids. Whence the saline Principle is altogether volatile, and
sublimed away by the ^ire.

36.. Lastly for Salts. And first of all, Borax makes no Effervescence nor any
Fumes with Oil of Vitriol or Spirit of Nitre.

37.. Oil of Vitriol and Nitre make fumes or steams, though no Effervescence.

38.. Green Vitriol, with Spirit of Hartshorn, is scarcely moved. White
Vitriol, with the same Spirit, makes a conspicuous huff. And Roman Vitriol a
vehement Effervescence. Whence the former is the least acid, and the latter the
most of all. Which also confirms what I said before of the like natures of the
several Metals to which they belong.

39.. Salt of Vitriol, though a fixed Salt, and made by Calcination, yet makes
no Effervescence with the strongest acid; but only with Alkalies; as may be
seen upon their mixture, but much better heard by holding the mixture to ones
ear. Hence, there are fixed Acids. Which further confirms what I have above
asserted concerning the nature of Gold, sc. That the predominant Salt thereof
is a fixed Acid.

40.. Sal Martis, with Spirit of Hartshorn, makes a considerable huff. Hence
it is much more acid than green Vitriol; and is therefore a cooler body.

41.. Alum and Spirit of Hartshorn make a plain Effervescence.

42.. Saccharum Saturni, with Oil of Vitriol, stirs not at all. With Spirit of
Salt, huffs a little. With Spirit of Nitre much more. Hence the acid of the
Vinegar, and not the Alkaly of the Lead, is the predominnt Principle.

43.. Common Salt stirs neither with Spirit of Salt, nor with Spirit of Nitre;
nor with Aqua fortis. But with Oil of Vitriol it makes a great Effervescence
with noise and steams. Hence, even common Salt, though it be not reckoned
amongst alkaline Salts, yet is far nerer in nature to that, than to an acid.
Hence also the Spirit of Salt is a subalkaline Acid, and of a very different
nature from Oil of Sulphur or Vitriol.

44.. Salt Ammoniac, with Spirit of Nitre, stirs not. But with Oil of
Vitriol it makes a great Effervescence. Hence Spirit of Nitre is a
subalkalizate Spirit.

45.. Oil of Vitriol and Spirit of Nitre, though both acids, yet make a great
smoke; greater than that which the Spirit makes of it self. Which confirms the
last precedent Corollary.

46.. Oil of Vitriol and Spirit of Salt, though both acids, yet make a strong
Effervesence, with noise and fumes. Which further confirms, what was noted
before, sc. that Spirit of Salt is a subalkaline Acid.

47.. Spirit of Salt Ammoniac, with Oil of Vitriol, makes an Effervescence so
extraordinary quick, and as it were instaneous, that nothing seems quicker.
Whence it is probable, That if Gunpowder were made of Salt Ammoniac, instead
of Nitre, or with both mixed together; it would be far stronger, than any kind
now in use. And thus far for Minerals.

48.. I have only one Corollary to add, from the whole; which is, That whoever
does undertake the Natural History of a Country, (such as that the Learned Dr.
Plot has exceedingly well done of Oxfordshire) the foregoing Method, seems
so easy, cheap, and indeceitful, for the finding out and well distinguishing
the natures of all kinds of Metalls, Ores, Salts, Earths, Stones, or other
subterraneal Bodies; as cannot, I think, be supplied, but by others of greater
difficulty and expense.

CHAP. III. What may be observed of the PARTS of Animals.
I NOW proceed to the several Parts of Animals; as Hairs, Hoofs, Horns, Shells
and shelly Insects, Bones, Flesh and the several Viscera, Silk, Blood, Eggs,
Musk, Castor, Gall, Urine, Dungs, Salts and Stones.

2.. And first of all, the Hair of a man's head, with Oil of Vitriol, makes no
Bullition at all. Nor yet with Spirit of Nitre. So that although it contains a
good deal of volatile Salt; yet it seems either not to be alkaline, or else
is centred in so great a quantity of Oil, that the acid menstruum cannot reach
it.

3., Hares Fur, with spirit of Nitre, makes, although a short, yet very plain
Bullition and huff. Hence the Hair, and therefore the Blood, of some Animals,
is fuller of Salt, at least of an Alkaline Salt, than that of some others. And
perhaps the Hair of some men, as of Black's, may be so full of Salt, as to make
a Bullition like Hares Fur.

4.. The shavings of Nails stir not at all, either with Oil of Vitriol, or
Spirit of Nitre: only with the latter they turn yellow. But Elks Claws, with
Spirit of Nitre, make a small and slow Bullition.

5.. Horses Hoof, with Oil of Vitriol, stirs not of many hours. But with Spirit
of Nitre, allowing it some time, makes a very plain Bullition, and huffs up
very high.

6.. Cows Horn, neither with Oil of Vitriol, nor with Spirit of Nitre, makes
any Bullition, only turns to a yellow color.

7.. Rams Horn stirs not with Oil of Vitriol; but with Spirit of Nitre, makes a
small and slow Bullition.

8.. Hartshorn makes a considerable Bullition and huff, even with Oil of
Vitriol, which the rest of the Bodies abovesaid, will not do. But with Spirit
of Nitre, it makes yet a greater. From the foregoing Experiments, and almost
all that follow, what is before asserted of the Salts of Vegetables and
Minerals, is here also evident concerning that of Animals, scil. That it is not
made, but only separated by the fire. It likewise hence appears, That the
proportion of Salt in the forementioned parts is very different; and that
therefore some of them are never, and none of them but with good discretion, to
be substituted one for another in Medicine. As also, that there is a different
proportion of Salt in the several Animals themselves, to which the said Parts
belong.

9.. Next for shells; as those of Lobsters, Eggs, Snails and Oisters: all which
make an Effervescence, both with Oil of Vitriol, and Spirit of tree. But with
Spirit of Nitre the greatest. Lobster-shells make a considerable Bullition and
huff, but no noise nor steams. Egg-shells make a Bullition and huff, with some
noise, but no steams. Snail-shells make an Effervescence with noise and steams.
Oyster-shells make one with the greatest noise and thickest steams. Hence we
may judge, in what case to administer one more appositely than another. As also
in what proportion, according to their different strength. Some may be better
for Children, as being milder. Or for a Body whose very sharp Blood or other
Humors, are more easily kindled into Ferments. Or else may be safest, to avoid
a sudden precipitation of the Humors; or for some other cause.

10.. Oyster-shells, and the rest abovesaid, make a quicker Effervescence, not
only with Spirit of Nitre, but even with Spirit of Salt, than they do with Oil
of Sulphur, or Oil of Vitriol. So that these bodies, as well as Metals, have
their proper menstruums whereby they are be dissolved.

11.. Egg-shells calcined, make with Oil of Sulphur, or Oil of Vitriol, or
Spirit of Nitre, a greater Effervescence, than when uncalcined. As also with
steams, which uncalcined, they produce not. The like is seen in calcined
Oyster-shells. And the longer the Calcination is continued, the quicker and
stronger will be the Effervescence. This I tried at several terms, from a
quarter of an hour, to five hours. So that after so long a Calcination, they
make an Effervesence almost instantaneous. The reason hereof is, Because the
several Principles whereof the Shells consist, being relaxed, and the Sulphur
for the greatest part, driven away by the fire; the remaining Salt lies now
more open and naked to the attaque of the Menstruum, so soon as ever they are
mixed together. From hence it is plain, That Egg-shells, and the others
abovesaid, being burnt, are far stronger Medicines, than when unburnt. It is
hereby likewise evident, That a great portion of their Salt, is not a volatile,
but a fixed Alkaly. To these may be subjoyned all kinds of shelly Insects. I
will instance in three or four.

12.. And first Bees, with Oil of Vitriol, stir not in the least. With Spirit
of Nitre they make an exceeding small Bullition, without any elevation.

13.. Cochinele (the Nest of an Insect) makes some Bullition with Oil of
Vitriol, but very small: for the bubbles are not to be seen without a Glass.
But with Spirit of Nitre the Bullition is more visible, and joined with some
elevation.

14.. Cantharides make no visible Bullition with Oil of Vitriol. But with
Spirit of Nitre they do, and huff up rather more than Cochinele. Yet is this
done very slowly, and comparatively with many other bodies, is not much. Hence
it is not the quantity, but the quality of their volatile Salt, which makes
them so strong an Epispastick. For most of those Bodies above, and hereafter
named, make a greater Bullition, and yet are neither Caustic nor Epispastick
in the least. It is hence also evident, as has been before suggested, That
there are diverse kinds of volatile Salts, eminently different; some being
highly alkaline, others very little, and some scarce any thing so: such as
those of Scurvy Grass, Anemone, Crow^oot, and many the like Plants; to whose
Salts, this of Cantharides seems to be very near of kin.

15.. Millepedes make a Bullition and huff, much greater and quicker, than any
of the Insects abovenamed: and that both with Spirit of Nitre, and Oil of
Vitriol it self. Yet is this Insect of a very temperate nature. Whereby is
further demonstrated, That the being simply alkaline, is not enough to make a
body to be Ca^stick.

16.. Again, although Millepedes make a Bullition, greater than any of the
Insects above named: yet is it much less, than that of Oyster, Snail, or even
Egg-shells; and of diverse other bodies above, and hereafter mentioned. Hence,
being given to the same intent, as any of those bodies; it is the mildest and
gentlest in its operation of them all.

17.. Millepedes likewise calcined, makes a stronger Effervescence, than when
uncalcined, as do the Oyster-shells, etc. So that it appears, That all
Testaceous Salts, are at least in part, fixed Salts.

18.. I next proceed to Bones. And first Whale-bone makes no Bullition at all
with any acid. A Cartilage, with Spirit of Nitre, makes some very small
bubbles, not to be seen without a Glass.

19.. The Bone in the Throat of a Carp, makes a little and slow Bullition with
Spirit of Nitre. The Spina of a Fish (that which I used was of a Cod-fish)
makes a Bullition one degree higher.

20.. All sorts of Teeth, as Dogs, Boars, the Seahorse, Elephant, make the
like. As also the Bone of an Oxes heart. So that all these are very gentle in
their operation, and fit for Children.

21.. Sheeps and Calves Bones both of them make a Bullition yet a little
higher, especially with Spirit of Nitre. Cocks Bones somewhat higher than the
former. Cranium humanum a little higher than all the rest.

22.. Bones likewise, being calcined, make a Bullition with Acids. And so does
also calcined Hartshorn. But in neither of them, is the Bullition advanced by
Calcination, any thing comparable to what it is in shells. Whence it appears,
That the Salt of Horns and Bones, is much more volatile, than that of shells.

23.. Next for Flesh and the several Viscera. And first, dried and powdered
Mutton, with Oil of Vitriol, stirs not at all. But with Spirit of Nitre makes a
small Bullition and huff. Sheeps Heart does the like somewhat more apparently.
Vipers flesh produces a froth, but huffs not, Powdered Earthsworms make a
great froth, and huff a little. Powdered Tripe makes only a little Bullition.
Lamb-stones do the like. Kidney, Spleen, and Liver, with some elevation. Lungs,
with bubbles very large; because extraordinary slowly. Dried Brain makes also a
little and slow Bullition. Hence there is a greater proportion of Sulphur or
Oil, and less of an Alkaly in all these parts, than there is in Bones, Shells,
and diverse other parts hereafter mentioned. And in some of them, as in the
Brain, that Alkaline Salt which there is, may rather be lodged in some
sanguineous parts mixed with them, than in their own proper substance.

24.. I proceed to instance in all sorts of Animal Contents. And first, raw
Silk, with Spirit of Nitre, makes a very small Bullition, but the elevation is
considerable.

25.. The grumous part of the Blood dried, with Oil of Vitriol, stirs but
little. But with Spirit of Nitre it huffs up considerably.

26.. Seram of Blood dried, with the same Spirit makes a plain elevation, with
a little Bullition. Herewith may be re^koned the White of an Egg, which is
nothing but a pure Crystalline Serum separated from the common stock. This
being dried, with Spirit of Nitre, huffs up rather more than even the grumous
part of the Blood, the Bubbles are much larger, break oftener, and the elevation
sooner made. Whence it seems, that there is a greater quantity of a volatile
Alkaly in proportion to the Sulphur, requisite to the Generation, than to the
Nutrition of an Animal.

27.. The Yelk of an Egg is scarce moved with Spirit of Nitre, producing only a
very few Bubbles. The Salt being either little alkalizate, or else immersed in
so great a quantity of Oil, that the Menstruum cannot reach it. For the same
reason Sperma Ceti stirs not with any Acid. Neither does Civet.

28. Russian Castor, with Oil of Vitriol, stirs not. But with Spirit of Nitre
makes a considerable huff and froth. Yet it requires time. Wherefore it
seems, That Castor by virtue of its alkaline Sulphur, becomes so good a
Corrector of the acid alkaline Sulphur of Opium: so I take leave to call it,
having some reasons to believe it such.

29.. Musk, with Oil of Vitriol, stirs not. But with Spirit of Nitre it makes a
considerable and quick Bullition, with large bubbles, which often break and
rise again. Whence there is a very eminent difference betwixt Musk and Civet.
Hence also, Musk is Cordial, not only from its Sulphur, but its Alkaly; by both
directly opposite to preternatural Acidities.

30.. Dried Gall with Spirit of Nitre, for some time, is still: but at length
it makes a considerable Bullition and froth. The reason why it is so long
before it begins, is because the Salt, (as was observed of some other Parts) is
locked up in so great a quantity of Oil. The abundance whereof is manifest, not
only from Destillation, but also from hence, In that the dried Powder, in lying
by, incorporateth all together into one body, as Mirrh, and some other softer
and oily Gums are used to do.

31.. Extract of Urine, with Spirit of Nitre, makes a Bullition with some
Effervescence, which continues for a considerable time; and at last it huffs up
with great bubbles. The Bullition begins presently: the Salt being copious, and
the Oil but little.

32.. The same Extract of Urine makes a considerable Bullition and fr^th not
only with Spirit of Nitre, but even with Oil of Vitriol. Hence the Salt of
Urine is more alkaline than that in most of the aforesaid Contents. From this
and some of the following Experiments, it also appears, That the Salt which
concurs to the generation of Gravel or of a Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder, is
of a very different nature from the Salt of Urine.

33.. Next for Dungs. And first, dried Goats-dung makes with Spirit of Nitre, a
small Bullition, but no elevation. That of Mice the like. And that of Cows. So
that of all I have tried, these three stir the least.

34.. Goose-dung, with Spirit of Nitre, makes a very small Bullition and some
elevation. But it requires time. Oil of Vitriol stirs it not.

35.. Album Graecum, with Spirit of Nitre, besides immerable small bubbles,
rises up with some great ones, exactly resembling the huffing up of Yest or
Barm. Also with Oil of Vitriol it makes some little froth, but slowly. So that
it should seem, that the Bones are a little opened by some acid Menstruum in
the Dogs stomach (as the body of Steel is in its preparation with Sulphur)
whereby it becomes a good mild Topic in Quinzies.

36.. Hens dung, with Spirit of Nitre, makes a very great bullition and huff:
greater and quicker, than any of the rest abovenamed.

37.. But of all I have tried, Pigeons dung, with the same Spirit, makes the
greatest and the quickest Effervescence and huff; and that not without steams.
Yet neither the same Dung, nor that of Hens, is moved in the least with Oil of
Vitriol. The Cause of so great an Effervescence in these, more than in the
rest, is that white part which is here mixed in a great quantity with the Dung.
Which white part, descends not from the Stomach, but is an Excrement
separated from the Blood (as the Urine in other Animals) by a peculiar Organ,
which evacuates it into the Intestinum rectum; whence, together with the
Stercus it is excluded. Hence it is evident, That in the said white part of
Hens, and especially Pigeons dung, is contained a great quantity of a volatile
Alkaly.

38.. I proceed to Salts. And first Salt of Blood and Urine both make a more
durable Effervescence with Acids, than does Salt of Wormwood, or Salt of Fern.
Hence the former are more alkaline, than the latter.

39.. Again, though diverse other Animal Salts will not stir with Spirit of
Salt, or with Oil of Sulphur or Vitriol; yet the Salt of Blood will make an
Effervescence with all kinds of Acids. Whence it is further argued to be highly
alkaline, and very proper for the correction, of all sorts of preternatural
Acids in the body. There is little doubt, but that Spirit of Hartshorn will do
the like.

40.. The Gravel which is precipitated out of Urine; with Oil of Vitriol makes
no bullition in the least. Nor with strong Spirit of Salt. But with Spirit of
Nitre, it makes a very great one, with Effervescence and steams. From hence it
appears, That there is much difference to be made in the use of acid
Diuretics, Nephriticks, etc.

41.. And that I may not altogether omit to mention, what may be so much for
the good of mankind, I do here declare, That for preventing (I say not, the
breaking, but preventing) the generation of the Stone, either in the Kidneys,
or in the Bladder, there are not better Medicines in the world, than some
certain Preparations of Nitre, duly administered. Whoever shall think that any
kind of acid, as Oil of Sulphur, Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Salt, or the like,
will have the same effects, will find themselves much deceived in their
practice.

42.. I conclude with Stones. And first, Spirit of Nitre droped upon a Stone of
the Kidneys or Bladder, produces the very same effect, as upon the Gravel in
Urine. That is to say, it makes it boil and huff up, until at length it is
perfectly dissolved into a soft Pulp; which neither Oil of Sulphur, nor Oil of
Vitriol, nor Spirit of Salt will do; nor give the least touch toward its
dissolution. This confirms what I said before of the use of Nitre and Nitrous
Spirits, if duly prepared and administered, above any other Acids, against the
breeding of the Stone.

43.. Pearls, with any Acid, make the like Effervescence, as do Oyster-shells.
But Magistery of Pearls, as usually prepared, stirs not at all, with any Alkaly
or Acid. So that as to the effect frequently intended by it, it is very
insignificant; as of that of Corals has been said.

44.. Crabs Eyes, with any Acid, make an Effervescence, almost as quick as that
of Oyster-shells.

45. Crabs Eyes likewise calcined, make a stronger Effervesnence, than when
uncalcined. So that these, as well as Shells, contain a fixed Alkaly.

46.. The Stones in Whitings heads make a strong Effervescence like that of
Oyster-shells.

47.. Stone of humane Gall, stirs not with Oil of Vitriol. But with Spirit of
Nitre makes a little bullition just upon mixing, and after a considerable
time, a little forth. Much less than what was observed before of the Gall it
self. So that it seems to be generated of the Gall coagulated by some Acid,
which has already refracted the Alkaly wherewith the Gall abounds. This
confirms the use of those Medicines in the Jaundies, or any other bordering
Disease, which destroys those Acidities by which the Gall is curdled or
coagulated, and so rendered more difficulty separable into the Guts.

48.. Since the first publishing of these Observations, Mr. William Matthews an
Apothecary in Ledbury, sent me part, as I take it, of a Stomach-stone, as big
as a Wallnut of the largest Size, voided by a woman about 82 years of age,
sometime after an Autumn Fever. It consists of the same Striae, as the Bezoar
Stone; and makes some Bullition with Spirit of Nitre.

49.. Bezoar, neither the Western nor the Eastern, does stir at all with Oil of
Vitriol.

50.. Western Bezoar, with Spirit of Nitre, makes a very little thin froth, and
that is all; and that it does very slowly. But Oriental Bezoar, with Spirit of
Nitre, after some time, makes a very great Effervescence, froth, elevation,
noise, and steams (as if you poured Oil of Vitriol upon Salt of Tartar) till it
be wholly dissolved by the affufed Spirit, and turned into almost a blood-red.
Hence it may seem to be no mean Remedy against such fretting and venenate
acids, as oftentimes in Fevers, and other Distemper, lie about the Stomach, and
are thence frequently translated to the Heart, Brain, Nerves, and other parts.
The difference likewise betwixt the Western and the Eastern Bezoar, is so
great, that in any case of danger, and where the Bezoar is relied upon, it is
an unpardonable fault, for the Apothecary, or any Person, to substitute the one
for the other: unless he will take ten times as much, or ten times as little of
the one, as he would have done of the other: if that will serve turn.

51.. The Stones already mentioned, (except the great Stomach-stone) are
ordinarily generated in the bodies of Animals. I have one Instance more of some
other Stones which are extraordinary. In the City of Hereford lives a Maid, who
often voids these Stones, and in the space of some years last past, has voided
several pounds, of several Colors and Sizes, not only per vias urinarias, but
also by vomit, and by stool. The first mention made to me of them, was by Mr.
Diggs, a worthy Gentleman of that City, as a thing that was there much wondered
at. And some of them, upon my desire, were sent me by Mr. Wellington, an
Apothecary in the same place. I have tried what several acid Menstrums will
work upon them; and find, That with Oil of Vitriol, and especially with Spirit
of Nitre the great one make a very quick and conspicuous Effervescence. But the
small ones, neither the white, nor the gray, make any Bullition in the least:
for in truth, they are no other but little Pebbles and Grit-stones.

52.. This being considerd, and the various colors and mixture of any one of
the great Stones, being well observed; it seems plain, That although she be
somewhat old (above thirty years) yet may she have a kind of (...), or diseased
Appetite to Stones, Bones, Woodashes, Tobacco-Pipes, Chalk, and such like
things; which sometimes swallowing in little lumps, sometimes grossly, or finely
ground betwixt her teeth; they are in her Stomach and Bowels, more or fewer of
them, cemented together, either with a pituitous, bilious, or some other more
or less glutinous substance. And that by virtue also of the said Cement, or any
of the said, or other like alkalizate Bodies, the greater Stones, which consist
of those partly, do make an Effervescence with acid Liquors. Thus far of
Instances upon the parts of Animals. I shall close with some Corollaries
deduced from the whole.

53.. And first, since we find, that amongst all the Menstuums we have made use
of, Spirit of Nitre, or any very Nitrous Spirit, is the most universal
dissolver of all kinds of Animal Bodies; the best dissolver of many others both
Vegetable and Mineral, and the only dissolver of some: Hence it is probable,
That the great stomachick Menstruum, which either dissolves, or opens almost
all Bodies which come into the Stomach, is a kind of Nitrous Spirit.

54.. Again, Spirit of Nitre being a subalkaline Acid, and workling more
evidently upon Animal bodies, than other simpler Acids do, which yet are as
strong; It hence follows, That most of the Salts of Animals are subacid
Alkalies. How far this conclusion may further instruct us, I shall have
occasion to show in another Discourse.

55.. Lastly, there being so many, say twenty or thirty degrees, from the
slowest to the most vehement, in the Bullition of mixed Bodies; it seems,
That Fermentation it self, as to the formal notion of it, is nothing else: or
that from the common Luctation of mixed Bodies whereof we have now been
speaking, it differs not in specie, but only in the manner of its causation,
and in degree: the Aer, or some certain Menstruum lodged therein, being of no
greater strength, than to produce a Bullition or Luctation of that low and soft
degree, which we call Fermentation.

56.. I have thus endeavored to prove, by various Instances, how instructive
this most easy, plain and simple Method in the Mixture of Bodies, may become
to us: and that merely by observing the Luctations which thence arise betwixt
them. How much more then, if a diligent remarque be made of all those various
Colors, Smells, Tastes, Consistencies, and other Mutations thereupon emergent?

AN ESSAY OF THE Various Proportions Wherein the LIXIVIAL SALT Is found in
PLANTS. Read before the Royal Society, March, 1676.
CHAP. I. Of the QUANTITIES afforded by several Plants calcined in gross.
IT is the part of a Physician, knowingly and artificially to use and govern
Nature. And therefore by every likely Method, to inspect the State and
Properties of all sorts of Bodies. One Method, is that I have taken in the
foregoing Experiments; sc. by mixing them with several Mestruums or Liquors:
whereby we may be assisted to judge, both of the Kinds and the Proportions of
Principles in any Body; and of the manner of their Mixture in the same.

Another is by Calcining them; or, as it were, by mixing them with the Fire, a
potent and almost universal Menstruum. I shall here only set down some Trials
for an Essay, upon Plants; chiefly noting, The different Proportions of their
Lixivial Salts. Of these Trials, some were made upon the whole Plant, or some
Portion of it wherein several Parts are mixed together: And others, upon some
one Part of a Plant distinct from the rest. All of them answering to such
Queries, as may seem proper to be proposed.

Query 1. As first, Whether Trees or Herbs and Bushes, quantity for quantity
and caeteris paribus, yield the most Lixivial Salt?

For this I took Ash-Barque and Rosemary of each lbj. The latter yielded 5
Scruples; the former but 32 Grains; which is three times less. I took also the
same quantity of the Barque of Black-Thorn, and of Agrimony. The latter yielded
5 Scruples and 6 Grains; the former, not above 1 Scruple and 5 Grains; which is
four times less.

Although the Barque of a Tree be compounded of Pithy and Lignous Parts; yet to
answer the Query exactly, the Wood of these Trees should be taken with the
Barque, that there may be some portion of every Part of the Tree, as well as of
the Herb.

But thus far the Experiment is conclusive, That the same quantity of Lixivial
Salt, does not always follow the same Generical Taste. For the Barque of Ash and
Rosemary, are both equally Bitter; and the Barque of Black-Thorn and Agrimony
are both Astringent and Bitter.

Quer. 2. Whether any Plant growing in a Garden or the Field, does not yield a
lesser quantity of Lixivial Salt, than another of the same kindred growing on
the Seacoast; and with what difference?

For this, I took Garden and Sea-Scurvygrass, of each lbj. The former yields 2
Drachms and 1 Scruple; the latter, being well washed, 9 Drachms, which is more
than 4 times as much. The like may be tried upon others.

Quer. 3. Whether the same Specific Plant affords more Lixivial-Salt, being
only dried, and then calcined, or after it has first been distilled, it is
then dried and calcined?

For this, was taken lbj of Mint only dried and then calcined; and another
first distilled. The former yielded an Ounce and a Dram of Salt; the latter,
5 Drachms and a Scruple; which is almost th more. This also should be tried on
other Plants.

Quer. 4. How far the proportion follows the different Tastes of Plants? The
first Experiment, relates to the same Taste in several Plants; this, to several
Tastes. And so,

Of Majorane, which is Aromatic, lbj affords but one Scruple of Lixivial Salt;
which is but the 384th part of the whole pound.

Of Oak-Barque which is Astringent, lbj yields a Dram of Salt; or the 256th
part of the whole.

Of Liquirish, which is sweet, lbj yields about the same quantity. But Anise
Seeds lbj yields 2 Scruples or a 192d part.

Of Sorrel, which is sower, lbj yields one Dram, or the 128th part.

Of Garden Scurvygrass, which is Hot, lbj yields 2 Drachms and a Scruple; or
the 59th part.

Of Mint, which is Hot and Bitter, lbj yields 5 Drachms and a Scruple, or the
24th part.

Of Sea Scuroygrass, which is Salt, lbj yields 9 Drachms and a Scruple or 28
Scruples; which is near ^th part of the whole. A greater proportion of Salt,
than in any other Plant upon which I have hitherto made Trial: Or even in
Tartar it self. Yet is it not a Marine, but true Lixivial Salt: as is evident,
both from its Taste; and in that it makes an Effervescence with Spirit of
Salt; which Sea Salt will not do.

For the Experiment to be fully adequate to the Query; the Trials shouldbe
made, either all on Trees, or all on Herbs; all on Roots, or all on Stalks,
etc. Yet thus much is evident, That Sorrel yields Thrice as much as Majorane;
Sea-Scurvygrass, Eight and Twenty times as much: Mint, Five times as much as
Sorrel; and Sixteentimes as much Majorane, etc.

Quer. 5. How far the Proportion follows the Faculties of Plants? And so, it
appears, that

Majorane, a Cephalic, has a greater Proportion of Volatile Parts, than any
of the Plants above mentioned, and so far, is more agreeable to the Animal
Spirits, and Genus Nervosum.

Agrimony, Quer. 1.
an Aperient, yields above Five times as much Lixivial Salt, as Majorane. Yet
much less than many other opening Plants which are stronger.

Mugwort ( lbj) yields two Drachms and two Scruples; or above half as much more
as Agrimony. So that this Plant, though it has no considerable Taste, and in
that respect promises but little; yet yielding a good quantity of Lixivial
Salt, seems no contemptible Medicine to subdue those Acidities which either by
causing Obstructions, or immoderate Fermentations, frequently disorder the
Female Sex.

Mint, yields still a greater quantity; and is therefore, partly for the same
cause so excellent a Stomachick: And Rosemary, Quer. 1.
which is appropriated both to the Head and Stomach, yields a middle quantity
of Salt; more than the chief Cephalicks, and less than the chief Stomachicks.

Common Mallow ( lbj) yields 5 Drachms and 2 Scruples. i. e. the 23d part of
the whole. So that this Plant, though of a very mild Taste, yet yields more
Salt than Mint it self a Bitter Plant. Whereby it no longer seems strange, that
a Plant of so soft a Taste, should be very Diuretic, and so evidently affect
the Reins.

Rhubarb (2 Ounces) yields scarce any fixed Salt, so far as can be judged by
the Taste of the Ashes, not more than a Grain or two. So that its Salt is, in a
manner, wholly volatile; and thereby apter to operate upon the Bilious parts of
the Blood; which contein a far greater proportion of Volatile Salt, than do the
Serous.

Of the Caput Mortuum or mere Earth, it is observable, that it was near an
Ounce or th part of the whole; Which is almost Six times as much as the Caput
Mortuum of Common Dock: and much more than that of any other Root I have yet
calcined. Whereby it seems probable that Rhubarb loses much of its Volatile
Part, and therefore of its Virtue, before it comes to our Shops.

Sena ( lbj) yields 4 Scuples and of Salt; or the 85th part.

Jalap ( lbj) yields but one Dram and 15 Grains, or 102d part.

Colocynthis ( lbj of the Pulp) yields an Ounce and half of Caput Mortuum,
which is almost all Salt. Yet allow half an Ounce of the Salt, and Earth to be
wasted in filtring etc. theremaining Ounce is no less than 1/16th part of the
whole. Which is more than in any of the above named Plants, except the
Sea-Scurvygrass.

CHAP. II. Of the QUANTITIES afforded by the Parts of several Plants distinctly
calcined.
I SHALL next set down some Trials, upon one Part of a Plant, as well Organick,
as Content, separated from the rest; in answer to these supposed Queries.

Quer. 1. What Proportion does the Lixivial Salt of the Pith or Pithy Part of a
Plant, bear to that of the Fibrous, or of the Woody Part? Or whether is there a
Fixed Salt always found in either of them? A sufficient Answer to which, must
be built upon many Trials. At present I shall mention only Two; one upon
Starch, answerable to the Pithy Parts; the other upon Flax, consisting almost
wholly of the Nervous or Towy Fibers: of the Volatile parts whereof, chiefly, I
have given some account in the foregoing Idea.. 50, 51, 52.


Of Starch, lbj yields about lb not of Ashes, but of Black Coal. For though
it be exposed in a Calcining Furnace to a vehement fire, for 5 or 6 hours,
which is longer then will serve to calcine most Bodies: yet would it not in the
least part, be reduced to Ashes; but to the last continued (though the
fierceness of the Fire consumed part of it) as black, as when it was first
burnt. So strangely was the remaining part of the Sulphur fixed to the Earth;
that in flying away, it did volatilize and carry that away with it. In this
Coal or Cinder, there is not the least of a Lixivial or other Taste. And
although, upon Trial I find, That the Pith of many Plants, as of a Cabbage
Stalk, will yield some quantity of Lixivial Salt; yet it is probably, that
generally, it yields less than the Wood.

Of Flax, lbj yields not above 50 Grains of Caput Mortuum or white Ashes, which
are Salt. According to vulgar conceit, it would seem to be a very dry Body: yet
of 153 parts, 152 are volatile, and being distilled would have been collected
into Liquor. Hence also appears the great and unexpected Variety in the
Proportion of the Earthy Parts, as well as the other Principles of Bodies. Or
else, that there are diverse kinds of Earths, even in Plants, of which, as well
as of Salts etc. some are volatile. For of lbj of this Plant, there remains
fixed but 50 Grains: whereas of lbj of Rhubarb, there will remain near 1920
Grains, i. e. 88 times as much as the former.

Quer. 2. In what proportion is the Lixivial Salt found in the Gumms of Plants?
and whether is it yielded, more or less, by all? For answer to which, I caused
the Eleven following, of each two Ounces, to be calcined, and so observed,

That Common Rosin, yields but one Grain and of Caput Mortuum. So that lbj will
yield but 12 Grains. In this Caput Mort. there is not the least particle of
Salt, it being altogether insipid.

Mastick yields gr. 12 of Cap. Mort. But not the least part of Salt. Of this
Rosin, it is observable; That being set, in a Crucible, within the fire, before
it comes to have thick fumes, it boyls up with a very great foame or froath;
and is the only Gum or Rosin (of the Eleven) that has this property. So that I
suspect, there is a great quantity of some kind of volatile Spirit, which then
flies away; and so, in breaking through the Oily parts, huffs them up to so
great a froath.

Olibanum yields half a Dram of Caput Mortuum. But it is to be noted, That
the weight is increased by certain little Spar-Stones, which in the burning of
several parcels, I always found mixed with this Gumm. These being picked clean
out, the Cap. Mort. weighs not much more than that of Mastick. And is in like
manner insipid, when the said Stones are picked out.

From hence it appears, how proper these Gums are for the Concoction of Salt
Rheums; Discourse of Mixture Cap. Ult.
according to what I have formerly suggested from another Experiment.

It may also be noted, that Rosin and Mastick, seem to be more purely
Acidoleous Gums; not only from their consistence which is uniform; and their
Smell, which is less strong and more pleasant: but also from the Acid Liquor
they yield by Distillation; and in that the young Leaves of Fir, and especially
of Pine, are sower; and it is probable that those of Mastick are so likewise.
Whereby these, and other like Gums are more especially fitted for the abovesaid
purpose. But Olibanum seems, besides its Acidity, to contein some Volatile
Alkaly, and so to be an Acid-Alkaline Gum. For as it has a stronger Smell than
the former, so a hotter Taste; both the ordinary effects of an Alkaline
Sulphur. And being infused in several Menstruums, appears to constist of two
Bodies, one of them more Resinous than the other. Of which, it is probable,
that the one is made by the Acid parts as the other by the Alkaline. Whereby it
is very well adapted in some Cases, as in a Pleuresie, for removing the
Coagulations of the Blood, or its disposition thereunto.

Asa foetida yileds no less than half its weight or an Ounce of Caput Mort.
that is 8 times as much as that of the other Gumms, and 48 times as much as
that of some of them. Yet does it not contein one grain of Salt, so far as can
be judged by its Taste. Yet the Strength and Loathsomness of the Smell and Taste
of the Gumm do argue it to be highly impregnated with some kind of Volatile
Alkaly proper to arrest those offensive Vapors (to use the vulgar word) which
flying, either by the Blood or Nerves, from part to part, do often prove so
troublesome.

Gum Arabic yields one Scruple of Cap. Mort. whereof, by the Taste, about ^d
part is Salt.

Euphorbium yields one Dram of Caput Mort. of which, by the strength of the
Taste, two Scruples seem to be Salt. Which confirms a former conjecture Of the
Luctation of Bodies, Chapter 1.
of its being an Alkaline Gumm.

Myrrh also yields a Dram of Cap. Mort. and at least two Scruples of Salt. Of
the Eleven, these two Gums have the greatest quantity of a fixed Alkaly.

Opium yields half a Dram of Cap. Mort. whereof the one half is Salt.

Aloe yields a Dram of Cap. Mort. containing about one Scruple of Salt.

Scammony yields Two Scruples of Cap. Mort. of which, about half a Scruple is
Salt.

Gutta Gamba yields but half a Scruple of Cap. Mort. of which four or five
Grains are Salt.

So that considering the Dose of any Cathartick Gumm, the quantity of the Fixed
Alkaly, is extreme small with respect to the Volatile parts: In which,
therefore, its Crthartick Power does chiefly reside.

Yet none of the Cathartick Gumms are without some portion, more or less, of a
Fixed Alkaly; though some of the rest are. Which seems to prove, That the
Fixed it self, has some Interest in the business of Purgation: as by being a
Clog to the Volatile, and so preventing its being deleterious; or some other
way. But the manner of their Operation will better be understood, when the
Volatile Parts have likewise been examined.

It may also be of good import, to know, what different quantities of Salt, are
afforded by the Tartars of all sorts of Wines Whereby, partly, as well as by
the quantity of the Tartar, we may be enabled the better to judge of the Nature
of Wines.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the ESSENTIAL and MARINE Salts of Plants. Read before
the Royal Society, December 21. 1676.
CHAP. I. In which is showed the way of making both an ESSENTIAL and a MARINE
Salt, out of the LIXIVIAL Salt of a Plant.
SOMETIME since, I took the boldness to present my thoughts to this Honorable
and Learned Body in a Discourse concerning Mixture. Wherein I have endeavored
to lay such a Foundation, as might hereafter reduce the Doctrine hereof to
Experience and Practice; and to demonstrate, the Power and Use of Artificial
Mixture. And in further proof of what is therein asserted, I have since made a
continuation of Experiments upon the same Subject, in Two Methods. One in the
Mixture of several Menstruums, both Acid and Alkaline, with all Sorts of
Bodies. The Other, by calcining them, or, as it were, mixing them with the Fire.

2.. I shall now proceed to a Third, which is, the mixing them with the Aer or
exposing them to it; another of Natures grand Menstruums; which goes sometimes
further than the Fire it self, in the dissolution of Bodies. This I have
formerly mentioned for the Imitation of Nature, Discourse of Mixture Chapter 5.
Inst. 2.
in producing a Marine or Muriatick Salt out of the Lixivial Salt of a Plant.
But some Learned Persons then present, seeming to doubt of the Experiment; I
thought it requisite to prosecute the same a little further; that so, if
possible, it might become clear and unquestionable. And because that Method was
imperfect, and required half a year, or a longer time: I bethought my self of
an other way; which proved far better, and more expedite. And which, withal,
afforded me, not only a true Marine Salt, out of the Lixivial Salt of a Plant;
but also another kind of Salt, different from them both: which may not be
improperly called, an Essential Salt or Nitre of Plants. The History or manner
of the production of them both, is as follows.

3.. December 15. 1675, I took about half a pound of a strong Solution of the
Lixivial Salt of Firne: and pouring it into an Earthen Pan, well glazed, broad
and shallow, exposed it therein to the open Aer, Tab. 83.
in a Chamber Window, to evaporate of it self.

4.. This Solution or Lee, although it was very clear before, and having stood
corked up in a bottle many days, had no sedement: yet standing now in the open
Aer, within the space of 4 or 5 days, it began to let fall a very white
Sedement, like fine Chalk; which increased daily for 8 or 10 days; amounting at
last to about half a Dram of white, light and mere Earth, altogether insipid,
and when it was well washed, stirring not upon the Affusion of Acids.

5.. Within the space of a day or two after this white Sedement began to fall
to the bottom; there was also gatherd on the top, a kind of soft Scum or
Cremor, wherewith the Solution was covered all over.

6.. Within 8 or 9 days after the first exposing of the Liquor, or 2 or 3 days
after the gathering of the Cremor; that Salt, which I take leave to call, an
Essential Salt of Plants, began to appear; shooting into several little
Crystals. These Crystals, as they grew bigger, began to sink, and at last fell
down to the bottom of the Pan.

7.. Upon their first generation or shooting, the said Cremor presently breaks,
leaving a bare space round about each Crystal; and upon the bounds of every
space is indented; Tab. 83.
the space growing bigger and bigger together with the Crystal in the Center.
And so, by that time the Crystals are grown to a considerable number and
bigness, the Cremor vanishes away, the several Circles or bare places breaking
at last one into another all over the Surface of the Lee. After which, it never
comes again.

8.. From whence it seems, That the several Circles or bare Spaces about the
Crystals, are made for the more free admission of the Aer, requisite to their
Generation. For as there is no Crystal begins to be formed before there is a
breach made in the Cremor: so that breach is enlarged together with the
Crystal. So that as the falling of the Sedement and the gathering of the
Cremor, shows that the Aer, as a Menstruum separates some part from the Lee:
so the breaking of the Cremor afterward, that as a Vehicle, it brings
something to it: both in order to the Generation of the Crystals. Nature taking
a Method for the Generation of simpler Bodies, as well as of those which are
Compounded and Organical.

9.. The Figure of these Crystals is angular and oblong, most of them about the
fifth, sixth or seventh of an Inch; but none of them very regular. Yet we are
not hence to conclude, but that with the help of some Circumstances which might
be wanting in the shooting of these; some portion of regular ones may be
obtained from this, as well as other Lixivial Salts hereafter mentioned.

10.. They are somewhat transparent, and of a dark Ambar Color, or like that of
brown Sugar Candy. Of a quite different Taste from that of the Solution or Lee
out of which they are bred; being not at all Lixivial, but very weak and mild;
not Salt, but Bitter in a good degree.

11.. It is also observable, that Alkaline and Acid Salts being both poured
severally upon these Crystals, they stir not, nor are any way affected with
either of them. So that these Crystals are no sort of Tartar, or Tartareous
Salt. As is plain, from the manner of their Generation; Tartar being still bred
in close Vessels; these never, but by exposing the Liquor to the Aer. As also
from their Taste, being not sower, in the least, but bitter. And in that Tartar
will make a Bullition with Alkaline Salts, which these will not do. Upon which
accounts it appears, that they are a Salt different in Nature from all other
Salts hitherto known, or a new Species added to the Inventory of Nature.

12.. These Crystals within the space of about a fortnight after their first
Generation, did also cease to shoot any more, but only increased a little in
their Bulk. After which time, I daily expected to see the production also of a
true Marine Salt. And about two months after the said Essential Crystals had
done shooting, and not before, this also began to shoot, in many small
Crystals, and at the top of the Solution, as the other did, still falling to
the bottom as they grew biger.

13.. The Size of most of them was near that of the Flakes or Grains of
Bay Salt. The Color of some of them white, of others transparent; and of
others white in the Center, with transparent Edges; as is also usual in the
Crystals of Common Salt.

14.. The Figure of most is a perfect Square, and of very many coming near to a
Cube; which is also the Figure of Common Salt, and seldom an exact Cube. An
exact Cube, being the constant property of no Marine Salt, Tab. 83.
that I know of, except that of the Dead Sea. Diverse of them were also raised
as it were by several steps from a deep Center to the Top: as is often seen in
the common shooting of Common Salt; and not in any other. Their Taste is
neither Lixivial, as that of the Solution out of which they shoot; nor
bitterish, as that of the Essential Crystals; nor sowerish, as that of Tartar;
but the perfect Taste of Common Salt.

15.. It is also to be noted, That if Oil of Vitriol, and some other strong
Acids, be poured upon this artificial Sea Salt, they make an Effervescence
together: but if Spirit of Salt or Spirit of Nitre either be poured on it,
though it be never so strong it stirs it not. In both which, and all the
formentioned respects, it answers to the Properties of a Marine or Common Salt,
which no other Salt does. I conclude it therefore to be a true Marine Salt
produced by Art in the imitation of Nature.

CHAP. II. Wherein is showed, That the said ESSENTIAL and MARINE Salts of
Plants are both of different Sorts.
HAVING made the Experiment, that both an Essential and Marine Salt may be
produced out of the Lixival Salt of a Plant. I thought it probable, that
neither the one nor the other, was always the same, but that as they had their
general properties which made them to be of two general kinds; so they might
have some special property, for the distinguishing of each kind into several
Sorts. And withal, that in a warmer season, than before taken, the Trial
hereof might be finished in a shorter time.

2.. For the making of which, I conceived it requisite to remove an Opinion
which seemed to lie in my way; sc. That there is little or no difference
between the several Lixivial Salts of Plants, as some Learned men have thought.
But either there is a difference, or not: if not, it should be proved: and if
there be, it should then be justly stated, what that difference is. For the
doing of which, I chose this Method. I took an equal quantity of the whitest
and purest Salts of diverse Plants, all made by an equal degree of Calcination;
and dissolved them all severally in an equal quantity of water. And pouring
likewise an equal quantity, as about 10 or 12 drops of each into a spoon, I
tasted them severally. Whereby it was very evident, that they were not all of
one Taste, but of very different ones, both as to strength and kind: and
therefore different in Nature also. The Salts I made trial of were those of
Sorrel, Anise, Wormwood, Mallow, Ash, Tartar and others: and upon half a Dram
of each I poured ijss of water. The Solutions are here present to be tasted. By
which the differences will easily be observed, and particularly that the Salt
of Wormwood or Scurvygrass, is almost as strong again as the Salt of Anise, or
Sorrel: and that the Salt of Ash is above twice as strong, and that of Tartar
above thrice as strong, as that of Sorrel, and almost thrice as strong as that
of Wormwood or Scurvygrass. So that he who shall give half a Scruple, suppose
of Salt of Tartar; instead of half a Scruple of Salt of Wormwood, or other like
Salt; he may as well give a Scruple of Rosin of Jalap, for a Scruple of the
powder, or almost three^ Drachms of Rhu^arb, or other like Purge, instead of
one. And the like is to be said of other Lixivial Salts in their degrees.

3.. Having observed thus much, I proceeded to repeat the former Experiment,
with some of the aforesaid, and some other Vegetable Salts, the best calcined,
and the purest, that could be made for this purpose, being these Six Salts, sc.
of Rosemary, Garden Scurvygrass, Black Thorn, Common Wormwood, Ash, and Tartar.
All which dissolved severally in fair water, I exposed in a Chamber window, and
not in Winter, as before, but in the heat of Summer, sc. on the 19 of July, to
evaporate of themselves.

4.. The Effect was, That the third day after their being exposed, the
Essential Crystals began to shoot in three of the Solutions, sc. in that of
Rosemary, of Garden Scurvygrass, and of Black Thorn. On the fouth day, in that
of Wormwood. On the fifth day, in that of Ash. In that of Tartar, not at all.

5.. These Essential Crystals began, in all, to shoot at the top, and then to
fall to the bottom; as in the Experiment before. But as there was very little
of the white Sedement before mentioned, that preceded; So no Scum or Cremor at
all. Which although a more perfect Calcination, it seems, did here almost
prevent; yet did not in the least destroy the aforesaid Essential Salt, but
rather make way for its more speedy and copious Production: exhibiting likewise
a distinct Species in several of the Solutions.

6.. For first, the Crystals of Rosemary (the largest of them) were about the
bigness of a Rice-Corn. In Figure almost like a Tip-Cat, which Boys play with,
Tab. 83.
split down the middle. Each Tip being cut into 5 sides all ending in a point:
the middle part divided into 7, all drawn by parallel Lines; the topmost with
the lowermost but one, on each side, being three exact Squares.

7.. The Crystals of Black Thorn are most of them poynted with just six sides
of Equal Measure: very like to the shooting of true Crystal it self. Tab. 83.
From the topmost of which six Sides, a Line being drawn out, runs parallel to
a broad Base, whereon each Crystal stands. So that they are in some sort of a
Rhomboid Figure.

8.. The Crystals of Scurvygrass have also a very elegant and regular Figure,
which is in a manner compounded of the two former now described. But they are
nothing near so bigg, the largest of them, being no biger than a Grain of that
which we call Pearl Barley.

9.. The Crystals of Wormwood have also very many of them a regular Figure; but
quite different from that of the Crystals before mentioned; each Crystal being
a little Cylinder, saving that it is constantly somewhat smaller at one end,
Tab. 83.
than the other: as it were one half of a Rowling-pin. And not evenly Circular,
but cut out by Six Sides of equal Measure: almost as in the Crystal of Nitre.
So that contrary to what is seen in the forementioned Crystals, the ends of
these of Wormwood are not poynted, but flat; and cut at Right Angles with the
Sides.

10.. The Crystals of Ash, though by their properties they appear likewise to
be Essential; yet are nothing near so regularly figured, as all the
forementioned.

11.. The Color also of the said Crystals is somewhat different: Those of Ash
being of a brown transparency, almost like those of Firne. Those of Wormwood
being also brownish, but paler. Those of Rosemary and Scurvygrass having some
little Tincture, yet very clear. But those of Black Thorn without the least
Tincture, and as clear as Crystal it self.

12.. None of these Essential Crystals have any hot siery Taste, but are very
mild, and sensibly Bitter; especially, about the Root of the Tongue: as is also
observable of some Plants hereafter mentioned, in speaking of the different
Tastes of Plants.

13.. Oil of Vitriol droped upon these Crystals does not affect them in the
least: yet droped into the several Solutions out of which the Crystals are
produced, immediately causes a great Effervescence.

14.. Of the Solutions above named, that, of Salt of Tartar was the 6th.
Whereof it is remarquable, That having waited several Months together, I could
not observe the least Essential Salt to be therein produced in all that time.
Whether there be any other Vegetable Salts, besides this of Tartar, which will
not yield the Essential above described, I have not yet experimented.

15.. In the mean time, from the Premises it is very probable, that most of
them afford more or fewer of the said Crystals. In regard they are Plants of a
very different kind, which I made trial upon: as Garden Scurvygrass, very Hot;
Rosemary, very Aromatic. Wormwood very Bitter; Black Thorn, Astringent and
Sower. And it is also plain, That the said Essential Salts contained in the
Lixivial, are not altogether one and the same, but of diverse Sorts.

16.. ABOUT 7 or 8 days after the Essential Crystals were produced; the Marine
Salt did also begin to shoot; first in Rosemary; quickly after, in Scurvygrass;
Next, in Black Thorn and Wormwood, sc. after the space of a week or 10 days
more. And in all of them with some difference of Size and Figure.

17.. The plainest of all, was that produced out of the Salt of Black Thorn,
consisting for the most part of very small Crystals, not above the 15th of an
Inch square, as also thin, shaped like a Duch Tile used for Chimnies. Many
others were very thick, and near to a Cube. Tab. 83.
Most of which were a little hollowed in the middle, like a grinding Marble or
Salt-Celler; and the hollow bounded by 4 plain and equal Sides, all descending
a little toward the Center; and measured by two cross Lines, which staid upon
the four Angles of the Square, and so cut one the other at Right Angles. Both
which Properties are likewise usually seen in the Crystals of Common Salt.

18.. In Wormwood, many of these Crystals, besides the plain ones, were figured
crossways like a Dagger-Hilt. Which was sometimes naked, Tab. 83.
and sometimes enclosed in a square and almost Cubical Box. Many others were
figured into Sprigs made up of four chief Branches standing crosswise, and
those subbranched; and all the Branches made up of little square Crystals,
clustered together in that Figure. The Sprigy Figure of these Crystals is not
accidental, but has constantly come after they had been three times dissolved,
and the Solution exposed to evaporate.

19.. The Marine Salt of Rosemary has also some variety. For besides the plain
ones above described, there are some thick Squares, which have also a square
hollow descending by five, Tab. 83.
six, or seven narrow steps, toward the Center; being in Figure, saving these
Steps, somewhat like the Hoper in a Mill.

20.. Upon a second Solution of the same Salt, there shoots another sort of
square; which is not plain on the edges, as the abovenamed, Tab. 83.
but scalloped or florid all round about, not unlike the Leaves of some Plants.

21.. The Crystals of Marine Salt of Scruvygrass are somewhat like to those of
Rosemary now described.

22.. As for the Lixivial Salts of Ash and Tartar, though in a Month or Five
Weeks Space, they yield some Crystals of very clear Salt: yet of Marine Salt
neither of them yields the least particle. So that of these Six Lixivial
Salts, sc. of Rosemary, Scurvygrass, Black Thorn, Wormwood, Ash and Tartar,
all, but that of Tartar, yielded an Essential Salt. And all, but those of Ash
and Tartar, yielded a Marine, such as is above described. All which Salts both
Essential and Marine, together with their Models, made of white Alabastre, I
have here ready to be seen.

23.. Of those that yield these Salts, or either of them, it is further to be
noted, That there is a considerable difference in the Proportion or Quantities
which they yield. The Rosemary yields store both of Essential and Marine, but
more Essential. Wormwood and Scurvygrass more Marine. Black Thorn less of
Either. The Ash no Marine, and the Tartar neither the Essential nor Marine, as
has been said.

24.. From what has been said, I deduce only at present these Three Corallaie.
First, That a Lixivial Salt, is not only a compounded Body sc. of Salt,
Sulphur, Aer and Earth; but even a Compounded Salt, containing both a Vegetable
Nitre, and a true Sea Salt.

25.. Secondly, That the Exposing of Bodies, in the manner above showed, may
justly be accounted one Part of Chemistry hitherto Deficient, and much farther
to be improved for the Discovery of the Nature of Bodies. For as Nature chiefly
compoundeth Bodies by Digesting them, and so either shutting out or keeping in
the Aer: So she Dissolveth them by Exposing, and so neither shutting in the
Aer, nor keeping it out, but leaving it free to come and go; and thereby to
bring, and carry off whatsoever is necessary for the Separation or Solution of
Bodies. For the Sea it self (to confine the similitude to our present case) is
but as a Great Pan, wherein all kinds of bodies being long exposed, are
thoroughly resolved, ultimately yielding from the rest of their visible
Principles, that which we call Sea Salt.

26.. Lastly, if by Exposing and Dissolving we can make one Satl; then by
Compounding and Digesting we may make another, yea any other Salt; either a
Fixed of a Volatile, or a Volatile of a Fixed. That is to say, a Volatile Salt
may be so separated from other Bodies, as to become Fixed; or a Fixed Salt may
be so mixed with other Bodies as to become Volatile. For that any Salt should
of it self become Fixed or Volatile, is a Fixion not grounded upon Experiment.

27.. As for the Virtue of the Essential Salts above described, I believe they
will be found upon trial, not contemptible in some Cases. For which amongst
other reasons, I have been the more punctual in relating the manner of their
Generation; that others also may have the opportunity of making proof hereof.

28.. When I made the Experiments for this and the foregoing Discourse, not
having so good convenience at home for making the Salts I used: I procured them
all (except that of Firne, which I made my self) to be purposely prepared by
Mr. John Blackstone a London Apothecary, who assured me of his great care
herein; and particularly, that he added no Nitre to whiten any of the Salts
with, as is commonly done for that of Tartar.

I do declare, That all the Lixivial Salts mentioned in this and the foregoing
Discourse except that of Firne, were faithfully prepared by me

John Blackstone.

A DISCOURSE OF THE COLORS OF PLANTS. Read before the Royal Society, May 3.
1677.
CHAP. I. Of the COLORS of Plants in their Natural Estate.
HAVING formerly made some Observations of the Colors of Plants; Idea,. 27.
and Anat, of R. P. 2.. 65, etc.
I shall now crave leave to add some more to them of the like Nature. None of
which, nor any of the Conclusions thence deduced, will, if duly considered,
appear contrary to the Hypothesis and Experiments of Mr. Boil, Mr. Des Carts,
Mr. Hook, Mr. Newton, or any other, concerning Colors. As not having respect
to the Colors of all Bodies in general. Nor to the Body of Color, which is
Light; Nor to the formal notion of Colors (ad extra) as the Rays of Light are
moved or mixed: But to those Materials, which are principally necessary to
their Production in Plants. Concerning which, the present Discourse shall be
reduced to these Three general Heads, scil.

2.. First, Of those several Colors, which appear in Plants in their Natural
Estate.

3.. Secondly, As they appear upon the Infusion of Plants into several Sorts of
Liquors.

4.. Thirdly, As upon the Mixture of those Infusions, or of any one of them
with some other Liquor, or other Body.

5.. As they appear in the Plants themselves, it may be observed in the first
place, That there is a far less variety in the Colors of Roots, than of the
other Parts: the Parenchyma being, within the Skin, usually White, sometimes
Yellow, rarely Red. The Cause hereof being, for that they are kept, by the
Earth, from a free and open Aer; which concurreth with the Juyces of the
several Parts, to the Production of their several Colors. And therefore the
upper parts of Roots, when they happen to stand naked above the Ground, are
often deyed with several Colors: so the tops of Sorrel Roots will turn Red,
those of Mullen, Turnips and Radishes, will turn purple, and many others green.
Whereas those parts of the same Roots which lie more under Ground, are commonly
White.

6.. As Roots are most commonly White; so the Leaves, Green. Which Color is so
proper to them, that many Leaves, as those of Sage, the young Sprouts of St.
John's Wort, and others, which are Redish when in the Bud; upon their full
Growth, acquire a perfect Green.

7.. The Cause of this Color, is the action of the Aer, both from within, and
from without the Plant, upon the Juyces thereof, whereby it strikes them into
that Color.

8.. By the Aer from without, I mean that which surrounds the Body of the
Plant: which is the Cause of its Greeness, not merely as it is contiguous to
it, but as it penetrates through the Pores of the Skin, thereinto; and so
mixing with the Juyces thereof, plainly deys or strikes them into a Green.

9.. By the Aer from within, I mean, that which entering, together with the
Aliment, at the Root, thence ascends by the Aer-Vessels, into the Trunk and
Leaves, and is there transfused into all the several Juyces, thereby likewise
concurring to their Verdure. Whence it is, that the Parts of Plants which lie
under Water, are Green, as well as those which stand above it; because, though
the ambient Aer, contained in the Water be but little, yet the want of it is
compensated, by that which ascends from the Root.

10.. And therefore it is observable, that the Stalks of Marsh-Mallow, and some
other Plants, being cut transversly, though the Parenchyma in the Barque be
white, yet the Sap-Vessels which lie within that Parenchyma, are as Green as
the Skin it self; scil. because they stand close to the Aer-Vessels. The
Parenchyma, I say, which is intercepted from the Aer, without, by the Skin; and
from the Aer within, by the Sap-Vessels, is white: but the Skin, which is
exposed to the Aer without, and the Sap-Vessels which are next neighbors to
that within, are both equally Green. So likewise if a Carrot be plucked up, and
suffered to lie sometime in the open Aer; that part which stands in and near
the Center, amongst the Aer-Vessels, will become Green as well as the Skin, all
the other Parts continuing of a Redish Yellow, as before. The Aer therefore,
both from without, and from within the Plant, together with the Juyces of the
Plant, are all the concurrent Causes of its Verdure.

11.. BUT how does the Aer concur to the Greeness of Plants? I answer; Not as
it is merely either cold or dry, or moist, nor yet quatenus Aer; but as it is a
mixed, and particularly, a Saline Body: that is, as there is a considerable
quantity of Saline Parts mixed with those which are properly Aereal. It being
plain from manifold Experience; That the several kinds of Salts, are the grand
Agents in the Variation of Colors. So that, to speak strictly, although
Sulphur be indeed the Female, or Materia substrata, of all Colors; yet Salt is
the Male or Prime Agent, by which the Sulphur is determined to the Production
of one Color, and not of another.

12.. If then it be the Aer mixed with the Juyces of a Plant, and the Salt of
the Aer, that makes it Green; It may further be asked, what kind of Salt? But
this is more hard to judge of. Yet it seems, that it is not an Acid, but a
Subalkaline Salt; or at least some Salt which is different from a simple Acid,
and has an Affinity with Alkalies.

13.. One reason why I so judge, is, Because that although all Plants yield an
Alkaly, or other Salt different from an Acid, and some in good quantity; yet in
most Plants, the Praedominant Principle is an Acid. So that the Supply of an
Acid Principle from the Aer, for the Production of a Green Color, as it would
be superfluous; So also ineffectual: a different Principle being requisite to
the striking of this, together with the Sulphur, into a Green Color.

14.. I suppose therefore, That not only Green, but all the Colors of Plants,
are a kind of Precipitate, resulting from the concurrence of the Saline Parts
of the Aer, with the Saline and Sulphurious Parts of the Plant; and that the
Subalkaline, or other like Saline Part of the Aer, is concurrent with the Acid
and Sulphurious Parts of Plants, for the Production of their Verdure; that is,
as they strike altogether into a Green Precipitate. Which also seems to be
confirmed by diverse Experiments hereafter mentioned.

15.. THE Colors of Flowers are various; differing therein not only from the
Leaf, but one from another. Yet all seem to depend upon the general Causes
aforesaid. And therefore the Colors of Flowers, as well as of Leaves, to
result not solely from the Contents of the Plant, but from the concurrence
likewise of the ambient Aer. Hence it is, that as they gradually open, and are
exposed to the Aer, they still either acquire, or change their Color: no
Flower having its proper Color in the Bud, (though it be then perfectly
formed) but only when it is expanded. So the Purple Flower of Stock-July
Flowers, while they are in the Bud, are white, or pale. So Butchelors Buttons,
Blew Bottle, Poppy, Red Daisies, and many others, though of diverse Colors when
blown, yet are all white in the Bud. And many Flowers do thus change their
Colors thrice successively; as the youngest Buds of Ladys-Lookinglass, ^ugloss
and the like, are all white, the larger Buds are purple or murrey, and the open
Flowers, blew: according as they come still nearer, and are longer exposed, to
the Aer.

16.. But if the Color of the Flower depends on the ambient Aer; it may be
asked: How it comes to pass then, that this Color is various, and not one, and
that one, a Green? that is to say that all Flowers are not Green, as well as
the Leaves? In answer to this Three things are to be premised.

17.. First, What was said before, is to be remembered, that here the Aer is not
a solitary, but concurrent Cause. So that besides the Efficacy of this, we are
to consider that of the several parts of the Plant, by which the Contents both
Aereal and Liquid are supplied to the Flower.

18.. Secondly, That in the Lymphaeducts of a Plant, Sulphur is the predominant
Principle, and much more abounding than in any other part of a Plant, as also
has been formerly showed.

19.. Thirdly, That it appears, according to what we have observed in the
Anatomy of the Flower, That the quantity of Lymphaeducts with respect to the
Aer-Vessels is greater in the Flower than in the Leaf.

20.. It seems therefore, that the Aer-Vessels, and therefore the Aer, being
predominant in the Leaf; Green, is therein also the predodominant Color. I say
predominant, because there are other Colors lie veiled under the Green, even
in the Leaf, as will hereafter appear more manifest.

21.. On the contrary, the Lymphaeducts, and therefore the Sulphur, being more,
and the Aer-Vessels and therefore the Aer, less, in the Flower than in the
Leaf; the ambient Aer alone is not able to control the Sulphur so far, but
that it generally carrys the greatest port in the Production of the Color. Yet
in different degrees; For if the proportion betwixt the Lymphaeducts and the
Aer-Vessels be more equal, the Flower is either White or else Yellow, which
latter Color is the next of kin to a Green. If the Sulphur be somewhat
predominant, the Flower will show it self Red at first; but the ambient Aer
has so much power upon it, as gradually to turn the Red into a Blew. But if
the Sulphur be much predominant, then the Acid of the ambient Aer will heighten
it to a fixed Red.

22.. Hence it is, that Yellows and Greens are less alterable, upon the drying
of Plants than other Colors; sc. Because the Aer being predominant in their
Production, they are the less liable to suffer from it afterward. Whereas Reds
and Purples, in the Production whereof Sulphur is predominant, are very
changeable. So the Red Flowers of Lysimachia, upon drying, turn Purple, and the
young purple Flowers of gloss turn Blew. So likewise the Purple of Bilberries,
and the Crimson of baked Damascens, both turn Blew. For being gathered, and so
wanting a continued supply of fresh Sulphur, to bear up the Color against the
force of the Aer; it strikes it down at last from Red to Purple or Blew. I
conclude therefore, that one Principal Cause of the Variety of Colors in the
Flower, is the over proportion of the Lympheducts to the Aer-Vessels, and
therefore the dominion of the Sulphur over the Aer, therein.

23.. If it be objected, that the Aer does not deepen, but highten the Color
of the Blood: I answer, First, That I am not now speaking of Animal, but of
Vegetable Bodies; the same Aer which hightens the Color of Blood one way, may
deepen that of a Flower, another: nay and may highten that of some Flowers too,
some other way.

24.. And therefore, Secondly, it is to be considered, That as there is not one
only, but diverse Saline Principles in the Aer; so are there also in the several
Parts of one Plant; as in the Root, of one sort; in the Leaves, of another; in
the Flower, of another; and so in the other Parts. For since the Figuration of
the Parts of a Plant depends chiefly upon the Saline Principles: and that the
Flower has a different Figure from that of the Leaf: it follows, that there is
some Saline Principle in the one, which is not in the other, especially, all in
such Flowers, whose Figures are cut out by a greater Variety and Complication
of Lines. The Leaves therefore, though variously shaped, yet agreeing so far in
one common Figure, as usualy to be flat; it therefore seems plain, that there
is a Saline Principle in them all, so far one, as to be the chief Cause of that
common Figure: and in concurrence with the ambient Aer, to be likewise the
chief Cause of one common Color, sc. a Green.

25.. Whereas the Figure of the Flowers, and therefore their Saline Principle,
being more various, and commonly distinct from that of the Leaf; it will easily
concur with as a great Variety of Salts in the Aer, whether Acid, Alkaline,
Nitrous, Urinous, Armoniacal, or any other therein existent, to the
Precipitation of the Sulphur into the like Variety of Colors. Thus far of the
Colors of Plants as they appear in their Natural Estate.

CHAP. II. Of the COLORS of Plants by Infusion.
THE next general Inquiry, proposed to be made, was this, After what manner the
Colors of Plants show themselves, upon their infusion into Liquors. The
Liquors I made use of for this purpose, were three, sc. Oil of Olives, Water,
and Spirit of Wine. The Water I used was from the Thames, because I could not
procure any clear Rain Water, and had not leisure at present to distill any.
But next to this, that yields as little Salt, as any.

2.. As for Oil, it is known, that most Plants either by Coction or long
Infusion, will give it their Green Color. I have likewise tried some Yellows,
and find they will do indifferently well; as Saffron, which, by Infusion in
Oil, gives it a light golden Tincture.

3.. Diverse Aromatic Plants, as Mint, Majorane, etc. being dried and infused
in Oil give it a double Tincture, both green and yellow; one drop of the Oil
showing green; but a good quantity of it held up against a candle looks
redish or of a deep yellow.

4.. But there is no Vegetable yet known which gives a true Red to Oil, except
Alkanet Root: with which, some coloring either common or other Oil, vend it
under the name of the Red Oil of Scorpions.

5.. These things confirm what we have said concerning the Causes of Colors in
the Leaves and Flowers of Plants, Discourse of Mixture Chapter 5. Inst. 2.. 3. and
Inst. 5.
upon this twofold Consideration. First, that Oil is the most proper Menstruum
of Sulphur. Secondly, that Oils have a greater congruity with Acids than with
Alkalies; as I have formerly showed.

6.. I say therefore, that in Blews, Purples and especially Reds, the
predominant Principles being Sulphur and Acid, the Oil either abstracts the
Sulphur of it self, or at least, unlocks it from the Acid Parts; whereby both
of them are bestowed seperately to their like parts in the Oil; upon which
their disunion the Color vanishes: that depending, not upon either of them
alone, which of themselves are Colorless, but upon both united together.

7.. On the contrary, a Green Color not depending on a predominant Acid, but
an Alkaly, or some Saline Principle different from an Acid; this will not so
easiely be imbibed separately, into the Pores of the Oil, but only by mediation
of their Sulphur. So that being both imbibed without any disunion, they still
retein the same green Color they had before in the Plant.

8.. Hence also it is, that red Roses being dried and infused some time in Oil
of Anise Seeds, a more potent Menstruum than Common Oil; they wholly lose their
own Color, and turn white; the Oil remaining Limpid, as at the first. That is
the Sulphur or that part of it on which chiefly the Red depended, is absorbed
separately by the Oil, and so the Color vanishes.

9.. A SECOND Menstruum I made use of, was Water. And First, Alkanet Root,
which immediately tinctures Oil with a deeper Red, will not color Water in the
least.

10.. Next it is observable, That Water will take all the Colors of Plants in
Infusion except a Green. So that as no Plant will by Infusion give a perfect
Blew to Oil; so their is none, that I know of, which, by Infusion will give a
perfect Green to Water.

11.. But although the Green Leaves will not give their visible Color, by
Infusion in Water; yet they will give most other Colors, as well as the
Flowers themselves. So the Green Leaves of Cinquefoyl, give a Tincture no higher
than to resemble Rhenish Wine; those of Hyssop, Canary; of Strawberrey, Malaga;
of Mint, Muscadine; of Wood Sorrel, Water and some drops of Claret; of
Blood-wort, Water and a dash of Claret; and those of Bawm make a Tincture near
as red as ordinary Claret alone. All Aromatic hot Plants, give a yellow-red
Tincture, or colorem ex luteo rubrum. All Plants with a yellow Flower give
either a pale citrine or yellowish Tincture; and the like. Yet all give not
their Tincture in the same space of time; some requiring a fortnight, others a
week, others five, three or two days, and some but one, or half a day. From
hence it appears, that the Colors of most Flowers are begun in the Leaves; only
Green being therein the predominant Color, as a veil spread over them, conceils
all the rest. But passing on into the Flower, where the Aer-Vessels, as is
aforesaid, are under the dominion of the Lymphaeductss they show themselves
distinctly.

12.. A THIRD and the last Menstruum I made use of, was Spirit of Wine. And
here it is to be remarqued; That as Oil rarely takes a Red, there being but one
known Instance of it; nor Water, a Green: So neither Spirit of Wine, a Blew. I
have tried with several blew Flowers, as of Lark-heel, Violet, Mallows,
Burrage, and others, whereof it will not take the least Tincture.

13.. Again though no Blew Flowers, that I know of, will give a Blew Tincture
to Spirit of Wine: yet having been for some days infused in the said Spirit,
and the Spirit still remaining in a manner Limpid, and void of the least Ray of
Blew; if you drop into it a little Spirit of Sulphur, it is somewhat snrprizing
to see, that it immediately strikes it into a full Red, as if it had been Blew
before: and so, if you drop Spirit of Sal Ammoniac or other Alkaly upon it, it
presently strikes it Green. Which further confirms what have been before said
of the Causes of Vegetable Colors.

14.. It is also observable, That the Green Leaves of Bawm, which give a
Muscadine Red, with some Rays of Claret, to Water, gives a pure and perfect
Green to Spirit of Wine: and is the only Plant of all that I have yet tried,
which does the like.

15.. It is likewise to be noted, That both Yellow and Red Flowers give a
stronger and fuller Tincture to Water, than to Spirit of Wine; as in the
Tinctures of Cowslip, Poppys, Clove-July-Flowers and Roses, made both in Water
and Spirit of Wine, and compared together, is easily seen. So that for
Tinctures made with Flowers, whether for Medicines, or other purposes, Water,
with respect to the Color, is the better Menstruum. I say for Tinctures made
with Flowers; for there are some other Parts, especially Gumms, as Gamboja,
Myrrh and Aloes, which give their Tinctures full and clear, only to Spirit of
Wine. Some of which are used by Leather-Gilders, and others, for the washing
over of Silver, so as to give it the Color of Gold. Thus far of the Colors of
Plants as they appear upon Infusion.

CHAP. III. Of the COLORS of Plants produced by their Mixture with other
Bodies.
THE last general Enquiry proposed to be made, was this, After what manner they
would exhibit themselves upon the Mixture of those Infusions, or of any one of
them with some other Liquor.

2.. A strong Infusion, or the Juice of the Leaves of Rose-Tree, Raspis,
Strawberry, Cynquefoyle, Goosberry, Primrose, Jerusalem Cowslip, Bearseare,
Bearsfoot, Peony, Bistort, Laurel, Goats-beard, droped upon Steel, make a
Purple Tincture. But that of Vine Leaves scarce makes any Tincture at all. So
that there is something else besides Sowerness concurring to the Purple upon
Steel.

3.. Saccharum Saturni droped on a Tincture of Red Roses, turns it to a faint
pale Green.

4.. Salt of Tartar droped upon the same Tincture, turns it to a deeper Green.

5.. Spirit of Hearts Horn droped upon a Tincture of the Flower of Lark-heel and
Borage turn them to a verdegreese Green.

6.. Spirit of Hearts Horn droped on most green Leaves does not change them at
all. The like Effects have Aq. Calcis, and Spirit of S. Ammoniac.

7.. These Experiments seem to confirm, That it is some Alkaline or other like
Salt in the Aer, which is predominant in the production of Green in the Leaves
of Plants.

8.. Salt of Tartar droped on the white Flowers of Daisy, changes them into a
light Green. Which as it further confirms the aforesaid Position; so likewise
argues, That Whiteness in Flowers, is not always from the defect of Tincture:
but that there may be White, as well as Yellow, Green, Red or Blew Tinctures.

9.. Spirit of Sulphur droped on the green Leaves of Adonis Flower, Everlasting
Pease, and Holy Oak, turns them all Yellow.

10.. Spirit of Sulphur on a Tincture of Saffron changes it not.

11.. Spirit of Sulphur on the Yellow Flower of Crowfoot alters them not.
Neither are they changed by the Affusion of Alkalies.

12.. So that it seems, that in all Yellows, the Sulphurous Acid and
Alkaline Parts are all more equal.

13.. Spirit of Sulphur on a Tincture of Violets turns it from Blew to a true
Lack, or middle Crimson.

14.. Spirit of Sulphur upon a Tincture of Clove-July-Flowers makes a bright
blood Red. Into the like Color, it hightens a Tincture of Red Roses.

15.. So that as Alkalys, or other Analogous Salts, are predominant in Greens,
so Acids in Reds, especially in the brighter Reds, in the Leaves and Flowers of
Plants. Hence it is, that Spirit of Nitre droped upon the Blew Flower of Ladies
Looking-Glass, Larkspur, Borage, turns them all Red, sc. into the Red of Common
Lychnis. But (which is particularly to be noted) being droped on the said Red
Flowers of Lychnis, alters them little or nothing: because, that very Color is
therein produced by a copious admixture of the like Principle.

16.. The Sum therefore of what has now been said, of the Causes of Vegetable
Colors, is this: That while their Sulphur and Saline Principles, only swim
together, and are not as yet united into one Precipitate, no Color results
from them, but the Contents are rather Limpid; as usually in the Root, and many
other Parenchymous Parts.

17.. When they are united, and the Alkaline are predominant, they produce a
Green.

18.. When the Sulphur and the Alkaline are more equal, they produce a Tauny.

19.. When the Sulphur, Acid and Alkaline, there a Yellow.

20.. When the Sulphur predominant, and the Acid and Alkaline equal, there a
Blew.

21.. When the Sulphur and Acid are predominant to the Alkaline, then a Purple.

22.. When the Sulphur predominant to the Alkaline and the Acid to them both, a
Scarlet.

23.. Lastly, When the Acid predominant to the Alkaline, and the Sulphur to
them both, a Blood-Red: which is the highest and most Sulphurious Color in
Nature.

24.. From the Premises, diverse Rules do also result for the making of
Tinctures, either for Medicines, or for any other purposes.

25.. I shall only add one or two Notes. As first, that of all Colors, Yellows
are the most fixed and unfading. As for instance, if you drop either a Solution
of Tartar, or of Spirit of Sulphur upon a Tincture of the Yellow Flowers of
Crowfoot, of Adonis, or of Saffron, neither of them will alter their Color.
Which shows the strength of most Yellows, to resist all manner of impressions
from the Aer.

26.. Again, that the use of Salts, is not only to highten or deepen Colors,
but also to fix and make them permanent. As for Instance, The Tincture of
Clove-July-Flowers, made either with Water or Spirit of Wine being exposed to
the Aer, will often turn into a Blackish Purple. But the addition of a few
drops of Spirit of Sulphur, does not only highten the Color, but renders it
stable and permanent.

27.. Likewise, of Salts themselves there is choice to be made. For there are
some, which although they fix the Color, yet, will a little give, as we say,
and not hold thoroughly dry; as most Lixivial Salts, and Stillatious Acids. But
there are some Salts, which will not give in the least, as Alum, that in
Limewater and some others; which latter, is so far from being moystened, that
it is rather petrified by the Aer. For which reason I take it to be one of the
best Liquors for a stable and permanent Green, and some other Colors.

28.. Amongst all Watercolors, the rarest, and most difficult to make clear
bright and permanent, is a Blew. There are many Flowers of an excellent Blew,
as those of Bugloss, Lark-heel and others; but they easily fade. And there are
very few Flowers that will strike into a Blew by any Liquor; being almost all
changeable into Green, Purple or Red. Yet some few there are, in which this
Color may be produced. As for instance, the Flower of Lathyrus or
Parseverlasting; which upon the affusion of Spirit of Hartshorn is changed
from a Peach, to as pure a Blew, as the best Ultramarine: that which hitherto
is, I think, wanting in Water Colors. Spirit of Hearts Horn was the Liquor I
used; but I question not, but that other Alkalies, and particularly Limewater,
will have the like Effect, and so render it the more stable.

29.. From what has been said, we may likewise be confirmed in the use of the
already known Rules, and directed unto others yet unknown, in order to the
variation of the Colors of Flowers in their Growth. The effecting of this, by
putting the Color desired in the Flower, into the Body or Root of the Plant,
is vainly talked of by some: being such a piece of cunning, as for the
obteining a painted face, to eat good store of white and Red Lead.

30.. The best known Rules are these Two; First, that the Seed be used above
any other part, if the variation of the Color be intended. One reason whereof
is, because that part being but very small, the Tinctures of the Soil will have
the greater over proportion to those of the Seed. Besides, the tender and
Virgin Seed, being committed to the Soil, will more easily take any peculiar
Tincture from it, then an other Part, which is not so susceptive, and has been
tinctured already. All the strange varieties in Carnations, Tulips, and other
Flowers are made this way.

31.. The other Rule is, To change the Soil, or frequently to transplant from
one Bed to another. By which means, the Plant, is as it were, superimpregnated
with several Tinctures, which are prolifick of several Colors; which way is
taken for Roots and Slips.

32.. The consideration whereof, and of the foregoing Experiments, may direct
us not only in changing the Bed, but also in compounding the Soil, as by mixing
such and such Salts, or Bodies impregnated with such Salts, I say by mixing
these Bodies in such a proportion, with the Soil, as although they have no
Color in themselves, yet may be effectual to produce a great variety of
Colors in the Plants they nourish; supplying the Plants with such Tinctures,
as shall concur with the Aer, to strike or precipitate their Sulphur into so
many several Colors, after the manner above explicated: and so to bring even
Natures Art of Painting, in a great part, into our own power.

A DISCOURSE OF THE DIVERSITIES and CAUSES OF TASTES CHIEFLY IN PLANTS. Read
before the Royal Society, March 25. 1675.
CHAP. I. Of the several Sorts of SIMPLE and COMPOUNDED Tastes; and the DEGREES
of both.
I HAVE formerly published some Notes, Idea,. 29. and Anat. of R. P. 2.. 68,
etc.
concerning Tastes. Since then, I have made other Observations upon the same
Subject: and these have produced further Thoughts. I will sum up all in
giveing an account, First, of the Diversities; and then, of the Causes of
Tastes, chiefly in Plants.

2.. The Diversities of Tastes are so many, and so considerable; that it seems
strange, to see the matter treated of both by Philosophers and Physicians, with
so much scantness and defect. For the Subject is not barren, but yields much
and pleasant Variety. And does also appear to be of great import unto Medicine.
Besides, it is preposterous to discourse of the Causes of Tastes, before we have
taken an account of their Diversities; Whereof therefore I shall in the first
place, exhibit the following Scheme.

3.. TASTES may be distinguished by these Three general ways. First, with
respect to the Sensation it self. Secondly, with respect to its Duration and
Terms. Thirdly, with respect to its Subject.

4.. The Sensation it self is differenced two ways, by its Species, and by its
Degrees. With respect to the Species, Tastes are Simple, or Compounded. By
Simple Tastes, I mean not such, as are never found in conjunction with other
Tastes: but the Simple or Single Modes of Taste, although they are mixed with
diverse others in the same Body. As for example, the Taste of a Peppin, is
Acidulcis; of Rhubarb, Amarastringens; and therefore Compounded in both. Yet in
the Peppin, the Acid is one Simple Taste, and the Sweet another; and so in
Rhubarb, the Bitter is one Simple Taste, and the Astringent is another.

5.. Two faults have here been committed; the defective Enumeration of Simple
Tast^; and reckoning them indistinctly among some others which are Compounded.

6.. SIMPLE Tastes, (of which, properly so called, there are commonly reckoned
but Six or Seven Sorts,) are, at least Sixteen. Fist, Bitter, as in Wormwood:
to which, the contrary is Sweet, as in Sugar. Thirdly, Sower, as in Vinegar: to
which, the contrary is Salt. Fifthly, Hot, as in Cloves: whereto, the contrary
is Cold. For we may as properly say, a Cold Taste, as a Hot Taste: there being
some Bodies, which do manifestly impress the Sense of Cold upon the Tongue,
though not by Touch. So does Sal Prunellae, although the Liquor wherein it is
dissolved, be first warmed.

7.. Seventhly, Aromatic. For it does not more properly agree to an Odor,
than a Taste, to be Aromatic. And that an Aromatic Taste, is dinstinct from
an Hot, is clear; In that, there are many Bodies of a Hot Taste, some meanly
and others vehemently Hot; which yet are not in the least Aromatic: as amongst
others, is apparent in Euphorbium. So that although an Aromatic Taste be often
conjoined with Heat; yet it is not that Heat it self, but another distinct
Sense.

8.. Eighthly, Nauseous or Malignant, contrary to the former. Such as is
perceived, together with the Astringent and Bitter, in Rhubarb; or with the
Bitter, and Sweet, in Aloes. It may be called Malignant, because distastful
although mixed in a low degree with other Tastes: whereas other Tastes will
render one another grateful.

9.. Again, Tastes may properly be said, to be Soft or Hard. A Soft Taste, is
either Vapid, as in Watery Bodies, Whites of Eggs, Starch, Fine Boles, etc. Or
Unctuous, as in Oils, Fat, etc.

10.. A Hard Taste is Fourfold, sc. Penetrant, Stupifacient, Astringent,
Pungent. Contrary to a Vapid, are Penetrant and Stupifacient.

11.. Penetrant, is a kind of Taste, which works it self into the Tongue (as
some Insects into the Skin) without any Pungency; as in the Root and Leaves of
Wild Cucumer.

12.. Stupifacient, as in the Root of Black Hellebore. Which being chewed, and
for sometime retained upon the Tongue; after a few minutes, it seems to be
benumbed and affected with a kind of Paralytick Stupor; or as when it has been
a little burnt with eating or supping of any thing too hot.

13.. Contrary to an Unctuous Taste, are Astringent, and Pungent; as in Galls,
and Spirit of Sal Aromanick.

14.. Again, Tastes are either Continual, as most commonly: or Intermittent; as
that of Dracontium, especially in the Root. For after it seems to be lost and
extinguished; it will then again (chiefly upon the Collision of the Tongue and
Goomes) be plainly heightened and revived.

15.. Lastly, Tastes are either Still, as usually; or may be called Tremulous,
as the Heat produced by Pyrethrum. Distinct from that of Cloves, Ginger, and
many other Hot Bodies, in that there the Heat is still; but here in Pyrethrum,
it is joined with a kind of Vibration: as when a Flame is brandished with a
Lamp-Furnace. Thus far of the Sorts of Simple Tastes.

16.. COMPOUNDED Tastes are very numerous; being made by the various Conjunction
of Simple Tastes, as Words are of Letters. Sometimes of two, as in Saccharum
Saturni, of Astringent and Sweet. Sometimes three, as in Aloes, Malignant,
Bitter and Sweet; in Rhubarb, Malignant, Astringent and Bitter. Sometimes four,
as in Agarick, Malignant, Astringent, Bitter and Sweet. And in some Bodies,
five or six Species may be joined together.

17.. For the more accurate Observation whereof, there are these easy Rules.
That not too many be tasted at one time: least the Tongue being surcharged,
become less critical. That the Mouth be washed with warm water betwixt every
tasting. And that those things be first tasted which produce a less durable
Taste; that so one may be thoroughly extinguished, before another be tried.

18.. Of the numerous Conjunctions of Tastes, which may thus be observed, there
are only Six to which the penury of Language has allowed (if I may call them)
Proper Names, sc. Acerbus, Austerus, Acris, Muriaticus, Lixivus and Nitrosus.
Most of which are commonly taken in to make up the number of Simple Tastes. But
very improperly; being all of them Compounded and Decompounded Tastes: to which
Class they ought therefore to be referred. For

19.. Austere, is Astringent and Bitter; as in the green and soft Stones of
Grapes.

20.. Acerb, properly so called, is Astringent and Acid; as in the Juice of
unripe Grapes.

21.. Acris, is also Compounded. For first, simply Hot, it is not: because
there are many Hot Bodies, which are not Acria; as the Roots of Zedoary,
Yarrow, Contrayerva. Nor Secondly, is it simply Pungent, because there are also
Bodies, which are Non-acria pungentia; of which kind is the Root of Arum.
Wherefore Acritude, is Pungency joined with Heat.

22.. Muriatick, is Saltness joined with some Pungency, as in common Salt.

23.. Lixivial, is Saltness joined with Pungency and Heat.

24.. Nitrous, is Saltness joined with Pungency and Cold.

25.. Besides these Six, or perhaps one or two more, there are, as is said, a
great number of Conjuctions, for which we have no Proper Names. For admit that
there were but Ten Species of Simple Tastes, sc. these Ten; Amarus, Dulcis,
Acidus, Salsus, Calidus, Frigidus, Aromaticus, Malignus, Astringens, Pungens.
And of these Ten, but Two, or at most, but Three to be compounded together in
any one Body. If only Two, they produce 45 Compounded Tastes. For the First, may
be compounded with all the 9 following; the Second, with all the 8 following;
and so, the rest: which together make 45. But if the same Ten be compounded by
Threes together; they produce no less than 120 Variations: as by the Table made
of them all does plainly appear.

26.. Some few of the Conjunctions therein set down, may not be found actually
existent in Nature. The abatement of which, will be much more than compensated
two ways. First, by the other Six Species of Simple Tastes, which are also
sometimes compounded. And by other more complex Conjunctions, as of many
Quadruples, and perhaps some Quintuple or Sextuple ones. Thus far of the Simple
Species, and Conjunctions of Tastes.

27.. THE DEGREES of Tastes are also numerous; and each Species, in every
Conjunction, capable of Variation herein. For the more accurate observing
whereof, it will be best, To take those Bodies, whose Tastes are, as near as may
be, the same in Specie: and that those be first tasted, which are less strong;
whereby the true Degree will be more precisely taken.

28. The Tastes of Bodies will thus appear to be varied, in most Species unto
Five Degrees; and in some of them, unto Ten. So the Root of Turmerick, is
bitter in the First Degree; of Gentian, in the Tenth. The Root of Carduus
Benedictus, is Hot in the First Degree; the Green Pods or Seed-Cases of
Clematis peregrina, in the Tenth. So that, allowing some to vary under Five;
yet by a moderate estimate, we may reckon every Species, one with another, to
be varied by at least Five Degrees. Which being added to the several Species of
Tastes, in all the Treble Conjunctions of the aforesaid Table, come to 1800
sensible and defineable Variations of Taste. And these are the Diversities of
Taste, with respect to the Sensation it self.

CHAP. II. Of the DURATION and several TERMS of Tastes.
THE next general way of dinguishing Tastes, is by their Duration, and their
Terms, or their Motion of Intension and Remission from one Degree to another.
For there are many Tastes, which have their Motions analogous to those of
Diseases; and by those may be distinguished in the same manner. For as of
Diseases, so of Tastes, there are Four Times, as Physicians call them, or Terms
of Motion; sc. Principium, Augmentum, Status, and Declinatio.

2.. For the distinct observing of which, those Bodies which are hard, and so
their tastable parts less easily extractable by the Tongue, should be reduced
to a fine Powder: otherwise, the true measure of the Principium will be lost.
And for the precise measuring of all the Four Terms, it should be done by a
Minute-Watch or a Minute-Glass. For so it will appear, that the Variations of
each, are diverse and remarquable.

3.. To instance first in those of the Principium. Which I call, That space of
time, betwixt the first Contact of the Body to be tasted, and the first
manifest Perception of the Taste. For Example, those Bodies which are Acid, or
Bitter, as Vinegar or Wormwood, are presently perceived, quatenus Acid or
Bitter, upon the first Contact; or have Principium brevissimum. Those Bodies
which are Acria, have their Principium somewhat longer. So the Seed-Cases of
Clematis peregrina, although they have a vehement Acritude, even in the Tenth
Degree; yet is not that Acritude so soon tasted, as the Bitterness of Roses,
which is but in the second. But the Principium of Hot Tastes, is generally
longer than that of any other. So the Bitterness of the Root of Black-Helebore,
which exceeds not the second Degree, is yet presently tasted: but the Heat
proceeding from the same Root, and which ascends to the third Degree, is not
perceived at all, till after two full Minutes. And so the Bitterness of Enula,
which exceeds not the 4th Degree, yet is sooner tasted than its Heat, which
ascends to the 8th.

4.. Next, in those of the Augment. Which I call, That space, betwixt the first
Perception of the Taste, till it become to the height. So the Heat of
Galangale, is not only presently perceived, but arises to the height within
half a Minute. But the Heat of the Root of Enula, comes not to the height till
after a whole Minute. And the Heat of Black-Hellebore, not till after four full
Minutes from the first Contact.

5.. The Status, or space wherein the Taste continues in its height, is also
diverse. So the Heat of the Seed-Case of Helleboraster, comes to its height,
and begins to decline within half a Minute; that of the Root of
Garden-Scurvygrass, not till after a Minute; and that of the Root of Asarum,
not till after two full Minutes.

6.. And Lastly, the Declination, or the space betwixt the first Remission of
the Taste, and its total Extinct^on. For instance, The Leaves of Millefolium,
are Bitter in the 4th Degree, and Hot only in the 1st. yet the Heat continues
for sometime, and the Bitter presently vanishes. Calamus Aromaticus, is Bitter
in the 4th Degree, Hot in the 1st, and Aromatic in the 3d: yet the Bitter
quickly vanishes, the Heat continues two Minutes, and the Aromatic seven or
eight. The Heat of the Root of Contrayerra, is extended, almost to two Minutes;
the Pungency of Jalap, almost to six; the Heat of Garden Scurvygrass, to seven
or eight. And even the Bitteress of Wild Cucumer, to near a quarter of an hour.
But the Heat of Euphorbium dureth much longer, as also that of Black Hellebore.
sc. above half an hour.

7.. So that the Augmentum, is seldom extended beyond Four or Six Minutes, from
the first Contact: but the Declination, sometimes to Thirty, Forty, or more.
Thus far of the Terms of Taste, or the manner of their Intension and Remission.

CHAP. III. Of the SUBJECT or SEAT of Tastes.
THE Third and Last way of distinguishing Tastes, is by their Subject, or the
Part or Parts where they are either wholly or chiefly perceived. And so, Tastes
are either Fixed, or Movable.

2.. A Fixed Taste, is that which keeps within the compass of some one Part,
all the time of its Duration; as upon the Tip, or the Root of the Tongue, or
other Part.

3.. A Movable Taste, is either Diffusive or Transitive.

4.. A Diffusive Taste, I call that, which by degrees spreads abroad into
diverse Parts, and yet in the mean time, adheres to that Part in which it is
first perceived. So the Bitterness in the dried Roots of Black Hellebore, is
first felt on the Tip of the Tongue; from whence it spreads it self to the
middle of the same. And the Bitterness of the Leaves of Wild Cucumer, spreads
from the Tip, to the Root of the Tongue.

5.. A Transitive Taste, is that, which after sometime, wholly quitting the
Part wherein it is first perceived, is thence transfered into some other Part:
as the Bitterness of Gentian, imediately from the Tip, to the middle of the
Tongue. And most of the Diffusive, are also Transitive.

6.. The several Parts which these ways become, and with some latitude may be
called, the Seats of Tastes, are, the Lips, Tongue, Palate, Throat and Gulet.

7.. Upon the Lips, the Root of white Hellebore, as also of Pyrethrum, being
chewed, make a sensible Impression; which continues (like the flame of a Coal
betwixt in and out) for 9 or 10 Minutes. But the Heat in other Parts much
longer.

8.. Upon the Tongue, Tastes are perceived in Three places, as has been
intimated. On the Tip or Cone of the Tongue; as most commonly. On or near the
Basis of the Tongue; where the Taste of the Leaves of Wild Cucumer chiefly
fixes it self. Or on the Vertex or middle of the Tongue; in which place it is
observable, that the Taste of Gentian, Colocynthis, and diverse other Bodies, is
then considerably strong, when not at all perceived at the Tip of the Tongue or
in any other Part.

9.. Upon the Palate or Roof of the Mouth, the Root, as I take it, of Deadly
Nightshade makes its chief Impression; and there continues about four Minutes
in some degree.

10.. The Throat, or the Vvnla, Larinx and other adjacent Parts are oftentimes
the Seat of Taste. For there are many Bodies, which although they have scarce
any Taste upon the Tongue, or any other of the aforesaid Parts, yet make a
strong Impression on the Throat: as the Leaves of little Daisy, little
Celandine, and of Pimpinel; as also the Roots of Jalap, Mercury, Asparagus and
others. Which being chewed makelittle or no Impression on the Tongue, but their
Juice being swallowed, causes a kind of pricking in the Throat; as when one is
provoked by a sharp Rheum.

11.. And that this Taste or Sense, is truly distinct from either the Heat,
Pungency, or Acritude upon the Tongue, it is hence further manifest; In that
Pyrethrum, which is very Hot, and Cortex Winteranus which is very Pungent upon
the Tongue; yet their Juice being swallowed, causes no Heat, Pungency or
Exasperation in the Throat.

12.. Lastly, if we will take the word (Taste) in a larger sense, the Oesophagus
it self may be said to be sometimes the Subject thereof; as of the Heat
produced by the Root of Common Wormwood. For of this Heat it is remarquable,
that being first perceived on the Tip of the Tongue, it thence makes its
transit to the Root of the Tongue, and so into the Throat, and by degrees
descends into the very Gulet; where it seems to warm the Stomach; and so
continues, in some degree, almost of an hour. And the Transition and Descent of
this Heat is made, although none of the Juice be swallowed. And in this manner
Tastes are distinguished with respect to their Subject.

13.. So that the general Diversities of Tastes are these. With respect to their
Species, they are Simplices vel Compositi; To their Degree, Remissi vel
Intensi; To their Duration, Breves vel Diuturni; To the Terms of their Motion,
Celeres vel Tardi; and lastly, To their Subject, Fixi, Diffusivi and Transitivi.

14.. I HAVE thus endeavored to draw up a Scheme or Inventory of the several
sorts of Tastes. In which, some may think, that I have over done: and that as
Galen has been censured for being too curious in the Distinctions of Pulses;
so have I been, in these of Tastes. Not to enquire now, how far the Differences
of the Pulse may be extended, or be fit to be taken notice of; I shall only
say, That we have not so much reason to censure him, if he has given us some
few which are coincident; as we have to thank him, for observing so many which
are really distinct.

15.. By the Scheme of Tastes here represented, we may be able, so to enumerate
the Modes of any Taste, as to make a Scientifick Definition of it. Which is
pleasant Instruction to any inquisitive mind; these things being all matter of
sense and demonstration; wherein lies, though not always the most plausible,
yet the most satisfying Philosophy; and where men, after they are grown weary
with turning round, are oftentimes contented to rest.

16.. But the usefulness of this Schem will further appear, in two respects;
sc. In conducting us to a cleerer and more particular Explication of the Causes
of Tastes: and the Investigation of the Virtues of those Bodies in which they
reside. Whereof in the following Chapters.

CHAP. IV. Of the CAUSES of Tastes.
TO speak of the Causes of Tastes, before we have well enumerated and
distinguished them; is to provide Furniture for a House, before the Rooms have
been counted and measured out. But the Varieties of Tastes having been first
laid down; it will induce us to believe, and investigate as great a variety in
their Causes.

2.. Now the Causes of Tastes, particularly of the Tastes of Plants, whereof we
chiefly speak, are, in general, these Four or Five, sc. The Bed out of which
they grow; The Aer in which they stand; The Parts of which they consist; The
several Fermentations under which their Juyces pass; And the Organs by which
their Tastable Parts are perceived: as will appear upon Instance.

3.. But the immediate Causes, besides the Organs of Taste, are the Principles
of Plants. As many of which, as come under the notice of Sense, we have already
supposed to be these Seven, Alkaline, Acid, Aer, Water, Oil, Spirit and Earth.
The Particles both of Alkaline and Acid Salts, are all angular and poynted.
Those of Aer, properly and strictly so called, are Elastick or Springy; and
therefore also Crooked; as I have likewise formerly conjectured. And I find the
Learned Borelli, in a Book of his since then published, to be of the same
Opinion. Those of all Fluid Bodies, qua Fluid, and therefore of Water, Oil and
Spirit, I conceive to be Globular, but hollow, and with holes in their Sides.
Those of Water, to be larger Globes, with more holes; those of Oil, to be
lesser, with fewer holes; and those of Spirit the least. Lastly, that the
particles of Earth are also Round; yet angular; and nearer to a solid.

4.. These Principles affect the Organs of Sense, according to the variety of
their Figures, and of their Mixture. So those which are sharp or poynted; and
those which are springy; are fitted to produce any stronger Taste: and those
which are round, are apt, of their own Nature, to produce a weaker or softer
one. And so by the diversities of their Mixture; not only with respect to their
Proportion, but also the very Mode of their Conjunction. Hence it is, that many
Bodies which abound with Salt, as Ambar with an Acid, and the Bones of
Land-Animals with an Alkaline, have notwithstanding but a weak Taste; the Saline
Parts being in the former drowned in the Oil, and in the latter also buried in
the Earth.

5.. The same is further confirmed by an Experiment mentioned in a former
Discourse; Of Mixed. Chapter 5.
sc. the Transmutation of Oil of Anise-Seeds, with the help of Oil of Vitriol,
into a Rosin. For both those Liquors, though so strongly tasted, apart; yet the
Rosin made of them, being well washed, has a very mild Taste, and without any
smatch of that in either of the Liquors. Whence it follows, that the very Mode
of Mixture is sufficient, not only for the variation of the Degrees in any one
Species of Taste; but also for the destroying of one Species, and the
introducing of another.

6.. THESE things being premised, I conceive, That as an Unctuous Taste
depends upon Oil; so a Vapid either on Water, or Earth: or upon such an
intimate Mixture of other Principles, as renders them indissoluble by the
Saliva, and so, in a manner, untastable.

7.. That a Pungent, is made either by an Alkaly or an Acid sharpened or
whetted; that is, cleared from the soil of other Principles; as in the Spirit
of Sal Aromoniac or of Sulphur. And so in those Plants which have a Pungent
Taste; whose Juyces or Tinctures, although they consist of diverse Principles,
yet all so loosely mixed, that being dissolved by the Saliva, the Saline are
hereupon left naked. Wherefore biting Plants, qua biting, are Nitrous Plants.
So that the Juice of such Plants, is a kind of Spirit of Nitre, made by the
several Parts of the Plant. Hence Arum grows best under an Hedge; where the
Ground, not being exposed to the Sun, but the Aer only, like those Rooms in
Houses, which are covered, is impregnated with a greater quantity of Nitrous
Salt. And those Roots which are Biting, have but few or but small Aer-Vessels;
whereby fewer parts of the nitroaereal Sap are carried off into the Trunk. For
the same Cause, it is no wonder, that many Aquaticks are Biting; Water being,
though it self cold, yet the Menstruum by which all Salts are imbibed most
easily, and in laxer state of Commixture with other Principles.

8.. Penetrant (something slower than Pungent) is made by any Salt that is also
soiled or guarded with Earth. Sower, by an Acid only soyled with Earth. Salt,
by an Acid guarded by an Alkaly, and soyled with Earth. Cold, by an Acid
drowned in Water, and soyled with Earth.

9.. In all these, the Salts are predominant; In Heat the Oil or Sulphur. The
particles whereof being Spherick and bored with holes; those of Salt stick in
them, as the Spokes do in the Hub of a Wheel, or as the Quills in the Skin of a
Porcupine. Whereby, as in Common Fire the Sparks of Sulphur being agitated and
whirled about by the Aer; with the help of the Salts, which stick in them, tear
in pieces all kinds of Bodies: so here, being agitated by the Circulation of
the Blood, they make a kind of hurry or combustion; and so, according to the
degree and strength of their Motion, tear in pieces fewer or more of the Fibers
of the Tongue; and in a greater quantity, would raise a Blister upon it; the
common Effect of Fire, or any strong Epispastick. So that a Hot Taste, is
produced by Sulphur toothed or armed with Salts. Wherefore all Stillatitious
Oils are Hot; being strongly impregnated or armed with the Essential Salts of
the Plants from whence they are distilled. And as those Plants which are very
Parenchymous, from the predominancy of their Volatile Acid, are biting: So
those which are Lignous, that is, have a good quantity of Lympheducts, from the
domiou of their Sulphur are commonly Hot. For the same reason it is, that many
both Biting and Hot Plants, as the Roots of Dragon, Garden-Radish, Onion, Iris,
Rape-Crowfoot, etc. being corked up in a bottle with Water, and set in a Cellar
or other cool place; they do all of them turn Sower in a few days: The same
Fermentation, at once sullying the Salts of the one, and disarming the Sulphurs
of the other. But some, wherein the Sulphurous parts are more copious, will
hardly ever become Sower. Hence also, some Plants, whose Roots are neither Hot,
nor of any strong Taste, as those of Wild Anemone; yet their Leaves and Flowers
are plainly Caustic: So that it seems, that as their Juyces rise up into the
Trunk or Stalk, and therein further fermented, the Sulphureus Parts thereof,
are at the same time relaxed from the other Principles, and acuated with an
Aereal Salt.

10.. A Stupifacient Taste (as the Impression which some Hot Plants make upon
the Tongue may be called) is in some sort, analogous to the mortifying of any
part of the Body by the application of a Caustic. For as there the
mortification succeeds the burning pain, so here, the Stupifaction, neither
comes before, nor with the Heat, but follows it.

11.. Sweetness is produced, sometimes by an Alkaly; smoothed either by a
Sulphur, as in Limewater; or by both a Spirit and a Sulphur, as in the
Stillatitious Oils of Animals. But most commonly, by a smoothed Acid; as in
Malt, Sugar, Honey. Hence a Sweet Taste, is generally founded in a Sower; So
Sower Apples, by mellowing, and harsh Pears, by baking become sweet; the Spirit
and Sulphur being hereby at once separated from the other Principles and
brought to a nearer union with the Acid. So the Sower Leaves of Wood Sorrel,
being dried, become sweet: and those of a sower Codlin, while they hang on the
Tree, and even of a Crab-Tree, are neither Astringent, nor sower, but sensibly
sweet. And so commonly, wherever the said Principles are a little exalted by a
soft Fermentation; as in the Juice of the Stalk of Maze or Indian Wheat, which
is a sweet as Sugar; and in the green Stalks of all sorts of Corn and Grass, in
several degrees. So likewise Tulips and some other Roots, being taken up, in
open weather, sometime before they sprout; if tasted, are as sweet as Liquirish
or Sugar; and at no other time: not only Fruits, but many Roots, Seeds, and
other Parts, upon their first or early Germination, acquiring a curious
Mellowness, wherein, all their Principles are resolved, and their most
Spirituous Parts exalted and spread over the Acid. Wherefore also most Roots,
which are not merely long, but grow deep in the ground, have at least some of
their Juyces of a sweet Taste; as Liquirish, Eryngo, Hounds-Tongue,
Garden-Parsnep, Black Henbeane, Deadly Nightshade, etc. Even the Juice of Horse
Radish, which bleeds at the Lympheducts, is of a sweet Taste. And of the same
kindred those which grow the deepest, are the sweetest; as a Parsnep is sweeter
than a Carroot, especially if you taste the bleeding Sap; and the Root of Common
Tall Trefoyl tastes somewhat like Liquirish, but is not near so sweet. For all
deep Roots, are fed with a less Nitrous Aliment: and being remoter from the
Aer, their Juyces pass under much more soft and moderate Fermentations.

12.. Bitterness is produced by a Sulphur well impregnated, either with an
Alkaline, or an Acid Salt, but also shackled with Earth. And therefore the
Bitterest Plants, commonly yield the greatest quantity of Lixivial Salt. So
also many Stillatitious Oils digested with any strong Acid, will acquire a
Bitter Taste. Wherefore this Taste is often founded either in a Hot Taste, or a
Sweet. Hence it is, that the Leaves of all sweet Roots are Bitter. And that the
Fig Tree, which bears a sweet Fruit, bleeds a Bitter Milk. So likewise those
Plants, which bear a Bitter Stalk, have not Bitter, but Hot Roots, as in
Yarrow, Primrose, Wormwood, Rue, Carduus benedictus etc. is manifest. So the
Coats of the Seeds of Viola Lunaria are of a hot and biting Taste; but the Seeds
themselves, in which the Salts, though copious, yet are also immersed in a
greater quantity of Oil, are Bitter. And that the Earthy Parts do also
contribute something more to this, than to most of the forementioned Tastes, is
argued from its being more Fixed; that is, the Body in which it resides, is
either more Fixed, or else flies not away in that same state of conjunction,
by which it makes a Bitter Taste. For whereas Hot, Biting, and diverse other
Plants lose the strength of their Taste, by drying; most of those which are
Bitter, do hereby increase it. And although the Extract of Dandelion and some
other Roots, which are very Bitter, has scarce any Taste; yet generally, they
are Bitter Plants, which are best for the making of Extracts. And the distilled
waters of Plants which are Hot and Bitter, notwithstanding that they always
taste high of the Heat, yet rarely and very faintly of the Bitter.

13.. Astringency, is made, partly, by the further increase and more intimate
union of the Earth. And therefore this is seated still in a more Fixed
Composition, than a Bitter. And partly, by the diminution of the Sulphur. And
therefore the Acid Parts ingredient to it, either by Fermentation or otherwise,
are easily exposed. Astringency being the Womb or Bud of a Sower. For all or
most Astringent Roots bear a sower Leaf, or a sower Fruit; as those of all
Docks and Sorrels, Black-Thorn, Dog-Rose, and others. Wherefore also,
Astringency is often found in conjuction with Bitter, Sweet, or Sower; but
scarce ever with Pungent, or Hot.

14.. An Aromatic Taste, seems to be produced, chiefly, by a spirituous, acid,
and volatile Sulphur; as in Ambar-griese, Cardamon-Seeds, many Stillatitious
Oils etc. A Nauseous, by a Sulphur less Spirituos and Volatile, and more
Alkaline; as in the Root of Dog-stones, Sheepscabious, the young and green
Leaves of Coriander, or the Seeds of Cumine. The Spirit, as it enters the
Nerves, carrying the Alkaline Sulphur along with it; as when a City is betrayed
by one of its Inhabitants to an Enemy.

25.. An Intermittent Taste, as in Arum, seems to have its dependence upon a
simple and very pure Nitre, which by its subtilty enters into the very Concaves
of the Nervous Fibers of the Tongue: and so being lodged there, is little
affected or stirred, by the Motion of the Blood; but only when the Tongue it
self is moved, at which time it causes a kind of pricking Taste.

16.. A Tremulous Taste, as in Pyrethrum, depends probably, upon an Aereal
Sulphur; which being agitated by the Blood in its Circulation, the springy
Motion or Vibration of the Aereal Parts produce that Taste.

17.. A Taste is Lingual, Guttural, etc. according to the grosness or sineness
or other difference of the Membranes into which the tastable parts are
admitted. For Tastes are made not merely by the outward Contact, but the Ingress
of the tastable parts. Now the outer Skin of the Tongue, which is commonly
observed to pill off in boiling, like the Cuticula in other Parts, has either
no sense, or much less than that which lies under it; and is therefore, but a
Seive or Strainer to the tastable parts. So that being of different sineness in
the several parts of the Tongue; it hereby comes to pass, that according as the
tastable parts of any Plant are more or less penetrant, subtle, or dissoluble,
they are admitted into one part of the Tongue, and not another. And in the
Throat, the outer Skin it self, seems to be the immediate Sensory; and so, to
be evidently affected with the Juyces of some Plants, from which the Tongue
receives little or no sensible Impression.

18.. When the Taste is Permanent and Fixed in some one Part; it is a sign,
either that the Gustable Parts are less dissoluble; or more subtle, so as to
enter the Concaves of the Fibers; and that there is an admixture of an Aereal
Salt, or a like Sulphur; some of the parts whereof, being crooked, hang like
Hooks on the Fibers of the Tongue. For the reception of such a Taste, is not to
be looked upon as a wound made with a Lancet, and so the Lancet taken away; but
with the Lancet sticking in the wound; until in time, it is carried off by the
Circulation of the Blood; which like the Stream of a River in a Flood, carries
all before it, but those things last, which stick in the Mud.

19.. But when the Taste, though Permanent, yet is Dissusive or Transitive; it
seems probable, that as there is a less admixture of Aer; so a greater subtlety
of the Tastable Parts, whereby they are conveyed, through the Nervous Fibers,
from one Part to another.

CHAP. V. Of the Judgment which may be made of the VIRTUES of Plants, from
their Tastes.
AS by duly observing the Tastes of Plants, we may be directed to understand
their Causes. So also the Use and Virtues of those Plants or Parts of Plants in
which they reside. For the proof whereof, an Instance might be fetched from
very particular difference of Taste before set down. But it may be enough, to
give these which follow.

2.. And first, we may make no ill guess ex Analogia, or where we find the same
Taste, that there the same Virtue in some kind, and in some degree, may reside.
So Jalap, Mercury, and Daisy, have all of them that exasperating Taste in the
Throat before described; and they are all three more or less Cathartick.
Wherefore, we may believe, that other Plants which make the like Impression on
the Throat, and there are many others which do, that they are in some degree
alike Cathartick. Those Plants which are reckoned amongst the chiefest
Cephalicks, cause rather a durable, than a vehement Heat upon the Tongue, as
Pyrethrum, Euphorbium, Black-Heliebore, etc. It seems therefore reasonable to
rank with these, any other Plant, though not used, which produces the like
durable Heat. The young Roots of Yarrow, or Millefolium, have the same Taste,
as the Root of Contrayerva: and may therefore be used for the same purpose,
with a probability of the like success; if not a better, because they may be
gotten fresher. But by drying the Root, the Taste and Virtue, which lie in its
exhalible parts, are much lost. The Seeds of the lesser Cardamom, and of
Zedoary Root, if sound, have both a smatch of the Taste of Camphire. They may
therefore all, so far, reach the same Case.

3.. Again, as we may make no ill conjecture from the sameness of Taste in
Plants of several Tribes; so from the diversity of Taste, in those of the same.
So the Flowers of all the Docks are evidently Astringent, and not Sower; except
those of the Rha-pontick, which are extreme sower, even in the 5th degree.
Which is no mean Signature of some more than ordinary Virtue in it, besides
what it has in common with the rest of the Tribe. The Flowers of Pancy have a
kind of fulsome Taste, plainly different from that of Violets: and in some
Hypochondriacal Cases may be more useful.

4.. It likewise imports much, to observe the difference of Taste in the
several Parts of the same Plant. So the Barque of Sassafras is three times as
strong, as the Wood: and the like may be observed in any other commonly known
Tree. If therefore we could obtein the Barques of Santalum, Lignum Rhodium,
Lignum Aloes, etc. they would doubtless, most of them, be of much greater use.
And as the Taste is sometimes stronger; so, much more grateful, in one Part
than in another: as in the Flowers or Yellow Attire in the Heads of Carduus
Benedictus; which being infused in Spirit of Wine, or other convenient Liquor,
make a pleasant Cordial. Nature having laped up the Virtue in the Leaves, as in
a brown Paper; but in the Flowers, as in Leaf-Gold.

5.. As also, how far the Taste of any Plant may alter, either in preserving,
or preparing it. So the Root of Arum, when taken fresh out of the ground, is
notably Pungent: but being thoroughly dried, and especially kept for some time,
has no more Taste, and therefore in all likelihood, no more Virtue, than a
Lump of Starch. The like we are to judge of all other Plants, whose Virtue
lies in their exhalible Parts. The Stillatitious Oils of many Plants, are
stronger than the Leaves or other Parts from whence they are drawn: but some
there are, which are weaker; as is that of Euphorbium, in which the Heat is
neither pertinaceous, as in the Gum it self, nor so great.

6.. We may make, moreover, a jugdment from the Nature of the Taste. So those
Roots which are Bitter, and not Hot, as of Cichory, and the rest of the
Intybous kind, may be accounted Nitro-Sulphureous; and so, to be Abstersive
without any Heating Quality. The Marum Austriacum, which is extreme Pungent, as
well as Aromatic, may be looked upon as the best Cephalic of that Tribe.
Because we find, that Jalap has a special property of imitating the Glandulous
Parts of the Mouth, and Throat; we may gather, That it is a better Purge to all
the other Glandulous Parts, than most other Catharticks. Which is also one
reason of its operation, for the most part, with at least a tendency to vomit;
the Stomach it self being Glandulous as well as the Throat, and thereby
answerably a^^ected with it. A strong Infusion of white Sarzaparilla in Water,
botled up, and kept in a Ce^ar for the space of two months, becomes extreme
sower; far beyond any thing observed in the Tastes of the Juyces and Infusions
of diverse other Plants kept as long and in the same manner. Which shows, how
well Nature has adapted a Plant of so mild a Taste, either by similitude of
parts, for the carrying off of any preternatural Acid; or by contrariety, for
the curbing of an exorbitant Salt. The Barque of the Root of common Wormwood,
which impresseth a pertinaceous and diffusive Taste, which descends from the
Tongue into the Gulet, as is before described; may be justly ranked with the
most excellent Stomachicks; and upon trial, I find it one of the best: besides,
that it is neither unpleasant, nor affects the Head, as the Leaves. Yet the
Gardener, and every Body throws it away, as good for nothing.

7.. I shall conclude with one note, which is this; That the Specific Virtue
of Medicines, which some Physicians positively deny, and most dispute; from
some of the forementioned Differences of Taste, as well as for other reasons,
may seem, at least, to be probable. For why should not a Medicine make an
Impression upon one Part, and not upon another, within the Body, as well as we
find it does within the Mouth? especially, since the Parts of the Mouth, are of
a less different Nature, than some of the Viscera.

An Appendix. Of the ODOURS of Plants.
THE Senses of Tasting and Smelling being so nearly allied; many things already
explained concerning the Diversities and Causes of Tastes in Plants, may easily
be transferred to those of their Odours. I shall now therefore only remarque
some particulars, not commonly taken notice of hitherto, and leave them as a
Specimen to be Improved by other Hands.

. 2. The Root of Rape-Crowfoot being cut, and held to the Nose, when it is
newly taken out of the Ground, smells almost like Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, of
fresh Scurvygrass Juice. And has the property of making the Eyes to water, as
Onions do. Horseradish Root is not so Pungent to the Nose, but gets pretty
much into the Eyes. But that of Dragon, does neither affect the Eyes, nor the
Nose.

3.. The Succulent Roots of Dogstones, and most of that Tribe, have a rank
Smell. And that of Crown Imperial, being rubbed a little, smells as like a Fox,
as one Fox smells like another.

4.. The Root of Patience digested with Water, in a warm Room, for the space of
three weeks, smells like Spirit of Hearts Horn, or other Urinous Spirit. Of Red
Dock, almost like Aqua fortis or Spirit of Nitre. That of Dragon bottled up
with Water, and set in a Cellar, about a Month, stinks like the pus of the most
Fe^id Ulcer. At the end of five Months, more abominably, than either to be
endured or expressed.

5.. The Leaves of Mountain Calamint, smell like Penny Royal. Those of Ulmaria,
like Walnut Pills. Of Yellow Lamium, like a Balsame. Of Sena, a good quantity
being held to the Nose, of a rank Smell betwixt that of Sweat and Urine. Of
Coriander, when green and young, stink so basely, that they can hardly be
endured. Sometimes the Leaves have a stronger Smell, than the Flower, as in
Borage, and sometimes the Stalk, a stronger than the Leaves, as in Ulmaria.

6.. Rue Leaves corked up in a bottle and set in a Cellar for about ten weeks,
smell like Spirit of Hearts Horn, or of Urine. The green Leaves of Roses infused
in water, have a mild, but pleasant Smell. Neither is that of Savine
unpleasant, upon the like Infusion.

7.. Scurvygrass Juice kept about of a year in bottles, with the green
Sedement, in a warm Room, stinks like Humane Excrements. And Scurvygrass Wine,
made only of the Juice, smells like some Issues.

8.. The Flowers of Yarrow, smell not much unlike to those of Southernwood. And
the Flowers of Crowfoot almost like those of Scurvygrass. Some Flowers are of a
weaker Smell in the Bud, as those of Mallow. But many have a stronger, than
when they are blown open; as those of Lavender, Rosemary, etc.

9.. The Buds of Vervaine Mallow, while they are young, and the Flowers unseen,
have a very pleasant Smell, like that of Geranium Moschatum: but when
afterward they are opened they have an unpleasant Smell. Common Mallow Flowers
dried and bottled up for some time, acquire, though not a strong, yet very
noysom Smell.

10.. The Purple Pouch of Dragon which covers the Seed, being broken, smells
just like a Lobster. But permitted to lie in a warm Room for some days, smells
exactly like Carrion; and scents the Room with the same Smell.

11.. Some Seeds as those of Cumine, Daucus, being powdered and laped up only
in Papers, do notwithstanding retein their Smell. But many others, as of Sweet
Fenil, in a short time, lose it. Some Seeds, when they first begin to sprout,
become Odorous, which were not so before; as the Garden Bean.

Tabula, qua perspicue videre est, quot Triplicati Sapores, ex solummodo december
Simplicibus numerantur.
AMARUS Am. du. ac. am. du. sa. am. ac. sa. am. du. ca. am. ac. ca. am. sa. ca.
am. du. fr. am. ac. fr. am. sa. fr. am. ca. fr. am. du. ar. am. ac. ar. am. sa.
ar. am. ca. ar. am. fr. ar. am. du. ma. am. ac. ma. am. sa. ma. am. ca. ma. am.
fr. ma. am. ar. ma. am. du. as. am. ac. as. am. sa. as. am. ca. as. am. fr. as.
am. ar. as. am. ma. as. am. du. pu. am. ac. pu. am. sa. pu. am. ca. pu. am. fr.
pu. am. ar. pu. am. ma. pu. am. as. pu. DULCIS Du. ac. sa. du. ac. ca. du. sa.
ca. du. ac. fr. du. sa. fr. du. ca. fr. du. ac. ar. du. sa. ar. du. ca. ar. du.
fr. ar. du. ac. ma. du. sa. ma. du. ca. ma. du. fr. ma. du. ar. ma. du. ac. as.
du. sa. as. du. ca. as. du. fr. as. du. ar. as. du. ma. sa. du. ac. pu. du. sa.
pu. du. ca. pu. du. fr. pu. du. ar. pu. du. ma. pu. du. as. pu. ACIDUS Aci.
sal. call. aci. sal. fri. aci. call. fri. aci. sal. aro. aci. call. ar. aci. fri.
ar. aci. sal. mal. aci. call. ma. aci. fri. mal. aci. ar. mal. aci. sal. ast.
aci. call. ast. aci. fri. ast. aci. ar. ast. ac. ma. ast. ac. sal. pu. aci. ca.
pun. aci. fr. pun. aci. ar. pun. ac. ma. pu. ac. ast. pu. SALSUS Sal. call. fri.
sal. call. aro. sal. fri. aro. sal. call. mal. sal. fri. mal. sal. aro. mal. sal.
call. ast. sal. fri. ast. sal. aro. ast. sal. ma. ast sal. call. pun. sal. fri.
pun. sal. aro. pun. sal. ma. pu. sal. ast. pun. CALIDUS Call. fri. aro. call.
fri. mal. call. aro. mal. call. fri. ast. ^al. aro. ast. call. mal. ast. call. fri.
pun. call. aro. pun. call. mal. pun. call. ast. pun. FRIGIDUS Fri. aro. mal. frig.
aro. ast. fri. mal. ast. fri. aro. pun. fri. mal. pun. fri. ast. pun.
AROMATICUS Aro. mal. ast. aro. mal. pun. aro. ast. pun. MALIGNUS ASTRINGENS
PUNGENS

Tabula, quae Genericas omnes Saporum differentias comprenhedit.
SAPORES, ratione* Sensationis ipsius, distinguuntur per Species. Sunt enim
alii Simplices, qui sunt Amarus Dulcis Acidus Salsus Calidus Frigidus
Aromaticus Malignus Aequalis Tremulus Mollis Vapidus Unctuosus
Durus Penetrans Stupifaclens Astringens Pungens Continuu^ Intermitten^


Compositi, qui sunt Nominati; scil. Acerbus Austerus Acris Muriaticus Lixivus
Nitrosus
I^ominati quamplurimi, ut Amaro-dulcis, etc*

Gradus. Ita enim sunt Remissi vel Intensi a gradu 3o ad 1um. 4o ad 10um.

Durationis, sunt Breves Diuturni
Motus, sunt Celeres Tardi
in Principio Augmento Statu Declinatione. Est autem Sapor in Principio
Quartarius Binarius Trinarius Minutarius Minuto-quartarius, etc. Bi-minutarius
Bino-quartarius, etc. Triminutarius
Augmento Quartarius, etc. Bi-minutarius
Statu. Quartarius, etc. Quadrinarius.
Declinatione Quartarius, etc. Quadrino-quartarius, etc. Quinarius Senarius,
etc. Vicenarius. Viceno-quinarius Tricenarius Triceno-quinarius Quadragenarius,


Subjecti, sunt Fixi Labiales Linguales qui ad Linguae Apicem Verticem Radicem
Palatales, percipiuntur Gutturales, Oesophagei.
Mobiles Diffusivi. Transitivi.



EXPERIMENTS IN CONSORT UPON THE Solution of Salts IN WATER. Read before the
Royal Society, January, 18. 1676-77.
CHAP. I. In which is showed, the Complete or Utmost Impregnation of WATER with
several kinds of Salt, both together, and apart.
IN discourse upon a Lecture formerly read, concerning the Lixivial Salts of
Plants; It was mentioned, as a thing asserted by some Philosophers, That Water
having been fully impregnated with one kind of Salt, so as to bear no more of
that kind; it would yet bear, or dissolve some portion of another; and so of a
third. And it was referred to Me by this Honorable Chair, to examine and
produce the Experiment. The doing whereof brought into my mind diverse other
Experiments hereunto relating.

2.. As next, With what difference of quantity this Superim-praegnation would
be made, upon the Solution of different Salts?

3.. Thirdly, Whether the Solution of a smaller quantity of several Salts, does
consist with the non-increase of the bulk of the Water? Because this also is
affirmed by some.

4.. Fourthly, What quantity of the several kinds of Salt, may be dissolved
severally, in the same quantity of Water?

5.. Fifthly, Whether by dissolving a Salt in Water, there be any Space gained,
or not? That is, whether the Bulk of the Water be greater, before the Salt
lying in it be fully dissolved, than it is afterward? Or if a Cubick Inch of
Salt be dissolved in nine Cubick Inches of Water; Whether the Water will then
fill a Vessel of ten Cubick Inches content?

6.. Sixthly, Whether the Space be equally gained, by an equal increase of the
same Salt?

7.. Seventhly, Whether upon the Solution of several kinds of Salts, be gained
so many several quantities of Space? That is, if the Solution of common Salt
gains, suppose, an Inch, whether the Solution of Salt Armoniack gains as much,
or more, or less? and so for other Salts.

8.. Eighthly, What that just space may be, which any Salt gains with respect
to its own Bulk, or that of the Water?

9.. And first, for the Superimpregnation of Water; I put into a bottle ij of
fair Water; adding thereto, first half an Ounce of Nitre; and afterward more,
as the Water would dissolve it; and (that I might be sure the Impregnation was
full) some portion above what the Water would bear. Then having separated this
remaining portion; I put to this Solution of Nitre, two Drachms of Sal
Ammoniac; which wholly and easily dissolved in the said Solution; though it
would not bear a grain more of Nitre. I then added a third Dram of Sal
Ammoniac, after that a fourth, and a fifth; all which, within the space of half
an hour, were perfectly dissolved in the said Solution, without any
precipitation of the Nitre.

10.. In the making of this Experiment, two things, to render it infallacious,
are to be noted. That the said Salts were not dissolved by the help of Fire,
but only by a strong and continued Agitation. And that this was done upon a
warm day: which I mention, because that even the changes of the weather will
somewhat alter the Solubility of the Salts.

11.. Having made the Experiment upon two Salts, I proceeded to repeat it upon
three. And first I dissolved as much common Salt in ij of Water, as that
quantity would bear. Then having separated the subsiding portion; I put to the
Solution, no less than five Drachms of Nitre, which by a continued Agitation,
was wholly dissolved therein, neither the Nitre nor the common Salt being in
the least precipitated. Then adding a Scruple more, it would not dissolve, but
subsided. This second su^iding portion, I again separated; and then put to this
Super-impregnation, near j of Sal Ammoniac, which was also dissolved as the
former. And if as many more Salts had been added, it is probable that the same
Water would have born some quantity of them all.

12.. From this Experiment, it is a Conclusion demonstrated, That not only the
visible Crystals, but the very Atoms of every Salt, at least those Particles
which are ultimately dissolved in Water, have a different Figure one from
another. Because that if they were all of one Figure; there would be no
Superimpregnation, but the Pores of the same Water, would imbibe as much of one
Salt, as answers to the total of two more Salts imbibed: that is to say, it
would as well imbibe two Ounces of common Salt, as one Ounce of common Salt and
another of Nitre: which yet is contrary to the Experiment. And it is the same
thing, whether we suppose the Pores of Water to be also different, or not.
Because, that if the Figure of all the said Atoms be the same; then their
respect to the Pores of the Water must be the same, how different so ever those
Pores be: which is also contrary to the Experiment. Besides it is a great
presumption, to say, that the Pores, and therefore the Atoms of Water have
different Figures; and yet not those of Salts.

13.. From the same Experiment we may go upon good ground in Compounded
Infusions; whether of Purgative, or other Materials. As not doubting, but that
the same Menstruum may be highly impregnated with several Ingredients at once,
whose operative parts may be therein copiously dissolved, without hindering
either an Extraction, or causing a Precipitation one of an other.

14.. The Second Enquiry is, With what difference this Superimpregnation of
Water is made? which I find considerable. For a Solution of above five Drachms
of Nitre may be superimpregnated with no less quantity of Sal Ammoniac. And a
Solution of five Drachms of common Salt, may be superimpregnated with as much
Nitre. Yet neither a strong Solution (as of five Drachms) of common Salt, will
bear above two Scruples of Sal Ammoniac: nor will a strong Solution (as of five
Drachms) of Sal Ammoniac, bear above a Dram of common Salt: for if above the
said quantities of either of them be mixed together: they are both copiously
and forthwith precipitated to the bottom of the Glass.

15.. Whence, notwithstanding the former Experiment, yet are we admonished, not
to infuse all manner of Ingredients in any proportion. Because though some do
not, yet others will precipitate one another.

16.. The Third Enquiry was this, Whether the Solution of a smaller quantity of
several Salts, does consist with the non-increase of the Bulk of the Water? For
this I took a Bolthead with a slender Neck, containing about a pint and a
quarter of Water; and dissolved therein about jss of Nitre. And marking the
place to which the Water ascended in the Neck of the Bolthead: I then dissolved
in the same Water about a Dram of Sal Gemmae: which little quantity raised
the Water above half an Inch higher then it was before. The like I observed in
the addition of Nitr^ to a Solution of Sal Ammoniac. So that to suppose the
variation of the Salt does prevent the increase of the Bulk of the Water, is a
manifest Error.

17.. From the same Experiment it also appears, That the ascent of the Water
upon a Superimpregnation, is the same, by whatsoever Salt the first
Impregnation be made. For instance, Let a Solution of Nitre ascend in the Neck
of the Bolthead, suppose, to 10 Inches, then add an Ounce more of Nitre, so as
to raise the Water, suppose, 12 Inches or more, or less, according to the Bore
of the Neck. In like manner, let a Solution of Sal Ammoniac reach to ten
Inches: then add again half an Ounce of Nitre; and it will reach just 12
Inches, or more or less, as before.

18.. The Fourth Enquiry is, What quantity of the several kinds of Salt, may be
dissolved severally in the same quantity of Water: that is to say, by agitation
alone, without the help of fire, as I noted before. And upon trial it appears,
First, that two Ounces of Water will dissolve three Ounces of Loaf-Sugar and no
more, except the Water be heated.

19.. The same quantity of Water that is, two Ounces will dissolve above two
Ounces of Salt of Tartar. I say above, for how much more, want of a greater
quantity of Salt which I could confide in, made me that I could not finish the
Experiment.

20.. The same quantity, sc. two Ounces of Water, dissolveth an Ounce and a
Dram of Green Vitriol.

21.. The like quantity dissolveth six Drachms and a Scruple or above of an
Ounce of common Salt.

22.. Of Nitre, Five Drachms two Scruples and an half.

23.. Of Sal Ammoniac, five Drachms and two Scruples.

24.. Of Alum, not above two Drachms and a Scruple.

^5.. And of Borax, not above a Dram and half a Scruple.

26.. Of these note, That although Common Salt be very dissoluble, and will
presently catch the moisture of the Aer: yet a much greater quantity not only
of Salt of Tartar, but even of Loaf Sugar, and of Green Vitriol it self, may be
dissolved in Water than of Common Salt.

27.. Again, as the great Solubility of some, so the less Solubility of other
Salts is also observable, as of Alum, and Borax. For the same quantity of Water
will dissolve near four times as much of Green Vitriol, as it will of Alum. And
of Sugar more than ten times as much. Of Green Vitriol near eight times as much
as of Borax; and of Sugar, twenty times as much.

28.. From this Experiment we are likewise cautioned, not only in the Infusion
of several Ingredients together, but of any one singly; that such a proportion
thereof to the Menstruuum, be not exceeded. For all that is over and above what
the Menstruum will bear, is either not extracted, or will be precipitated. As
is evident not only in the Dissolution of the Salts above named, but in the
Infusion of Plants themselves: as, for instance; of Senna; two Drachms whereof
will impregnate four Ounces of Water as strongly, as if twice the quantity were
infused; because the Water will bear no more of the Purgative Parts of that
Body.

29.. There is only one Salt more remains to be spoken of under this
Experiment; and that is, the Crystals of Tartar. Whereof, it is somewhat
strange to observe, that it will scarce at all dissolve in Water: not more,
than even diverse Resinous Gums, as Mastick, Tolu, Tacchamahacca, and some
others will do. For if two Drachms, suppose of these Crystals, of Tartar
(commonly sold for Cremor Tartari) be put to one Ounce of Water, scarce five
Grains thereof will, by Agitation, be therein dissolved.

CHAP. II. In which is showed, that by the Solution of Salts in Water, some
certain space, more or less, is gained. That the space is different according
to the Nature of the Salt. And what the just space is, which is gained.
THE Fifth Enquiry is, Whether by dissolving of a Salt in Water, there be any
space gained, or not. That is, whether the Bulk of the Water be greater before
the Salt lying in it be fully dissolved, than afterward. For trial whereof, I
took a Bolt-head with a slender Neck, holding somewhat more than a pint; and
filling it up to a certain place in the Neck; I then put in an Ounce or two of
Salt. And observing the hight of the Water, both before it was dissolved, and
afterward; It plainly appeared, that there was some, and that a considerable
space, gained by the Dissolution; the Water thereby sinking several Inches
below the place, where it stood after the Salt was first put into it.

2.. From this Experiment it is plain, that there are Vacuities in Water. That
is to say, that all the parts of Water are not contiguous, but that either
betwixt, or in the Atoms of the Water themselves, there are certain Pores,
either absolutely void, or at least filled up with another more subtle body
which is easily excluded by the particles of Salt: by possessing the room of
which the above said space is gained.

3.. The Sixth Enquiry is, Whether the space be equally gained, by an equal
increase of the same Salt.

4.. For this I made two trials; the first was this. Two half Ounces of Salt
Ammoniac, being successively dissolved in the same Water; both of them raised
up the Water in the Neck of the Bolt-head, equally; the first 3 Inches, and so
the second.

5.. The other was this. Four half Ounces of Nitre, being successively
dissolved in the same Water, they all of them raised up the Water in the Neck
of the Bolt-head, equally; the first a little above two Inches, and the 2d, 3d,
and 4th, just as much.

6.. The Seventh Enquiry is, Whether upon the Dissolution of several kinds of
Salts, be gained so many several quantities of space. For this I made trial
upon Eleven several Salts, sc. Salt of Tartar, Common Salt, Sal Gemmeus, Roman
Vitriol, Nitre, White Vitriol, Green Vitriol, Alum, Borax, Loaf-Sugar, and Sal
Ammoniac; of all which, I dissolved an equal quantity sc. two Ounces, in an
equal quantity of Water, severally; that is, taking fresh Water for every
Solution. The success was, That the Sal Ammoniac raised the Water 15 Inches.
The Loaf-Sugar, 13 Inches and ^ths. The Borax, a Foot. The Alum 11 Inches, and
ths. Green Vitriol, 9 Inches and ths. White Vitriol, 9 Inches and th. Nitre, 8
Inches, and ^ths. Roman Vitriol, 7 Inches and ths. Sal Gemmae, 6 Inches, and
ths. Common Salt, 6 Inches and ^ths. Salt of Tartar, not above 4 Inches and th.
All which differences are plain, and most of them very remarquable: Two Ounces
of Sal Ammoniac raising the Water near four times as high, as the same quantity
of Salt of Tartar.

7.. From this and the fourth Experiment, compared, it also appears, That the
several spaces gained by the several Salts, though sometimes they do, yet do
not always answer to the Solubility of the said Salts. As to give some
Instances; Loaf-Sugar is the most dissoluble of any other Salt; yet it gains
less space than all the rest, save only Sal Ammoniac. So Green Vitriol is more
dissoluble then either Nitre or Common Salt; yet gains less space than
either, especially than the latter. And Sal Ammoniac, which is more dissoluble
than Alum or Borax, yet gains less space than either of them. The Cause
whereof is not easily assigned.

8.. Note also, that by the same Experiment, as well as by the Taste and other
Circumstances, it is plain, That Sal Gemmae is nothing else but Common Salt,
coagulated or Crystalliz'd under Ground.

9.. Again, as the Fifth Experiment shows, That there are Vacuities in Water:
so does this Last, that those Vacuities, are of differing kinds. Because,
otherwise, it should seem, That the Bulk of the Water would increase, more or
less, according to the Solubilitie of every Salt, and not be alternately
differenced as it is; Some Salts, more dissoluble, increasing the Bulk of the
Water less, and others less dissoluble, increasing it more. I say, that this
difference depends not only upon the different Figures of the Atoms of Salt;
because then every Salt which is more dissoluble, would (quantity for quantity)
take up less room in the Water: which is contrary to the Experiment.

10.. From the same Experiment, howsoever paradoxical it may seem, yet is it
also manifest, That although Water be a Fluid, yet the Particles thereof are
hard and consistent, and unalterable in their Figure. Otherwise it is plain,
That all manner of Salts would be dissolved in the same manner, and take up the
same room in the Water. For let the Figures of the Salts be never so various,
yet if the Particles of Water were themselves Fluid or Inconsistent and
Alterable, they would always so conform to those Figures, as to fill up all
Vacuities; and so upon the Solution of several Salts, if of equal quantity, the
Water would still retein an equal Bulk. As suppose an Ounce of Iron were drawn
into Wire, another beaten into Plates, a third made into Hooks, a fourth into
Needles, a fifth into Nails; every one of these five Ounces, being put
severally into Water will increase its Bulk equally. I conclude therefore, That
the Atoms of Water are hard and unalterable.

11.. The Eighth Enquiry was this, What that just space might be, which any
Salt gains upon Dissolution, with respect to its own Bulk, or the Bulk of the
Water? For the making of this Experiment, Water will not serve, nor yet Spirit
of Wine; because they both of them dissolve more or less of those Salts which
are put into them; whereby the observation of the true Bulk of the Salt, and
consequently of the just space it gains by Dissolution is lost. I took
therefore Oil of Turpentine, and pouring it into a Bolt-head, marked the place
of its ascent in the Neck. Then pouring likewise into it two Ounces of Common
Salt, I marked the second ascent of the Oil; and found it to be 10 Inches and 6
eighths. Repeating the Experiment in like manner with two Ounces of Nitre, I
found the ascent of the Oil to be 11 Inches and th. Repeating it again with two
Ounces of Alum, the ascent of the Oil was 13 Inches and ^ths. And making it
once more with Sal Ammoniac, the Oil ascended to 15 Inches: the said several
ascents of the Oil being the true spaces which the Four abovesaid Salts take.
From which, the space which the same Salts take up upon Dissolution, being
deducted; the remainder is the space gained by that Dissolution. And so it
appears, first, that Sal Ammoniac gains nothing; being the only Salt of all I
have tried, which causes the equal ascent both of the Water and the Oil sc.
just 15 Inches in both. Alum causes the ascent of the Oil to 13 2/8ths, of the
Water, to 11 Inches and ths: So that it gains about 1 Inch and out of 13. Nitre
causes the ascent of the Oil, to 11 Inches and th; of the Water, to 8 Inches
and ths. So that Nitre by Dissolution gets almost the space of 3 Inches in 11.
Common Salt causes the ascent of the Oil, to 10 Inches and 6/8ths; of the
Water, 6 Inches and ths. So that Common Salt gains by Dissolution 4 Inches in
10, which is very considerable.

12.. By this way the Specific Gravity of all kinds of Salts may be easily
taken, and the difference betwixt them is somewhat surprising. For it appears
by the Ascent of the Oil, that Nitre, quantity for quantity, is about a 22th
part lighter than Common Salt. Alum about a 6th part lighter. And Salt
Ammoniac, almost a 4th part lighter than Common Salt. The like estimate may be
made of the Gravity of all other Salts.

13.. By the same Experiment it also appears, That according to the Specific
Gravity of Salts they are many times at least more or less Volatile; as in the
four last Salts is plain. For Common Salt which of all the four is the most
fixed, is also the heavyest. Nitre which is somewhat less fixed is somewhat
lighter. But Alum which is still less fixed is much lighter. And Sal Ammoniac
which is wholly Volatile, is the lightest of all the Salts above mentioned.

CHAP. III. Wherein, from the Experiments in the foregoing Chapter, is showed,
the Cause of the Motion of the Mercury in the BAROMETER.
FOR the doing of this, it will first be acknowledged, That not only several
sorts of Sulphur, but also of Volatile Salts, are continually sublimed from
most Bodies into the Aer. So Lightning, from the celerity of the accension,
appears to be made of a Meteor, which is Nitro-Sulphureous. Snow depends upon
a Mixture of Nitrous, and other Salts; as is evident, from the regularly and
differently Figured Parts, which compose the whole Body of a Snowy Cloud,
before it clusters into Flakes. And one reason, why Rain is the best Water for
any Soil, is because it is impregnated with diverse Volatile and Fruitful Salts.
And so from other Meteors.

2.. And next, that these Salts, are not always in the same Quantity,
Proportion, and State, in the Aer: but that sometimes they are more copious; at
others, less: sometimes, one more copious, than an other: sometimes, more
plentifully dissolved; at others, more spareingly: and that, either as they are
more or less pure and dissoluble; or according to the quantity of the Vaporous
Parts in the Aer, in which they are incorporated or dissolved.

3.. Thus much being granted, from the Experiments in the foregoing Chapter
compared together, we may resolve our selves about some Phenomenon in the
Barometre. Which seems to vary, not so much with the mere Weight of the Aer,
which hitherto has been supposed: as by the different pressure it makes, in
being crowded more at one time, than at another. That is, according as certain
Nitrous, or other Saline Bodies, take up less Space in the Aer, when dissolved
in the Watery Parts therein, than while they are undissolved.

4.. And therefore it is especially to be observed, That as the Mercury
commonly rises in the Cylinder for some days, but always for some time, before
the change of the Weather, whether for Snow or Rain: So, that then it presently
falls again, even before the Snow or Rain falls. Whereas, if the Weight of
the Aer, were the only, or the chief Cause of the ascent of the Mercury; than
as it rises all the while the Weather is gathering, so it would keep its
standing or height, until the Weather breaks and falls down: which yet it
never does, but always falls before it; sometimes no less than a whole day. The
Cause whereof is, in that all the while the Mercury rises in the Cylinder, the
Aer is crowded with more and more Saline Parts, which by the Winds, or
otherwise, are carried into it; and so causes it to press upon the Mercury in
the Box: but after that in some time the Salts are dissolved or incorporated in
the Aqueous Parts of the Aer, as in Rain or Snow; so soon as that is done,
there is some Space gaind; and so, before any Weather falls, the Aer is less
crowded, and presses less upon the Mercury in the Box, which gives way to its
descent in the Cylinder.

5.. From hence also it is, that the Mercury rises higher with Cold Winds,
than it does with those which are Warm. Both because that in cold Winds there
is the greatest quantity of Nitre: and that the coldest Winds, are usually the
dryest. So that the Nitre wanting Moisture fully to dissolve it; it takes up so
much the greater space, and so causes a greater pressure in the Aer, as has
been said.

6.. Lastly, For the same reason it comes to pass, that the Mercury first
rises higher, and then falls lower before Snow, than it does before Rain.
Because that for the production of Snow, the Aer is crowded with a greater
quantity of Nitre, or some other like Salts; which before they are dissolved,
take up so much the more space; and afterward so much the less, even before
the Snow falls: as has been proved.

FINIS.
AN INDEX OF THE Chief Matters,
In which, Id. signifies Idea. An. Anotmy. The Figuers before. the Page. The
Figures following. the Section in that Page.

A.
ACid, commonly the predominant Principle in Plants, 240.. 8. That is of the
Parenchyma. Id.. 48. Aer, how to be examined, as relating to Vegetation, Id..
60. Aer, in Plants, How made, An. 93.. 61. Where it enters the Plant, 127.. 1.
Its Motion and Course in Plants, ibid. Aereal Salt, Id.. 60. Aer-Vessels, their
Structure, 115.. 16, etc. See Root and other Parts. Affinities of Plants, Id.
6.. 11. Age of Roots, See Roots. Agitation, a Cause of Mixture, 230.. 6. Akern,
186. Albumen, See Seed. Alkaline Salt, in many Plants in their natural estate.
240.. 9. This the predominant Principle of the true Wood of a Plant, Id.. 52.
Anagallis, of what Taste, 284.. 10. Angellica Roots, when dry, full of Rosin,
Id.. 41. Anatomy of Plants, why fit to be made, Id.. 17. In what manner,. 18.
What to be observed thereby,. 19. Of what use,. 20. Animals, their Parts mixed
with several Menstruums, 247. to 253. Cantharides, of what nature, 249.
Antimony, of what nature, 245.. 23. Apertures of Seeds, An. 2.. 5. and 200.. 1.
Apple described, An. 40.. 2. and 179. Aprecock, 148. Arsmart, coded, how its
Seed ejaculated, 188.. 18. Arenulae in Pears, An. 41.. 4. and 241.. 20.
Arum-Root, of what Taste, 281.. 21. The Pestil of what Scent, Id.. 28.
Aquafortis double, mixed with Spirit of Wine, what remarquable thereupon,
242.. 26. With Steel, 244. 22. With Tin. 245.. 27. Asa soetida, of what nature,
258. Query, 2. Ascent of the Trunk, how made, An. 22.. 21. A Magnetic Motion,
136. Ascent of the Sap, how made, An. 24.. 29. and 126.. 13. Asparagus, of what
Taste, 284.. 10. Attire of Plants see Flower.
B.
BArbado Nut, Id. 30. Barque of the Root, see Root. Of the Trunk, see Trunk.
Bawme, its Tincture in Water, 274.. 11. In Spirit of Wine, 275.. 14. Beams of
the Sun, different from the Heat of Common Fire, Id.. 61. Bean dissect^d, An..
1. Beech-Wood, An. 20. Berry, see Fruits. Bezoar, its nature, 252.. 49.
Bezoardicum minerale, 245.. 25. Bleeding of Plants, Id.. 23. An. 124.. 3.
Bolus, what, 242.. 2. Bonus Henricus, of what Taste. 284.. 10. Bones, their
different nature, 249., 18. Branch, how made, An. 28.. 3. Its Claspers, An. 27.
see Trunks. Bud of a Branch, how originated, nourished, and kept, An. 28.. 1.
How kept, 145.. 2. Bud of the Seed, see Seed. Butyr of Flax, Id. 51.
C.
CAlamus Aromaticus, of what Taste, 283.. 6. Cantharides, their nature, 249. 14.
Case of the Seed, of several manners, An. 45.. 2. and 186. Cardus green Leaves,
their scent, Id.. 28. Castor, 250.. 28. Celandine, little, where tasted, 284..
10. Cherry, 185. Circulation of the Sap, An. 17.. 30. Claspers, An. 27.
Clematis peregrina, the Seed-Case of what Taste, 283.. 3. Coats of the Seed, see
Seed. Colocynthis. Its nature, 240.. 13. and 257. Query 5. Where tasted, 284..
8. Colors of Plants, To what Parts of Plants they belong, Id. 26. How to be
observed, Id.. 27. Colors of Roots, An. 94. 65. and 270.. 5. Of Leaves, 270..
6. Of Flowers, 271.. 15. By Infusion, in Oil, 273. In Water, 274. In Spirit of
Wine, ibid. By their Mixture with other Bodies, 375. By Cultivation. 277. Their
Causes summed up, 276. Compression a Cause of Mixture; and of Dissolution,
229.. 3. 232.. 4. and 237.. 3, 4. Contents of Plants, in what Method to be
examined, Id.. 21 to 26. and 31 to 47. Of what kind,. 21. Their Receptacles,.
22. Motions,. 23. Quantities,. 24. Consistence., 25. How made in the several
Parts of a Plant, An. 92.. 57. What in the Seed, 208.. 15. Contrayerva, of what
Taste, 283.. 6. Convolution of the Trunk a Magnetic Motion, 137. Copper, its
nature, 245.. 28. Copperas, 246.. 38. Coral, the Magistery, 244.. 15. Tincture,
Id.. 28. Corin white, 285. Cortical Body, see Barque. Covers of the Seed, see
Seed. Cucumer, An. 181. Leaves of the wild, of what Taste, 280.. 11. and 283..
6. Where tasted, 284.. 4, 8.
D.
DAisy Leaves, where tasted, 284.. 10. Descent of the Root, how made, An. 34..
3. Diametral Rays, see Roots. Digester, the nature of that invented by Mons.
Pappin, 237. Dissolution of Bodies promoted by Compression. 237. Dissimilar
Leaves, see Leaves. Dragon Root, 59.. 13. Dung of Pigeons, 251.. 37.
E.
EArth, how to be examined, as relating to Vegetation, Id.. 57. How nature
prepares it for the growth of Plants, 11.. 8. Empalement, see Flower.
Emulsionss, sometimes for Glysters, Id. 39. Enula, of what Taste, 283.. 3, 34.
Essential Salts of Plants, see Salts. Evergreen, 156.. 2. Euphorbium, Of what
nature, 200.. 1. 241.. 19. and 258. Query 2. of what Taste, 283.. 6.
F.
FAt, how made by Art or Nature, 233.. 3. Fermentation, 253.. 55. Fibers of the
Leaf, see Leaves. Of the Seed, see Seed. Figures, of Plants, Id.. 11. Of Roots,
An. 58.. 4. Of Trunks, 135. Of Leaves, 150.. 1. Of Seeds, 195. Figs, their
Sugar. Id.. 41. Flax, its nature, 258. Query 1. Flower, its Empalement, An.
35.. 2. and 163. Foliature, its Foulds, An. 36.. 5. and 164.. 1. Protections,
An. 36.. 7. Hairs, An. 36.. 8. and 168.. 8. Globulets, An. 37.. 10. and 165..
9. Number of Leaves, 165.. 11. Parts of the Leaves, 166.. 15. Use, An. 37.. 11.
and 166.. 18. Shape or Figure, 167.. 20. Attire, Seminiform, An. 37.. 13. and
167. Florid, An. 38.. 17. and 170. Globulets or Sperme of both, An. 38.. 15.
39.. 21. 168.. 9. and 170.. 5. Use of the Atire, An. 39.. 22. and 171. Flower,
when formed, 173. Colors of the Flower, 271. How by the Flower to find out to
what sort a Plant belongs, 175.. 13. Foetus, see Seed. Foulds of Leaves, see
Leaves. Formation of the Root, see Root. Fruits; Apple, An. 40.. 2. and 179.
Limon, 180. Cucumer, 181. Pear, An. 41.. 3. and 182. Quince, 183. Plum, An.
42.. 5. and 183. Aprecock, 184. Peach, 184. Cherry, 185. Walnut, ibid. Grape,
ibid. Gooseberry, An. 43.. 9. and 185. White Corin, 185. Filbert, An. 43.. 8.
and 186. Akern, 186. The Use of the Fruit, An. 44.. 10. Of its Parts to its
self, 189. To the Seed, 191, and 209. When the Fruit formed, 192.. 9. Furr of a
Hare, 247.. 3.
G.
GAll-Stones, 252.. 47. Generation of the Seed, and other Parts, see the Seed,
and other Parts. Gentian Root, where tasted, 284.. 5. Germen, see Bud.
Glysters, sometimes best made of Emulsions, Id.. 39. Globulets, see Leaves and
Flowers. Gold, its nature, 245.. 31. Gooseberry, 185. Grape, 185. Gravel, its
nature, 251.. 40. Gums, of three kinds, 134.. 15.
H.
HAirs, see Leaves and Flowers. Hares Furr, 247.. 3. Hartshorn, 248.. 8. Hazel
Nut, see Fruits. Hellebore black, of what Taste, 280.. 12. and 283.. 3. etc.
where tasted, 284.. 4. Hoglice, 249.. 15. Horses Hoof, 247.. 5.
I.
JAlap, of what Taste, 283.. 6. 284.. 10. Insertions, in the Root, and other
Parts, see Root and other Parts. Iris Root described, 60.. 14. Irish Slate, its
nature, 243.. 4. Iron, see Steel.
L.
LApis Calaminaris, its nature, 243.. 9. Lapis L^zuli, 243.. 7. Lapis Tuthjae,
243.. 9. Lead, its nature, 244.. 16. Lead Spar, 244.. 12. Leaves, the two first
which come of every Seed, what, An. 8.. 42, etc. Their Use, An. 10.. 46. Leaves;
their Protections, An. 32.. 17. and 145.. 2. Foulds, An. 31.. 14. and 147.. 9.
Shapes and Measures, An. 30.. 17. and 150.. 1. Globulets, An. 34.. 7. and 148..
1. Hairs, An. 34.. 4. 149.. 8. Spots, 148.. 4. Thorns, 148.. 6. Their
Compounding Parts, An. 29.. 7. Skin, 153.. 1. Parenchyma or Pulp, 153.. 5.
Fibers or Vessels, Their Position In the Body of the Leaf, 152.. 19. In the
Stalk, 154.. 9. The Lignous Vessels. 155.. 16. The Aer-Vessels, 155.. 19.
Texture of a Palm Leaf or Bag, 156.. 20. Duration of the Leaf, 156.. 2. Time
and manner of its Generation, 156.. 4. and 174. Color of the Leaf, 270. How by
this to find out to what sort a Plant belongs, 174.. 1. Lignous Body, see
Trunk and other Parts Lilium convalle, its nature, Id.. 30. Limor, described,
180. Lithosperm the Seed, its nature, 241.. 21. Lixivial Salts, see Salts.
Lobes of the Seed, see Seed. Lympha out of which the Seed is first nourished,
see Seed. Lympheducts their Structure, 111.. 30.
M.
MAgistery of Corals, 244.. 15 Of Pearls, 252.. 43. Mallow, its nature, 257.
Query 5. Marine Salt of Plants, see Salts. Mastick, its nature, 258. Query. 2.
Measures of Leaves, 150.. 1. Mechanic uses of Timber, 137. Membranes of the
Seed, see Seed. Menstruum of the Stomach, 253. 53. Metals; Lead, 244. 16.
Mercury, 244. 16. Steel, 244. 20. Antimony, 245. 23. Tin, 245. 26. Copper. 245.
28. Silver, 245. 29. Gold, 245. 31. Milks of Plants, Id. 21, and 26. How made,
An. 67. 19. and 93.. 60. and 133. 12. Milk-Vessels, their Structure, 112. 35.
Millipedes, 249. 15. Minerals of all sorts, how easily tried, 247. 48. Mixture;
the received Doctrine hereof, 222. Its nature explained, 225. Callses, 229.
Power and Use, 231. Mixture of the Parts of Plants with several Menstruums,
239, etc. Of Minerals. 247, etc. Of Animals, 247, etc. Motions, Of Plants, Id.
16. Of Roots, and other Parts, see Roots, and other Parts. Of the Sap, see Sap.
Of the Aer, see Aer. Muciducts, An. 66. 18. Mucilages, Id.. 21. and An. 210..
4. Musk, its nature, 250.. 29.
N.
NAture of Bodies, how discoverable, 235 Navel- Fibers, see Seed. Nightshade
deadly, of what Taste, 284. 9. Nitre, of what Ta^, 280. 6. Noli me tangere, how
the Seed ejaculated, 188. 18. Number of Leaves in Flowers. 165. 11. Number of
Seeds, 198. Nut Barbado, Id. 30. and 205. 17. Hazel Nut, 43. and 186.
O.
OAK-Wood, described, An. 20, and 21. Odors of Plants, how to be observed, Id.
28. Some Instances how made, An. 44 46. Imitated, 235. Olibanum, its nature,
258. Query, 2. Oils stillatitious, how mingled with Water etc. 232 7, and 237.
Oily Sap, how made, 132. 6.
P
PArenchyma or Cortical, Pithy, and Pulpy parts of a Plant, their predominant
Principle, Id. 48. Described in the Root and other parts, see Root, etc. How
formed, see Roots and Leaves. Peach, see Fruits. Pear, see Fruits Pearls, their
magisters, 252. 43. Philosophy, legins and ends with Theology. 79. 1. Pimpinel,
where tasted, 284.. 10. Pith, its structure, 76,. 7. and 120 11, etc. Plants,
their Natural History how far cultivated, Id.. 3. Wherein defective, 2. Fit to
be further improved, 3. and 63. What to be enquired of,. 6. The usefulness
hereof. 8. Plants, their Nature and Virtue how judged of, see Virtues. Plants,
their places of Growth, Id. 15. Propotions,. 13. Plants, their Parts only Two
Essentially distinct, 47. 14. Plants; the general structure of their Parts,
120. 11, etc. Plants, their Pin iples how to be observed, Id.. 48. For what
purpose, 53. What predominant therein, 240. 8. Plants, how to find out to what
kind any one belongs, 174 Plum, see Fruits. Principles of Bodies, 223. which
predominant in the true wood of a Plant. Id. 52. Principles of Principles. Id.
62. Protections of the Leaf and Flower. See Leaf and Flower. Pyrethrum the
Root, of what Taste, 281. -- and 284. 7.
R.
RAdicle, see Seed. Raisins, their Sugar, Id. 41. Rings annual in the Trunk,
An. 19. 6. Roots; their Original, 57. 1. Shapes or Figures, and Sizes 58. 4,
and 89. 41, Motions, An. 15. 24. etc. 34. 3. 59. 9. etc. 90. 48 etc. Ages, 60.
16. and 91. 54. Parts, the Barque, its Skin, An. 11, 2. and An. 61. Parenchyma
described, An. 11. 3. and 63. 2. How formed, 87. 34. Its Diametral rays, 64. 7.
Vessels, 65, 66, 67. The Wood, Herein the Insertions, An. 12. 10 and 17. 28.
and 70. 2. Lignous Fibers or Vessels, 70. 4, 8, 9. Aer-Vessels, An. 12.. 7. and
71. 5, 6, 10, etc. The Pith, An. 13. 16. and An. 16. 27. and An. 75, 76. 7.
Root, how it grows, An. 14. 23. The Sap, how imbibed and distributed to its
several Parts, 82. 15 etc. How circulated, An. 17 29. How all the parts are
formed, 85. 26. etc. And differently disposed, 88. 36, etc. The Colors of
Roots, 170. 5. How made, 94. 65. Root of Wormwood, where tasted, 285. 12.
Rosin, how made by Art, 233. 4. Rosin in dried Roots of Angelica, Id. 41.
Common Rosin, its nature, 258. Query 2.
S.
SAlt aereal, Id. 60. Salt Alkaline, in many Plants in their natural estate,
240. 9. Salt ammoniac, 246, 44. Salt, essential of Plants, How made, 262. 3,
etc. and 265. 3. etc. Of several sorts, Id. 48. Instanced also in those of
Rosemary, Black Thorn, Scurvey-Grass, Wormwood, Ash, 865, 6 etc. Tastable in
good Rhubarb, Id. 41. Salt fixed, of what use in Purgation, 260. Salt Lixivial
of Plants, how imitated, 233. 6. Of different nature, 264. 2. Salt of Ash, of
what nature, 167. 22. Of Tartar. Ib. Yielded in different quantitys by the
Barque of Ash, Rosemary, Black-Thorn, Agrimony, 256. Query 1. Garden and Sea
Scurvy Grass. 256. Query 2. Mint distilled, and not, 256, Query 3. Majorane,
Oak-Barque, Liquorish, Aniseeds, Sorrel, Garden Scurveygrass, Mint, Sea
Scurveygrass, 256. Query 4. Majorane, Agrimony, Mugwort, Mint, Mallow, Rhubarb,
Sena, Jalap, Colocynthis, 257, Query 5. Flax, 258. Qu. 1. Gum Arabic,
Euphorbium, Myrrh, Opium, Aloe, Scammouy, Gutta gamba, 258. Query 2. Salt
Marine, its nature, 246. 43. Salt Marine of Plants, how made by Nature or Art,
234. 8. 263 12, etc. 266. 16. Of several sorts, instanced in those of Rosemary,
Scurvey grass, Black Thorn, Wormwood, 266. 17 etc. Salt of the dead Sea, 263.
14. Saps of Plants, how to be observed, Id. 21. to 26. and 31 to 47. Their
several kinds,. 21. Receptacles, 22. Motions, 23. Quantitys, 24. Consistence,
25. Sap, how imbibed, and distributed to the several parts of the Root. An. 82.
15 etc. Its Circulation therein, An. 17. 29. where, and how it ascends in the
Trunk, An. 24. 29. and An. 124. Sap and other contents of the several Parts how
made, An. 92. 57 etc. and 131. How a Milky Sap, An. 67. 19. and 93. 60. and
133. 12 etc. How a Winy, 93 62. and 132. 3 etc. How one very Oily, 132. 6 etc.
Scurveygrass Garden, of what Taste, 283. 6. Scurvey-grass Sea, its Nature, 256.
Query 4. Seasons of Plants, Id. 14. Secundine see Seed. Seeds; their Case or
Uterus, An. 45. 2. of several manners, 186. Figures, An. 45. 3. etc. 195.
Number, 198. Motions, 188. 18 and 199 3, etc. Stones, 201. 2. and 209.
Mucilages, 201, 4. Coats or Membranes, An. 2. 3. 45. 3, etc. 46 10. 47. 15 and
20^. 6. 210 etc. Apertures, An* 2. 5. and 200. 1. Vitellum, 20. 2. 9. The
Foetus, or true Seed, its Radicle and Lobes, An. 2* and 3. 9 to 12. and 203.
Plume or Bud, An. 3. 13 and 206. Skin, An. 4. 16. and 207. 9. Parenchyma, An.
4. 18. and 207. 10. Seminal Root or Vessels, An. 5. 21, etc. and 207. 11, etc.
Navle Fiber, An. 48. 17. and 212. Content. 208. 15. The manner of its
Vegetation, An. 6. 30, etc. Of its Generation, An. 48. 18 etc. and 209 etc.
Shape of Roots, and other Parts. see Roots and other parts. Shells, their
Nature, 248. 9, 10, 11. Skin, see Seed and other Parts. Silver, its Nature, 245
29. Smell of green Carduus, Id. 28. Of the Pestil of Arum. Ib. Soil. see Earth.
Sperme of Plants. see Flower. Spirit of Salt, 247. 46. Spirit of Salt Ammoniac,
247. 47. Spirit of Peas-Cods, Id. 30. Spirits urinous, how made less offensive,
Id. 45. Spirit of Wine mixed with Aqua fortis, what thereupon remarkable, 242.
26. Stalks. see Trunks and Branches. Steel, its nature, 244. 20. Mixed with
double Aqua fortis, what thereupon remarkable, 244.. 22. Stillatitious Oils,
how mixed with water, 232. 7. and 237. Stomachick menstruum, 253. 53. Stones; a
strange one bred in the stomach, 252. 48. Others probably bred there, 253. 51.
Of the Kidneys or Bladder, of what nature, 251. 32. How prevented, 251. 41. and
252. 42. Gall Stone, its nature, 252. 47. Bezoar, its nature, 252. 49.
Lead-Spar, 244. 12. Lapis Calaminaris, 243. 9. Tuthiae, ibid. Lazuli, 244. 12.
Structure of a Plant. 120. 11, etc. Sugar of Raisins and Figs. Id. 41. Sulphur
predominant in the true wood of a Plant, id. 52. Sun, its Influence on Plants
how to be examined. Id. 61.
T.
Tastes of Plants; how to be observed, Id. 29. Simple, 280. 6. Compounded, 281.
Their Degree, 282. Motions or Terms, 283. Seat, 284. Causes, An. 95. 68 etc.
and 286 etc. Taste of Arum Root, 281. Asparagus Root, 284. 10. Bonus Henricus,
284. 10. Calamus Aromaticus, 283. 6. Celandine little, 284. 10. Clematis
peregrina the Seed-Case, 283. 3. Colocynthis, 284. 8 Contrayerva, 283. 6.
Cucumer wild, the Leaves, 284. 4, 8. Daisy Leaves, 284. 10. Enula, 283. 3, 4.
Euphormium, 283. 6. Gentian Root, 284. 5, 8. Hellebore black, the Root, 280.
12. 283. 3. 284. 4. Jalap, 283. 6. 284. 10. Nightshade deadly, 284. 9. Nitre
280. 6. Pimpinel, 284.. 10. Pyrethrum the Root, 281.. and 284. 7.
Tamarisk-Leavs, Id. 29. Wormwood-Root, 285. 12. Yarrow, 283. 6. Texture of a
Plant, 120. 11, etc. Thorns, their kinds. An. 33. 1. Timber, see Trunk. Tin,
its nature, 245. 26. Tin mixed with strong Aqua fortis, what thereupon
observable, 245. 27. Tincture of Bawme in Water, 274. 11. In Spirit of Wine,
275.. 14. Tincture of Corals, a cheat, Id. 28. Trunks, and Branches several
described as they appear to the naked Eye, sc. of Indian Wheat, Dandelyon,
Borage, Colewort, Holyoak, wild Cucumer, Scorzonera, Burdock, Endive, Vine,
Sumach 103, etc. Trunk, Skin, An. 19. 2. and 107. 2 to 5. The Barque, An. 19.
3. Its Parenchyma, 108.. 7. Vessels, 108. 8. to p. 113. The Lympheducts their
Structure, 111.. 30, etc. Milk-Vessels, their Structure, 112. 35, etc.
Different Surface of the Barque how made, 129.. 4. How united to the Wood, 129,
2, 3. How this always keeps moist, not the Pith, An. 20. 7. and 93. 58. and
124.. 2. The Wood, An. 19. 4. to 11. and An. 20 and 21. Its Annual Rings, An.
19. 6. Insertions, An. 19.. 5. 12. to 15. 17. and 128. 8. etc. True wood, 114.
10, etc. How dilated, An. 22. 22, 23. And why, 24, etc. Aer-Vessels, An. 20. 8,
9. and 115. 16, etc. How less in the Trunk, than in the Root, and wh^n^ formed
late in the year etc. 130. 10. and 131. 16. The Pith, An. 19. 5, 18, 19, 20.
and 119. to 122 and 129. 5. etc. Trunks, their different Structure whence, 129.
Shapes, whence, 135. Motions, whence, An. 22. 21. and 136. Trunks, how fitted
for Mechanic use, 137. Trunks, of their Bleeding, Id. 23. and 124. 3, etc.
Trunk-Roots, An. 27, 28. Turnep, des^ribed, An. 13.
V.
VAlves, no where in Plants, An. p. 21.. 16. Vegetables, see Plants. Vegetation
of the Seed, see Seed. The manner of Vegetation, how judged of, Id.. 53.
Vessels of the Root and other Parts, see Root and other Parts. Virtues of
Plants, how to be observed and judged of, Id.. 12, 30, 47. and p. 236. 290.
Imitable, 235. The reason of them, how knowable, Id.. 55. Vitriols, their
nature, 246.. 38. Uterus of Plants, fleshy or membraneous, 186.
W.
WAllnut, 185. Water, how to be examined as relating to Vegetation. Water, how
mingled with stillatitious or other Oils, 237. Wood of the Root and other
Parts, see the Parts. Wood of Beech, An. 20. and 21. Of Oak, Ibid. Its
predominant Principle, Id.. 52.
Y.
YArrow Leaves, their Taste, 28^. 6.
THE EXPLICATION OF THE TABLES, Reduced to a narrow compass; as serving to
clear those Particulars, chiefly, which the Descriptions before given, have not
reached.
The TABLES to the First BOOK, are Four.
TAB. I. FIgure 1, a, The Foramen. F. 2, a, the Radicle lodged in the Body of
the Iner Coat. F. 3, a, the Radicle, b, the Plume or Bud. F. 4, the Seed
covered; c, the Seed open; e, the same magnified. F. 5. a, the Corn covered; c,
naked and a little magnified. F. 6. a, b, the two Lobes; e, the Radicle; c, the
Radicle and Bud; d, the Hollow in which the Bud lies. F. 7. a, the Seed
covered; c, naked; e, open. F. 8. a, one Lobe; -- b, the Bud; b, magnified. F.
9. the Slice a little magnified. F. 10. The Radicle d, cut transversly c. F.
11. The Plume or Bud a, cut transversly c. F. 12. Cut by the Length. F. 13. A
Lobe cut transversly. F. 14. Both the Lobes pared by the Length, to show the
Seminal Root. F. 15. a, the unequal side of one Lobe, showing the Seminal Root
without cuting; c, the flat side. TAB. II. F. 1, 2, and 3. show the gradual
conversion of the Lobes of the Seed, into Leaves. F. 4. a, the Radicle cut by
the length; b, transversly. F. 5. The white Wedges, are the Insertions; the
black, are the Wood; the pricks are the Aer-Vessels; and the black half ovals,
the Lympheducts in the Barque. F. 6. The three black Rings, are the terms of
three years growth. F. 7. a, the upper part; b, the lower. F. 8. A Turnep cut
transversly, and part of the Rind cut off. F. 9. shows the gradual growth of
the Pith. TAB. III. F. 1. The Bud cut transversl^, and part of the Radicle by
the Length, in a Bean newly sprung up. F. 2. shows the Wood as it appears to
the naked Eye. F. 3. the Cane split down. F. 4. the Corn newly sprouted. F. 5.
A Branch of five years growth. From the Circumference, to the utmost black
Ring, goes the Barque. F. 6. a, a piece of the Stalk; b, magnified. F. 7. a, a
piece of Oak wood cut transversly; b, the same magnified. The white Lines are
the lesser and greater Insertions. The Pricks, are the Wood. The little and
great Holes two sorts of Aer-Vessels. F. 8. Part of a Branch ten years old,
with the Barque stripped off, and cut ^oth transversly and down the length, to
show how the Barque is inserted into the Wood. TAB. IV. F. 1. showing how the
Insertions appear, in a piece of Beech-Tree split down, to be braced or w^ven
in together with the Wood. F. 2. to 11. show the different position and Figure
of the Lignous Fibers. F. 12. a, one of the Thecae Seminiformes in a ^^ly, with
the spermatick Powder therein, as apparent to the naked Eye. F. 13. a, one of
the suits in the Florid Attire, as it appears to the naked Eye; b, the Floret;
c, the Sheath; d, the Blade. F. 14. Wherein the white Pentangular Acetary is
bounded by the Calculary. F. 15. The Branches which run through the Stone to
the Flower and Seed. F. 16. The Innermost Cover of the Seed, as shaped when it
is ripe. F. 17. The Coats cut open. F. 18. The Seminal Root.
The TABLES TO THE Second BOOK are Thirteen.
TAB. V. shows the generation of Roots out of the Descending Trunk. So F. 6.
is a treble Root of three years descent; the lowermost, half-roted off. TAB.
VI. F. 1. shows the Surface of the Barque. F. 2. the middle part. F. 3. the
Barque striped. F. 4. the Root cut down the length. F. 5. the Barque striped
off. F. 6. the Network ^oth of the Lympheducts, and of the Aer-Vessels. F. 7.
the Generation of a Bud. F. 8, 9, 10, 11. The Root split down, to show the
Position of the Vessels, and the Figure of the Pith at the top of the Root.
TAB. VII. The Roots all cut transversly, and their Varieties described, in the
second Book, as they appear to the naked Eye. TAB. VIII. Other Roots cut
transversly, and the varieties of their Parts also described in the second
Book. TAB. IX. More Roots cut transversly. TAB. X. F. 1. A Slice of the Root
cut transversly; but a little too big for the life. F. 2. AA, One half of a
like Slice. bb, The Skin. AA DD, The Barque or all that part of the Root
analogous to it. GD, The Lympheducts on the inner edge of the Barque. GG, The
Wood. GT, The Aer-Vessels th^rein. TT, The Pith. TAB. XI. F. 1. The Neck of the
Root cut transversly. F. 2. One half of the same split down. F. 3. Magnified.
AB, The Skin. AE, The Barque. EE, The Lympheducts. The black Columns under
them, are the Wood. The Holes in the Columns are the Aer-Vessels. The white
Columns EL, are Insertions betwixt the Barque and the Pith. Le, The Pith. ee,
The angular Bladders of the Pith. TAB. XII. A, one half of F. 1. magnified. Ab,
The Skin. AG, The Barque, or all that part of the Root which answers to it. In
which the round black spots, are the M^ciducts. DG, The common Lympheducts. DT,
The Pithy Part of the Root. TT, More Lympheducts. In both which, the black
Holes are the Aer-Vessels. TAB. XIII. A, One half of F. 1. magnified. AC, The
Skin. AG, The Barque, or that part of the Root which answers to it. DD, The
Milk-Vessels placed in Rings. EE, The Parenchymous Rings betwixt them. GT, The
Bladders streaming in Rays, by the mixture of the Lympheducts with the
Lacteals. GG, To the Center, the Wood. In which the Holes are the Aer-Vessels.
TAB. XIIII. A b., The kkin, which should have been thicker. AF, The Barque. Gb,
The Bladders in the outer part of the Barque, oblong and postured circularly.
SS The Bladders in the inner part, standing in Arches. FF, A Ring of
Sap-Vessels. dd, Parenchymous Insertions. dLd, The Wood. In which, the Holes
edged with white Rings are the Aer-Vessels. TAB. XV. AA, The Skin. AB, The
Barque. BL, The Sap-Vessels in the form of a Glory. BE, The Wood. In which, the
Holes are the Aer-Vessels. GE, A Ring of more Sap-Vessels. EE, The Pith. TAB.
XVI. Ab, The Skin. AC, The Barque. In which the round Holes B, are
Balsame-Vessels. B. C. Parcels of Lympheducts. In which there are more
Balsame-Vessels. CD, Parenchymous Insertions. DE, Parcels of Wood, In which the
Holes are the Aer-Vessels. TAB. XVII. A, the Skin. AB, The Barque. LS, A parcel
of Sap-Vessels. LI, A Parcel of Wood. In which the Holes great and small are
Aer-Vessels. BB, Parenchymous Insertions betwixt the parcels of Wood. DD,
Others within them.
The TABLES to the Third BOOK are 23.
TAB. XVIII. Hereof see the Description in the Third Book, Chap. 1. TAB. XIX.
F. 1. A Branch of Corin Tree. A, shows the surface of the Barque. B, Of the
wood. F. 2. Stalk of Sonchus split down. F. 3. Branch of Vine split down. In
both, the several Storys or Chambers of the Pith. F. 4. Branch of Walnut. A. an
older, B, a younger: in both, the Pith parted into transvers Membrans. TAB. XX.
F. 1. Shows the Surface of a Walking Cane. And the Clusters of Aer-Vessels,
surround^d with Rings of Succi^er^us. F. 2. The surface of the Skin of Borage
Stalk. F. 3. The Turpentine Vessels running through the length of the Barque;
one of them cut down the middle, the other entire. F. 4. The Milk-Vessels
showed in the same manner. TAB. XXI. Shows the Woody and Aer-Vessels by the
length of the Branch, part of the Barque, and wood, being taken away. TAB.
XXII. AB, The Skin. AC, the Barque. Q, the Parenchymous part. HI, Parcels of
Muciducts in a Ring. DC, Common Lymphedusts. CDEF, the Wood of 3 years growth.
KLMN, The second years growth. O (...), the great Insertions. P (...), the
smaller. XX, ^ignous parcels. Within which the Holes are the Aer-Vessels. EFG,
the Pith. TAB. XXIII. AB, the Skin. AC, the Barque. Q, the simple Parenchyma.
H^, a Ring of special Vessels. P, common Sap-Vessels. CDEF, the Wood of 3 years
growth. KLMN, one yea^s growth. X, great Insertions. PO, lesser between them.
The black parcels are the wood. In which the Holes are the Aer-Vessels. EFG,
the Pith. TAB. XXIV. AB, the Skin. ABCD, the Bark. NN, the Parenchyma. HI, a
Ring of special Sap-Vessels. DMC, Parcels of Lympheducts. CDEF, the Wood. EFLK,
one years growth. KPQL, the larger Aer-vessels in the several parcels of Wood.
(...), the lesser Aer-vessels. MT, the insertions. EFG, the Pith. TAB. XXV. AB,
the Skin. ABCD, the Barque. HI, Special Sap Vessels in arched parcels. OO, the
common Sap-vessels which begin to turn into Wood. CDEF, the Wood. KLMN. one
years growth. The Holes are the Aer-vessels in the wood. (...), the true wood.
Oz, Oy, the Insertions. OF, other Sap-vessels. EFG, The Pith. TAB. XXVI. AB,
the skln. ABCD, the Barque. QQ, the Parenchyma. HI, Special Sap-vessels in
arched parcels. DC, a Ring of common Lympheducts. DCFE, the Wood. KLMN, one
years growth. The Holes are the Aer-Vessels. OO, the greater Insertions. PO,
the smaller. OF, other Sap-vessels. EFG, the Pith. TAB. XXVII. AB, the Skin.
ABCD, the Barque. WV, the Parenchyma. HI, round parcels of Sap-Vessels, DC, the
common Sap-Vessels. DCEF, the Wood of 5 years growth. QRFE, one years growth.
XX, the true wood. The Holes both great and small are the Aer Vessels. SS. The
great Insertions. TS, the smaller. EFG, the Pith. TAB. XXVIII. AB, the Skin.
ABCD, the Barque. HTI, special Sap Vessels in round Parcels. DSC, common Sap
Vessels. DCEF, the Wood of five ysars growth. (...), the true w^od. KL etc. the
great Aer-Vessels. DC, the smaller. SS, the Insertions. EFS, the Pith, TAB.
XXIX. ABCD, the Barque. AB, a Ring of Sap-Vessels in round parcels next the
Skin. HI, the Parenchyma. Another Ring of round parcels. DOC, Common
Lympheducts. DCEF, the wood. MNEF, one years growth. SS, the true wood. KL, the
great Aer Vessels. PQ, the lesser. OO, the Insertions. EFG, the Pith. e, the
Bladders of the Pith. TAB. XXX. AB, the Skin. ABCD, the Barque. RR, the
Parenchyma. HRI, two Rings of special Sap-Vessels. DC, Common Lympheducts.
DCEF, the wood of four years growth* dd, the true wood. Quoth, part of it whiter,
by the mixture of special Sap-Vessels represented by the transvers Lines. MN,
the great Aer Vessels. ce, parcels of lesser ones. OF, a Ring of other
Sap-Vessels. EFG, the Pith. TAB. XXXI. ABCD, the Barque. mm, the Parenchyma.
HmI, Milk Vessels in arched parcels. DKC, Lympheducts. DCEF, the wood of one
years growth. ST, probably milk Vessels heretofore. The Holes in the
Aer-Vessels. KK, the Insertions. EvF, other Milk-Vessels. EFG, the Pith. TAB.
XXXII. ABCD, the Barque. MN, The Parenchyma. DLC, the Lympheducts. HI, The
Vessels which carry the Turpentine. DCFE, the Wood. LL, the Insertions. EFG,
the Pith. The greater Holes both in the Wood and Pith, are more Turpentine
Vessels. TAB. XXXIII. ABCD, the Barque. XY. The Parenchyma. KXYL. Special
Vessels in round parcels. HI, other in a Ring. DC, Common Lympheducts. DCEF,
the wood. SZT, probably one sort of Sap-Vessels heretofore in the Barque. QMQN,
small Aer-Vessels. MN, great Aer-Vessels. RQ, the small Insertions. QQ, the
great ones. EFG, the Pith. TAB. XXXIV. AB aa, the hairy Skin ABCD, the Barque.
HwI, the Parenchyma. DMC, the common Lympheducts. KL, the Milk Vessels. v, one
Vessel. HI, Another sort of Lympheducts, arched over the Milk Vessels. XX,
seems to be a third sort of Lympheducts. DCFE, the Wood. MM, the Insertions.
XX, the true Wood. The Holes therein are the Aer Vessels. OF, a Ring of
Lympheducts. EFG, the Pith. TAB. XXXV. ABCD, the Barque. AMB, the Parenchyma.
HMI, Balsam Vessels. KL, another sort of Sap Vessels in parcels. KLDC,
Lympheducts. DCEF, The Wood. In which the Holes are the Aer-Vessels. MM, the
Insertions. OF, more Balsame-Vessels. EFG, the Pith. TAB. XXXVI. aa, part of a
Vine-Branch cut transversly, and also split half way down the middle. BB, The
same magnified. Showing the Position of the Bladders in the Barque and Pith in
perpendicular Rows; in the Insertions, in Horizontal Rows. And the Vessels or
Parcels of Wood not raced as in many other Trees. TAB. XXXVII. Shows the
bracing of the Vessels. And how the several Parcels of Vessels or Wood are
interwoven with the Insertions. TAB. XXXVIII. ABCD, the Barque. HI, The
Parenchyma. ee, A sort of Sap-Vessels. aa, Another sort. cc, Milk Vessels.
DCEF, the Wood. VV, the Aer-Vessels. tt, More Lympheducts. ss, More
Milk-Vessels. at, The Insertions. EFG, The Pith, composed of ang^lar Bladders,
the Bladders of Threads, and the Threads of single Fibers. (...), One of the
single Fibers. TAB. XXXIX. Shows the Structure of the Lympheducts or of the
Lignous Fibers both in the Barque, and the Wood. F. 1. a, and F. 2, A single
Vessel in the Barque of Flax, composed of a great number of other Lignous
Fibers; with which also the Parenchymous are intermixed. Not visible, except
very highly magnified. F. 3. A parcel of the same Vessels in Wood. F. 4, and F.
5. show the manner of the Ascent of the Sap, both in the Lympheducts, and in
the Lactiferous and other larger Vessels. TAB. XL. The Fibers which hang down
from the Barque are the Lympheducts; one of which is composed of a great many
other smaller Fibers. The large Tubes are the Milk-Vessels composed of
Bladders. The Fibers which hang down from the wood, are some of them the old
Lympheducts t^rn'd to wood. And some, Aer-Vessels unroav'd. The thin Plate
between the two wedges of wood, is one of the Insertions, composed of Bladders,
and those Bladders of Threads. The remainder, is part of the Pith, composed of
Thread, or Fibrous Bladders.
The TABLES to the Fourth BOOK are 42.
TAB. XLI. b, a Dock-Leaf covered with the Veil. d, the Leaf naked. ac, the
Veil spread open. In Clary, the Bud is embraced by the Curled Leaves. In Sumach,
the Bud lies within the Stalk, as an Egg or Kernel within a Shell. TAB. XLII.
F. 1. shows how the Pipes are enclosed one within another. F. 2. a, the Leaf
foulded up. b, opened. F. 3. ab, the B^d. b, a little magnified. F. 4. a b, the
Leaf rolled up, inward. c, a little magnified and cut transversly, to show the
Roll. F. 5. a, the Leaf rolled up. b, magnified and cut transversly. F. 6. a,
the Leaf rolled backward. b, magnified and cut transversly. TAb. XLIII. F. 1.
shows the Tenter-Hooks, by which the Leaf cli^bs. F. 2. shows the
Globulets, turned to a white powder. The Leaf of Jerusalem Cowslip. shows the
Way of the Insect under the Skin. TAB. XLIV. and XLV. shows the Measures of
Leaves by the Circumference. TAB. XLVI and XLVII. shows the proportion between
the chief Fibers; and also the Angels they usually make together. TAB. XLVIII.
F. 1, 2. and 3. show the Apertures in several Leaves. F. 4. shows the same.
And likewise, the peculiar composure of the Bladders and Fibers of the Leaf.
TAB. XLIX. shows the difference in the Bladders, and in the Position of the
Lignous Fibers in the Stalks of Leaves. TAB. L. shows the Pulp of a
Borage-Leaf and many others composed of Bladders; the sides of which Bladder,
are made of other smaller ones. And the distribution of the Lignous Fibers (and
of the Aer-Vessels sheathed within them) not like that of Veins in Animals, but
of the Nervs, etc. See the description of the Leaf. TAB. LI. F. 1. The
appearance of the Aer-Vessels like Cobwebs to the naked Eye, upon breaking the
Leaf. F. 2. A small pei^e ^ut off of the Leaf. F. 3. The same magnified in
which the same Vessels look like spiral wyers stretched out. F 4. The same as
they stand entire within the Wood. TAB. LII. Represents the Aer-Vessels of
Scabious, as in Tab. LI. Tab. LIII. Shows the manner of the Generation of the
Leaf; chiefly, by the help of several Salts, wherewith the Sap is impregnated.
F. 5. (1) The Foundation of the work. F. 6. (1 and 2) strengthened. F. 7. (1 and
3); in which (3) is set with the square end to end: and with the poynt-side of
one, to that of another. F. 8. The same, directing the Position of the Lignous
Fibers at very Acute Angles. F. 9. At less Acute Angles. F. 10. The greater
Fibers at Acute, and the smaller at Right Angles. F. 11. The greater at Right
Angles with the help of (1) (2) or (3). F. 12. (3) directing the Fiber in the
Edge of the Leaf into a greater Circle. F. 13. Into a less, and with diverse
Diameters. F. 14. (4) derecting the Parenchymous Fibers in making the Bladders.
F. 15. In winding from one Bladder to another. F. 17. Or about the Lignous
Fibers. F. 16. In making the Aer-Vessels. TAB. LIVE. shows how Nature manages
the Folds of Flowers according to their Shape. TAB. LV. F. 1. shows the Edges
of the Leaf fastened by their Indented Hairs. F. 2. The Balsamic Knobs in the
place of Hairs. F. 3. The number 5 running 3 times into its self in 13. F. 4.
And five times in 21. F. 5. etc. The Seminiform Attire in Clematis Austri^c^.
With one of the Thecae magnified; of which, there are about 30 or 40 in one
Flower. F. 8, etc. The same in Blattaria, with one of the Thecae magnified; of
which are there about 5 in one Flower. TAB. LVI. The same in yellow Henbane.
With one of the Thecae magnified; of which there are about 5 in one Flower. And
the Column on the top of the Seed-Case. TAB. LVII. The same in St. John's wort,
entire, together with the Seed-Case or Vterus. TAB. LVIII. The Varieties of the
Spermatick Particles in the Seminiform Attire. TAB. LIX. The Florid Attire of
Golden Rod; In which, the several suits consist but of two pieces. And of which
Attire, the Flower does almost wholly consist. TAB. LX. F. 1, etc. The same
Attire in French Marigold or Flos Africanus, with one suit magnified. Of which,
there are about 12, in one Flower; and every suit consisting of 3 Pieces. F. 5.
One of another Flower, consisting also of 3 Pieces. TAB. LXI. One suit of the
same Attire in Marigold, and Knapweed, each of them consisting of three Pieces.
F. 5. a, The Attire of one Piece, proper to each Leaf in a Marigold Flower,
besides that in the bosom of the Flower. F. 8. a b, the Seed-Case or Uterus at
the bottom of every suit. TAB. LXII. The Attire (of 3 Pieces) proper to each
Leaf in the Flower of Cichory. TAB. LXIII. shows the Flower of Mezereon
perfectly formed in all its Parts, in the year before it appears. But differs
in Shape, as a Foetus does when newly formed. TAB. LXIV. shows the same in
the Flower of Asarum. TAB. LXV. shows the position of the 20 chief Branches
in an Apple. Their Production from the Stalk to the Seeds and Flower. And a
part of the Parenchyma magnified, sc. that which is pricked out from the Coar
to the Skin; showing the oblong Figure of the Bladders, and the Divisions in
every Bladder. TAB. LXVI. F. 1, etc. shows the Bladders in the Rind of a
Limon containing the Oil. The Bags and Bladders of the Pulp, containing the
sower Juice. And the Position of the Vessels belongs to the Fruit, Seed, and
Flower. F. 5. shows the same Vessels, and treble Parenchyma in a Cucumer. TAB.
LXVII. Repres ^teth the Parts of a Pear. The position and pr^duction of the
Vessels. The Chanel from the top of the Pear to the botome of the Coar. The
Tartareous Knots. And the Bladders radiated to them. TAB. LXVIII. See the
Descriptions of Fruit^; and the last Chapter of the Generation of the Seed.
TAB. LXIX. F. 5. Shows the Parts of a Goosberry. The darker part is the sower
Rind. Consisting of two sorts of Bladders, of which some very small, and others
very great. The white pieces on the circumference of the Berry, are the Lignous
Fibers. The two opposite white and radiated Bodies are the Middle Parenchyma. And
the oblong Baggs round about the several Seeds or Seed-Cases, are the sweet
Pulp. TAB. LXX. Shows the Seed-Case of Radish opened, and the Seeds hanging
on two Ro^es. That of Poppey both entire, and split down the middle. A slice of
the Cod of Garden-Bean, while very young; and therein the Bladders and Threads
of the Spongy Parenchyma. And the gradual ripening and opening of that of
yellow Henbane. TAB. LXXI. Shows the Seed-Case of Tulip entire, cut
transversly, and split down. A slice of Thorn-Apple, or of the Seed-Case of
Stramonium, while young. That of Pimpinel naturally divided into two
Hemisphers; with the Button, on which the Seeds grow, erected in the middle.
The manner of the ejaculation of the Seed, in Coded Arsmart. And the Coats of
the Seed of Azarum formed the year before it ripens. TAB. LXXII. Shows the
measures of Plum-stones. The Apertures, and Divisions, of the covers of the
Seed. The Seed and Seed-Case of Hearts Tongue, opened with a Spring. And other
contrivances both for the Motion, and Arrest of other Seeds. TAB. LXXIII and
LXXIV. See the Descriptions. In Tab. 74. the corners and edges of that of
Fox-glove should have been rounder. The Figures are all done pretty near a
Scale. TAB. LXXV. The Belly and Back of a Datestone, and the small sprouting
Node taken out of the Hole in the back ^ut open. The Shapes and Foulds of
diverse Seeds. The Vitellum of Orach, and Rhapontick. In great blew-Lupine, d,
the Navle; b, the descending part of the Radicle. TAB. LXXVI. Flag. 1, the
Seed. 2. s^lit open. 3, the true Seed which lies in the hollow made in the
Cover (2) 4, one half of (2) magnifyd. 5, the Seed (3) magnifyd. Purging Angola
Nut. 1, with the shell on. 2. taken off. 3, the soft Cover split down. 4, the
Seed which lies in it; the Lobes hereof answerable to two Leaves, and Radicle
to the Stalk. And so in the rest. TAB. LXXVII. Coffee Berry stone. 1, The belly
of the Stone. 2, the Black. 3, pared a little. 4, the Kernel taken out of it.
5, the same magnifyd. Goosgrass. 1, the entire Seed. 2, the back of the hard
Cover. 3, the belly. 4, cut in two. 5, the same magnifyd. 6, the true Seed
taken out of it. Staphisagria. 1, the entire Seed. 2, the hard Cover. 3, Split
in two. 4, the true Seed taken out of it. 5, The same magnifyd. Peony, 1, the
Seed commonly so called. 2, one half of it split down. 3, the other half. 4.
the true seed taken out of it. 5, the same magnifyd. Stramonium. 1, the Seed
entire. 2, the iner thick cover. 3, the same split in two. 4, the true seed
taken out of it. 5. half the thick Cover (3) magnifyd. 6, the Seed (4)
magnifyd. TAB. LXXVIII. Some examples of the Buds of Seeds before they are
sown. Sena. 1, the naked Seed. 2, the Lobes divided to show the Bud. 3, one
Lobe with the Bud magnifyd. Carduus Benedictus, 1, the entire Seed. 2, with the
outer Covers off. 3, naked. 4, divided. 5, that half with the Bud, magnifyd.
Hemp. 1, the naked Seed divided. 2, 3, the same magnifyd. Almond. 1. one half
of the Kernel. 2, the Radicle and Bud at the bottom of it. 3, the same broken
off. 4, magnifyd. 5, opened. TAB. LXXIX. F. 1. ab, Part of the outer Coat. c d,
Part of the Inner Coat. c d e, one Lobe covered with the Skin. f g, the other,
with the skin and part of the Parenchyma pared off. f f, the Skin. h h. the
Parenchyma. i i. the Seminal Root. k k, the Radicle. k l, where it is cut off
from the Lobes. M, the Plume or Bud. N, The Cavitys in which it is lodged. F.
2. Shows the Barque, Vessels and Pith of the Radicle. TAB. LXXX. F. 1. A
Slice of a young Apricock, cut transversly, near the lower end; showing the
duplicature of the Skin half way through the Stone. F. 2. A Slice, cut near the
upper end; showing the duplicature of the Skin quite throw the Stone. F. 3. A
well-grown Apricock cut by the length. F. 4, 5, The Membranes of a Filbert full
rite. F. 6, The Membranes of a young Apricock, with part of the Seed-branch. F.
7. the two Membranes cut by the length. TAB. LXXXI. F. 1, The outer and middle
Coats or Membranes; with the Chanel, oval at both ends, now formed in the
latter. f. 2, Part of the same, with the upper Oval grown larger, and the
inmost Cover now also formed therein. f. 3. the same with the inmost cover
grown larger. f. 4. the In most Cover more magnified, and the hollow in the
smaller end, laid open, to show the Seed it self, newly begun in a round Node.
f. 5. the same; in which the Node begins to be divided into two Lobes. f. 6, 7,
8, the gradual forming of the Lobes. f. 9, next the forming of the Radicle. f.
10, 11, Its gradual contraction at the point, into a short and slender Navle
string. Which in the further growth of the Seed, breaks and disappears. TAB.
LXXXII. a a, the Pulp, or open Parenchyma. b b, the close Parenchyma or ground
of the Stone. c c, the Flower-Branch running through the body of the Stone. d
d, the Seed-Branch striking into the hollow of the Stone, and so running round
the outer Membrane ee. f f, the middle Membrane. g g, the Chanel. h, the inner
Membrane, in which lies the Seed. TAB. LXXXIII. f. 1. the manner of the
generation of the Essential Salts of Plants. f. 2, a Crystal of the Essential
Salt of Rosemary, a little magnifyd. f. 3, a b, two of Wormwood, a, upon the
second Solution; b upon the first. f. 4, one of G. Scurvygrass; a, one side; b
the other. f. 5. a Crystal of the Marine Salt of Rosemary. f. b, of Garden
Scurvy Grass; a the upper side; b. the nether. f. 7, of Wormwood. f. 8. of
Black Thorn. f. 9. another of the same. f. 10, of Firne. f. 11, another of
Wormwood.
FINIS.
Tab. 1.
fig. 1 f.2. f.3. Garden Bean

f.4. Cress seed

f.5. Barley

f.6. Almond

f.7. Foenugreek Seed

f.8. French Bean

f.9. Slice of a Bean

f.10. Radicle

f.11. Plume

f.12. Plume

f.13. Lobe

f.14. Seminal Root

f.15. Gourd



Tab. 2.
fig.1 Lupine Seed.

f.2. Cucumer-S.

f.3. Lettice-S.

f.4. Bean.

f.5. Vine-Root.

f.6. Plume-Root

f.7. Fenil-Root

f.8. Turnep

f.9. Columbine-Root

f.10.



Tab. 3.
fig.1 a Bean

f.2. Oak Wood

f.3. Rice of Cane

f.4. a Barley-Corne

f.5. Plum-Tree Branch

f.6. Bur-dock

f.7. Piece of Oak magnifyd

f.8. Piece of Beech



Tab. iv
fig.1 Piece of Beech Wood

f.2. Stalks of ye Leafes of Asarum

f.3. Stalks of ye Leafes of Cichory

f.4. Stalks of ye Leafes of Cabbage

f.5. Stalks of ye Leafes of Coltsfoot

f.6. Stalks of ye Leafes of Endive

f.7. Stalks of ye Leafes of Ivy

f.8. Stalks of ye Leafes of Dock

f.9. Stalks of ye Leafes of Mint

f.10. Stalks of ye Leafes of Borage

f.11. Stalks of ye Leafes of Mullein

f.12. Lily

f.13. Peruvian Starwort

f.14. Pear

f.15. Aprecock

f.16. ye Secundine

f.17. Coats of lupine

f.18. Lupine



Tab. 5.
fig.1 Primrose Root

f.2. Wood Sorrel R.

f.3. Deuils-bi^t R.

f.4. Tuberous Iris R.

f.5. Dandelion R.

f.6. Dragon R.

f.7. Spring-Crocus R.



Tab: VI.
f.1 f.2. f.3. f.4. The Root of Scorzonera.

f.5. Burnet

f.6. f.7. Jerusalem Artichoake.

f.8. Dandelion.

f.9. Borage.

f.10. Carrot.

f.11. Parsley.



Roots which Bleed little or nothing.
Mallow Patience Iris Peony Bistord
Roots which Bleed a Lymphna.
Bugloss Bryony Borage ^. Henbeane. Horseradish. Deadly Nightshade. ^^^^wort
Non-Bulbous Lily Asparagus. Columbine.




Tab. VIII.
Roots which Bleed a Lympha.
f.1 Parsnip f.2. Carrot f.3. Beet f.4. Nettle f.5. Jerusalem Artichoak f.6.
^alerian f.7. Dropwort f.8. Lychnis
Roots which Bleed a Milk or Oily Sap
f.9. Louage f.10.Bulyr Bur f.11. Dandelyon f.12. Great Celandine f.13. Cychory
f.14. Goatsbeard f.15. Bishopsweed




Tab: 9.
Roots with Milky or Balsamic Vessels, and Lymphaeducts, both apparent.
F.1 Fenil F.2. Enula camp F.3. Tracheliu^ F.4. Wormwood
Roots with two sorts of Lymphaticks; in some, Aqu^educts and Muciducts.
F.5. Guard: Scurvygrass. F.6. Wild Cucumer. F.7. Melilote. F.8. Potato F.9.
Carduus beued. F.10. Eryngo F:11 Cumfrey F.12. Monks Hood F.13. Valerian. F:14.
Cinquefoyle. F:15 Burnet.




Tab. x.
Fig. 1 Small Root of Asparagus

Fig: 2. The same magnified.



Tab. xi.
fig.1 Root of Jerusalem Artichoak cut transversly

f.2. Half a Slice of ye same

Fig.3. Half a Slice Magnifyd

Standard of Bladders in Roots.



Tab: XII.
Fig.1 Slice of a small M. Mallow Root

Fig.2. The same Magnifid



Tab XIII
f.i. Slice of Dandelyon Root

Fig.2. The same magnifyd



Tab. 14
Fig.1 The small end of a Bugloss Root

Fig.2. The same magnified



Tab 15
Fig.1 (...) (...) end of Horse Radish Root

Fig.2. The same magnifyd



Tab. XVI.
f.1 Wormwood Root cut transversly

f.2. The same Magnified



Tab: XVII
Fig.1. Vine-Root cut transversly

Fig.2. The same Magnified.



Tab. 18
Stalks and Branches cut transuersly
f.1 Dandelyon

f.2. Indian Wheat

f.3. Borage

f.4. Holyoak

f.5. Colewort

f.6. Wild Cucumer

f.7. Burdock

f.8. Scorzonera

f.9. Endive

f.10. Vine

f.11. Sumach



Tab 19
F.1 Corin

F.2. Sonchus

F.3. Vine

F.4. Walnut



Tab. 20.
Fig.1. the Surface of Walking-Cane

F.2. the Skin of Borage-Stalk

F.3. Turpentine-Vessels in the Barque of Pine.

F.4. Milk-Vessels in the Barque of Sumuch.



Tab.21.
AB Piece Cut out of (...) Magnified to Show ye Lymphaeducts and Aer-Vessels

ab. Part of a Vine Branch cut transversly



Tab. 22.
f.1. Holly Branch cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 23
f.1. Hazel-Branch cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 24
f.1. Barberry Branch cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 25
f.1 Apple Branch cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 26
f.1 Pear Branch cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 27
f.1 Plum Branch cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 28
f.1 Elm Branch cut transversly

f.2. (...) same



Tab. 29
f.1 Ash branch cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 30
f.1 Wallnut Branch cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 31
f.1 Figg Branch cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 32
f.1 Pine Branch cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 33
f.1 Oak Branch cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 34
f.1 Sumach Branch cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 35
f.1 Wormwood Stalk cut transversly

f.2. The same



Tab. 37
Part of a Corin Branch cut as in Tab. 36.


TAB: XXXVI^^
Part of a Vine Branch cut transversly and splitt half way down ye middle


Tab. 38
f.1 Thistle Stalk cut transversly

f.2. The same



TAB XXXIX
f.1 a Linen Thread

f.2. One of ye Lignus Fibers or Lympheducts ye Thread

f.3. The small particle of Fir-wood magnifyd.

f.4.

f.5.



TAB XL
Part of Tab.34 represented somewhat Larger and with several Breaks to show ye
Contexture both of ye Perpendicular and Horizontal Fibers


TAB. XXXXI
Leaf of Dock

Wild-Clary

Branch of Sumach



Tab. ^^
f.1 Onion

f.2. Mallow

f.3. Scabious

f.4. Violet

f.5. Bears Ear.

f.6. Dock



Tab: 43
Fig.1 Leaf of Goosgrass

fig.2. Of Bears Ear.

Hairs on ye Leaf of Tree Sage.

Of Herusalem Cowslip.

Hairs on ye Leaf of Mullen.



Tab. XLIIII
Leaf of Venetum Vetch

Orange

Sage-Leav'd Ironwort

Cornelian Cherry

Broad Leaved Laser-wort



Tab. XLV.
Leopard's Bane

Great Laser^^^^

(...) Calamint

Black Poplar

Shrubby Marsh-Mallow



Tab. 46.
Leaves of
Clematis Nyl^m. Mallow Vine




TAB XLVII
Leaf of Sirynga

Hemlock

Holyoak

Strawberry



TAB. XLVIII
Leaf of Firr.

Rhamnus Salicis Folio.

The top of a Pine Leaf.

The top of a Lilly leaf.



TAB. XLIX.
Stalks of
Mallow. Dock. Dandelion. Wild-Clary. Borage. Mullen.




Tab. 50.
A young Borage Leaf


Tab. 51.
The Aer-Vessels (...) in a Vine Leaf.


Tab. LII.
The Aer-Vessels (...) in a Scabious Leaf.


Tab. LIII
Marine Salt

Nitrous

Alkaline

Acid



TAB. LIVE.
Flowers of
Blattana Starwort Convolvulus Mallow Poppey Ladys Looking Glass Ladys Bower
Marvel of Peru Cichory




Tab. 55.
f.1 Flower of Dulcamara magnified.

f.2. Flower of Colus Jovis magnified.

f.3. Flower of St. James's wort.

f.4. Fl. of Chamemile.

f.5. Fl. of Clematis Austriaca.

f.6. One of ye Thecae in ye flower.

f.7. Theca (a) magnified.

f.8. Fl. of Blattana.

f.9. One of ye Thecae.

f.10. The Theca (c) magnified.



Tab. 56.
f.1 Flower of Hyoscyanus.

f.2. One of ye Spermatick Thecae.

f.3. The Backside of ye Theca.(a)

f.4. The Belly of the Theca. (a)

f.5. The Edges of the Theca (a) open.

f.6. The Column in ye Middle of ye flower.

f.7. The Column (e) Magnified.



Tab. 57.
f.1 Flower of St. John's wort.

f.2. The same a little magnified.

f.3.

f.4.



Tab. 58.
The Sperme of
f.1 Snapdragon. f.2. Plantaine f.3. Bearsfoot f.4. Carnation f.5. Bindweed
f.6. Devils-bit f.7. Bean f.8. Lily ^^ Deadly Nightshade f.10. Pancy f.11. The
flower of Mallow f.12 The Attire (e) on f.11. f.13. One of ye Thecae (t) in
f.12. f.14. Mallow. The spermatich Globulets in f13.




Tab. 59.
f.1 A sprig of Golden-Rod flowers.

f.2. One flower.

f.3. The flower (a) magnified.

f.4. and 5. One suit of ye flower (a)

f.6. The Blad wth-in ye sheath. (c)



Tab. 60.
f.1 A French Marigold.

f.2. One suit of which about 12 are withing ye circle.

f.3. The (...) magnified.

f.4. The Blade^^^ taken out of ye sheath.

f.5. One suit of Chrysanthemum Creet. of which about 80 are in every flower.



Tab. 61.
f.1 Marigold.

f.2. One of ye suits of which are about 40 in ye circle.

f.3. The suit magnified.

f.4. A Marigold leaf.

f.5. (...) Magnified.

f.6. The flower of Knapweed.

f.7. One suit of Knapweed.

f.8. The suit (d) Magnified.



Tab. 62.
f.1 Cichory flower.

f.2. One leaf.

f.3. The Leaf (a) with its Attire Magnified.

f.4. The Sheath.

f.5. The Blade.



Tab. 63.
f.1

f.2. One of ye Flowers in ye Bud (a) magnified.

f.3. The same flower cut open, showing ye spermatick Thecae, and ye Uterus.

f.4. Shows a young Tulip (a) as it is formed in ye bottom of ye Root in
September.



Tab. 64.
f.1 A flower Bud of A Sarum.

f.2. The Same Opened.

f.3. Is (a) Magnified.

f.4. Is (a) with ye Leaves Stripped of.

f.5. one of ye Theca (a. b.) surrounding (c.)

f.6. (...) or ye Column Naked.



Tab. 65
f.1. an Apple cut by the length

f.2. Cut transversly

f.3. The piece (ab) magnified



Tab. 66.
f.1 a Limon cut down

f.2. cut transversly

f.3. great one of the Baggs, a.c.e.

f.4. One of the little Baggs c.e. cut transversly

f.5. Garden Cucumer

f.6. Wile Cucumer



TAB. LXVII
fig.1 Pear cut transversly

fig.2. Cut by ye length

f.3. A Piece cut out of f. 1.

f.4. The piece (a.b.) magnified.

f.5. Quince



Tab. 68. (See Tab. 80. etc.)
f.1. a plum cut transversly

f.2. an Aprecock cut transversly

f.3. a piece taken out of f.2.

f.4. the piece a) magnified

f.5. A young one with ye now bulky Coats of ye Seed

f.6. the same by ye length

f.7. One with the kernel full grown



Tab. 69.
f.1. a Cherry unskind

f.2. a Grape

f.3. a Goosberry cut down.

f.4. a Goosberry cut transversly.

f.5. Is (f.4.) magnified.

f.6. a Filbert



Tab. 70.
Seed-Case of
Garden Radish Red Poppy of Garden Bean. Yellow Henbeane.




Tab. LXXI.
Seed-Case of
Tulip Stramonium Anugallis Code^ Arsinart Azarum




Tab LXXII
Plum Stones

French-Bean

Chestnut

Stone of Bellir: Myrobal

P. Christi S

Orange S

The Small piece (a c) taken out of the Leaf and magnified

Leaf of Hearts tongue

The Seed Case open

The Seed

Seed of Typha Mayor

Seed of Pine

Wood Sorrel Seed

S. of Goos Grass



TAB. LXXIII
Seeds of
Poppy Little Century Spergula Little Celandine Lychnis Great Celandine
Chickweed Ben Pentaphyll fragif. Doves-feet Br^^klime Rush Little Bell. Sed.
maj. Vervaine Ragwort Barley Grass. St. John's wort




LXXIIII
Seeds of
Nettle Eyebright Wormwood Yarrow Sorrel Anagallis Nigella a Sort of Bugloss
Melissa Moldarica Bellis Ta^aceti folio annua. Stachas Arabica. Wart Wort.
Chrysanth. Americ: Blattaria. Fox Glove. Tansey.




Tab: 75.
Seeds of
Date Hounds tongue Cucumer Scorzonera Viola lunaris Woad Great blew Lupine.
Orach Rhapontick Garden Radish Holyoak Cotton Plant




Tab: 76
Seeds of
Flag Purging Angola Nut Purging Barbado-Nut Ricinus Americanus Nux Vomica
officin:




Tab 77
Seeds of
Coffee Goosgrass Staphisagria Peony Stramonium




Tab. 78.
Seeds of
Sena Carduus bened Hemp Almond




TAB: LXXIX.
f.1 A Garden Bean in one Lobe of which the Seminal Root is laid bare.

f.2. The Radicle cut transversly

A piece of ye true skin



Tab. 80
Shows ye Structure of ye (...) two uper Membranes of ye Seed


Tab. 81
Shows ye further process in the Generation of ye Seed


The young Fruit, Three Membranes, and Seed now loose.


(...)
Essent: Salts of Plants

Marine Salts of Plants.




