Hosonna to the Son of David: OR, A TESTIMONY To the Lord's Christ. Showing His
rule and reign over the people of the Jews upon Earth a thousand years,
together with his second personal appearance proved from the Scripture of
Truth. With A general word of Use from the point to Saints and Sinners.

By Samuel Grosvenour.

And behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall
call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the
highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his father David,

Luke 1.31, 32, 33. LONDON, Printed for L. Chapman, at the Crown in
Popes-Head-Alley. 1659.

To the Reader.
IT is observable throughout all generations, that truth in its first
appearance in the world can be very hardly entertained, but rather opposed. I
am sure, of all truths, this has not, nor is not like to escape. For
Gospel Truths will bring Gospel-sufferings: and therefore whosoever thou art
that wilt inquire into this truth, I beg of thee, that thou would first sit
down and consider what it will cost thee; and search the Scriptures, whether
things be so or no: For this is no new Doctrine, but that which has been
testified by the mouths of all the Prophets: and consider what the Apostle
says: For he has chosen us unto salvation, through sanctification of the
spirit, and belief of the truth. So that every truth is to be looked after by
believers, because that God, who is a God of truth, is sweeth to be enjoyed in
all truth. Reader, accept of this small mite, and the Lord grant that the eyes
of thy understanding may be enlightened in the knowledge of Christ, as King,
Priest, and Prophet unto thy poor soul; and then how sweet will it be unto thee
to consider, that that King that rules and reigns in thy heart, shall ride
Conquering and to Conquer, until all his Enemies, both within and without, in
thy heart, and my heart, and in the world, be made a footstool: which shall be
the desire and prayer of him, who is a servant unto the God of Jacob,

Sam. Grosvenour.

Hosanna to the Son of David: Or, A Testimony to the Lords Christ.
THe most wise God of Heaven and Earth has so ordered and disposed of all
truth revealed in his word, that every truth throughout all generations has
broke forth in its due season: and truly this truth that I am now speaking of,
it does more particularly concern the Saints of the last times. I shall make it
appear, how all along this truth has been testified unto from the first to the
last: we shall begin with Gods promise unto Abraham, the thirteenth of Genesis,
and the fifth verse; And the Lord (...) said unto Abraham after that Lot was
separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou
art, Northward, and Southward, and Eastward, and Westward: For all the land
which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever. This land
was the land of Canaan which God promised Abraham; yea, and a promise that is
yet to be fulfilled.

Object. Abraham was in the Land of Canaan, and his seed after him.

Answ. It is true; but in what condition? they were strangers, and Pilgrims
there, and this they confessed, and therefore this could not be a possession of
it.

Ob. I, but God in promising Abraham the Land of Canaan, it was a Type of the
heavenly Canaan.

Answ. It is true, Abraham had an eye of faith to see into the promised rest,
as all the seed of Abraham that are spiritual Jews have; However, there is more
then this in the promise.

For, observe how God cites this promise unto him: it is said, After that Lot
was separated from him. I do not question but that Lot belongs unto the
general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, whose names are written in
Heaven, but yet Gods Covenant must be with Abraham: now observe the promise,
For all the land which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for
ever; now we know that all the Types of the Law, as that of the blood of Bulls,
and Coats, and others, they did all center in Jesus Christ, and so every true
believer has entered into that rest: but consider what the Lord says, The
Land which thou see, the breadth and length of it, will I give unto thee, and
to thy seed for ever. And you shall find in many places of Scripture, that
when the Lord promises to bring back again the Captivity of the Jews, (he
says) I will bring them into their own Land: a Scripture as clear as the Sun,
for this, you may see in Jer. 23.5, 6, 7, 8. Behold, the days come, says the
Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign
and prosper, and execute Justice and Judgment in the Earth. In his days Judah
shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is his name whereby he
shall be called, The Lord our righteousness: and in verse. 8. They shall dwell
in their own Land. So that here is both the two Tribes, and the ten Tribes
promised to enjoy their own Land again, which is the Land of Canaan, under the
rule and reign of that righteous branch unto David, which is the Lord Jesus
Christ, for it is said, he must execute Justice and Judgment in the earth.
That Christ is that branch spoken of, you may see plainly in the eleventh of
Isaiah, the first verse: the whole Chapter is a sweet discovery of the Kingdom
of Christ; and in the ninth verse (he says) The earth shall he full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. We shall now begin with all
the Prophets that have spoken in the name of the Lord: and that the Lord might
be justified out of the mouths of the wicked, stand forth wicked Balaam in the
24th. of Numbers, and the third verse, And he took up his Parable, and said,
Balaam the Son of Beor has said, and the man whose eyes are open has said.
Pray observe in the first place, it is said in the second verse, that the
Spirit of God was upon him: from whence I would infer this, that a Soul by
the common enlightening of the Spirit may come to see into this and other
glorious truths, and therefore it ought to be our care, that we have not only
that Spirit upon us, but the Spirit in us; and as Christ says, Rejoice not
that the Spirits are subject unto you, but rather that your names are written
in heaven: so I say, Rejoice not in thy knowledge of this Kingdom, but rather
that Jesus Christ is King in thy heart, whereby thou come to have assurance
that thou have an Interest in this glorious spiritual Kingdom, when Jesus
Christ shall come to be admired in all them that believe. But to go on where we
lest Balaam, in the seventh verse: He shall pour the water out of his buckets;
(speaking of Jacob) and his seed shall be in many waters, and his King shall be
higher then Agag, and his Kingdom shall be exalted. Jesus Christ shall be
higher then all the Agags, and Nimrods, and Potentates of the Earth. For he is
the great and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy
6.15. Moses also did by faith perceive what God would do for his Israel in the
last days, as you may see in Deuteronomy. 33.26, 27, 28, 29. Hannah in her sweet song
of deliverance prophesies of Christ, and of his Kingdom, 1 Samuel 2.10. The
adversaries of the Lord shall be broken in pieces; out of heaven shall he
thunder upon them; the Lord shall judge the ends of the Earth, and he shall
give strength unto his King, and exalt the horn of his anointed. Mark, friends,
the Exaltation of Christ it lies in the destruction, of his implacable
enemies, Ps. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand
until I make thine Enemies thy footstool: he shall give strength unto his
King: Jesus Christ is the King of Gods own appointment, a King that God has
given unto his subjects, Isa. 9.6, 7. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a
Son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his Nme shall
be called, Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The
Prince of peace. Of the increase of his government and peace, there shall be no
end, upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to
stablish it with Judgment and Justice, from henceforth even for ever. The zeal
of the Lord of Hosts will perform this. That same Jesus that is the King of his
Saints and people, that Jesus shall also be the King over all the Nations: Rev.
3.21. To him that overcomes, will I give to sit with me on my Throne, even as
I also overcame, and am set down with my Father on his Throne. So that here you
may see that Jesus Christ has a Throne, which he calls more properly his
Throne. Now what this overcomer shall do, you may see in Rev. 2.26, 27. To him
will I give power over the Nations; agreeing with that Parable that Christ
spoke of, concerning the Lord and his servants: to him that had gained ten
Talents, his Lord says, Be thou ruler over ten Cities; and to him that had
gained five, over five. But let us a little consider this sweet Prophecy of
the ninth of Isaiah. Some Expositors have much reasoned whether they should
call Isaiah a Prophet, or an Evangelist. And truly, though all these names that
are given unto Christ be sulfilled in respect unto his people in the state of
Grace, (for he is the wonderful Counselor of his people in all straits and
difficulties, and he is the mighty God, for his own arm has brought salvation,
and he is the everlasting Father, and he is the Prince of peace; for Christ
only is a believers peace) but it is said, He shall be King upon the Throne of
David. Now ye know that the Throne of David it was in the Land of Judea over
the people of the Jews, this is the Throne which Jesus Christ shall have.

Object. How can that be? for Jerusalem is destroyed.

Answ. Though it be, yet we have the promise of God for it, that it shall be
again inhabited, Zech. 12.6. And Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own
place, even in Jerusalem. Yea, we find that at Christ's second personal
appearance, it is said that his seet shall stand upon the Mount of Olives,
which is before Jerusalem, Zech. 14.4. and in the same day you find that he
shall be King over all the earth, and there shall be one Lord, and his name
one, in the 9. verse. We know also, that as Solomon in his succession to the
Crown was a sweet Type of Christ, so likewise in respect of his peaceable
Kingdom, and therein Christ shall well be called the Prince of Peace. Now it is
very much to our purpose to consider with what difficulty Solomon did attain
unto the Crown; you have the story in the 1. of Kings, chap. 1. the whole
Chapter is very remarkable: you find that Solomon's mother in the 17. verse
comes unto King David, and she said unto him, My Lord, thou swarest by the Lord
thy God unto thine handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy Son shall reign
after me, and he shall sit upon my Throne, the 18. verse, and now behold,
Adonijah reigns. Observe, it is the woman that prevails with David, and
surely it must be the woman (even the Church) that must prevail with God for
the exaltation of Jesus Christ, for she is said to travel with the man-child,
in the twelfth of the Revelation, and she brings him forth at last in verse 10.
Now is come salvation and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power
of his Christ: no more accusings then of Satan; no, no, the accuser of the
brethren is cast down. Now observe how the woman and the Churches and Saints of
Christ may agree together in their Petition: for as she said, My Lord, thou
swarest that thy Son Solomon should reign, so may the Church say, Lord, thou
have sworn that thy Son Jesus Christ shall reign, in the 89th. Psalm, verse 3,
4. Well, what follows? And now (says she) behold, Adonijah reigns. This
word, Behold, it is an expression of admiration; Behold, my servant whom I have
chosen (speaking of Christ.) Truly, it should be matter of admiration unto the
Sons and daughters of Zov, that the Lord should have so much patience as to
afford the Kings of the earth that time which is allotted unto them, but the
Lamb shall at last overcome them; we find that when Bathsheba had done, then
came in also Nathan the Prophet, and he comes with the same story: certainly
the true Prophets of God they will in all generations join with the Church in
that which concerns the glory of God; and hereby we may come to know who are
the false Prophets, and who are the true. The false Prophets they cry up the
beast, and wonder after the beast; but the true Prophets they cry up Jesus
Christ, and admire at his excellency, and are forced to cry out, Who would not
fear thee, O thou King of Nations! Jer. 10.7. and as you read in the following
Chapters, of the miserable end that did follow them that helped to Crown
Adonijah, so be assured that nothing but misery and destruction will be the end
of them that are enemies to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: But as for those mine
enemies that would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and
slay them before me. This will be Christ's sentence unto such his enemies at his
appearance. It is my desire to run through the whole current of Scripture, that
the Reader may be surnished against all Gainsayers. The next Scripture that
hints unto this truth, is in Job 19 25. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and
that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, verse 26, 27. yet in my
flesh shall I see God, my eyes shall behold him: this was the comfort of Jobs
knowledge, that he knew that Christ was his Redeemer. O man, or whoever thou
art that read, what does thy Soul say to this? can thou say as Job said?
has Christ given thee an entrance into his everlasting Kingdom of Grace?
believe it, otherwise this truth will afford thee little comfort: he does not
say, A Redeemer, or THE Redeemer, but MY Redeemer, and this Redeemer shall
stand upon the earth; yea, (says he) mine eyes shall behold him: for our vile
bodies shall not be taken away from us at Christ's appearance, but as Paul
says, they shall be changed and made like unto his glorious body. And now we
come to the 2. Psalm, where you have a plain demonstration of Christ and his
Kingdom, verse. 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion: as sure as
ever this was performed in his state of Humiliation, so shall it surely be
accomplished in his Exaltation, Acts 4.25. yet this Psalm does more
particularly point at his Exaltation, when he shall come the second time
without sin unto salvation: for it is said in the 9. verse, Thou shall break
them with a Rod of Iron; agreeing to that which is said in another place, By
the breath of his mouth he shall slay the wicked; yea, we find sometimes that
God has so revealed this truth in his word, that it cannot well be understood
spiritually, unless we will turn Scriptures into Allegories, as in Psalm 47.
where the very Translators or Expositors of the Bible have helped us with this
Exposition: The Nations are exhorted cheerfully to entertain the kingdom of
Christ. In the 2. verse it is said, He is terrible, and a great King over all
the earth, whereas Christ as he is King to his people, he is the Prince of
peace, Isa. 9.6. but see the work that this King is to do, in v. 3. He shall
subdue the people under us, and the Nations under our feet: this will be more
especially done at his second glorious appearing, agreeing to that in Dan 12.1.
And another thing that you may take notice of in the Psalm, is in v. 9. where
he says, The Princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of
the God of Abraham. By Princes here I understand the Saints of God, for they
are made Kings and Priests by Christ unto God the Father, as the Apostle says,
If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's, seed and heirs according to the
promise, Gal. 3.29. that it is spoken of the Saints that shall rule and reign
with Christ as Princes, you may see in Isa. 32.1. Behold, a King shall reign in
righteousness, and Princes shall rule in judgment. Second verse, and a man
shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the Tempest: this
is the Man Christ Jesus, born of the Virgin Marie, crucified, dead, and buried,
and ascended: for as he suffered as God-man in the earth, so he shall be
exalted as God man upon the earth, witness his own words, who is truth it self,
Mark. 13.26. And they shall see the Son of man coming in the Clouds, with great
power and glory. Christ so coming as he is the Son of David, and the Son of
Abraham. Now the place whereunto he shall gather all his people, it is said to
be the excellency of Jacob, which is in the Land of Canaan. The next Psalm that
speaks of this truth, is 67. 4. O let the Nations be glad, and sing for joy:
why, what is the matter? it follows: For thou shall judge the people
righteously; and lead the Nations upon earth. It cannot be denied, but that
Christ does govern and dispose of all things, now: but this points at his very
personal being as God-man upon the earth, verse. 6. Then shall the earth yield
her increase; I cannot believe that the earth does now yield the same increase
that it did before the fall of Adam, but certainly God will make the earth as
glorious for the second Adam as ever he did for the first. You have also a
plain Prophecy of his Kingdom, Psalm 72. But I pass to the second of Isaiah
in the second verse: And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the
Mountain of the house of the Lord shall be exalted in the top of the Mountains:
agreeing to that in the fourth of Micah, the first. The Scripture makes a
difference between the latter days, and the last days: Christ says, As it
was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the coming of the Son
of Man.

Object. But is not Christ's second coming, called the judgment of the great
day, as in the sixth of Jude? where then is any room for days?

I answer, that this day of judgment may as well be taken for the thousand
years rule of Christ as for one days and the Scripture does bear witness that
there is no difference as to God, second of Peter, the third and eighth verse,
One day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day:
in the fourth verse, And he shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke
many people. Here he is brought in performing his Kingly office upon the Throne
of his father David amongst the Nations: the glorious effects of this his
Kingdom you have in Isa. 35. The whole Chapter is a most glorious Prophecy of
the Kingdom of Christ, not only internally in the spirit of his people, but
also externally in the world.

Object. Was not this already performed when Christ came in the flesh, when the
deaf did hear, and the blind see, and the lame leap?

Answ. Though the Prophecy has a special eye unto that time, and was
specially fulfilled then, yet it reaches unto a higher dispensation, as will
appear if we consider the 8th. verse, and the 10th. verse: in the 8th. verse it
is said, And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called, The
way of holiness. I know not the like expression again in all the Scripture,
where the way of holinesle is called an highway; I do believe that when Christ
spoke of the straight way and narrow Gate that leads unto life, that he meant
the way of holiness: now we know that an high way it is a broad way, and a
plain way; and yet rightly considered, they do not oppose each other: for while
the Prince of the power of the air (which is the Devil) does rule and bear
sway in the world, he (as all other Kings have) has his high way, which is the
high way; of sin, error, and prosanesse, and there are multitudes that are
found galloping in this way: but the way of holiness is so strait, that he
that walks in that way must walk alone; but when Christ comes, and shall be
King over all the earth, then shall be fulfilled that saying of the Prophet
Isaiah, Thy people also shall be all righteous, Isa. 60.21. It is further
apparent if we consider Isa. 35. the 10th. verse: by the ransomed of the Lord I
understand, either the people of the Jews in general, or else every true
believer in particular: These shall return, and come to Zion with songs, and
everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Why Gods bringing of his people now unto
Zion, it is with weeping, and with supplication; but in this day when ( Zion)
the Mountain of the house of the Lord shall be exalted in the top of the
Mountains, it shall be with everlasting joy; agreeing to that in Jer. 31.12.
Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion. But in the 9th. verse
there is weeping and supplication, and in the latter end of the 12th. verse,
they shall not sorrow any more at all. Certainly then this will be a time of
extraordinary spiritual joy, which we expect and wait for, and not an outward
glorious Jewish Kingdom, which some speaking against it, say that we look for:
but let such see their portion, it they have a portion in Christ, and how
gracious Christ will be unto them in this his kingdom, in that sweet Prophecy
of his reign in Isa. 32.4. The heart also of the rash shall understand
knowledge. I am persuaded that many a gracious heart, in the corsideration of
that glorious truth of Christ's spiritual reign in the hearts of his people over
sin, Satan and the world, has cried down this his personal reign upon the
Throne of his father David, as error and Heresy. I might cite much in the
behalf of this truth, from Isa. 65.17. to the end, but I shall pass over to
Jer. 30.9. And they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their King, whom
I will raise up unto them. Now observe the time when they shall serve this
King, it is when God shall give them to pessesse the land which he gave unto
their fathers, as you may see plainly in the third verse: and before they do
thus serve him, they shall return and seek him, even the Jews that are called
the children of Israel, Hosea 3.5. O ye Gentile Saints of the most high, what
room has God made in your hearts for the poor Jews? did they think upon us
when we were not a people, and shall not we think upon them? Ye that make
mention of the Lord, keep not silence; for he has said that the Nation and
kingdom that will not serve them shall perish; yea, those Nations shall be
utterly destroyed, Isa. 60.12. certainly then there is little hopes for England
that would not suffer you to dwell amongst us: but faithful is God that has
promised, and will accomplish, even to set over them that great Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls, the Lord Je us Christ, Ezekiel 34, 23. The next plain
Scripture is Dan. 7.27. And the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of
the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints
of the most high, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions
shall serve and obey him. This is a plain Prophecy of Christ's personal
appearing to rule and reign with his Saints: if ye consider the 22th verse,
there ye have him mentioned; Until the ancient of days came; agreeing with
that his title in the Revelation: I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last.
This is a kingdom, and dominion under the whole heaven, certainly then it must
be on earth; and then shall that promise be made good, which says, The meek
shall inherit the earth. We do not doubt, (as a worthy Preacher Mr. K^^llys
lately said) of a kingdom in the heavens, in that celestial place of glory
prepared for us; but our God has promised us a kingdom under the whole heaven;
wherein Christ shall be King, that one Lord, both over believing Jews and
believing Gentiles.

This kingdom it is given him by God the Father, who is also called the ancient
of days; for as Christ says, I and my father are one, you have it in the 13.
and 14. verses of Dan. 7. I saw in the night Visions; and behold, one like the
Son of Man, came with the Clouds of Heaven; agreeing unto Christ's words, Then
shall ye see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with power and great
glory. I shall plainly lay down my Meditations concerning it, and leave it to
the judgment of the Christian Reader, which were this; Christ coming, and the
Saints bringing of him unto God their father: for it is said in the 13th.
verse, They brought him near before him; agreeing to that in Isa. 8.18. Behold,
I and the children which thou have given me. And now being before their father,
(as Christ said, I go to my father and to your father, to my God and to your
God) the subject matter of their plea is for a kingdom founded in the
sufferings of Christ, and so a branch of the new Covenant, Isa. 53.12.
Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong, because he has poured out his Soul unto death. Now God
the father being faithful that promised, he gives the kingdom unto the Son;
agreeing to that in Ps. 72.1. Give the King thy judgments, O God, and thy
righteousness unto the Kings Son, which is fulfilled in Dan. 7.14. And there
was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and
languages should serve him; even him that was despised and rejected of men, a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, unto whom the Nations have said, We
will not have this man to reign over us, even unto him shall this glory and
dominion be given, that so that which is written may be fulfilled, At the name
of Jefus every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess that he is the
Lord, for he will be King alone in that day, Hosea 13.10. The Prophet Joel is
very large in declaring the signs and wonders that shall be, before this great
day of the Lord, agreeing with those in Matthew. 24. The Prophet Amos is in the
latter end of his Prophecy treating of the restoration of the children of
Israel, which take in many special circumstances concerning this truth, and
will require a larger Trearise then this is: for there is both height and
depth, and length and breadth in the truths of God. But I pass them over, and
shall only take notice of Mich. 4.3. And he shall judge among many people, and
rebuke strong nations afar off, verse. 4. They shall sit every man under his
Vine, and under his Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid. It shall be a
Solomon's kingdom in respect of peace; so that in this sense he will come as the
desired one of all Nations, and this kingdom shall come to the daughter of
Jerusalem, as you may see in verse. 8. but more especially in Zeph. 3.14. Sing,
O daughter of Zion, shout, O Israel, be glad and rejoice with all the heart, O
daughter of Jerusalem. Now see the reason why: The Lord has taken away thy
judgments, and then thou shall not see evil any more. O how beautiful upon the
Mountains should the feet of such publishers be, that would say unto Zion, Thy
God reigns, Isaiah 52.7. Then shall the Saints of the Lord sing that song,
which none shall learn but only those who are redeemed from the earth, and
from amongst men, Rev. 14.4. Then shall Mount Zion sing. Zech. 2.10. Sing and
rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of
thee, says the Lord. And many nations shall be joined unto the Lord in that
day, and shall be my people. Verse. 12. The Lord shall inherit Judah his
portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again. There will be such
abundance of light in the latter days, that the Nations shall be able to see,
and to distinguish between the Bride and the Whore; the false Church, and the
true Church; the house of God, and Babylon that shall be made the Cage of every
unclean and filthy bird, even when the Gentiles shall come to the light of the
Jews, which shall be as life from the dead, Romans 11.15. for as sure as ever the
Lord has cast them off, so surely will he receive them again: but Oh, the
dreadful work that the Lord must make in the earth, before he shall have
accomplished his designs unto his people! and for this he has appointed a
day: and Oh, that Saints and Sinners would take notice of it: Mal. 4.1. For
behold, the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and
all that do wickedly, shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them
up, says the Lord. Agreeing unto this, is that Prophecy in Isa. 2.12. For the
day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and
upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. And in verse. 20.
In that day a man shall cast his Idols of silver, and his Idols of gold which
they made, to the Moles and to the Bats. All which may certify us of a notable
fiery day of Trial, which will come before the great day of Christ. And truly,
here I may justly take up a deep Lamentation in the Consideration of that
abundance of pride and wickedness which does abound, not only amongst the
common profane of the world, but also amongst Professors themselves: this is a
lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation. O, how few have kept their first
love! and such as are in the day of their first Espousals, if they be not very
watchful, will be carried away with the stream, amongst Professors that have
cooled in their first love: certainly therefore it is a time for such as fear
the Lord, to be thinking upon his dishonored Name; for unto such as fear his
Name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing under his wings.

Thus far there has been only treated of this Kingdom from the Old Testament
Prophesies: I shall come now to some New Testament Scriptures wherein it is as
clearly affirmed.

From Mat. 25.31. it is thus written: When the Son of man shall come in his
glory, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: and in the 34 verse,
Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand. By the man Christ Jesus,
the Son of David, the Son of Abraham, God will judge the world; yea, and so
judge them as he is a King; or el^e what Kingdom shall he have to deliver up
unto God the Father? Then comes the end (says the Apostle) when he shall have
delivered up the kingdom unto the Father, that God may be all in all, 1 Cor.
15.23, 24, 25. Mat. 2.2. Mark 13.26. Luke 1.32. there God makes a promise unto
Mary by the Angel, that that child Jesus which was in her womb, should sit upon
the Throne of his Father David, which is to rule and reign over the house of
Jacob, as it follows in the 33 verse. And in order unto this, he shall so come
from Heaven, as he ascended up into Heaven. Now there is none that will deny
this, but such as will deny Christ and Scripture too, that he did ascend with
the same body with which he did arise: and this is his own testimony of his
second coming, when he says, Then shall ye see the Son of man coming, Act.
1.9, 10, 11 but until that time, the Heavens must receive him, which will be
the time of the restitution of all things, Act. 3.21. 2 Timothy 4.1. Paul does
charge Timothy upon the account of the appearing and Kingdom of Christ, to be
faithful in the work of his Ministry: so that Christ as he is King, and in his
Kingdom, shall judge both the quick and the dead: but when Christ shall give up
this Kingdom unto God the Father, (which he shall do, 1 Cor. 15.) then says
Christ to his, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you before the foundations of the world were laid. And thus God the Father
shall be all in all, and the Saints shall come into the Fathers Kingdom: Come
ye blessed of my Father. Luke 12.32. It is your Fathers good pleasure to give
you a kingdom: and this is a Kingdom which was prepared for them, from before
the foundations of the world were laid: so that the Saints of God, besides that
Kingdom that they shall have upon the foundation of the world, shall have a
Kingdom prepared for them, from before the foundation of the world was laid,
which is a house eternal in the Heavens.

Amongst the twelve chosen Apostles of Jesus Christ, John was the beloved
Disciple, who lay in the bosom of Christ; and therefore he did deeply share in
afflictions for Christ; and being banished into the Isle of Patmos, there he
had the glorious things that do belong unto this Kingdom opened unto him: it is
the Revelation which God the Father gave unto Christ, and Christ by his Angel
revealed unto John; I John (says he, in the ninth verse) who also am your
brother and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of of us
Christ: John, and the Saints that he did write unto, were traveling toward
this Kingdom; yea, and they were in the way too, and that was through many
tribulations. You have in the third verse a blessing pronounced upon him that
reads, and they that hear and keep the things which are written in this
Prophecy; that is, keep up the testimony of them, and the power of them being
manifested in their lives and conversations. Now see those sweet Motto's that
he gives to Christ in the fifth verse:

First, he is the fathful witness, and that in respect of that witness that he
did hold forth in the world to his Fithers glory. And

Secondly, in respect of that witness that he bears unto his people by his
Spirit, and that is a witness that he holds forth by his Spirit unto their
spirits, that they are the children of God, Romans 8.16.

Secondly, he is called the first begotten of the dead, as the Apostle argues
it in 1 Cor. 15.21. For since by man came death, by man came also the
resurrection of the dead: and in verse 22, he speaks of Christ as being the
first fruits, agreeing to that in Col. 1.18. where he is called the first born
from the dead.

Thirdly, he is called the Prince of the kings of the earth; and this very
manifest in Scripture: he is often called the King of kings, and Lord of lords.
But I shall speak something of that which he delivered to the Pharisees, Mat
22.49. If David then call him Lord, how is he his son? It was the question that
Christ put unto the Pharisees; What (says he) think ye of Christ? whose Son is
he? And they answered him. The Son of David. How then (says Christ) does David
call him Lord? as in Psalm 110.1. So that by this it does appear, that Christ
is both David's Lord, and David's Son: he is David's Lord, not only as he is Lord
of Heaven and Earth, but also as he is King of kings, and Lord of lords. And
thus he is David's Lord, and David's Prince, as well as Nero's Prince, or any
other wicked Prince that ever was upon the Earth.

Again, he is David's Lord, in respect that he shall sit upon David's Throne;
and this is that which David by faith did foresee, and that which is promised
Christ in Luke 1.31, 32, 33. Now I hope that there is none that will deny that
Christ is the Son of David: for taking upon him our sins, he must of necessity
take upon him our body; a body have thou prepared me. And thus he was in all
things like unto us, sin only excepted; and that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, he is born of a Virgin, Isa. 7.14. compared with Mat. 1.23. I am
persuaded in my very conscience, that the clearing up of the birth of Jesus
Christ, with his personal appearance in the flesh, to suffer and dye for
sinners, together with his personal appearance in glory hereafter, will be the
Doctrine that God will make effectual in order unto the conversion of the Jews:
for I understand that herein lies their blindness, which was also in their
forefathers, an expectation of the Messiah in a state of glory; but what says
Christ unto this? O fools, and slow of heart to believe! ought not Christ to
have suffered these things, and so to have entered into his glory? Luke 24.25.
so that the very foundation of Christ's exaltation, lies and consists in his
humiliation: because he was despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrow, and
acquainted with grief, therefore shall he come in the glory of his Father, and
in the glory of his holy Angels.

This Truth is farther confirmed from Rev. 2.26. He that overcomes, and
keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations, even
as I have received of my Father. Psalm. 2.9. The saints, as the Scripture
speaks, are Heirs, joint Heirs, yea, Coheirs with Jesus Christ, and therefore
he having received of God the Father to have power over the Nations, he will
give the same power over the Nations unto his saints that do overcome: and as
he did overcome Sin, Death, Satan and the World, and is now set down in his
Fathers Throne, so also he has a Throne (even the Throne of his father David)
that he will give his overcoming Saints to sit down upon with him, Rev. 3.21.

In Rev 11.15. it is thus written, And the seventh Angel sounded, and there
were great Voices in heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ: from hence it is very plain, that they
are the Kingdoms of this world, which shall be given unto Jesus Christ. And the
devil, that red Dragon, that devouring Lion, that old Serpent, did know full
well of this, when he came to tempt Christ: for after that he had failed twice,
he comes, in the third temptation, with this: All the Kingdoms of this world
will I give thee, and the glory of them, so thou will but fall down and worship
before me, Mat. 4.8, 9 he knew it with a witness, from the very first promise
that God gave unto fallen man, The seed of the woman shall break the head of
the Serpents; which is, Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, and manifested to
destroy the works of the devil.

Object. Whereas you speak here of a thousand years reign, it is said in this
verse, That he shall reign for ever and ever.

I answer: I do believe that a thousand years is a Type of perfection; and
therefore we cannot read of any of the sons of Adam that God did suffer to live
a thousand years; to demonstrate unto man, that there is no persection here in
this life: but then see the limitation that this word Ever has in Scripture,
in Psalm. 72.17. it is for ever, as long as the sun. But let us take a little
notice how the Nations will take this: it is said, They were angry, verse. 18.
so that while the Saints are praising and rejoicing before God, with great
admitation in the enjoyment of this salvation, the Nations will be sretting and
vexing to see what is come to pass: for thy wrath is come, and the time of the
dead, that they should be judged; all Christ's implacable, impenitent Enemies do
but heap up wrath, against this day of wrath, for this will be a day of
Judgment wherein Christ will give to every man, according to his works; yea,
God will have an account of the very carth which he has let out unto the sons
and daughters of Adam, for it is said, He will destroy them which destroy the
earth.

And certainly, this is that the Church of Christ is now in pain for, and
crying, traveling to be delivered, even of this Man child, who shall rule all
Nations with a Rod of Iron, Rev. 125. and that because of that great joy which
they will receive when Christ is exalted; for the Saints they are such as love
the appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 4.8. For when he shall come in
flaming fire unto his Enemies, he shall be with his people as a Lamb: And I
looked, and lo! a Lamb stood on the Mount Zion: here is fulfilled that
Prophecy in Psalm. 2. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion: so that
he will be both King and Lamb upon mount Zion. Mount Zion, as it is written,
shall be exalted above all mountains; and the Name of Jesus, upon this exalted
mountain, shall be exalted above every Name, and then shall the Saints of God
sing the song of Moses and of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvelous are thy
works, Lord God Almighty; Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints,
Rev. 15.3. Now it will be to our purpose to consider in what respect these
shall be said to sing the song of Moses, which is Typical; for I believe that
both Jews and Gentiles shall sing this song: And they sung a new song, saying,
Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the Seals thereof, for thou wast
slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people, and Nation; And have made us unto our God, Kings and
Priests, and we shall reign upon the Earth, Rev. 5.9, 10. so that out of every
people, Christ will have a peculiar people. Now let us see how well the
children of God traveling toward this new Jerusalem, and the children of
Israel toward the Land of Canaan, will Agree together.

First then, to take in the spiritual meaning; as the Children of Israel were
in Egypt, under sore bondage; so are all the sons and daughters of Adam by
nature, under the bondage of sin and Satan, and led captive by him at his
pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26. now the Lord by the hand of Moses, he brings them out of
Egypt, and they are set safe over the Red Sea, and now for the Land of Canaan:
but they came not thither, for we read of their sad fall through unbelief, Heb.
3.18. so the Lord, by the death of Jesus Christ, has set out a way for all
toward the heavenly Canaan, but few come thither, and why so? Many are called,
but sew are chosen; one of a Tribe, and two of a Family, as the Scripture
witnesses, Many that are first shall be last, and the last first.

Secondly, if we look at the mystical meaning, then by Egypt we are to
understand Babylon, mystical Babylon, amongst whose inhabitants there is
Egyptian darkness, and the Lord now in the days of the Gospel having called
and brought his people out of Babylon, while they stand upon a Sea of glass
mingled with fire, they are enabled by the Spirit of God to sing: They sing the
Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, saying, Just and true are thy ways, thou King
of Saints, Isa. 33.22. The Israel after the flesh, they sing, being delivered
from outward Enemies; the Israel after the Spirit they shall sing, being
delivered from all their enemies, both inward and outward.

In Rev. 19. you have the great joy and rejoicing of the Saints at the downfall
of Babylon, whilst the Kings of the Earth which have committed Fornication with
her, and the Merchants of the Whore are weeping, and wailing, and crying out,
Alas, alas; the Saints they shall be saying, Alleluiah, salvation, and honor
and glory, and power unto the Lord our God, even so Amen. Alleluiah. It is a
praising and rejoicing in the Lord, for his great Judgments and vengeance
which he had taken; and to this end Christ was anointed, to proclaim the day of
vengeance of our God, Isa. 61.2. and 63.4. and 34.8. but in what posture then
shall the Saints be in that day? you may see in the 7. verse. Let us be glad,
and rejoice, and give honor to him; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and
his Wife has made her self ready. Well, amongst all this vengeance and
Judgment, let us see what will be the Name of Jesus Christ, and that is, King
of kings, and Lord of lords, verse. 16. We come now to Rev. 20.1. we have
presented unto us an Angel coming down from Heaven, having the Key of the
bottomless pit: whether Christ be meant here by this Angel, or no, I shall
leave that to the judicious Reader; with his meditations upon Rev. 1.18. where
Christ faith, I have the Keys of Hell and Death: now this Angel lays hold on
the Dragon, which is Satan, and binds him a Thousand years; and he is cast
into the bottomless pit, with a Seal upon him. Some there are that do imagine,
that this thousand years was in the time of Constantine; but I see no ground
for the truth of it: for when he shall be bound, the Nations shall not be
deceived with any false worship, as ever hitherto they have been, since the man
of sin, that son of perdition, has been up; and that he was loosed in the time
of wicked Hildebrand a Necromancer: but the words here in the 3. verse. faith,
That after his binding, he must be loosed for a little season: now the wise man
faith, There is a time, and a season for everything: and if the time since, in
the Scriptural Account, can be looked upon as a little season, yet where has
Satan's work been? For I believe, that Satan is yet at his first work, in being
a lying Spirit in the mouths of false Prophets, and so deceiving the Nations
in the things of God, and of Christ, and carrying on the Mystery of Iniquity;
and at this work he is new very busy, laboring to pervert Foundation-truths
by sinful suggestions into our hearts. I know it by mine own experience: for he
has been very much laboring to blind my understanding and judgment in a
foundation-truth: but O for ever blessed he that faithful High Priest, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who knowing all his plots, has still kept my Faith running out
upon his word, with an answering, It is written. But now his last work that we
read he shall do, is to gather the nations against this beloved City, to their
final destruction: he is no sconer out of prison, but he goes to his work, and
loses no time: it is said, that he went out to deceive the nations which are
in the four quarters of the earth. Why it is reported by writers, that
Jerusalem is in the midst of the earth, and so in this sense Christ will rule
in the midst of his enemies, as it may truly be said, when Christ takes
possession of any heart; why there is flesh, and sin, and the world: I, but
Christ he is King, and he keeps his Throne, and will at length bring them down
under his seat, though for a time (for ends best known unto the Lord) they may
have their lurking corners in the soul. Now when Satan had cathered them
together, the next news that we find, is their general destruction by fire,
which I believe is the general destruction of the whole world, with all things
that are therein. Heaven and earth shall pass away (faith Christ) but not one
tittle of my word, until all be fulfilled: for I find that the general
Judgment of the righteous and the wicked, it follows afterward, and then
shall those wicked ones who were in that last Conspiracy against Christ and
his people, and so filled up the measure of the sins of all the Serpents seed.
that went before them, be condemned before his Tribunal: for the book shall be
opened, and every one shall be judged according to his works. But before this
Throne and Judgment of Christ, upon this white Throne, by himself particularly
spoken of in verse. 11. we have diverse Thrones spoken of in the fourth verse:
And judgment was given unto them who had not worshipped the beast nor his
Images and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years; but afterward
Christ who is the Elder Brother, is sole Judge of all; and having finished the
Judgment, he delivers up all into the hands of God the Father: then shall the
Saints, above what they know now, know with admiration, that the Son and Father
are one, and they one in them, according to Christ's prayer, Joh. 17.21, 24.

Now in order unto their reigning with Christ, they must be brought forth by
the enjoyment of a Resurrection: and this I judge to be the first Resurrection,
which shall be only of the Saints that sleep in Jesus; for the dead in Christ
shall rise first, according to St. Paul's Doctrine, 1 These. 4.10. and 1 Corin.
15. Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. I
know there are some that will apply this Resurrection to the Resurrection of
the Soul out of the grave of sin and corruption: Well, I shall not much
controvert it; but whoever I see so risen, I do not question his part in the
first Resurrection: for it is said, Blessed and holy is he that has part in
the first Resurrection: It does not speak of sinners, but of saints which had
not worshipped the Beast, neither his Image, they lived and reigned with Christ
a thousand years; but the rest of the dead lived not again, until the thousand
years were finished.

Quest. But what are the rest of the dead that have not their part in this
first Resurrection?

Answ. We have them set down in Rev. 21.8. and I am sure there is not a Saint
amongst them; they are the fearful, and unbelieving, and abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liars; and
where shall all these be? why these shall be without; for without are dogs and
sorcerers, Rev. 22.15. without; that is, without this holy City new Jerusalem
coming down from God out of heaven; so that they shall not see that
transcendent glory, which will be manifested in this City, a glimpse of which
the Lord even now sometimes lets down into the spirits of his people, that so
they might with the Apostle groan for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of
our bodies: yea, he witnesses that the whole Creation groans for this, even
for the manifestation of the sons of God; and they that had received the first
fruits of the spirit, groaned also. O then how shall the saints of the latter
days that are under the great Promise of the Father, groan and travel for the
accomplishment of these things! And surely such that are in some measure
delivered into the beauty, and spiritualness, and glory of this glory, cannot
but long and desire to be unclothed, that they might be clothed upon: John, in
this chapter, saw a new heaven, and a new earth, which was prophesied of long
before, in Isa. 65.17. and there you have a description what this new Heaven
and new Earth is, in the 18 verse, For behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing,
and her people a Joy. A new heaven indeed, when Jerusalem which now is, which
is in bondage with her children, shall rejoice with that Jerusalem which is
above, which is free, and is the mother of us all, which shall come down from
God out of Heaven: there shall also be a new Earth, for the Devil being bound
up, there will not be that Enmity in the hearts of Earthly men, neither to the
Saints nor amongst themselves, but according to the Prophecy in Isa. 65. last.
The Lion and the Lamb shall lie down together. verse. 2. And I saw the holy City
new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned
for her husband. John in the time of all this Revelation was in the spirit,
Rev. 1.10. I was in the spirit on the Lords day; and all that was revealed unto
him was spiritual, from first to last: he that reads, let him understand. I
saw (says he) the holy City (for nothing that is unholy can enter in; flesh
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.) It is a City, and it is a holy
City; and certainly this is the City which Abraham by faith looked for, while
he was a stranger in the Land of Promise, Heb. 11.10. For he looked for a city
that has foundations, whose builder and maker is God: This City has
Foundations, as you may see in the fourteenth verse, and God is the Builder and
Maker of it, for it is of his Creation.

This holy City, this new Jerusalem, it is said to come down from God out of
heaven: does not this plainly demonstrate unto us that the saints shall come
down from heaven, according as it is written, The Lord thy God shall come, and
all the Saints with him; and in Phil. 3.20. For our conversation is in heaven,
from whence also we look for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: this is an
expectation of Christ from heaven, and I see no difference between this
expression and that of Christ's, I am the true bread which came down from
heaven: now see in what manner this holy City does come down, and then consider
whether it will be any way a disadvantage unto the Saints, to come down from
heaven, for they come as a bride adorned for her husband. (O blessed Union!)
all the Saints are Christ's Bride, the whole general Assembly and Church of the
firstborn, whose names are written in heaven, they do but make up the Lambs
Wife; and thus she shall come adorned for her husband, that is, without s^o: or
wrinkle, as will appear if we compare spiritual things with spiritual. For here
Christ does by his spirit and word espouse us unto himself, 2 Cor. 11.2. O but
there is a marriage day, Rev. 19.7. and then it shall be granted unto the Bride
to be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, which is the Righteousness of the
Saints: Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage-supper of the Lamb.
Christ he is the Kings son, according to Psalm. 72 1. and God the Father he will
institute a supper for his Son, which is called The Marriage Supper of the
Lamb, a Supper that shall begin, when all other suppers shall have ended: this
does not any way diminish from the souls feeding upon Christ here, according
unto Christ's words, My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; but
this is a supper the which all the Saints shall be called unto, that they might
be married unto Christ, who were in this life espoused unto Christ, and
therefore when ye have the cry at midnight, it is said, Behold, the Bridegroom
comes Christ comes unto his Saints, as a Bridegroom in the glory of his Father
and of his holy Angels: the Saints, they meet Christ as the Lambs wife, yea, as
a Bride adorned for the Bridegroom, that although he comes at midnight to the
ungodly, and to the seeming godly foolish Virgins without Christ in the world,
yet it is the Saints Morning Star, that infallible sign of day unto them.

In the third verse: And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold!
the Tabernacle of God is with men; Heaven it self will witness unto this truth,
[ Behold!] wherever we have this word, it speaks out something of admiration,
that his people might know the certainty of that which is promised: you have it
in Isa. 52.15. Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and
extolled, and be very high.

Christ Jesus the Son of the Eternal God, though equal with God, yet he took
upon him the form of a servant, My Servant shall be extolled; yea, and as it
follows, the kings shall shut their mouths at him, etc. It is said of this new
Jerusalem in the fourth verse, And the kings of the Earth do bring their glory
and honor into it.

In the fourth verse: And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there
be any more pain, for the former things are passed away. Here are the Saints in
their perfect state, a sinless state; for surely if there shall be no more
crying, there shall be no more sinning: when a Saint sins, God will take care
to bring him unto Godly sorrow. O but this is a state without sorrow: Sin is a
way of pain, but the former things shall be passed away. A Saints grief is
either first for himself, or else secondly, for the sins of others: why in both
these respects sorrow and sighing shall flee away: if it be in himself, it is
from a body of sin, a Law in his members warring against the Law of his mind.
O but this vile body shall be changed, and (as it is written) made like unto
his glorious body.

Secondly, sin in others is that which does often grieve the gracious heart, as
it tends unto the dishonor of Christ: but in this state the Saints shall have
no such cause of grief, for Christ alone shall be exalted and admired in them
that believe.

I might cite much more in the behalf of this truth, from diverse other verses
in this chapter: but I pass by them all unto the last verse:

And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie, but they which are written in
the Lambs book of life: though it has twelve gates of entrance, yet at these
gates there are twelve Angels. There is such a glory of God in the new
Jerusalem, as would even torment a poor sinner to be in the presence of it, as
you may see in the eleventh verse. As they see not here into that kingdom of
grace, set up in the heart of a believer, which consists in peace and joy in
the holy Ghost, so they shall not see into that Kingdom of glory that the
believer shall be possessed of, and shall be revealed in him: No, no, it is the
Saints only, that can give the description of both, Psalm. 145.10. And thy
Saints shall bless thee, they shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and
talk of thy power; to make known unto the Sons of men his mighty acts, and the
glorious Majesty of his Kingdom.

I come now to Rev. 22.3. And there shall be no more curse; but the Throne of
God, and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve Him. Verse. 4.
And they shall see His face, and His Name shall be in their foreheads. And
there shall be no night there; and they need no Candle, neither light of the
Sun, for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever and
ever. Such as shall be brought unto this state of glory, shall never more know
what belongs unto the curse: for they being redeemed from the curse of the Law,
Christ being made a curse for them, they shall also be delivered from death
into a state of immortality; and therefore they are said to reign for ever and
ever: here the Saints shall see that beatifical vision, and be perfected in
that glory which in some measure was here revealed in them, (according as the
Apostle says) he reveals them unto us by his Spirit: they shall see his
face, and his name shall be in their forehead: this name is that name which
Jesus Christ shall write upon him that overcomes, even the name of my God, and
the name of the City of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which comes down out
of Heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name, witnessed in Rev.
3.12. agreeable unto this is that Prophecy in Isa. 65.5. For the Lord God
shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name: but this in the time of
this new Jerusalem state, as you may see in verse. 17. whereas formerly men
blessed themselves in the abundance of their enjoyments, there shall be no such
Generation here; but he that blesses himself in the earth, shall bless
himself in the God of truth; and whereas formerly the Land has mourned because
of Oaths, now he that swears in the earth shall swear by the God of truth:
And there shall be no night there, and they need no Gandle, neither light of
the Sun, for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever and
ever. It has been night long enough, but now the day shall dawn, and the
shadow shall flee away, and it shall be such a day, as night shall never follow
it, yea, such a day as shall not need the light of the Sun, if by the Sun we
may understand, as also by the Moon, to be held fo^^h unto us the Ordinances of
the Gospel in this respect, in this respect there will be no need of these,
because we shall no more see darkly as through a glass, (though much glory is
so manifested but we shall see him as he is, Isa. 60.19, 20. Now here I would
speak a word unto such who professing themselves to have gone through all, and
do look upon others as Carnalists and Legalists that walk in the practice of
Ordinances. Certainly if in this state there is no need of these, we may safely
conclude that until this state there is need of them, and that it is the will
of God that his people should walk in them according as it is written in
Isaiah, Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness, and
remembers thee in thy ways. We are so frail and to apt to be taken in the
snare of iniquity, that we have need to be instructed in many things, (as the
Apostle says) though we know them already: and if Satan can but once find us
in that sin of spiritual pride, then it is to be feared that he will beguile us
as once he beguiled Eve; For it is the Lords revealed method to discover
himself in love and mercy, in, and through his own appointments: but I would
not limit the holy One of Israel, neither yet would I set up the Ordinances as
to the bare use and practice of them, without the enjoyment of God in them, or
above the enjoyment of God without them: He gave some Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, for the perfecting of the Saints; and this should be the
great aim and end of Saints in the use of Ordinances, to press forwards after
perfection, if that by any means they may attain unto the Resurrection of the
dead, which Paul pressed after, but yet did not leave nor forsake any of the
least of Gods Ordinances: wherefore Return, Return, O Shulamite, unto the stock
of thy Companions, Return, O back-slidden Israel; for God will heal thy back
slidings, for the redeemed of the Lord shall return and come unto Zion, Isa.
35. ult. O hasten into the way of righteousness, and get thee out of all
filthiness both of flesh and spirit, before that word come out, He that is
filthy, let him be filthy still, verse. 29 He which testifies these things
says, S^^ely I come quickly, Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus. I had thought here
to have concluded all: but my thoughts being altered, I have desired to speak a
word unto all, whether Saints or sinners. And first, unto the poor sinner:
Alas, what is all this unto thee? I will tell thee what it may be likened unto,
it may be likened unto a man that tells a poor Captive bondslive of a glorious
Kingdom, with the Liberties and Privileges of the Subjects, and the goodness
of the Prince, but all this while this poor man is in his Chains and Fetters,
and may cry out, What is all this to me? Why, it may be that thou will say that
thou do believe all this, and thou do believe that Christ shall have a
Kingdom; this thou may believe, and believe no more then the History of the
Gospel: and what will it profit thee to know the History of Christ's reigning
without thee, and not be acquainted with the mystery of Christ's reigning,
within thee? it is only such as have followed Christ in the regeneration, such
only as have here been made partakers of the spirit and grace of this Kingdom,
that shall hereafter be taken into the fruition of it. Wherefore well it is to
be noted, that Christ said, Straight is the way and narrow is the gate that
leads unto life, and few there are that find it. Truly, we may say, few
there are that seek it, and of the a few many shall strive to enter in, which
shall not be able. Should we then make this Atheistical conclusion, To what
purpose should we strive? (God forbid) but as Christ says, strive therefore.
There are many that will bid fairly for the Kingdom, but will not come to the
set rare: some there are that bid too little, and others there are that bid too
much, and the last are worse then the first. They that bid too little, are they
that would give Christ a part of their hearts, but would keep the other part
for the world; they would cut off a left hand sin, but not a right hand sin:
but let such know that Christ will either have all, or none at all. The second
sort which bid too much (not that any can either bid, or give too much upon a
right account) are they, that when the Gospel says, He every one that
thirsts, let him come without money, and without price; yet these will bring
something of their own, and so from some qualifications within themselves,
would set up a Savior of their own, which is directly opposite to the mind of
God, in his revealed word: and Oh that such would consider these two
^criptures, Act. 4.12. 1 Cor. 3.11. Alas, were we but made sensible with the
Church in Isaiah, that all our Righteousness were but filthy Rags, we would
never willingly appear so before The King of Glory.

Truly poor sinners may be likened unto a company of strangers, unto whom a
Prince resorting, makes Proclamation of a precious Pearl that is to be had,
only for coming and receiving it: Now these strangers not believing the
proclamation, either first neglect to come, or else further questioning his
faithfulness, bring with them their Country Coin, which is but stones and
rubbish. Truly the comparison is rather too short to hold forth the Free Grace
of God in Jesus Christ, who has made Proclamation, Let him that will, come,
and take of the water of Life freely. Christ Jesus is both Prince and Pearl,
who has made Proclamation by himself, and by his Saints, of himself, unto poor
sinners; they are the strangers (for so are all sinners) that questioning his
faithfulness, will not come; as Christ himself says, Ye would not come unto
me, that ye may have life; and this is that, when the Spirit of God comes, it
will convince the sinner of this great sin of not believing in Christ.

The second sort are they that undervaluing the worth of this Pearl, will bring
something of their own to purchase it: If God the Father had set a price upon
Christ, for every one to pay, before he should receive him, ah! woe had been to
all poor sinners: but now Christ is to be given, he is not to be bought.

Object. In Mat. 13.45, 46. it is said, The Merchant BOUGHT the Pearl.

The Parable is very significant, but does no way contradict what has been
affirmed.

First, if we consider the Merchant in his seeking condition, he is seeking
goodly Pearls: the young man in the Gospel comes to Christ, saying, Good
Master, What good thing shall I do to inherit eternal life? and being directed,
but not carried forth thereunto, by the power of the love of Christ, he uttrely
failed: but now this Merchant being directed to seek for Christ, and finding of
him, is enlightened from above to see him to be the Pearl of great price, and
so sells and hates, and forsakes all for Christ. Now in his finding of him, it
is plain that Christ first found him, as he says, Ye have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you, Mat. 4.18, 32. Lord, (says Peter) We have left all, and
followed thee; and Paul counted all things dung and dross, and was willing to
suffer the loss of all things that he might gain Christ; which was only the
working of the love of Christ dwelling in him: O poor sinner! what is it that
stands in thy way? is it hills or mountains? all the opposition that either sin
or Satan can make against thee? why behold, He comes leaping over the
mountains, and skipping over the hills; even He whom thou have made thine
Enemy, first seeks for a Treaty; O give Him entertainment while He knocks at
the door of thy heart; and say, Welcome Jesus, Rule and Reign in the midst of
thine Enemies, and let all thine Enemies be made thy Footstool. But thou will
say, I am a very bond-slave unto my sins and corruptions: why of a captive
slive Christ will redeem thee, and make thee his servant; and can thou desire
a greater dignity then to be a servant of Jesus Christ? and that Faith may have
a ground for this, see Isa. 61.1. Paul the chiefest of the Apostles glories in
this, that he was the servant of Jesus Christ, Romans 1.1. and when once thou art
the servant of Jesus Christ, it will no longer then be thy complement unto men
[ Your Servant, Sir] for Saints are bought with a price, that they might not be
the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.23

Another it may be, will say, I have been an Enemy unto Christ, and to his
Ways, and to his People: truly this is a very bad condition, yet Christ makes
Friends of Enemies: all sinners are Enemies, but God commended his love unto
us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us; therefore it is high
time for thee to see that thou love aright, and hate aright: if thou love
rightly, thou love God; if thou hate rightly, thou hate the world. See
what James says, Jam. 4.4. Know ye not that the friendship of the world is
enmity to God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the enemy
of God. And John says, Love not the world, nor the things of the world. If any
man love the world, (either the lusts of the flesh, or the pride of life, or
the lust of the eyes) the love of the Father is not in him. Saints do not thus
learn Christ, who has said, If any man will be my Disciple, let him take up
his Cross, and follow me. Of a vagabond stranger, thou may be an adopted Son;
of a Beggar, a King; and therefore seek not after the Kingdoms of this world,
but rather profess (as once the Captain of our Salvation did before Pilat) My
Kingdom is not of this world.

I shall conclude all that I have to say, with that good word of the Apostle
Peter, in Act. 2.36. Therefore let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that
God has made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.
Peter so preached Christ, that he got three thousand souls at that time, in the
Net of the Gospel: a good example for the Ministers of the Word to take pattern
by. And we shall find that he preached unto them of the visible Kingdom of
Christ, as you may see verse. 30. Knowing that God had sworn with an Oath, to
him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up
Christ to sit on his Throne. A Scripture it is, so full to the truth, that
neither all the Sathan-like transformed Angelical light, on the one side, or
all Political, Philosophical light on the other side, shall be able to deceive
the truly-enlightened Soul.

Now therefore I entreat you, unto whom this shall come, that ye receive it in
the love of it and marvail no^ that ye cannot hear these things from the Great
Doctors, and Rabbis, and Clergy men of this our age; for it is the Fathers
good pleasure to hide these things from the wife and from the prudent But woe
unto them, for their judgment is at band, (as it is written) The wisdom of
their wise men shall perish, And the understanding of their prudent men shall
be hid, Isa. 29 14.

The Lord give thee an understanding heart, to try whether these things be so
or no. AMEN.

I would now willingly also commend something unto such as are sanctified in
Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, even unto as many as are preserved in Christ
Jesus, which have received the White Stone, which none knows but he that
receives it: That you would show forth the Virtues of Him that has called
you, and has transl^^ed you out of the kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom of
his mavelous light. I cannot but cry out with the Apostle, What manner of
persons ought we to be in all holy c^nversations, and Godliness? O it becomes
us that look for Christ from heaven, to have our conversation in heaven:
certainly the knowledge of this truth should makeus to trample upon the world,
and the glory thereof, as base and contemptible; and to content our selves in
the worst of conditions, in the quiet hope, and patient waiting of our Lord
from heaven. Surely the coming of Christ cannot but yield very much comfort
unto the soul that is assured of its interest in Christ.

Are Saints the Stewards of Christ? then let them know that their Lord and
Master will return and call them to an account: and blessed is the servant whom
his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

Are Saints the Spouse of Christ, the Bride of that blessed Bridegroom? then
let them know, that whatever their afflictions may be in this world, yet their
loving husband will return from his long journey, and put an end to all: and
let not the Saints expect their full deliverance until he come, but rather
persecution and suffering while the world stands; for he has said, In the
world re shall have trouble, and, through many tribulations we must enter into
the Kingdom; and therefore it is our duty to arm our selves with the same
mind: For if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him: Christ Himself
has shown us the way, and we are called by His Name, O let u foll w his
footsteps. And surely it does highly concern us to look to it that as Christ
fore warned us, we be not overtaken with surseiting, and dru^kenness, and cares
of this life, and so that day come upon us unawares; we shall hardly win the
race, if our hearts be loaded with the things of this world; and they will so
lull us asleep, that we shall endanger our selves to be found sleeping at
Christ's coming, and therefore how does it become the Saints at this day to be
provoking one another to love, and to good works, exhorting one another, and so
much the more, as ye see the day approaching. O let us consider that our Lord
is a Person of such Highness and Excellency, that he deserves our waiting for
Him: for he is the King of kings, and Lord of lords.

It is but bring faithful unto the death, and enduring unto the end: the battle
is but once to be sought, and the race is but once to be run; but yet the Lord
knows, that without his sufficient grace, we shall not overcome: and therefore
how does it concern us to take the oil of the grace and spirit of God into out
Lamps, lest when the bridegroom comes, we should be found wanting, but rather
to shine as lights set upon an hill, and as Bees, sucking Honey from this
precious flowery Truth, from which so many spiders have sucked poison, as (if
History may be believed) some out of a notion of this Kingdom, to be but mere
earthly, and for sensual delights, have run out into all manner of
licentiousness, and the devil has made great use of it against the truth, and
no doubt but he will do still: but what faith the Apostle? We can do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth; but truly (with shame let it be
confessed) we do much in these days against the truth, because we do not walk
as becomes the truth, but God has promised (and we do believe it) that the
Redeemer shall come out of Zion, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob,
Romans 11.26. And then the inhabitants shall not say, I am sick; for the people
that dwell therein shall be forgiven their inquity, Isa. 33.24.

Oh how greatly now is Unity to be desired amongst the Saints! Truly I have for
a long time been running to and fro, and now I will give you the report of all:
but I may truly say, All seek their own, and none the things of Jesus Christ;
yea even the Saints themselves in their several Forms, are so zealous about
shadows, and are not so careful in the substantial commands of Jesus Christ,
that as for poor Wayfaring souls, they may cry out and say, Lord where are thy
Disciples, which are to be known by their love one to another? but may also
come upon Jesus Christ again, and say, Tell me, O thou whom my Soul loves,
where thou feedest. Well, let the wayfaring man be encouraged, and let the
lambs of Jesus Christ be comforted; for yet a little while, and there shall be
but one Shepherd andone sheepsold: and in the mean time, see, that ye are
walking in the way that ye should go, even in the way of holiness, wherein the
way-faring-man, though a fool, shall not err, but be seeking the way to Zion,
with their faces thitherward.

And Oh that the Lord would put it into the hearts of his people, according to
that Isa. 57.14. Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling
block out of the way of my people: Surely if ye did but know how the mouths of
the wicked are opened against you all, you would quickly shut your mouths that
ye have so opened one against another.

There are many (I fear) that are ready to say, with the fool, in his heart,
There is no God; but it were to be wished that the people of God would
continually remember this, that whatever comes to pass, it is that the
Scripture might be fulfilled: if a Judas betray Christ, it is because the
Scripture might be fulfilled, Act. 1.16. compared with Psa. 44.9. If perilous
times come, wherein men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, and the like;
if because iniqui^y shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold; or if we
should see one servant smiting his fellow servants, or eating and drinking,
building and planting (which so abound in our days, in the excess of them)
come what will come, we may say of all, The Scriptures must needs be fulfilled:
and herein is to be admired the faithfulness and truth of Him who is Truth it
self, who has foretold us all things that shall come to pass unto his second
coming.

If many should come in His Name, saying, I am Christ, it is that the Scripture
might be fulfilled: but believe it Christian, whoever thou art, no true Christ
comes until Jesus comes, who shall come in the glory of his Father, and of his
holy Angels. So that thou shall not need to follow Lo here, or lo there; for
(if thou art indeed a Christian, one that believes that Jesus is the Son of
God) thou shall appear with him in glory, Col. 3.4. Again, it is written, That
he shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather together his Elect from
the four winds, that so the prayer of Jesus Christ may be fulfilled upon all
his servants, Father, I will that they also which thou have given me, be with
me where I am, Joh. 27.24.

Wherefore (as the Apostle faith) comfort one another with these words: and
certainly hereby will the saints be distinguished in the latter days, from all
others. Because that when such as are but men shall have their hearts fail them
in the sight of those Judgments, Earthquakes, Famines and Pestilences, which
shall come upon the earth, then shall the Saints of the most High lift up their
he^ds, as knowing that their Redemption draws nigh: Unto which duty I will
also resolve, in the strength and Spirit of the Lord, with the Prophet, In Isa.
61.10, 11. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my
God: for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me
with the Robe of Righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh himself with Ornaments,
and as a Bride adorneth her self with jewels. For as the earth brings forth
her bud, and as the garden causes the things that are sown in it to spring
forth, so the Lord will cause Righteousness and Praise to spring forth before
all the Nations.

HOSANNA unto David's Son,
The Lords anointed One,
Who shall have the Dominion
Upon his Father's Throne.
Triumph and shout O heavens high,
And let the earth rejoice;
For why, with Might and Majesty
He shall lift up his voice.
O let the Bride prepare her self
Against this Marriage-day,
When Christ shall bring his saving health
Unto his Saints for aye.
Let Sinners come, and now fall down,
And worship at his feet:
For he alone shall have the Crown,
When his with him shall meet.
Before his golden Scepter fall;
Then know assuredly,
His Iron Red you shall not feel
With grief and misery.
His bleeding wounds, outstretched arms,
And yearning bowels sure
Run toward you, that from all harms
You might always endure.
He is the sure Foundation-stone,
JEHOVAH'S Treasury,
He is the choice and lovely One,
Unto the faithful eye.
He is true Wisdom for the fool,
The sure and certain way;
Meat, Drink and Clothing to the Soul
That trusts in him always.
He is the first, and eke the last,
Was dead, and is alive,
And lives for aye: O then to Christ
All honor, glory give.
If to the Father thou would go,
He is the only door:
O strive to enter in; (why so?)
Few shall; then strive the more.
If unto God an Offering
Thou would put up for sin,
It Is Christ our Priest has done the thing,
Our sins were laid on him.
A Prophet to his Saints is he;
A King to Rule and Reign:
King, Priest and Prophet thou may be;
Thy Title he will maintain.
Acquaint thy self now with the Lord,
His Name, and dwelling Place:
Be guided by his Spirit and Word
Till thou have run thy Race.
O Virgins know, both Fools and Wise,
The Bridegroom is at hand,
He comes, he comes, let this suffice:
But who with him may stand?
It Is he that walks rightecusly,
And speaks full upright:
As for deceit, he sets it by,
From evil shuts his sight.
His dwelling place shall be on high;
His bread and water sure:
His eyes shall see the Kings glory,
Enjoy for to endure.
What blameless ones ought we to be,
That know he will appear?
From worldly cares Lord set us free.
Remaining in thy fear.
O let the glory of this day
So dwell upon our Mind,
That we may forward press always,
Forgetting what is behind.
And let the Nations Know, O Lord,
Thou will thy right maintain;
Unto the Heathen send this word,
That JESUS CHRIST shall Reign.
So come, O Lord, O quickly come;
The Bride shall glory then:
This is Saints joy, that Christ shall come.
ALLELUIAH, AMEN.
A POSTSCRIPT.
I Have now but this one thing more to acquaint the Reader withal, and that is,
The reason why this little Treatise is brought forth into the world. Know
therefore, all and every one unto whom this Treatise shall come, That on a
certain time I entered into a public Assembly, where a great Rabbi did speak
against this Truth, and called the Professors thereof Heretics: But this I
should have minded before, That as I was purposing in my heart to go in,
because I thought I might hear something that was good, nevertheless I had this
sweet Voice behind me, from the Spirit of the Lord, My Sheep hear my voice, and
a stranger they will not follow: nevertheless (wretched man that I was) I went
on, and came in; and while I was hearing, I had great strivings and struglings
in my soul, whether I should speak or no: one great Objection was a Declaration
from the Higher Powers against the Disturbance of any public Minister; but by
Experience have I learned that the truth of Christ is to be vindicated, rather
then the command of man obeyed.

But just and righteous was the Lord, in that after I had grieved and resisted
(if not vexed) his Spirit, that he should leave me to mine own strength, and so
flesh prevailed; and now at what time soever I came to present my self before
the Lord, the Words of Christ stuck as a Dart in my heart, He that is ashamed
of me and of my words, in this sinful and adulterous generation, of him shall
the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in the glory of his Father and of
his holy Angels. And though I could not for some space of time afterward see
my sin, yet now Satan helped on to the uttermost, so that I was in great fear
that I was guilty of that Unpardonalle sin; but the Lord, that watched over my
soul for good, did first strengthen my faith from the consideration of the
unvaluable preciousness of the blood of Christ: but still unbelief was very
powerful, and great tumults there were in my soul; yea, I may say, The bones of
my peace were broken, sometimes concluding this, and sometimes that, and at the
same time under the guilt of another sin that lay heavy upon me, and thus was I
afflicted and tossed, but not comforted; but God that is plentiful in loving
kindness, visited my soul with so sweet a promise, so suitable unto my
condition, as possibly my soul could wish: for when he was working godly sorrow
in my soul, and gave me a sight of him whom I had pierced, yea, when I was
mourning for the Abomination of others, from Isa. 6.5. and had the sense of
these sins upon my heart, I cried out in my sorrow, Lord, whither shall I be
carried away in this stream of iniquity? It was immediately whispered into my
soul, by the sweet and still voice of the Spirit of God, My Grace is sufficient
for thee. And faithful is the Lord who has fulfilled his Promise: for whereas
before I did find that he had taken his holy Spirit from me, and I had not the
pourings forth of the Spirit of Grace and Supplication; now his assisting grace
was come, and now I consessed my sin freely: I question not but that also his
accepting grace is sufficient for me, and his rewarding grace in his due time,
even for me also, on whom the Lord Jesus might have been ashamed.

Now therefore, in the words of my dear Savior, I do counsel every one that
has an ear, to hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, Rev. 2.

A SONG OF PRAISE.
A Rise, shine forth, my Soul, thy light is come;
Stand and admire at Free Grace and Love:
The Morning Star appears, break forth O Sun,
With thy sweet Rays, descending from above.
Disperse all Clouds, and gather my souls praise,
My Love, my Choice, my Glory, and my Crown:
O Thou who art the Ancient of days,
To Thee be Honor, Power and Renown.
Sam. Grosvenor.
FINIS.

