THE SEARCHERS for SCHISM SEARCHED: Or, Their pretended Questions for
Conscience sake, ANSWERED.

Wherein is proved, That those Baptized Congregations under Laying on of Hands,
are not guilty of Schism in Separating from them.

Showing, Supposition to their threefold Hypothesis, 1 That their Church
Constitution is not true. 2 Separation from them proved lawful. 3 The Truth and
Authority of the Doctrine about which they Separate, vindicated.


Humbly presented to all concerned, J. Griffith, a cordial desirer of the
flourishing (...) of the Church in Unity and Peace, with (...) and Truth; but,
Societas in (...) tantum ab^st ab (...) pl^ n^aria con(...) pariter (...).

Prove. 18, 17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his
neighbor comes and searches him.

Printed for the Author 1669.

To the Baptized Disciples not under laying on of Hands, is heartily wished the
true knowledge of God, and sincere Love, with submission to the whole Doctrine
of Christ, desired in the way of Truth.
WHen we first saw your Book, read the Title, and how you pretend your
Questions are for Conscience sake; we thought Silence for some time would be
the best Answer, considering what has formerly past between us about the
Difference still depending, and the present face of things, as they now show
themselves in the world.

But when we came to take a view of your Epistle, finding it writ by some
spirit enraged, rather than one desirous of satisfaction from any serious,
sober, conscientious scruple, or doubt, We were invited the more to consider
your Questions; and finding them to strike at the root, filled with animosity,
taunting and insulting terms, rather than a spirit so much as sprinkled with
conscious, candid, and serious aims, though you give your selves the name, as
the obscure Parents of this (in some sense) abortive Child of the Lovers of
Truth and Peace, which bespeaks the Babe both conceived and brought forth under
the melevolent Aspects of some froward contentious (and yet pretended glorious
and Christian) design.

Your Epistle, which as the Midwife that brought the Child into the world, we
find ushers it in with caluminations so foul, and of such a sort, as if it were
intended to scale Rome's Walls, and bid Defiance to the Man there that usurps
the Keys of Heaven and Hell.

And withal, that way may be made for its more laudable entrance and progress,
she no sooner speaks, but, like Athalia, she cries Treason, treason, (the
Lord's Prerogative is invaded) when alas, she was the Traitor her self; and
then she marches on, and proclaims them (she is sent to with so much pretended
calmness) to be like the Man at Rome, usurpers of the Keys of Hell and Death.

But how much the mark is missed is evident enough, for who more free and ready
to stop up the way to Hell, and open the way to Heaven, so far as lies in them,
by all the abilities they have, and endeavors they can use, than they whom you
brand with the aforesaid Usurpation. Though we would not make the road to
Heaven as the foolish Woman and clamourous does the way to her House, saying,
Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant, to her guests.

And though your Babes-Usher has got the knack on it to clamor with so much
scurrility, by such oily lines, perhaps borrowed from some other Pen, yet is it
an argument of a weak Cause rather than otherwise, it being usual, when there
is no better weapons to make use of such, with this gloss, The Lords
Prerogative is invaded, and what will thou do to thy great Name? and the like;
when you your selves are the invaders of that Royal Prerogative of the Lord's
Anointed, by not suffering his Princely Authority to be obeyed without
control from you; and such his liege People to whom his Prerogative and Name
is more dear than their lives, as sufficient testimony has been given, and
further may through his grace, should he call for it. You study against ways
of obtractation.

But how easy a matter is it for men to pretend to Conscience in their own
Case, and with the same Pen, bespatter the Consciences of others with foul
inormities of mere pretenses under that cloak, as if they made bates, and
pretended Conscience; but let the sober inspect this newborn Babe, and they
will see makebate writ in the face of him, though it has Conscience for its
Name, and is surnamed a Lover of Truth and Peace; and do but trace it in its
proceedings, and let but its conception be calculated, and they will find it
both conceived and brought forth to that end, it being furnished with
Confidence sufficient to pass it without suspicion of being tardy of any such
thing as makebate, while it can talk of Peace and Unity among Brethren, and
pretend to more than ordinary zeal to it; and that it may go abroad without
jealousy of the contrary, all that stands in its way, must be rendered as
maintainers of Notions, caught up and charged upon Conscience, without regard
had to the interest of Religion, yea, and renting and running away from all
that agree not with them, when there is nothing less intended by you, than to
run divisions among us that are united in that thing under debate.

And for the more effectual accomplishment of this design, we must also be
rendered as such that take upon them to judge all that come not up to the same
dimensions with us, not to have God, nor to have communion with God, when our
judgment in that case is, Those that transgress and abide not in the Doctrine
of Christ, have not God as his Church has; not that thereby you or any man is
judged by us, to have, or not to have God: And as for you, we have before given
our Testimony, that we can, and do love you for the Truths sake you own, so far
as you have gone, or so far as you do own the Truth; but we cannot, nay we dare
not love you with the love of Brethren in the true and right order of the
Gospel. See Gods Oracle, and Christ's Doctrine, page 94. then have you no cause
to render us, as judging all but our selves in no sense to have God, nor
communion with God.

And if you have better Arguments to prove your in erest in Christ than laying
on of Hands, we have no cause to grieve at it, but to rejoice; and can with all
our hearts wish you have; for laying on of Hands can be none for you, (and it
will be well if it be none against you) who have so long opposed it with so
much bitterness, as you have done, and and still do. But be we esteemed your
Friends or your Enemies, for saying, you are not a Church rightly Constituted,
and so have not God as his Church; we must still say it, until our Judgments
and Consciences be otherwise persuaded by his Word; and if you will not believe
what we say, we must leave it to the revelation of the righteous Judgment of
the Lord, who will then make the decision of that, and also of your
uncharitable judgment of us, That if we could execute all (as you say) we
condemn, then who shall be saved? you had as well said, none; though thanks be
to God we have our testimony on high, how much we have labored and traveled
for the Salvation of Souls; nor have you any cause to say, The Devil may have a
Writ of Ease from any Judgment or Practice of ours; for, to the praise of God
we speak it, we have been by him made Instruments to turn men from Darkness to
Light, and from the power of Satan to God, and not a few: but if any do give
the Devil a Writ of Ease, and bring Prey to the Den of that great Devourer, it
is more like to be you that seek to keep men from the Truth, and that leave no
stone unturned, to draw them that are in it, to the like dis-esteem you your
selves have of it: And indeed, before you had charged others with
Church-dividing, you should first prove your selves to be a true Constituted
Church, and then cry out against the Ignorance and Pride of those that
Separated from you; but while that beam is in your eye, how can you discern
aright the moat in another? for as the Devil can dance at discord, so he can
dance at concord, in confusion and disorder; when Unity is kept in Iniquity and
Error, nothing can please the Father of Lies better, promote his interest,
enlarge his kingdom, and give a more secure Writ of Ease than that will; and
therefore, if he be no better furnished, than where Unity is kept with Truth,
and Unity in Iniquity, and Error is avoided, he may go look for Men and Arms
where he can find them; for where Unity and Truth are together, and Truth and
Unity are individuals, he will find none: And what will lay the Church more
open to ruin and spoil, than Unity in Error and Sin? and who, that is a
Christian, can rejoice in such Trophies? the Devil shall gain by such
victories, yet will Church-divisions do much, and cause her Enemies to triumph;
let them take it to themselves that are guilty thereof: Men in such cases most
times miss the mark, and lay not the saddle on the right horse, but satisfy
and please themselves by charging others with that they want proof of, that so
the Plea for themselves may the better pass for Not guilty, by crying up lawful
Separation to be Church-Renting, and a wounding Christ's Body. And who will
sooner reflect the want of Knowledge, and Pride, than such who are proud,
knowing nothing, but doting about Questions? 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.

And how many men might silently go to their Graves without noise, had they not
secured their Names, and in some kind their Reputation, by such doting ways,
and contendings against Truth, by branding others with the infamous character
of Church-breaking? And while they do this, kindle a Fire to themselves, and
then delight in the sparks thereof; withal reflecting the guilt of it on
others, being ambitious that none are so holy, humble, and wise as they: and
besides, think it their duty to sacrifice in the flame of their own fire, all
their abilities and parts, to promote their intended designs; not standing much
upon it, if to help forward the Work they venture to add a little Hypocrisy,
that with fair words and feigned speeches, they might the better deceive the
hearts of the simple: And that by stigmatizing others with the name of foolish
Builders, and unskilful Physicians, you (like Absalom) might get in place your
selves; and while you pity the state of others in this defect, crave the work
your selves, as Builders, and the Cure, as Physicians; who yet have not
attained the skill to lay a foundation. And if your skill to cure, be ^o better
than to build; there is but small hopes for them that employ you, but to be
destroyed by your Building, and to die by your Practice.

And most sure it is, that this will be the issue, if such unskilful Builders
and Physicians be courted as they have been by some, to lend their assistance
and advice; whose pride and interest is such, that will not suffer them to be
controlled in their work, since their hearts are so stout, and their conceits
of themselves are so high, that they will not endure that should be amended,
which they have unskilfully built. What will then an agreement to join with
you, to build, and to cure (though styled happy) prove, but little better than
destruction, and a languishing under an incurable disease, whose Reputation
will not admit of any Regulation, that have so long made opposition against the
true Rules of sure and safe Building? And then how shall they become Truths
Proselytes, that have rejected it so long, without assuming the guilt of what
they stand charged with, which may expose them to reject Conviction, rather
than lose their Credit and Reputation? For which they must say, we make
causless Separation, hating them, and casting them out, when none they charge
are guilty of the one, nor of the other, as the Answers to your Questions will
inform you; which we present to your serious Consideration; believing that
Peace is the blessing of the most High, when Truth and Purity join hands with
it. And O how happy a thing, and desirable, is such a Peace and Unity! And how
much longed for! But ah! when will it once be? How can this so desirable a
thing be hoped for, while Truth and You stand at a distance? Your subjection to
Christ, in owning and obeying that sacred Appointment of his, which you have
made such opposition against, may heal the Breach, by which you will be
baptized into one Body with us; and so you and we may grow up together a Temple
and holy Habitation of God through the Spirit.

J. G.

The Searchers for Schism searched.
MEeting with a small Book called A Search for Schism, and finding with what
specious and glorious pretenses it comes forth, and how reproachfully, yea and
falsely the Authors thereof do represent those dissenting from them; lest they
should insult yet more, and trample upon that sacred Truth they contend against
and oppose, We therefore thought it necessary that their Questions should be
answered.

Quest. 1.
Whether a Congregation of people, that have confessed their sins, and
professed their Faith in Christ for the pardon of them, and thereupon are
baptized; resolving by Gods assistance further to believe, do, and suffer what
they shall from time to time understand to be according to the Will of God; We
demand whether a people so qualified and congregated, ought not to be esteemed
a Church of Christ, and Members in particular? 1 Cor. 12.13.

Answer.
Before we come to answer, it will be necessary that we observe some few things
which lie hid in this Question.

1. That the difference depending between you and us, is about laying on of
hands on baptized Believers, as such.

2. That you at the present are ignorant, and do not understand laying on of
hands to be your duty, according to the will of God, to submit to.

3. That if you did understand (as aforesaid) laying on of hands to be
according to the will of God your duty, you would do it.

4. And you being thus qualified, de^and whether you ought not to be esteemed
a^ ^^urch of Christ?

These things premised, we now answer.

1. How can you be ignorant that laying on of hands is your duty to do, when
one of you, and one that is esteemed eminent among you for parts and knowledge,
yea, and one of the chief, if not the alone Author of your Search, did not very
long since receive laying on of hands upon the same ground, and to the same end
we practice it; giving of it first under his own hand, as is still to be seen.

2. Can he then be ignorant that laying on of hands is his duty to do,
according to the will of God, when he shall submit to it as to one of the first
Rudiments of Christianity? Either he did submit with understanding, or he
offered the Sacrifice of Fools, which know not what they do; or did he design
to deceive the Brethren that administered Prayer and laying on of hands upon
him, that so he might be the better able, (being now admitted a Member of a
Congregation under laying on of hands) and with the less suspicion, to
undermine that part of the Foundation on which the House was built? To say he
did as Fools do, would be too saucy a reflection; to say he received laying on
of hands designedly, would proclaim that action of his rather Jesuitical than
Christian, and conclude him notorious for Hypocrisy.

3. How can it be thought he should not understand prayer and laying on of
hands to be a foundation-Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, when he has more
than once in the presence of many people confessed it so to be, and at length
confessed it under his hand, and submited to the practice thereof, as one of the
first Rudiments (to use his own terms) of Christianity?

4. But suppose he nor you understand not laying on of hands to be your duty
according to the will of God, will it follow that therefore you ought to be
esteemed a Church of Christ rightly and duly constituted? etc. We believe that
there are many that sprinkle their Children (whose Confession of Sin, and
Profession of Faith in Christ, we and you can own) that you have so much
Charity for, that did they believe it to be the duty of Believers only to be
baptized, and not Children, they would submit to Baptism themselves, and never
sprinkle, no^ own sprinkling of Babes more: Will this give you sufficient
ground to esteem them a Church of Christ? You will say, No: And why no* Because
they are not baptized according to the will of God, and Baptism is one
Principle o^ the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.2. Even so say we, having so much
Charity for some of you that did you understand laying on of hands to be your
duty to submit to, according to the will of God, you would do it: yet may you
not be esteemed a right constituted Church, though you have obeyed one
Principle of the Doctrine of Christ more than they which sprinkle their Babes,
and are right in Faith and Repentance because you are not under laying on of
hands which also is one Principle of Christ's Doctrine, Heb. 6.1, 2. Ignorance
will be no excuse, where Knowledge may be had; we may not own you a true
constituted Church for your Ignorance.

5. If you be ignorant that laying on of hand^ is your duty to submit to, where
is the fault? Not in God, He gives liberally, and upbraidet^ not, Jam. 1.5.
nor in his Word, that is able t^ make a man wise to Salvation, through faith
i^ Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.15. Is it not written i^ the Scriptures of Truth, and
has it not bee^ asserted both by preaching and printing, as you your selves
know and say. Insomuch that the Light of this Truth (had you not rejected it)
might have shined into your hearts, long ere this day, and you brought to the
knowledge of the mind of Christ. If they have not enlightened you, who knows?
since no answer has been given by you to those Books wherein Laying on of
Hands has been asserted; especially See Gods Oracle, and Christ's Doctrine, p.
91.
considering that you have been invited to answer them, with a promise, that
the mistake and error should be acknowledged, when you should prove laying on
of hands to be no Principle of Christ's Doctrine.

6. You do not only seem to plead ignorance, but you give us to understand
that you are resolved to believe, do, and suffer what from time to time shall
be made known unto you, etc. further than your present seize. The words
are good words, it is true; but how can they agree with your practice? For from
before the time we departed from you, down to this day, you have been constant
and unwearied opposers of laying on of hands, speaking evil of the way,
disputing publicly against it, and now lastly make opposition in your
Questions for Conscience Sake, as you pretend, with scurrilous and taunting
expressions, as in several places does appear, which makes it not easy to be
believed, that if you are ignorant you desire to understand, or understanding,
resolve to do as you say you will.

7. Will resolving to do the Will of God when known in a fundamental, give you
the esteem of a Church of Christ rightly Constituted? if you, then it will give
others we hope in your eyes the like esteem that are short of you in one
principle of Christ's Doctrine, as you are of us in another; and if so, then
ought you to esteem those in the Presbyterian and Independent way, especially
those of them that believe Christ died for all, as you do, between whom there
is no fundamental difference but in Baptism of Water, and that only too about
the subject and manner of Baptizing; and no doubt but they are as ready to
attest their resolution to own and submit to Baptism as Believers, or any other
thing whatsoever, shall from time to time be made known to them, according to
the will of God, as you are, or can be.

8. And whereas you say you are not only resolved to believe, and do, but also
to suffer, etc.

Your actions, some of you, and those some, none of the meanest for place and
parts, will rather speak the contrary; witness their freeing of themselves from
the yoke of Suffering by sinful swearing, out-living their Testimony for
Christ, preferring the world and their interest therein above his righteous
Cause.

9. We then have cause to doubt, whether you are ignorant as you insinuate, and
so resolved as you say; but if you are, we thus answer your demand, That it is
not any Peoples resolving to believe, do, and suffer, what hereafter shall be
made known to them, etc. but the knowing and doing what is according to the
Will of God, that will make them a right constituted Church, and Members in
particular, though you are, or may be esteemed baptized Disciples.

Quest. 2.
Whether any other qualifications, etc. viz. then is set down in the first
Question, are required of God, as pre-requisits to Church Communion, and Church
Membership; if so, show us what those things are, and where they are so
required?

Answer.
1. If we should grant, as we do not, that God requires no other qualification
than what you mention, as pre-requisits to Church Communion; yet have you not
found the Schism, but must search nearer home for it, if you intend to find it;
because you are not the men so qualified as you intimate you be, as may well be
perceived without secret search by any, let but those qualifications you speak
of, be compared with the actions of those, time after time, that are of highest
esteem amongst you.

2. But if you were qualified, as you say you are, yet will not that prove you
a Church whose Constitution is right; for God requires laying on of hands,
which is one Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, and one of the first
rudiments of Christianity, as you have confessed, as pre-requisits to Church
Communion; But then you demand, where God requires it as a pre-requisit to
Church Communion: We then demand of you, where God requires Water Baptism as a
pre-requisite to Church Communion? If you shall say that Baptism is one
Principle of Christ's Doctrine; so is laying on of Hands, as well as Baptism,
numbered among the principles of Christ's Doctrine, Heb. 6.1, 2. But if you shall
say, that there is more in the Scripture to be said for Water Baptism, than
there is for laying on of Hands; we say, if there be more said for Baptism in
the Scripture than is for laying on of Hands, all that is said cannot make it
more than a foundation principle, and so is laying on of hands.

3. What if there be more said in the Scripture for Faith toward God, than is
for Baptism of Water, as there is in many things agreeing to it, yet is it no
more than a foundation principle of Christ's Doctrine, and so is the Doctrine of
Baptism, Heb. 6.2. And will it then follow, because there is more said in
Scripture for Faith toward God, than is said for the Baptism of Water, that
therefore Baptism is not required of God as a pre-requisite to Church
Communion; even so, should it be granted, that there is more said for Baptism,
in some one thing, or more, than is for laying on of Hands, it does not follow
but that laying on of Hands being numbered by the Apostle among the foundation
principles of Christ's Doctrine, as well as Baptism, Heb. 6.2. is required of
God as a pre-requisite to Church Communion, and Membership, as well as Baptism.

4. Again, where is the belief of the Resurrection of the Dead required of God
as pre-requisite to Church Communion? yet is that a principle of Christ's
Doctrine Heb. 6.2. and such a one, that if not owned and believed, you would
not own such a People should be admitted to Church Communion and Church
Membership. If you should say, that to deny the Resurrection is an Error which
makes Faith vain, and concludes us yet in our sins; we say that it is no more
than a Principle of Christ's Doctrine, and so is laying on of Hands, and yet you
cannot show where its required of God, viz. The belief of the Resurrection of
the Dead, as a pre-requisite to Church Communion; it does not therefore follow
but that if you are so qualified as you say you are, should you deny or not
believe the Resurrection of the Body, that you are a Church Communicable, or
Church Members; therefore there is other qualifications than those you speak of
pre-requisite to Church Membership and Communion.

Quest. 3.
If it shall be said, that Churches ought to be found in the knowledge and
practice of all Christ's Doctrines: We demand, whether the knowledge and
practice of all truths be indispensably necessary to the constituting of
Churches and Church Members?

Answer.
1. We say that Churches ought to be found in the knowledge of all Christ's
Doctrine, (not Doctrines) and so we think will you say.

2. We do not say never the more for that, that the knowledge and practice of
all truths is indispensably necessary to the constituting of Churches and
Church Members; for there are many truths, Churches rightly constituted, may be
ignorant of; but the first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, none ought to
be ignorant of, or without the knowledge and practice, and be true constituted
Churches and Church Members.

Quest. 4.
If you say the knowledge and practice of all truths is not indispensably
necessary to the constituting of Churches and Church Members; then we demand,
that you would define what truths the knowledge and practice whereof is so
indispensably necessary as aforesaid? and what truths and practices the
ignorance of, may be consistant with a true Church and Church Membership?

Answer.
1. What truths the knowledge and practice of are indispensably necessary to
the constituting of Churches and Church Members, we have given you the
definition of in our Answer to your 3d Question.

2. Those truths of highest moment, the ignorance of, may be consistent with a
true Church and Church Members, are such as belong to the perfecting and
completing the Church and Church Members in Christ, which a true Church may be
ignorant of in her minority; as the Hebrew Church was about many things Paul
had to say, hard to be uttered, because they were dull of hearing, and were
still as Babes, who are unskilful in the Word of Righteousness, Heb. 5.11, 12,
13.

3. Those truths of less moment, consistent with a true Church, are washing of
Feet, saluting with a holy Kiss, taking an Oath to end strife, the matters of
Apparel, and suchlike; and who pray makes these things the Essentials of
Communion, though you falsely say they are so made; no Congregation in England
as we know of.

4. Yet may the matter of Apparel give just cause of reproof when Church
Members shall exceed the bounds of moderation, and sobriety in their Apparel,
to the grieving, wounding and offense of their fellow Brethren, and may amount
to a sin against Christ, when they shall stop their ear, and stiffen their
necks against them that are so grieved and offended.

5. There may be many things done by Churches and Church Members, that are
sinful, which may justly deserve reproof; and if not repented of, may merit the
censure of the Church. The Angel of the Church of Pergamos was reproved for
sin, for having those in the Church that held the Doctrine of Balaam, to eat
meat sacrificed to Idols, and to commit Fornication: which Fornication was mixed
Marriages, as says Josephus, and we think his authority as good in this case,
as you can think Dr. Hammond's is in laying on of Hands.

6. The Angel of the Church of Pergamos is by the Spirit commanded to repent of
this evil, the command backed with a commination, which proves that such must
be put out of the Church that so hold, much more such which so do.

7. But laying on of Hands we do indeed make Essential to Church Communion,
because it is a Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, as has been proved now,
and heretofore, and never was disproved by you, except asking questions be
refutation.

Quest. 5.
We demand, whether there was not a Church of Christ in the world before his
Ascension? and whether any other qualification was then pre-requisite to Church
Membership, than Confession of Sins, and Faith in Christ for the remission of
them together with a being Baptized into his Name, and walking in a holy life
and conversation? if you say any thing else was then required and practiced, as
Essential to Church Membership, show us what that was, and where it was so
required and practiced: And if you say nothing else was then required and
practiced, we demand, whether the Church of Christ was wanting of any thing
then that was Essential to its being, whatever it might want as to its
well-being? If you say it wanted nothing then that was Essential to its being,
then we further demand how this People so continuing in Faith, Baptism and
Holiness of life, could cease to be a Church of Christ after his Ascension,
though they might not come up to some of those others Truths, that were
afterward revealed when the Spirit was made manifest, etc.

Answer.
1. We do not find that Christ before his Ascension does give the Name or Title
of a Church to any, but only calls his Followers Disciples, as we might
enumerate a multitude of places in the Evangelists.

2. We find that our Lord Jesus, when Peter confessed that he was the Christ
the Son of the Living God, answered Peter, and said, Upon this Rock will I
build my Church: He does not say, I have built my Church upon this Rock, but, I
will, etc. speaking in the future tense, Hereafter when I do build it; not that
he had then built his Church, but was about the work, making all things ready
as materials both for the Foundation and Building.

3. Nor is what we say destitute of good reason; for his Disciples might then
confess and believe him to be the Christ, but could not believe him dead,
risen, ascended, and that the Comforter was come, upon which, as upon ^ Rock or
sure Foundation, Christ would build hi^ Church, and has, since his last Will
and Testament is in force by his Death, Heb. 9.16, 17 for his Church now is
founded upon these Basi^ Christ is come, and died for our Sins, according to
the Scriptures; believing that we in dut^ ought to be baptized in his Name for
the Remission of them, Act. 2.38. and 22.16. and pray, with laying on of hands,
for the gift of the Spirit, which now is come since Christ is ascended to the
Father, according to his promise, John 16.7. to guide us into all Truth, and to
be with us for ever, John 14.16, 17. as his alone Vicar on Earth, John 16.13,
14, 15. by which Spirit we are baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. believing
that as he is risen from the dead, he will also raise us up at the last day,
John 6.40. and will come the second time sitting upon the Throne of his Glory
to Judgment, and to render to every man as his work shall be. On all which, as
on a Rock or Foundation, the Disciples could not be built in the time of
Christ's life, not till after his Ascension, because they were not then laid,
nor could not till Christ was dead, risen and ascended to the Father: Yet in
the time of his Life, as his Disciples he was diligent to instruct, teach, and
inform them of all these things, as such which should be done and accomplished
in their due and appointed time, viz. after he had suffered, was risen and
ascended to the Father.

But it may be objected, That Christ says, Mat. 18.17. If he shall neglect to
hear them, tell it to the Church; there Christ calls them a Church.

That does not follow, those being words of direction and instruction which
Christ gives them, by which they might be guided when they had received power
from on high to proceed as a Church, to censure unholy and disorderly Walkers;
not that they, before they were endowed with that power from on high, were to
act as a Church to censure the impenitent, no^ did they, as we read.

You may further object, That Christ did break Bread with them, and therefore
they we^ then a Church.

It is true, Christ did before his Passion institute the Supper, he brake the
Bread, and gave it to his Disciples; but it was only with the Twelve, the rest
of the Disciples being absent then does it not follow that the Disciples we^ in
the capacity of a Church, because the Twelve are singled out from the rest of
the Disciples which shows (excepting him that was lost) tha^ they were taken
apart from the other Disciples as those that were appointed by the Lord to b^
Witnesses in a more eminent way and manne^ than the rest, of all those things
he should suffer* And those whom Jesus had chosen and give^ commandment to, not
only by his own mouth but through the Holy Ghost also, Act. 1.2. wha^ they
should teach others to believe and observe Mat. 28.20. Breaking Bread then at
this tim^ might not be solemnized as Church Communion which ought to be when
the whole Body comet^ together, to commemorate the Body and Blood of Christ,
the one as broken, the other shed, and to show the Lords death till he come;
but rather was instituted then by Christ at the feast of the Passover, to show
them what they should after he was ascended do, and also to teach others what
they should do and observe, when they were endowed with power from on high, and
thereby were en^ighted to all things relating to Church Power, and the
administration of all Church-Ordinances; which until they were so empowered,
they were only to wait at Jerusalem, Luke 24.49. Act. 1.4. If otherwise, why
should the rest of the Disciples be excluded, and not called to this last
Supper of the Lord? If they broke Bread as a Church, the rest of the Disciples
had as much right to that Communion as the Twelve, or else the Twelve only
were the Church, and the other Disciples no part of it: And if a Church, why
must they wait for power at Jerusalem? This we humbly and modestly offer to
consideration. And as for the rest of your Queries and Demands which you
multiply in this Question, they are either removed and answered, or require
none further.

But (say you further) if you shall say they wanted something while Christ was
among them, essential to Communion; then we demand whether this does not
reflect a want of care in Christ, who left them so, and indeed want of
understanding in those that say so? For if Christ had a Church before his
ascension that wanted any thing essential to its being, then it was a Church,
and no Church, at the same time, which is absurd to imagine.

Let what is abovesaid be duly and considerately weighed, and there will be no
reflection upon Christ, nor ignorance in those that say they were only
Discipl^^, and not empowered as a Church before Christ's Ascension. It can
reflect no want of care in Christ, because they could not be in any other
capacity than his Scholars, before the Spirit was given them; no^ were they
capable to receive more than what Christ did communicate to them, and leave
with them, until the Spirit was manifested; I have many things to say, but ye
cannot bear them now, John 16.12. Then its no reflection upon Christ for want
of care, considering the time, and the Disciples incapacity to bear them then.

Nor do we say Christ had a Church before his Ascension (if they were a Church)
that wanted any thing essential to its being in that dispensation; therefore
you may keep your absurdity till you have more occasion.

Quest. 6.
We demand whether those qualifications that give us a Right to Baptism, do not
give us a Right to the Lords Table?

Answer.
1. Those qualifications that give you a right to Baptism, do not give you a
right to the Lords Table.

2. For confession of sins, and profession of Faith in Christ for the pardon of
them, are qualifications that gives ^^^ht to Baptism; but they do not give the
person so confessing and professing, a right to the Lords Table, except he be
first baptized, by your Principles and Practice, if we be not deceived by you.

Quest. 7.
We demand whether it be not sinful to make more conditions of Communion, than
ever God made? And whether the imposing of any thing (though true) as the
conditions of Church Membership and Communion, which God has not made a
Condition, be not to keep those out of the Church, that Christ would have in?

Answer.
1. We grant it is sinful to make more Conditions of Communion than ever God
made.

2. And to impose any thing, though true, as ^he Condition of Church Membership
and Communion, which God has not made a Con^ition, is to keep those out of the
Church that Christ would have in.

Quest. 8.
If Christ has required no other conditions of Church Communion, than
Confession of Sin, Faith, Baptism, and a holy Life, whether you can by an Rule
deny Communion to any that are so qualified. If so, show that Rule.

Answer.
1. Though it be true, that Confession of sin, Faith, Baptism, and an holy
Life, be condition^ of Communion, yet are there more condition^ required by
Christ, of Church Communion* that those: for the twelve Disciples Paul foun^ at
Ephesus, had confessed their sin, professed their faith, and were baptized,
yea, and were men of holy Lives, and yet they wanted some conditions of
Church Communion.

2. For these Disciples were ignorant of the Doctrine of Baptisms, Heb. 6.2.
knew no more than the Baptism of John; for they had not heard whether there
were a holy Ghost, or no^ Act. 19.

3. They were not under laying on of hand^ which God had appointed as the means
h^^ which the holy Ghost was given and received both which, viz. the Doctrine
of Baptisms an^ laying on of hands, are Principles of the Doctrine of Christ,
Heb. 6.2. And therefore ^ truly conditions of Church Communion, ^
Water Baptism, for it is by one Spirit we a^ all baptized into one Body, 1 Cor.
12.13.

4. Then not to hear whether there were holy Ghost or no, as these Disciples
did not, ^less defect in them, than for you to hear and read there is a holy
Ghost promised to as many as obey Christ, and you not believe the Baptism
thereof, but oppose and reject the means by which the Baptism of the Spirit is
obtained, and by which we all are baptized into one Body, is a far greater
defect, and want of the conditions Christ requires of Church Communion in you,
than was in them.

5. Then can we deny Communion with you, because Christ requires more
conditions of Church Communion than you yet have; for which we have these
Rules, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. Cum multis aliis.

Quest. 9.
Whether the Baptized Congregations that are not under laying on of hands, do
not make those qualifications above mentioned, absolutely necessary to
Church Communion and Church Membership? And if so, why should you refuse
Communion with them?

Answer.
1. You may well make a question of it, whether you do make those
qualifications you mention before, absolutely necessary to Church Communion and
Church Membership, when in your sixth Question you demand, Whether those
qualifications that give you a Right to Baptism, do not give you a Right to the
Lords Table? Which ^mporteth, That those which have a Right to Baptism, by
virtue of some qualifications, have a right to the Lords Table by virtue of the
same qualifications at the same time; and if they that have a right to Baptism,
have at the same time a right to the Lords Table, they may by right have
Church Communion though they be not baptized.

2. Therefore we must Answer you, That we cannot tell, or we do not know,
whether you do make those qualifications you mention, absolutely necessary to
Church Communion, and Church Membership, because in your sixth Question, you
more than seem to leave out Baptism as a qualification, which you put in
elsewhere as one.

3. But if you do make all those qualifications you mention, absolute necessary
to Church Communion and Church Membership, you have been already told why we
refused Communion with you; it will be too much in this place to say it again.

Quest. 10.
Whether you have not at some turns, both by practice and professed agreements,
owned those for Churches and Church Members, that are baptized Believers as
aforesaid? and if so, by what rule can you refuse to have Communion with them?

Answer.
1. It is not without cause to believe, that is too true, that some have been
daubing with untempered mortar, Ezekiel. 13.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. to heal the hurt
slightly, saying, Peace peace, when there was no peace, Jer. 6.14, having both
by practice and professed agreements, owned you for Churches rightly
constituted.

2. It were well if those that have so practiced and agreed, would remember
from whence they are fallen, and repent, and do their first works before it be
too late, and their Candlestick be removed out of its place, Rev. 2.5.

3. And they their giving so much advantage to you, who oppose some part of the
mind of Christ which they believe and practice, which is now taken up by you,
and used as weapons against the truth they practice, does cry aloud upon them
to repent, and smite upon the thigh, saying, What have we done?

4. For if such practice and professed agreement be according to the will of
God, wherein they have owned you Churches, and Church Members rightly
constituted, Communion by no rule can be refused, but ought to be maintained
and held with you.

5. But we say, whatever some have practiced and professedly agreed, that you
are not Churches, nor Church Members rightly constituted, because you have not
yet laid all the principles of the foundation, but are wanting in some one, if
not more, of the first rudiments of Christianity, as you have confessed laying
on of Hands to be; We therefore refuse Communion with you by the
abovementioned rules in our Answer to your 8th Question.

Quest. 11.
But if you shall deny you have so owned them, then we demand whether you that
are under laying on of Hands, do not daily receive such into your Communion
that have been converted and baptized by those not under laying on of Hands,
without taking an account of their Faith, or baptizing them again? If it shall
be answered, you do so receive them; because they had confessed their Faith,
and were baptized before: then we demand whether such as you so receive were
converted by, or made their confession to, and received their baptism from, the
Church or the World? If you say they were the Church; how dare you separate
from them you own to be Gods Church, though less perfect? If you say they were
the World, they made their confession to, and did receive their baptism from,
then show us whenever God entrusted the world with, or otherwise how the world
came by a power to take a Confession of Faith, and to administer a lawful
Baptism? If you shall say they that Baptized them you so receive, were neither
the Church nor the World; then show us a middle state of men, that are
entrusted with the lawful and due Administration of Gods Ordinances, that are
neither the Church nor the World; if not, does not this practice of yours
declare you own those for a Church of Christ, that are not under laying on of
Hands? etc.

Answer.
1. We confess that we which are under laying on of hands, have received to
laying on of hands, and then to Communion, some from you not under laying on of
hands; nor did we take account of their Faith, nor baptize them again, because
we were satisfied in both, not inquiring who converted them, thinking that not
material, so they were converted.

2. To your next demand, we say, They were neither Baptized by the Church, nor
the World, but by Disciples; and therefore we dare to separate from you, though
not from them that God owns for his Church, though they should be less perfect.

3. To your third demand, we say, Men and Women may be converted and baptized,
and yet they that convert and baptize them, neither the Church, nor the World.

4. Philip (Asts 8.) converted and baptized the Samaritans and the Eunuch, but
Philip was neither the Church nor the World; But you will say, Philip was a
Member and a Deacon of the true Church; it is true, he was: but then Apollos,
who taught diligently the things of the Lord at Ephesus, and elsewhere (and its
beyond a supposition to say, the twelve Disciples, Acts 19. were baptized by
him; but if not by him, by some other, whose seize were no more than his)
and he, if he did not baptize them, might as lawfully, as teach the things of
the Lord, and by as good authority might Baptize them as they that did, if he
did not; and he was neither the Church, nor a Member rightly Constituted; for
he at that time knew only the Baptism o^ John, Acts 18.25.

5. So the Men and Women Philip Baptized at Samaria, were not a Church complete
in their constitution, though they had confessed their sins, believed and were
baptized, but were thereby made materials fit, and framed ready to be put into
the Building, which the Apostles Peter and John were sent by the rest of the
Apostles from Jerusalem to do, who prayed and laid their hands on them, and
they received the Holy Ghost, Acts 8.14. then were they all Baptized by one
Spirit into one Body, according to 1 Cor. 12.13. before which they were not a
Church, nor Church Members according to right and true Church-constitution; nor
were they the World, because they were Believers baptized. So in like manner,
the twelve Disciples Paul found it Ephesus, Acts 19. were not a Church, because
they were not baptized by that one Spirit into one Body, nor were they and
Apollo's the World; because they were Believers baptized, they are said to be
Disciples, Acts 19.1.

6. Then is there a middle-state of men, that were neither the Church, nor the
World, that were entrusted with the lawful and due Administrations of some of
God's Ordinances, as Apollos, who taught and baptized; or if he did not
baptize, yet some other did, no more authorized than he; and if one might
lawfully, an hundred might by the same rule that were in no other capacity than
he.

7. Then does not our practice in receiving some that you have converted and
baptized, as before, declare we own you for Churches that are not under laying
on of hands.

8. And whereas you again demand, Whether it was not agreed on at a general
Meeting of Elders, That such as believe and are baptized, were in the account
of the Scripture to be estimated a Church: We say, we know of no general
Meeting of Elders where any such thing was ever agreed, though we are apt
enough to believe, that at a meeting of some Elders there have been such
non-scriptural agreements made.

9. But such agreements you speak of, make work for Repentance, let them be
made by whom they will; and well may it be said of those Elders that make such
agreements, as was once said of the Hebrew Church, they have need that one
teach them again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God. Heb. 5.12.

10. And to your demand, Whether it has not been permitted by, and practiced
among us, that those which are under laying on of Hands, may and do lawfully
marry with those that are not under laying on of Hands? We say, it has been so
permitted and practiced; and since from thence you demand, Whether this was
not, and is not esteemed by us a marrying in the Church, and in the Lord? We
say, that it is not a marrying in the Church, though we say it may be a
marrying in the Lord; since Believers baptized may be out of the World, and in
the Lord, though not a right and true Church State constituted according to the
pattern Christ appointed: The Samaritans that believed and were baptized, and
Apollos, and those twelve Disciples mentioned before, were in the Lord, yet not
a Church, as has been showed. Thus you see we do not own you a Church in the
Lord, therefore you may spare your last demand, (Whether it be not prodigiously
absurd to own you a Church in the Lord) till we do own you a Church in the
Lord, and yet deny you a Church in the Lord. And whereas you say, you have
Members fi^ to make us husband and wives: Truly, not so fit neither, as we
could and do desire our Members would make choice of; however not so fit as to
be Church Members at the Lord's Table.

Quest. 12.
If a People congregated upon profession of Faith, Baptism, and a Holy life, be
a Church of God, and God requires no other conditions in order to the
constituting of Churches and Church Members, as appears by the light of the
former questions, and ^our own practice and confession at some turns. Then we
demand, whether he that first separated, and those with him, did not make a
separation from such a Church? and whether such a separation from the Communion
of, or disowning Communion with such a Church, be not to make Divisions and
Schism in the Body of Christ?

Answer.
1. We have already showed you, that such a People, no otherwise qualified than
you are, cannot be a Church rightly constituted; and that God does require more
conditions than you have in order to the right constituting of Churches, and
Church Members.

2. Nor does it appear by any light your questions give, that you have a true
Church state; for had we no other light to walk by, in finding out ^ right
constituted Church, than your questions, we should be in the dark, stumble, and
fall, as many of late have done, the more it is to be ^amented.

3. Nor does it appear that you are a Church rightly constituted, never the
more for what some back-sliders have practiced, and confess^ at some turns.

4. You may well call them turns, for tu^^ they are indeed; for had they not
turned from the truth, as they were taught, and as they h^ believed, and as the
Truth is in Jesus, the had never so practiced, and confessed, as y^^ say they
have.

5. Then he that first separated from you; a^ those with him, did not separate
from Church, whose Constitution is according to t^^ will of Christ.

6. And then separation from you, and di^owning Communion with you, whose
Church state is not true, is not to make Divisions (...) Schisms in the body.
For,

7. The Apostle Paul, after he had laid han^ on the twelve he found at Ephesus,
went into (...) Synagogue, and spoke boldly for the space of the Months,
disputing and persuading the thi^^ concerning the Kingdom of God, Acts 19.8.

8. He that separated from you, and the with him (after they were under Laying
o^ Hands) continued disputing and perswadi^^ the things concerning the Kingdom
of Go^ for more than the space of three months.

The Apostle Paul, when diverse were hard^ and believed not, but spoke evil of
the way bef^ the multitude, departed from them, and separa^^ the Disciples,
verse. 9.

10. So he that separated from you, when ^^vers of you were hardened and
believed not, (...) spoke evil of that way before the multitude, ^aying, Laying
on of hands was an invention (...) the Devil; Such a one's hands were holy, and
^ould keep their heads warm; with suchlike as ^at) departed from you, and
separated the ^isciples.

Quest. 13.
Whether or no to deny Communion, or not to re^ive such so qualified into
Communion (as aforesaid) does not savor of pride, singularity, and
uncharitableness? And whether this does not sympathize with the spirit of
Diotrephes, who did not ^^ly refuse to receive the Brethren, but forbid those
that would? 3 John 9.

Answer.
1. For those under laying on of hands to de^y Communion, and not to receive
such into Communion no otherwise qualified than you ^re, does not savor of
pride, singularity, nor uncharitableness, because your Church-constitution is
not right.

2. If so, it has no sympathy with the spirit of Diotrephes to refuse
communion with you, nor to forbid those that would: But it may be ^ride,
hardness of heart, and unbelief in you, ^ the cause you stoop not to Christ,
but do ^ill persist in making opposition against a Principle of his Doctrine,
as you have done, and now do.

Quest. 14.
Whether all that maintain such a Separ^^^ from any Congregations that do
believe in G^^ and are baptized, and walk holily, as aforesaid ^ not guilty of
Schism, and the sin of Diotrep^ aforementioned?

Answer.
This is much the same with the last quest^^^ therefore we shall say only
this, That nei^ all, or any which maintain a Separation from ^ upon the grounds
we do, are guilty of Sch^ or the sin of Diotrephes; for we maintain ^
Separation from Churches, nor Church Members rightly constituted.

Quest. 15.
Whether we who you have separated from, ^ denied Communion to, have not used
all Christ and candid ways of Accommodation, that can reasonably be thought on?
Have we not professed ^ you, That if we saw laying on of hands (in the ^ you
practice it) a Duty, we would submit to ^ Have we not also declared, That we
are willing ^ the better finding out the Truth, that you sha^^ come and preach
it among us? Have we not ^ promised that we would never preach or di^ against
it, to avoid offending of you? Nay, ^ we not practiced this, by suffering your
Coun^^^ Elders freely to preach among us, who preache^ your practice, without
any opposition from us? ^ further, have not many desired to come under ^ ^ on
of hands, if you would not make it the bounds ^ conditions of Communion, and
tie them from ^ning us, or having Communion with us after^^rds? Whether then to
refuse Communion with (...) after such large and loving Condescensions as ^se,
be not Schism greatly aggravated?

Answer.
1. We believe you have of late used ways of ^ccommodation, (as you call them)
but whe^^er Christian and candid, we have cause to ^pect: When one of you shall
desire hands ^^ght be imposed on him by the Elders, upon ^s confession given
under his own hand, viz. ^^ese may therefore certify that I do believe the
Doctrine of laying on of hands, mentioned Heb. 6. ^ be one of the first
Rudiments of Christianity; ^d yet now he is one of the chief Opposers of ^t
laying on of hands which he profanely (to ^ no more) submitted to: Which how
Chri^^^an and candid he therein was, may easily be ^^^cerned by any.

2. What if you have professed, that if you (...) laying on of hands to be a
duty, in the way ^ practice it, you would submit to it? Will (...) make your
Church State true? It is more ^^n probable that those in the Presbyterian and
^^dependant way, are as ready heartily to pro^^^, That did they see Baptism as
you and we ^^^ctise it, and laying on of hands also, to be ^ Duty, they would
submit to both; does it follow that your separation and ours from t^ is Schism?

3. And what if you have declaired that ^ are willing for the better finding
out of Tr^ (as you pretend) that some under laying o^ hands should come and
preach it among y^^ Will that heal your sore, and give you a ri^ and due
Church-constitution?

4. And if you have promised never to pre^ nor dispute against it, and if you
have pract^^^ so, by suffering some Country Elders freely ^ preach it among
you, without any opposit^^^ from you; will these things you call
condes^^^tions, make you a right constituted Chu^ that wanted a right
constitution before? ^^sides, these condescentions might be just ^ Christian
and candid as his was, that desired ^ come under laying on of hands, confessing
i^ be one of the first Rudiments of Christian mentioned before.

5. For there is cause to suspect that t^ condescentions of yours were (rather
than C^^^stian and candid) designs to raze out that ^ of the foundation, viz.
Laying on of han^ that is, raze out the belief and practice of ^ time, or
divide them about it that are under as appears by what some of you have said at
so^^ certain times, viz. That in seven years tim^ should not have that esteem
of laying on of han^ now we have: And another at another (...) should say, That
the Churches would stand with ^rs in their eyes for their acting. These
condescentions then, we say, rather tended to the ^tting laying on of hands,
and the esteem of (...) out of their hearts that have submitted to it, ^t so
the practice of it might perish and die in ^e; or if not so in all, yet then to
cause a ^ecessity of dividing about it, as great Pretenders as you be to Peace
and Unity, that thereby you might hide your disobedience to Christ, and so pass
for current a right-constituted church.

6. What if some of you have desired to come under laying on of hands? If they
will make ^nful conditions, and bring them to us with ^eir desire, we then have
just cause to keep ^em from so sacred an Ordinance as laying on ^f hands is,
until they shall come to the obedience thereof, upon Christ's terms and
conditions, denying themselves and their own.

7. Our refusing then communion with you, ^ough whether in reality or pretense
you have ^ade such large and loving condescentions, (as ^ou call them) since
you still want that loving condescension to Christ, in obeying the Voice ^f
that great Prophet, does not make us guil^ of Schism; much less Schism greatly
aggravated.

Quest. 16.
Whether there are not many among you that ^ all they can to obstruct our
reconciliation, and ^dermine all our Endeavors after Unity; cry^^ down and
condemning all but themselves, lest t^ should most of all condemn themselves,
for mak^ unnecessary divisions in the Church of God? L^^ the Painter in
Plutarch, that had unskilfully painted a Cock, afterward chased away all Cocks
(...) Hens, lest the imperfection of his Art should ^ discovered. And whether
some among you in (...) manner, having made this unskilful Separation, ^ say no
worse, have not cast away all thoughts (...) tenders of accommodation, and them
that tender ^ lest their foul deformity of Church-breaking sho^^^ be detected?

Answer.
1. We Will and can (without being asham^ thereof) freely acknowledge, That
there (...) many we hope among us, that do the best a^^ all they can to
obstruct such a Reconciliatio^ as you would have, and to undermine (as yo^ call
it, though we have and will play abov^ board, and deal plainly) all your
endeavo^^ for Unity, upon your terms of Unity: Whi^ would rather tend to a
going back, than a going on to perfection; and would be rather ^ combination
against the God of Order an^ Truth, than a right well-approved Reconciliation
and Unity which he will say Amen to.

2. And in so doing we cry up truth, and not our our selves otherwise then
servants to it, and lovers of it, knowing withal we are but unprofitable
servants, for when we have done all, we have done no more than what is our duty
to do; nor do we cry down you, nor any, but as the Word of the Lord does, for
your disobedience to Christ; we must not say, light is darkness, and darkness
is light; woe be to us if we should.

3. Neither do we obstruct your endeavors after Reconciliation and Unity, from
any self-condemnation, of making Divisions in the Church, knowing the guilt of
Church-dividing, is not upon us; the Word of the Lord, and our own Consciences
not condemning us (but justifying us) though you unjustly do, that you might
cover your selves under the mantle of men's approbation; which covering would be
too narrow, had you by your late endeavors obtained your end, for your only
way will be to lay your Church-Foundation right, submit to that you have long
quarrelled about, have respect to all the commands of the Lord Jesus, so will
you approve your selves to God, and be united to his People.

4. And as for your levity and flash about the Painter and his Cock; we never
drove you away, as being ashamed of any thing we have ^one in separating from
you, but were always willing to meet the best of you in any place, in public
Conference, or otherwise, by all ways and means we lawfully might use, that
our practice may be seen and tried by the Word; and never upon that account
chased away your Cock, nor no other, but have given yours battle again and
again; nor do we fear to let ours be seen, being drawn not by the unskilful
Painter in Plutarch, but by the Lord Jesus in the Gospel; and therefore if we
chase you away from us in point of Communion, it is lest the deformity of your
Fabric, having but a piece or part Foundation, should bring us in time to the
same deformity, and disorder with you.

Quest. 17.
Whether to break Communion with, or separate from the Communion of a Church of
Christ for some single Error not essential to a Church state, be not a
wounding to the weak, and a hardening to the wicked? Whether it does not keep
many out of the Church that would come in, and give occasion of going out to
many that are in? Whether Divisions from a true Church, are not an inlet to
Atheism and Infidelity? and whether all Christians ought not to eschew
Divisions, as great reproaches to Christian Religion?

Answer.
1. A known Error is not to be suffered not tolerated in the Church of God;
for by the same rule, one may, more may, till the Church be fuller of stinking
weeds, than choice flowers; and what will the weeds do, but eat out the living
and thriving virtue of the flowers; we would not be so much the Devils friend,
as to give him leave to plant, much less to suffer any thing of his planting to
grow in the Lord's garden: Error is of the Father of Lies.

2. Error in the Church, though held but by some; if suffered; threatens the
ruin of the whole body. Thou have them there, that hold the Doctrine of
Balaam, etc. Repent, or else I will come quickly, etc. Error suffered in some
Members, may defile the body, and make it culpable of the sin of Error and
Heresy; A little Leaven leaveneth the whole lump. What will make the Church of
God such a sinful confused, unclean heap, as the Church of Rome is, sooner than
such a tolleration.

3. Yet such Errors, as not eating meats, though every creature of God be
good, if it be received with thanksgiving, and suchlike, being an Error not
essential to Church Communion; to break Communion with a Church of Christ for
some such single Error, may be a wounding to the weak, and a hardening to the
wicked; and may keep many out of the Church that would come in, and give
occasion of going out to many they are in; and such Divisions from a true
Church, may be an inlet to Atheism and Infidelity, and ought to be eschewed by
all Christians, as great reproaches to Christian Religion, and all this, Errors
in Fundamentals, etc. will do.

The end of the Questions grounded upon the first Hypothesis; the second
follows with their Answers.

Quest. 18.
But if it shall be said (as some of you have Preached and Printed) that laying
on of Hands is essential to Church Communion, and that those that are not under
it, have not God, and are not in Communion with God; it is demanded, where are
the Scriptures that either prove it essential to Communion, and that those that
are not under it, have not Communion with God?

Answer.
1. We have not only said, but still do say, that laying on of Hands is
essential to Church Communion, and that those who transgress against Christ's
Doctrine (of which Doctrine laying on of Hands is a Principle, as has been
confessed by you to be, in these words, viz. One of the first Rudiments of
Christianity) has not Communion with God as his Church has, especially you,
who have made such wicked and absurd opposition against it, as you have done.
See our Answer to the 12th Question.

2. Whereas you demand where the Scriptures are, that prove laying on of Hands
to be essential to communion: we say they are in Heb. 6. Acts 8.19. But if you
mean where are the Scriptures that in terminis will say so; we demand, where
are the Scriptures that in so many words will prove Baptism of Water, the
Resurrection of the Dead, eternal Judgment, to be essential to Communion, every
one of which you make an essential thereof, if you deceive us not; and if they,
why not laying on of Hands, which is as truly as either of them a Foundation
Principle of Christ's Doctrine.

3. And since you demand where are the Scriptures that prove those that are not
under laying on of Hands, have not Communion with God; we tell you once again,
that the Scriptures proving such transgressors as you have been, who have both
blasphemed and profaned that sacred Appointment of the Lords, which is a
Foundation Principle of his Doctrine, have not Communion with God as his
Church, are in 2 John 9. Joh. 14.24. Acts 3.22, 23. with many more in the New
Testament.

Quest. 19.
If it shall be said, as some of you have Printed and said, That they that are
not under laying on of Hands, have not God, because they transgress, and not
abide in the Doctrine of Christ, according to 2 John 9. We demand whether this
be not vain Philosophy; and whether by the same reason, we may not unchurch all
the Churches that ever were in the world? Might it not be said of the Church of
the Hebrews, that they had not God, because they had not an acquaintance with,
and so consequently did not abide in all the Doctrine of Christ, relating to
his Priestly Office; and whether those many things that the Author had to say
concerning Christ's high Priesthood, where the Doctrine of Christ, and Christ's
Oracles, or the Authors own inventions? if they were Christ's Oracles or sayings
which they could not receive because they were dull of hearing, then they did
transgress them; or why does the Author find fault with them? And if they did
transgress his sayings and Oracles, and yet were a Church, and still in
communion, and are called Babes in Christ, how dare you say, they that abide
not in all Christ's sayings, have not God? Did not the Churches in Asia
transgress? and might it not be said of them that they did not abide in all
Christ's Doctrine, when Ephesus left her first love, when Pergamos retained
those in communion that held the Doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicholaitans; and
the Church of Sardis kept their communion with those that had defiled their
garments, and the Laodiceans are charged with Luke-warmness, and with being
self-conceited, and so are the Church of Corinth, in suffering the incestuous
person; for which they ought by Christ's Doctrine to have been humbled; we
demand where the Scriptures do declare these to be no Churches or
incommunicable, though in many things they did transgress the sayings (and did
not continue or abide in all the Doctrines and Oracles) of God? but if for all
these they were still owned as Churches, how then dare you say of them, or of
any that should fail like them, that they are no Churches, and have not
communion with God, because they abide not in all his Doctrine?

May not we rather turn the edge of that Argument upon your selves? thus:

They that God owns for Churches, you sin in disowning; but God owns those for
Churches, that fail and come short of many things, that Christ taught them;
therefore you sin in disowning them.

Answer.
1. We say again, as some of us have Printed and said, That you who have
transgressed at such a rate as you have done, and still do against the Doctrine
of Christ, have not God as his Church, according to 2 John 9. nor is this vain
Philosophy (as you vainly enquire) but sound words and wholesome Doctrine, which
some of you will find to your sorrow in the day of account, if you repent not.

2. Nor can any Church rightly constituted be unchurched by this reason,
Because Churches rightly constituted do not transgress against the Doctrine of
Christ, but continue in it, and have both the Father and the Son; nor can it be
said of the Hebrew Church, that they had not God, because they understood not
all those things hard to be uttered, relating to the Priestly Office of Christ;
because they had laid all the Principles of Christ's Doctrine, Heb. 5.12. and
6.1, 2. which you have not, and continued in them, Act. 2.42. which you do not.
Their fault for which the Apostle blames them, was, their slack and slow growth
for the time they had been a Church, built upon the Rock Christ, and the
Foundation-Principles of his Doctrine; by which neglect, they became dull of
hearing, and were yet but as Babes unskilful in the Word of Righteousness, and
therefore he exhorts them to go on to perfection, Heb. 6.1. that they might
redeem their lost time, and avoid the danger they stood in of falling away from
what they were partakers of; their danger being such, that if they should still
continue slothful and negligent, and not go on to perfection, they would at
length fall from, and not continue in the Doctrine of Christ on which they were
built, which if they did, there was no renewing them by repentance.

3. And indeed those things of which they were ignorant, were those parts of
the Doctrine of Christ that belonged to perfection, and their further growing
up in him; but not the Foundation or beginning part of Christians. Nor though
they were dull of hearing, and could not receive those things hard to be
uttered, relating to the Priestly Office of Christ; yet were they not Denyers,
Opposers, and Disputers against it, as you have been against laying on of
hands, more than twenty years.

4. The Churches in Asia were true constituted Churches, and yet they
transgressed and did not abide in all Christ's Doctrine, for which cause (though
the Spirit commends them in some things) they would not have God long as his
Church, except they repented of those Transgressions; I will remove thy
Candlestick out of its place, except thou repent, Rev. 2.5. By which it may
plainly be perceived that their not abiding in the Doctrine of Christ, would
unchurch them that were true constituted Churches, without Repentance, and
doing their first works; though we will not say that they were ipso facto
declared no Churches of Christ, and such as have no communion with God as his
Church: Though we dare say that you, whose Church-constitution was never right,
have not God as his Church; and we dare say, That the Churches in Asia, and the
Church of Corinth for suffering the incestuous person, and for saying, (some of
them) the Resurrection was past, etc. after all lawful endeavors made, and
means used to purge them from those evils, had they not repented, but still
persisted in their Sin and Impenitency, they would soon find they should cease
to be a Church in God, and incommunicable for their not abiding in the Doctrine
of Christ and Oracles of God. And thus much we dar^ say of them, or of any that
fail like them, Tha^ then (as before) they are no Churches, have no^ communion
with God as his Church, because they abide not in all his Doctrine.

5. Your Argument then is not of such forc^ to turn the edge of ours upon us,
as you think ^ for we answer it by distinction thus: If in you^ minor
Proposition, by failing and coming sho^^ of many things Christ taught them, you
mea^ fundamental things, we deny your minor. O^ if you mean a failing and
coming short of man ^ things Christ taught, as in the Churches of Asia, and the
Church of Corinth, joined with impenitency, all lawful means being used to
purg^ them, we then likewise deny your minor. B^^ if you do not mean
Fundamentals, nor sins joined with Impenitency, as is aforesaid; then ^ say,
God owns such for Churches, and w^ should sin if we did not; though they fail
an^ come short of perfection in many things. B^ then it follows not that God
owns, or that (...) ought to own such for Churches, that fail an^ come short in
Fundamentals, or the first Rud^ments of Christianity, as you do.

Quest. 20.
Whether it be not an abuse of that Text, 2 Joh^ to infer from the Doctrine of
Christ there menti^^ed, That there can be no Churches nor Church Members, where
every thing that Christ taught, is ^^t observed and continued in: When by
Doctrine, ^ere, a man of a short sight may perceive is meant ^^e confessing
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, ^ appears verse. 7. which whosoever
abides not in, ^ut shall deny, has not God; and if this be not the ^ense, but
the other (viz.) That he that continues ^ot in all Christ's sayings, has not
God, and is no Member of Christ; then either your selves are no Church, or else
you are all perfect, and guilty of no (...), because all sin is a transgressing
Christ's Doctrine, ^^d he that says he has no sin, is a Liar, and the truth is
not in him, 1 John 1.10.

Answer.
1. Who did you ever know infer from ^ Joh. 9. That there can be no Churches,
nor Church Members, where every thing Christ ^^ught is not observed and
continued in. It Is ^rue, we say that every Principle of the Do^trine of Christ
which he taught as the first Ru^iments of Christianity, must be observed and
^ontinued in, or else there can be no Church ^or Church Members rightly
constituted. And ^ observed, believed, and practiced, and not ^ontinued in,
they that now are a Church right ^n constitution, may (as before is said) cease
to ^e a Church for their transgressing, and not a^iding in the Doctrine of
Christ, 2 John 9.

2. But you say, By Doctrine in that place, is ^eant (as a man of a short sight
may perceive) the confessing that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, ^ appears,
verse. 7. Suppose this should be t^ meaning, we demand whether every one the
verbally so confesses, and does not verbally d^ny Christ to be come in the
Flesh, does answ^^ the mind of the Spirit in that Text, and ha^ both the Father
and the Son, so long as he ab^deth by such a Confession, we think you wi^^ not
so say; for if you should, then must yo^ own Rome to be a Church of Christ:
Because they stoutly confess with their mouths, and ^bide by it that Christ is
come in the flesh, ye^ and will burn them that shall deny it; now ^ this be the
meaning of the Text, then has Rom^ both the Father and the Son, and does not
transgress, but continue in the Doctrine of Christ and thousands more besides,
who will thus confess Christ to be come in the flesh, but know yo^ not that in
works they deny him? If then ^ man short-sighted may see that by Doctrine, ^
meant a confessing of Christ to be come in the flesh, that confession must be
more than verb^^ as a man very short-sighted may perceive; an^ that by
confessing Christ, is to own him to be ^ Prince and a Savior, to believe,
obey, and t^ do what he has taught, and to continue in hi^ Doctrine. So then,
though it may be as yo^ say, yet is it not to be thought, that only the single
and alone confessing of Christ to be com^ in the flesh, is there meant by
Doctrine: ^ being so comprehensive a word, that it contains in it no less (if
not more) than the foundation-^^rt, mentioned Heb. 6. And therefore they that
transgress, and abide not in that fundamental part, viz. Repentance, Faith, the
Doctrine of Baptisms, Laying on of Hands, the Resurrection from the Dead, and
eternal Judgment, have not God as his Church; but he that continues in the
Doctrine of Christ, has both the Father and the Son.

Then is it no abuse of the Text, to say as the Text says: But you rather
abuse us, to say that we infer that there can be no Churches nor
Church Members, that continue not in every thing that Christ taught; and that
they have not God, nor are no Members of Christ. But we say, They cannot be
Churches rightly constituted, that abide not in Christ's Doctrine, for they have
not God, and so says the Text. And yet there may be Churches truly stated,
that are not perfect, and that will not say, they have no sin: For in many
things we offend all, James 3.2.

Quest. 21.
If you shall say, That by denying Communion to those that abide not in the
Doctrine of Christ, you mean such as abide not in Fundamentals; not but that
you could have Communion with those that err and differ from you in the
Circumstantials of Religion, as some of you have said, and others have printed:
Then we demand, what those Circumstantial Errors are? And whether they are not
tran^gressions of the Word, Doctrine, Sayings, Commands, or Oracles of Christ?
If they be transgressions of the Sayings and Oracles of Christ, etc. the we
demand whether that argument is not ridiculou^ that says, They have no
communion with God, the abide not in all the Sayings and Doctrines of Christ
etc? And then what becomes of your great cry y^^ make against us, for not
continuing in all the D^ctrines and Sayings of Christ; and that whoev^^ does
not continue in all, has no communion wit^ God? when your selves allow there
may be communion where Errors are circumstantial, and there^ tacitly
acknowledge what other whiles you oppos^ (viz.) That they that abide in all
Christ's Doctrine may notwithstanding have communion with God.

Answer.
1. We have already told you, That no know^ Error ought to be suffered in the
Church; no^ do we say we can have communion with thos^ that maintain any thing
contrary, or in opposition to the Doctrine of Christ: Yet as you say ^ we can
have communion with those that diffe^ from us in Circumstantials; but to give
ou^ selves or others an allowance to err in Fundamentals, would be a crime as
bad, as an allowance in any fleshly and actual sin.

2. You then demand what those Circumstantials are, and whether they be not
transgressions of the Word, Sayings, Doctrine, Commands, or Oracles of Christ;
we say no, they ^re not transgressions against Christ's Doctrine, etc. but such
things as may be done, or left ^ndone, and no sin committed against God. But
say you, what are those Errors? It is an ^rror to refuse and deny the eating of
meats, because every creature of God is good, and nothing ^o be refused, if it
be received with thanksgiving: Yet if my Brother be weak, and will eat herbs,
and will be offended if I eat flesh, we will not ^reak communion with him
because he will eat ^o flesh, nor eat flesh our selves, lest we cause ^^r weak
Brother to stumble and be offended; this is to err in circumstantials, and all
other things of the like kind, that may, or may not be done, and no Law of
Christ broken; for transgressions of the Word and Doctrine of Christ, must not
be tolerated in the Church of Christ, he must be heard in all things; and if
^o, that Argument is not ridiculous, but re^ains firm and untouched, that
says, They ^^ve not God as his Church, who transgress and abide not in the
Dostrine of Christ.

3. And then that great cry (as you call it) ^e make against you, for your
disobedience to Christ, is still remaining where it was; our ^oices will be
lifted up as high as ever, until ^ou do from the heart obey that form of
Doctrine which was delivered to the Primitive Saints, Romans 6.17. nor do we
allow Communion where Errors are (except you mean such ^ is above expressed)
longer than the erronio^^ can be orderly dealt with; therefore we do no^
tacitly acknowledge (as you imagine) wh^^ other-while we oppose.

Quest. 22.
But if you shall say, you intend by Christ's Doctrine those six Principles
contained, Heb. 6. a^^ that whoever agrees with you in them, does agr^^ in
fundamentals, and with such you can communicate: then we demand why some of you
refuse communion about an Oath, others about mixed Marriages, others about
washing of Feet; others ^ you refuse communion with such as are under layin^ on
of Hands, if they do hold communion with the that are not under laying on of
Hands; others refuse communion in matters of Apparel; others about Blood and
things strangled? What reason ha^ you for these divisions, unless you will say,
all th^^ are Fundamentals; and if they be, then what a^^ your circumstantials
you talk of? and whether (...) have not adopted more Fundamentals than ever yo^
found in the 6th of the Hebrews? And wheth^^ you may not by the same reason, if
that Notion ^ Christ's not taking flesh of the Virgin, get but Proselytes
enough; adopt that also into the number ^ Fundamentals, as well as the rest?
and so at l^ leave us no circumstantials to differ about; for ^ can well
remember, when laying on of Hands w^ ^ot esteemed a Fundamental Doctrine, but
the ^ractisers of it, for some time, kept their communion with us, till it had
made a Party, and then (...) was advanced to the dignity of Fundamental, and
afterward we were esteemed too mean to keep ^^mpany with those that so
esteemed it; and have (...) all the forementioned Opinions, bid fair for the
^me advancement? and will they not be so esteemed, when they which are the
Abettors of them ^hink they have numbers and opportunities for that ^^rpose?

And may they not by the same arguments which (...) use to separate from us,
separate from you, when ^^ey believe any thing to be a Doctrine of Christ which
you do not?

And do you not by this means furnish men with ^eapons to divide Churches into
Atoms, till they ^^ve made Gods spiritual House like his literal House, that
shall not have one Stone left upon another, which will not be thrown down? Will
they ^^t argue thus: They which abide not in the Do^trine of Christ, have not
God; but such as are not ^or washing of feet, saluting with a holy kiss, and
^^ch as are for taking an Oath, though to end strife, (...) for eating of
Blood, and things strangled, and ^uch as being under laying on of hands, yet
communicate with them that are not under it; together ^^th such as do not eat a
Supper before breaking of ^ead, and such as marry out of the Church, and ^^ch
as believe Christ took flesh of the Virgin Mary; all these do not abide in the
Doctrine of Christ, and therefore they have not God? Where will not this kind
of reasoning run you at last?

Answer.
1. You know we say and do intend by Christ^ Doctrine, those six Principles
mentioned Heb. 6. and that whoever agrees with us in Fundamentals, we can have
Communion with, provided their Conversation be according to the Gospel.

2. We refuse communion with those th^^ take some Oaths, because Christ does
forbid such swearing, Mat. 5.34. Jam. 5.12. and also because such as take them,
abjure their obedience to Christ, and swear obedience to the Doctrines and
Commandments of men.

3. We refuse communion about mixed Marriages, because they are forbid both in
the Ol^ and New Testament: The Church of Pergam^^ must not have them among them
that hold suc^ Doctrine.

4. We know of none that refuse communic^ about washing of Feet.

5. We refuse communion with those that a^^ under laying on of hands, if they
have communion with those that are not under laying on (...) hands; because it
is disorder and confusion, an^ also a transgression against the Doctrine ^
Christ.

6. We do not refuse communion in matte^ of Apparel, otherwise than is said in
the Answer to the fourth Question.

7. There is sufficient ground to deal with such Members as will eat Blood, and
things strangled, to the trouble and offense of their fellow-Brethren, Act.
15.29. and 21.25. for we would have you to know that Members of Churches may
hold that in their Judgments and Practice, and that in their Lives, though they
are under all the first Principles of the Oracles of God, that may deserve the
censure of the Church, and yet the Church not adopt them first Rudiments of
Christianity; for we have no Fundamentals adopted by us, nor do we own more
than those Heb. 6. for all this taunting Talk of yours: And yet we shall say,
That there is good reason why we should differ with those that deny the
Doctrine of the Trinity, and that Christ is the second Person in it, God of one
substance with the Father; yea, and refuse communion with them that say he is a
crea^ed Being, and was not, nor had no being, before he was conceived in the
Womb of the Virgin Mary; and indeed this wicked and absurd opinion did get
Proselytes, and found opportunity to make a Schism in the Body of Christ.

8. Your memory fails you, as well as you say you can remember; for we can
better know and remember that before we came under laying on of hands, we did
esteem it a Foundation-Principle, and submitted to it, as to one; but did
indeed keep and continue with you for some time, preaching, disputing, and
persuading you to obey the Lord Jesus, (but other communion we had none) until
many of you were hardened, and believed not; but spoke evil of this way before
the multitude; then we departed, and separated the Disciples.

9. There is none, by our Arguments we have to separate from you, can separate
from us; because we still continue, through the grace of God, in the Doctrine
of Christ; nor say things are of the Doctrine of Christ, that are not. Nor do
we, by what means we take to defend that Truth which you oppose, put Weapons
into the hands of any to divide Churches; but the means you take to resist the
Truth, will furnish those that list to make use of them wi^ Weapons to fill the
Church with Error and Si^ till it becomes as filthy as Rome it self.

10. Therefore though you would argue u^ falsely into great inconveniences, we
may be ^ui^ it upon your selves from what you maintain ^ and argue thus: If
communion may be hel^ with them that disown the practice of laying on of hands,
then with them that disown another Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, and so
^ third, and them that adore two Gods, the tru^ God and a dumb Idol; sinful
Marriages; the Christ is a mere created man, and only a Go^ made, as Moses and
David was; and sinful swearing: Then may we not break communion, though all
Rome's trash and filth should be brought in. And where will this kind of
reasoning run you at last?

Here ends their Questions grounded upon their second Hypothesis: The third
follows, with our Answers to them.

Quest. 23.
But if you shall say, Laying on of hands is reasoned by the Scripture, Heb. 6.
to be a Doctrine of Christ, and a Foundation-Doctrine, and therefore though
some Opinions may be called Foundation-Doctrines, without warrant; yet that
does not hinder, but you may call a Doctrine so, when you have ^ Warrant, as
you have for this; and therefore if (...) differ from you in denying a
Fundamental Doctrine, you can have no communion with us:

We demand, How you can infallibly infer your ^ractice from this Text, Heb. 6.
if you do but con^^der first, That there are many learned men of the Church of
England, who though they practice lay^^ on of hands upon all their Members, as
you do: (...) as you, so they use their endeavors to prove ^h a practice from
hence; yet Dr. Hamond, as ^^arned and Judicious as most of that Way, and as
(...) read in the Customs of the Primitive Times, (...) us in his Annotations
upon that place, that the laying on of hands there spoken of, is understood for
a laying on of hands upon such as had fallen after Baptism, which was done to
signify their Restoration to the Church. And this he further proves from
Paul's advice to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.22. where he is not speaking of any other
thing, but Church Censures; as how that an Elder should not be accused, but by
two or three Witnesses, verse. 19. that those that sin should be rebuked before
all, ver. 20. and that he should not in judging Offenders, (...) any thing by
partiality, verse. 21. neither lay o^ hands too suddenly upon any that had been
censure^ by the Church, and had not truly repented of their sins; lest he
thereby became partaker of the^^ sins, etc.

We from hence demand, Which of all these laying on of hands is intended Heb.
6. and is the which you call a Doctrine of Christ? And whether (if the laying
on of hands spoken of Heb. 6. ^ a Doctrine of Christ) it is not more safe to
understand it for that Doctrine which Christ preached (...) practiced, and his
Apostles afterward practiced ^ healing the Sick, than for those other laying
o^ hands, which Christ never taught nor practiced, ^ which the Apostles never
practiced in conformit^ a Command, but by way of Accommodation to ^ laudable
Customs of the Jews, as they did in di^ other Cases; and if they did practice
that o^ laying on of hands, Acts 8. and 19. in obedien^ a Command, show those
Commands; and also your practice of laying on of hands on all you baptize, both
Men and Women, who have no such Blessing to communicate as they had, does agree
with their practice, and we shall be satisfied.

And since we read of diverse laying on of hands, and diverse men are differently
persuaded concerning that in Heb. 16. yea, and such men whose interest leads
them to think of it as you do; and yet they cannot reasonably so understand it;
we demand, Whether this is not a sufficient ground for us to doubt whether the
laying on of hands practiced by you, be instituted by God? Whether it can
reasonably and infallibly be inferred from this Text? And if not, whether it be
not great presumption for you to judge all incommunicable, that come not up to
you in a matter that is so dubitable.

Answer.
1. Never put an if to it, for we do say, laying on of hands, mentioned Heb. 6.
is one Principle of the first Oracles of God, and of the Doctrine of Christ,
one of the first Rudiments ^f Christianity, etc. You then demand, How ^^om this
Text, Heb. 6. we can infallibly infer ^ur practice? Considering Dr. Hamond, as
^earned and Judicious as any in the Church of England, and as well read in the
Customs of the ^rimitive Times, tells us in his Annotations ^^on that place
That the laying on of hands there ^^ken of, is understood for a laying on of
hands upon such as had fallen after Baptism.

2. It Is notably done, and well thought on, seeing help fails you from the
Scriptures, to see whether the learned judicious and well-read Doctors in
Mystery Babylon, can lend you any* But pray does not this learned, judicious,
and well-read Doctor, tell you no where, in no place of his Annotations, That
the baptising of Infants was a primitive Practice, or that it came in near
those Times by good, authentic, Orthodox Authority? If he does, pray do you
consider how you can infallibly infer from Mat. 28.19. the Baptism of
Believers, as you practice it, since so learned a judicious and well-read
Doctor was in his Judgment and Practice for sprinkling of Babes; and no doubt
but he (so learned and wise) has something to say for his Practice.

3. But this (say you) he further proves from Paul's advice to Timothy, 1 Timothy
5.2. where he ^ not speaking of any other thing but Church Censures. Look again
the whole Chapter through, i^ that a Church-Censure? v. 18, 19. if not, the^
that, v. 22. may not be a laying on of hands suddenly upon any that had been
censured by the Church* And this will appear more plain, (...) comparing the
third Chapter with this; the^ may it be as fairly and as wisely conclude^ That
this laying on of hands which Timothy m^^ not be sudden in, was for Ordination
of Bishop and Deacons, rather than a laying on of han^ upon such as had fallen
after Baptism: for where read you of such a laying on of hands in all the
Scripture, either taught or practiced by any; the deep silence thereof, makes
us we can neither credit the Doctor nor you in this matter, though he be
learned, judicious, and well read in the Primitive Customs. But if what he
says were true, yet will it do you no service; because if such a laying on of
hands were then practiced, neither you nor Dr. Hamond to help you, (nay, take
Victor, and the third Council of Carthage with you also) can prove such a
laying on of hands to be that menti^^ed Heb. 6. which is there said to be a
Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, a Foundation-Principle. But no more in
this place to such a Scriptureless-notion.

4. To your second consideration, we shall say no more yet, than what we have
already said in answer to your former printed Questions, where this is stated,
and by us answered. See Gods Oracle and Christ's Doctrine, p. 39, 40. But we
grant,

You do read of a laying on of hands on the Sick, but how delivered in the
Commission, we shall hereafter examine: And you do read of laying on of hands
to ordain Officers, and of laying on of hands by which men received the
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit: But why do you not make up just half a
dozen, but leave out that now, you brought in with the rest in your printed
Questions before; mentioned Luke 21.12. But the fifth (you say) is that laying
on of hands which was afterward called Confirmation* because by the Gifts of
the holy Ghost, the Christians were confirmed in the truth of the Gospel: and
though those Gifts ceased, yet they continued the practice of it in the Church
of Rome, and many other Protestant Churches to this day.

5. Here you confess that the laying on of hands mentioned in Act. 18.17. and
19.6. is practiced by the Church of Rome, and many Protestant Churches, down
from the primitive times to this day. May we not think it str^^ge, if it be so,
that you should oppose and refuse to practice that which so many learned,
judicious and well-read Doctors as have been all along in the Church of Rome,
and many Protestant Churches, do practice; but rather against many, take the
private opinion of some few, who by their opinion (if true) do not contradict
nor oppose that laying on of hands mentioned by you in the fifth of your
numerations; considering withal, that the Doctors in Rome, and in many
Protestant Churches, do not consent to such a practice as laying on of hands,
when they receive any that are fallen after Baptism, at this day.

6. In your next, you seem to thrust in by head and shoulders, another sort of
laying on of hands; or if not, another ground the Apo^^les and primitive
Churches had to practice the former you numerate, than the Authority of Christ's
Doctrine, when you say, It was practiced by them, by way of accommodation to the
Jewish Customs; as (you say) appears in Moses laying his hands upon Joshua,
Numb. 18.19, 22, 23. Deuteronomy. 34.9. and so Jacob blessed the Children of Joseph,
by laying his hands upon them. Does it appear from those places and passages
you quote, that the Apostles and primitive Churches did practice laying on of
hands by way of Accommodation to the Jewish Customs? We think when you consider
better what you say, you will not be of that mind: For, may it not is well be
concluded, That the Apostles practiced the Baptism of Water by way of
Accommodation to the Jewish Customs, as appears, because the Jews among their
Customs had diverse washings, Heb. 9.10. And is not this as good a proof of the
one, as yours is of the other?

7. And what though the people brought their Children to Christ for him to
bless, Mat. 19.13. in observation of a Jewish Custom, and the Ruler of the
Synagogue did the like? Mark 5.23. And what if it should be granted that Christ
did lay his hands on them to confer Blessings on the one, and to heal the
other, by way of Accommodation to the Jewish Customs? Will it follow therefore
that his Apostles after his passion^ when he had blotted out the handwriting
o^ Ordinances, nailing them to his Cross, Col. 2^ 14. Ephesians. 2.15. and after
his Resurrection, when he had given them their Commission, Mat. 28.19, 20. yea,
and after he was ascended, and had sent them, according to his Promise, the
Spirit of Truth, which should guide them into all Truth, should practice laying
on of hands by way of Accommodation to the Jewish Customs, and call it a
Principle of Christ's Doctrine, Heb. 6.1. Surely no man in his right mind, will
so conclude. But leaving this too, as a Scriptureless-notion, we will proceed.

8. You then demand, Which of all these layings on of hands is intended Heb. 6.
and is that which we call a Doctrine of Christ?

You have been told long since, which laying on of hands is intended Heb. 6.
that it is that practiced by the Apostles, Act. 8.17. and 19.6. for which let
the Reader consult Gods Oracle, and Christ's Doctrine, from page 41. to page 54.
where this Question is stated by you, and answered, yea, and clearly proved to
be that laying on of hands on baptized Believers as such, and no other.

9. But then you enquire, Whether it be not more safe to understand it for that
Doctrine which Christ preached and practiced, and his Apostles afterward
practiced in healing the Sick, than that Christ never taught nor practiced, nor
his Apostles neither, in conformity to a Command, but by way of accommodation
to the laudable Custom of the ^ews, as they did in diverse other Cases.

We confess, it is more safe, of the two, to understand it to be for healing
the Sick, than that which Christ never taught nor practiced, ^or his Apostles
neither, in conformity to a Command, if any such laying on of hands there is;
which if there be, we know of none, ^^cept it be that laying on of hands
mentioned Luke 21.12. which not they, but the wicked practiced.

But it is observable how rarely well you beg ^^e Question, when you conclude
that the Apostles did in diverse cases practice laying on of ^^nds by way of
Accommodation to the laudable Custom of the Jews: Pray where is that written?
There is not the least syllable in the Scripture that intimates such a thing,
much less that affirms it.

10. And whereas you require us, if they did practice that laying on of hands,
Act. 8.17. and 19. in obedience to a Command, to show it. We say it has been
already showed. Let the Reader peruse Gods Oracle and Christ's Doctrine, from
page 79. to page 84. And as for our practice of laying on of hands on all we
baptize, both Men and Women, that has been showed and proved also: Let the
Reader see Gods Oracle and Christ's Doctrine, page 47, 48, 49. Read an^ weigh
well what is there said, without partiality, laying aside all prejudicate
Opinions an^ biased Resolutions, and he will be satisfied i^ both.

11. But you further say, Since diverse men an^ differently persuaded concerning
that in Heb. 6. y^^ and such men whose interest leads them to think o^ it as we
do, and yet they cannot reasonably so understand it; you demand whether this is
not a sufficient ground for you to doubt whether the layin^ on of hands
practiced by us, be institued (...) God?

Truly we think it so far from being a sufficient ground for you to doubt,
because Dr. H^mond, or any other learned judicious Doct^^ does, that we think
it is not any ground at (...) for you to doubt also: We have abler (an^ more
approved) Doctors for our practice, tha^ Dr. Hamond, or Victor, or Carthage's
Councils* And therefore we say it can be both reasonabl^ and infallibly
inferred, and more than an inf^rence it is from Heb. 6. comparing this Te^^
with some other, that the laying on of hands (...) practice, is instituted by
the Lord, as a Found^tion-Principle of Christ's Doctrine; ans is (...)
presumption to judge you incommunicable that come not up to us in a matter not
dubin^ble, but clear and plain.

Quest. 24.
And whereas you say those Doctrines are called beginning Doctrines, Heb. 6.
and therefore laying ^n of hands must be so called:

We demand, Why the Wonders which the Apostles did, and the Cures they wrought
by laying on of hands upon such as they healed, being that which Christ ^aught,
and himself and Apostles practiced, might not rather be esteemed a beginning of
the Doctrine of Christ, than that which you practice, for which ^^u have at
best but a doubtful example? And though this of healing was practicable upon
none but upon the Sick, yet was it teaching to all, to see and ^ear the Sick
were raised and cured; as appears Luke 13.47. Act. 28.8, 9. and so it was a
practice ^^at was introductive to the beginnings of Christianity in those times.

Answer.
1. You demand, Why the Wonders which the Apostles did, and the Cures they
wrought, by laying on of hands upon such as they healed, ^^ing that which
Christ taught, and himself and the Apostles practiced, might not rather be
esteemed a beginning of the Doctrine of Christ, ^^an that which we practice?

The laying on of hands to heal the Sick, was ^ot preceptively taught by
Christ, but promis^^vely, in the way of a Promise annexed and made to them that
did believe; These signs shall ^ollow them that believe, Mark 16.17. They shall
lay hands on the Sick, and they shall recover, vers^ 18. By which signs the
preceptive part of Christ's Word and Doctrine was confirmed to be from Heaven,
and not of Men; And they wen^ forth and preached every where, the Lord working
with them, confirming the Word with signs following, Amen, verse. 20. Then
laying on of hands to heal the Sick, not being preceptively taught by Christ,
by way of command, but promissively, by way of Promise, it cannot be esteemed
that laying on of hands, which is a Principle o^ the Doctrine of Christ, Heb.
6. now under debate, but that by which that Principle of Christ^ beginning Word
or Doctrine, was (among the rest of them) confirmed to be from Heaven, and not
of men.

2. Again, If laying on of hands to heal the Sick, was preceptively taught, by
way of Command, and so ought to be esteemed that part of the beginning Doctrine
of Christ, Heb. 6.2* Then is casting out Devils, speaking with new Tongues,
taking up Serpents, drinking any dead ^ thing and not be hurt, taught also by
way o^ Command; and then every one of them is a well the beginning Doctrine of
Christ, Heb. 6^ and your duty to do, as to be baptized: An ^ why then should
not casting out Devils, and every one of the rest be esteemed a Principle i^
Christ's Doctrine, and the first Rudiments o^ Christianity? We have then better
Reason tha^ any you have to the contrary to esteem laying ^n of hands on
baptized Believers as such, pra^tised by the Apostles, Act. 8.17. Act. 19.6. to
^^e one Principle of the beginning Doctrine of Christ, rather than that to heal
the Sick, because it was promissively and not preceptively ^aught by Christ.

3. But you say, Rather to heal the Sick, than that we practice, for which we
have but a doubtful Example at the best.

How can you be so clouded, as to say, We ^ave for laying on of hands but a
doubtful Example at the best? What practice can have more clear and apparent
example than we have for ^urs? See Act 8.17. and 19.6. Moreover it is one of the
first Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. One of the Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, a Foundation-principle, Heb. 6.1, 2. Authority enough to
all that have reason, and will use it, whose minds are not darkened.

4. And as you say, so we say, This laying on ^f hands to heal the Sick, was
practicable to none out the Sick: But how then could it be one of the first
Rudiments of Christianity, when no Christian Man or Woman could be built upon
this Foundation, except he or she were first sick, and then you may esteem
Sickness to be a foundation to this foundation, and so rather a beginning of
the Doctrine of Christ. But you say, It was teaching to all: And we say, So it
was practiced on all; and therefore it cannot be the beginning Doctrine of
Christ, Heb. 6. becau^^ they laid on hands to heal the Sick that were ^
Church Members, but of the world, Luke 1^ 11, 12, 13. Act. 28.7, 8, 9. The Lord
working wi^^ them, confirming the Word with signs following according to Mark
16.20.

Quest. 25.
But whereas you say, Laying on of hands is ^ Foundation-Doctrine, or a part of
the Foundation of Christianity, and therefore you cannot communicate with such
as do not own it; We demand when the Text says any such thing? And wheth^^
there can be any other Foundation laid, than the which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ? 1 Cor. ^ 11, 12. --

And we demand, whether this be not the ver^^ words and sense of the Text, when
the Autho^ says, Heb. 6. he would not lay again the Foundation OF Repentance,
and the Foundation OF Faith, and the Foundation OF the Doctrine o^ Baptism, and
the Foundation OF laying on o^ hands, etc.

From all which we demand, Whether this practice of yours, in laying on of
hands upon all Baptized Disciples, (though it should be intended in Heb. 6.
which we despair of ever seeing the proof of) (...) a Doctrine or Principle
without which Gods House cannot be, or a Doctrine or Principle without which it
cannot so well and so completely be? If you say, It is that without which Gods
House cannot be; prove it, and we will believe you: But if you say, God may
have a House, though less perfect, without it; then are not you all guilty of
Schism in making a Separation from it?

Answer.
1. Your demand here is, Where the Text says the laying on of hands is a
Foundation-Doctrine, or a part of the Foundation of Christianity? Oh strange!
Are you still ignorant of that, not-withstanding one of you confessed it to be
one of the first Rudiments of Christianity, and so submitted to the practice of
it? It is to be feared he did not lie to men but God, when he so confessed and
practiced; and yet secretly and mentally reserve, That it was no part of the
Foundation of Christianity; as he here does not only query, but plainly affirm.
But we will gratify you once more, and tell you, That Text Heb. 6.1, 2. says,
Not laying again the Foundation of -- laying on of hands.

2. Then you demand, Whether there can be any other Foundation laid, than that
which is laid, Which is Jesus Christ? And go from querying to arguing; being
put to this lamentable and desperate straight, that rather than you will
acknowledge laying on of hands to be a foundation-Principle, you will deny
Repentance, Faith, the Doctrine of Baptisms, the Resurrection of the Dead, and
eternal Judgment, to be a foundation, or any part of the foundation of
Christianity: for it appears by your argument that you hold that it is no part
of the foundation of Christianity to repent and confess our sins and to believe
in Christ for the pardon of them nor no part of the foundation of Christianity
t^ be baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, an^ to practice Prayer, with
laying on of hands, tha^ we might receive the Spirit; to which end laying on of
hands was and is practiced, that every Member might be baptized by that one
Spirit into one Body; nor no part of the Foundation of Christianity to believe
the Resurrection o^ the Dead, and eternal Judgment. And pray, seeing the
Spirit in Heb. 6.1, 2. says they ar^ Foundations, (for thus you and we read,
No laying again the foundation of Repentance from dea^ works, and Faith toward
God, the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of laying on of Hands, and of the
Resurrection of the Dead, and of eternal Judgment) and they be (as you say) no
part of the foundation of Christianity, what are they the foundation of then?
Judaism, or Paganism? For ^ foundation they are, and we relieve of
Christianity. But you thus reason:

If there can be no other foundation than Jesus Christ, then is not Faith, nor
Repentance, nor Laying on of hands, nor the believing the Resurrection of the
Dead, nor eternal Judgment, a foundation or part of the foundation of
Christianity. But there can be no other foundation laid than Jesus Christ.
Ergo, Repentance, Faith, Baptism, and Laying on of hands, the belief of the
Resurrection of the Dead, and eternal Judgment, cannot be a foundation, or
part of the foundation of Christianity.

We deny the consequence of your major Proposition: For all these that you say
cannot be a foundation, nor no part of the Foundation of Christianity, the
Spirit of God says they are Foundation, Heb. 6.1. and the Spirit tells the
Ephesians they were built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20. And were they
not built on that foundation as Christians? If they were built thereon as
Christians, which you cannot deny, then sure that foundation was part of the
foundation of Christianity, which foundation is not another, but the same
mentioned Heb. 6.1.

3. Nor will your next Argument prove your major: For though Christ be the
foundation of all those Duties, as the Author, the great Doctor and Teacher of
them, and the chief Cornerstone; yet does it not follow; but that these Duties
be the Principles of his Doctrine, and the Foundation of Christianity; being in
plain terms said to be so by the Spirit of God, in the forecited places.

4. Neither does this hinder but that Christ is the Foundation, and that other
foundation can no man lay, than Christ; which those do, who from the heart obey
this form of Doctrine, Romans 6.17. for by Repentance we see our wretched and
undone condition without Christ; by Eaith we see our sins pardoned, out persons
justified and accepted by Christ; by being baptized into his Name, we actually
acknowledge his Death for our sins, and a washing of them away, and that he is
risen, and we with him, to newness of life; by prayer and laying on of hands,
we wait therein upon God, for the Spirit which he promised to send from the
Father, John 15.26. by which we are all baptized into his Body, and have the
witness in our selves, that we are the Children of God; by the belief of the
Resurrection of the Body, we wait in hope of the glory of God, and acknowledge
that Christ is risen, and is the Resurrection and the Life; and that we shall,
though dead, be raised up to life by him at the last day; and by the belief of
eternal Judgment, we look for his coming to judge both the Dead and the
Living; and that we shall all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and
there receive according to the things done in our Body, whether they be good or
bad, with the Reward either of eternal Joy, or everlasting shame and contempt.
So that in deed, he that builds not upon these foundation-Principles, lays not
Christ the foundation, not can he be a Christian. So inseparable is Christ and
these Principles of his Doctrine, that he cannot be laid the Foundation without
these are laid, nor can these be laid the foundation without Christ; for had
not Christ been a Prince and a Savior, able to save all that come unto God by
him, there had been no foundation for these. And whosoever shall refuse to submit
to these, as the Principles of his Doctrine, Christ will be no Savior to them.
And this is the very sense of the Text, to which the whole body of Scripture
agrees and consents: for the Apostle does not deny Christ to be the Foundation,
when he says these Principles of his Doctrine are; nor does he deny these are,
when he says Christ is, 1 Cor. 3.11, 12. as you absurdly argue. And who knows
not, that knows any thing in Christianity, that he that falls away from one of
these foundation-Principles, viz. the Resurrection of the Dead, falls from
Christ, and denies him to be the foundation: If Christ be not risen, your faith
is vain, you are yet in your sins, 1 Cor. 15.17. Then those cannot be denied to
be the foundation, but Christ must be denied also.

5. But then when you leave arguing, and query again, Whether this be not the
sense of the Text, when the Author says, Heb. 6. he would ^o^ lay again the
foundation of Repentance, and the foundation of Faith, and the foundation of
the Doctrine of Baptisms, and the foundation of Laying on of hands, etc. Here
now you say the Author himself says these are the foundation, as stoutly and as
confidently as you denied them so to be before; and these he says he will not
lay again, Not laying again the foundation of Repentance, etc. Heb. 6.1. but
will go on to perfection; though we doubt not but he intended no less but that
Christ was the chief Cornerstone, the foundation of all these Principles and
first Rudiments of Christianity. He then concludes that they ought not to lay
the foundation again, but to leave them, and to go on to perfection; and if
they did not go on unto perfection; but fall from the foundation they had laid,
there would be no renewing them again unto Repentance, no laying the foundation
the second time.

And then you argue again, If then the faith and obedience mentioned Heb. 6. be
the Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, that we build upon this foundation,
according to 1 Cor. 3.12. and not the foundation it self, etc.

If it be as you say, is not laying on of hands, which is among them, neither
Gold, Silver, nor a precious Stone? If not, it must be Wood, Hay, Stubble; and
yet you say the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews says it is a Foundation;
but it is the Foundation, we say, with Jesus Christ, himself being the Chief
Cornerstone on which the Christian Church is built, Ephesians. 2.20. Then it
follows, except this foundation be laid, all and every part of it, the House
can never be; though where the foundation is laid, there are other things
without which the House may be, though not so well and completely be. And in
like manner we say, This Foundation Heb. 6. and every Principle of it, the
belief and practice of, is absolutely necessary to the being of Gods House; and
yet there are other things, the belief and practice of, is necessary to the
further edification of Gods House, without which, it cannot so well be. And
since here we seem in some sort to agree, you had done well if you had told us
what in your opinion those things are, without which the House of God can never
be; seeing you say that Repentance and Faith, etc. are no parts of the
foundation of Christianity; and how Christ can be laid the Foundation, and
those Principles and Foundations mentioned Heb. 6. neither believed nor
practiced.

But not to dwell any longer on this, our answer to your last demand in this
Question, is, That the House cannot be, except the Foundation be laid in whole,
not in part; and laying on of hands on all baptized Disciples, being one
Principle of the Foundation, must be necessary to its being; without which, a
Church rightly constituted can never be. And this we have proved, whether you
will believe it, or no. And therefore we are not guilty of Schism in making a
Separation from you.

Quest. 26.
We demand, Why that laying on of hands, Heb. 6. which you say is called a
foundation, may not be figuratively understood for the holy Spirit which was
given thereby, and which they were said to partake of, verse. 4. the Gift
whereof was a great support to the profession of the Christian Faith, and for
that reason the Doctrine of the Spirit might there be understood for one of the
Doctrines of Christ, which he taught his Disciples once and again, before his
departure from them? We demand why may not this be so, since the Scripture does
usually speak after this manner, putting the Cup for the Wine contained in it;
and the Bread and Wine, for the Body and Blood of Christ, which are but the
means by which the Body and Blood of Christ are commemorated; in like manner
men are said to be Enemies to the Cross of Christ, when they slight those
advantages that acrue to the world, which he obtained by his suffering
thereupon? And whether that laying on of hands, Heb. 6. may not by the same
figure of speaking, be put for the reception of the Spirit, which was so
necessary to the first establishing a Christian Church? Heb. 2.3, 4. How shall
we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the first began to be
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? God also
bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles and
gifts of the holy Ghost, acding to his own will.

Answer.
1. Before you said, Laying on of hands was no foundation; and now here you
demand, Why that laying on of hands, Heb. 6. which we say is called a
Foundation, may not figuratively be understood for the holy Spirit that was
given thereby? We perceive you would be content it should be nothing, or any
thing, but what it is said by the Spirit of God to be.

And again, you demand, Why this may not be so, seeing the Scripture does
usually speak after this manner; putting the Cup for the Wine contained in it;
and the Bread and Wine, for the Body and Blood of Christ, which are but the
means by which the Body and Blood of Christ are commemorated?

2. Well, for Argument-sake, what if we should say it may be so understood? We
hope you will not say, Though we are to take the Wine for the Cup, that the Cup
is not by institution to be used, as a decent and necessary means to convey the
Wine to our mouths, that so we may drink the Wine: And so though the Bread and
Wine be taken for the Body and Blood of Christ, and are but the means to
commemorate his Body and Blood; yet we hope you will allow us to use the Bread
and Wine, as the means to commemorate the Lords Body and Blood, and not reject
it, and cast it off as useless. So in like manner, if laying on of hands be a
figurative speech, and understood for the Spirit that was given thereby; we
hope you must allow that laying on of hands ought to be used and practiced, as
the means by which the Spirit was obtained, and is given, as well as you will
the Cup, and the Bread and Wine, in your figurative instances, and we desire no
more.

3. But we further say, That laying on of hands is not figurative, but is a
plain practical Ordinance, joined with solemn and fervent Prayer to the most
High, in the Name of Christ, for his holy Spirit, that according to his
faithful and never-failing promise, them that believe and are baptized in the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, might receive the Spirit; by which, as the
means, the Spirit was given to some of the Baptized in the primitive times, in
more than an ordinary manner, and was necessary to the establishing Christian
Churches; than which extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit given then, is a
confirmation to us now, that not only the other Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ are to be believed and practiced, but this in debate also, as one
Principle of the Foundation of Christianity, God having confirmed them all to
be the Word spoken, and Foundation-Doctrine taught by the Lord, bearing witness
to them, both with Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the
holy Ghost, according to his own will; and then how shall we escape, if we
neglect so great Salvation? Heb. 2.3, 4.

Quest. 27.
If you shall say, That simply the Act and Ceremony it self as you practice it,
is put for a Foundation Doctrine of Christ; then we demand, Whether the
Apostles ever taught any thing for a Doctrine of Christ, whereof we do not read
Christ did either preach or practice before his Ascension? And if you say, That
Christ did teach and practice laying on of hands upon all Disciples, both Men
and Women, before his Ascension, or any thing from which such a practice may be
inferred, pray show it, and we will believe it.

Answer.
1. We say, That Prayer and Laying on of hands, as we practice, is a Principle
of the Doctrine of Christ, one of the first Rudiments of Christianity.

But you demand, Whether the Apostles ever taught any thing for a Doctrine of
Christ, whereof we do not read Christ did either preach or practice before his
Ascension.

2. What is it to the purpose when Christ taught laying on of hands, whether
before his Passion, or after; or before his Ascension, or after by his Spirit?
It suffices he did teach it, for it is one of the Principles of his Doctrine:
And can it be a Principle of his Doctrine, and he not teach it? We are certain
it cannot: And taught it was likewise by his Apostles, for a
Doctrine-Principle, and an Oracle of God, Heb. 5.12. and 6.1. and they did not
only teach, but practice it also, Act. 8.17. and 19.6. And do you think they
would both teach and practice it, and never receive it from Christ, but must
invent it themselves? We cannot believe you do so think: Then was it taught by
Christ, and taught and practiced by his Apostles, as a foundation-Principle.
And that suffices us, and might you, if you were willing and obedient. See
this answered before, in Christ's Doctrine, p. 58.

Quest. 28.
If laying on of hands upon all baptized Believers be to be practiced in your
sense, as an indispensable Duty; then we demand, Why all the other Principles
in Heb. 6. should be expressly and particularly commanded, believed, or
practiced in Christ's time, and not this, as it is practiced by you, if there be
that weight in it, as you lay upon it? etc.

Answer.
1. If laying on of hands (say you) upon all baptized Believers, be to be
practiced in our sense, as an indispensable Duty; then you demand, Why all the
other Principles, Heb. 6. should be expressly commanded, believed, and practiced
in Christ's time, and not this, as it is practiced by us, if there be that
weight in it as we lay upon it? We told you above, that it matters not when
Christ taught laying on of hands, whether in the time of his Life, or not. And
whereas you say, That Faith, and Repentance, the Baptism of Water, the
Resurrection of the Dead, and eternal Judgment, were in Christ's time plainly
taught: Pray where did Christ in the time of his Life, before his Ascension, or
after it either, so plainly command baptising with water? Though we do not deny
but there was both Faith, Repentance, the Resurrection, and eternal Judgment,
plainly enough taught, according to that Dispensation; and so they were before
Christ's Incarnation, by the Prophets of old; nor do we deny, but grant, that
there was Authority enough from Heaven for the Baptism of Water then practiced;
and that there was them that did foretell that the holy Spirit should be
afterward given, and so it was by the Prophet Joel; all which were as
preparatives to what afterward Christ should command and teach, when he had
suffered and was risen, and all power in Heaven and Earth was given unto him,
Mat. 28.18. So John was sent to prepare the way, and he taught the Baptism of
Repentance, saying, They should believe on him that was to come; so that
between both the Faith and the Baptism then, and that after Christ was come,
had suffered, ascended, and the holy Ghost was given, there must needs be a
vast difference; therefore (as you affirm) Paul baptized the twelve Disciples
he found at Ephesus again, because they were only baptized into John's
Baptism; who, as was his Baptism, so was his Doctrine of Faith and Repentance:
John verily baptized with the Baptism of Repentance, saying to the People, That
they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ
Jesus, Act. 19.4. From whence, or from which Dispensation, we do not take the
Authority of the Foundation-Doctrine of Christ, no, not of Repentance, Faith,
Baptisms, Laying on of hands, Resurrection, and eternal Judgment; but from
Christ dead, risen, and ascended to the Father, from whom he sent his holy
Spirit to confirm them all to be his Doctrine, on which he has built his
Church: Yet might these Principles be (nay doubtless were) left and commanded
by Christ before his Ascension, which they better understood and put in
practice, when they were endowed with power from on high, Acts 2. by the Spirit
of Truth, which Christ sent to them, to guide them into all Truth, John 16.13.
and of them whom Christ commanded by word of mouth to observe and teach these
Principles, have we received them, as the Doctrine of the Lord Jesus; of which
Doctrine laying on of hands on baptized Believers, ^ such, is one Principle,
taught also by the Apostles, and by them practiced, Acts 8.17. and 19.^ And if
we do not find it was practiced in the ^ime of Christ's life, that does not make
invalid what was taught and practiced after his Ascension; He had many things
to say in the time of his life, his Disciples could not then bear, John 16.12.
which he promises to instruct them in by his Spirit, verse. 13, 14, 15.

2. It being then clear, that laying on of hands is a Principle of the Doctrine
of Christ; it is not to the thing in hand where, when, or how Christ taught it;
but that you will study doubts rather than obedience. And whereas you speak of
the Doctrine of the holy Spirit, if the Truth were known, you as little believe
it, as you practice laying on of hands for the reception of it, as will appear
hereafter. Concluding from what has been said, That laying on of hands is as
clear a Principle of Christ's Doctrine, as any of the other are, having the same
Authority; we refuse, and keep no communion with the Disobedient.

Quest. 29.
If you say, The practice of the Apostles, Act. 8.17. plainly shows that they
had a Command for what they did; We thereupon demand, Though we read they
baptized Men and Women promiscously, yet where do you read they ever laid hands
promiscuously upon Men and Women? If you shall say, It is implied in the word
THEM, which the Apostles laid their hands upon, which were the same THEM that
Philip baptized; we demand, Whether it may not be as truly said that Philip
preache^ to every Man and Woman in Samaria, because it i^ said, He went to the
City of Samaria, and preached Christ to them? verse. 5. And whether i^ may not
be as well said, That every Man and Woman in Samaria believed and were
baptized, because it is said, That Samaria had received the Word of God, and
was baptized; as you may say, That because the Church of Jerusalem sent unto
Them Peter and John, to lay hands on Them, that therefore it must be understood
they laid hands on every baptized Man and Woman? etc.

Answer.
1. We do say the practice of the Apostles, Act. 8.17. and elsewhere, does
plainly show that they had received a Command from Christ for what they did;
and so must you say, unless you will say it was their own humane invention. And
if you think it was practiced by them, without command from Christ, and so
their own invention, why do you not say so? But if you think they had received
sufficient Authority from Christ for what they did, why do you make opposition
against their practice, and refuse to follow them, as they followed Christ, and
keep those traditions they delivered.

2. But you demand, Though we read that they baptized both Men and Women
promiscuously, yet where do we read they ever laid hands promiscuously upon Men
and Women?

We say it is in so many words said, Act. 8.12. they were baptized, both Men
and Women; and no less plain it is, that Peter and John prayed and laid their
hands upon them, both Men and Women. For by as good reason may one conclude
that Peter and John were sent by the rest of the Apostles but to some of them
that believed and were baptized at Samaria, as to conclude that Peter and John
prayed for, and laid hands on, but some of them. Nor can it be as well said
that Philip preached to every Man and Woman in Samaria, because it is said that
Philip went down to the City of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them; nor
every Man and Woman in Samaria believed and Were baptized, though it be said
Samaria had received the Word: the former being true, though he had preached
but to twenty; and the latter, though but six believed and were baptized. And
to conclude all in Samaria were preached to, believed, and were baptized, were
not logical indeed; but to conclude that Peter and John prayed for, and laid
hands on the Women that Philip baptized, as well as they prayed for, and laid
their hands on the Men he baptized, is Scriptural and Logical; because the
Women had equal right to the Gift of the Spirit (which was the end of that
service) by virtue of Gods Promise to them, as well as to men, Joel 2.28, 29.
Act. 2.17, 18. Then is it Scriptural and Logical, to conclude that the baptized
Women had equal right to the means by which the Spirit was given, as well as
the baptized Men.

3. So that the Truth is, (whereas you say, That we are so far from having a
Command for laying on of hands on all baptized Believers, that we have not a
plain Example for it) you are so far from knowing and believing the Truth, that
you will not see any Command there is, nor Example neither, for laying on of
hands on baptized Believers, as such, that you still remain contradicting, and
putting it from you; thereby judging your selves unworthy of the blessing of
Gods holy and guiding Spirit, which to his praise is received thereby: There
being both Command and plain Example from the Apostles; which Command they
received from Christ, and Christ from God his Father. See this answered before,
in Gods Oracle, page 47, 48, 49.

4. But you say, Dr. Hamond questioneth which laying on of hands is here
intended, and says it is probable it was upon Disciples, for the Gift of the
Spirit; and does confess there is a difficulty to resolve whether it be for the
laying on of hands for Confirmation or Ordination.

Dr. Hamond and you might conclude that it was not for Ordination, had you but
consulted Paul to Timothy, when he says, A Novice must not be chosen or
ordained a Bishop, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.6. Then could not Peter and John lay hands
on the Baptized at Samaria for Ordination, because they were but of yesterday,
newly come to the Faith. Moreover the very end of their laying on of hands was,
That they might receive the holy Ghost, Act. 8.15. Now had your learned and
judicious Doctor considered these things, he would not have said it was
difficult to resolve whether the laying on of hands, Act. 8.17. was for
Confirmation or Ordination.

5. But we perceive the Authority of this Doctor goes very far with you, that
you will believe when he believes, and doubt of what he doubts: That if he had
said there is a Command for laying on of hands, and a plain Example,
peradventure you would say so too. For you say, And therefore though laying on
of hands as we practice it, be true; yet it is not so infallibly true, because
it depends upon our Exposition. If you had drawn your conclusion right, from
what was before premised by you, it must have been thus: Therefore though
laying on of hands as we practice it, be true; yet it is not infallibly true,
because Dr. Hamond is at a stand about it and says it is difficult to resolve
whether it be for Confirmation or Ordination: and not say, Because it depends
upon our Exposition, which it does not; for we have plain words and practice
for it, in the Scripture, there being from this Text, Act. 8.17. plain and
clear Example for laying on of hands both on Men and Woman, and not conjectural
and guessed at; we have good reason to divide from you about it.

Quest. 30
Suppose we had a plain Example that they laid hands on Men and Women
promiscuously, this being but an Example, and no Command preceding it; how
could it become binding, so as to give you a ground to separate about it?

Answer.
We have plain example without supposition, that the Apostles laid on hands
both on Men Women; yet you say, This being but an Example, and no Command
preceding it, how could it become binding, so as to give us ground to separate
about it.

How uncharitable (to say no worse) do you here secretly charge the Apostles
with practicing that for which they had received no Command from Christ to
practice? What unfaithfulness were it for them to set up their post by their
Lord and Masters? And if they were so unfaithful in one thing, how can we give
them so much credit as to believe and follow them in any thing? But we firmly
believe, and make no doubt (though you beg the question, by concluding they had
no Command to warrant what they did) but they had a Command from Christ for
what they did, when they laid hands on the baptized Believers in Samaria, or
they had never put it in practice, and left it upon Record for future Ages to
read, as we could abundantly prove, against all such Quarrels you or any other
shall pick with them. You still give more ground to separate about it.

Quest. 31.
But if you shall say the Apostle Paul did lay hands upon the Disciples of
Ep^esus, Act. 19. and therefore it was surely commanded; we demand whether Paul
did not also baptize the same persons after they had been baptized into John's
Baptism, as appears he did, verse. 5. and why should not his baptizing them
again be a Fundamental Doctrine, since the Doctrine of BAPTISMS is as much a
Fundamental Doctrine, as laying on of hands? Heb. 6.2.

And why may you not as well produce the Apostles Example, Act. 19. for the
Explication of the Doctrine of Baptisms, Heb. 6. seeing he baptized those that
had been baptized before, and so baptize all our Members again, that come to
you; as produce this Example for the explaining the Doctrine of laying on of
hands?

We demand then what can be inferred from hence to prove it an unquestionable
Duty? And if not, why should you divide about it?

Answer.
1. We do say the Apostle Paul did lay on hands upon the Disciples at Ephesus,
Act. 19. and therefore it was surely commanded him, and so us, Phil. 3.17. and
4.8, 9. that have believed on Christ through their word, John 17.20. You then
demand whether Paul did not also baptize the same persons, after they had been
baptized into John's Baptism? And then you answer your selves, and say, It
appears he did, verse. 5.

And then you ask, Why should not his baptizing them again be a Fundamental
Doctrine, since the Doctrine of Baptisms is as much a Fundamental Doctrine as
laying on of hands? Heb. 6.2.

We do not say but his baptising them again was a Fundamental Doctrine.

2. But then you enquire, Why we may not as well produce the Apostles example,
Acts 19. for the explication of the Doctrine of Baptisms, Heb. 6. seeing he
baptized those that had been baptized before?

When we meet with the same case, we shall have occasion to make use of that
ex^mple to explain the Doctrine of Baptisms, Heb. 6. till then, we need not.

Then you further say, And so baptize all your Members again that come to us,
as produce this Example for the explaining the Doctrine of laying on of hands.

Had your Members known no more than the Baptism of John, and had been baptized
into John's Baptism; we should have baptized them all again; but as they
professed, and we believed, they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, we
had no reason to baptize them again, and so no occasion to produce that
Example, to explicate the Doctrine of Baptisms, Heb. 6. as we have of laying on
of hands.

And from this Example of Paul's laying on of hands on the twelve Disciples he
found at Ephesus, Act. 19. we infer that he, as well as Peter and John, Act. 8.
had Christ's Doctrine for his practice; and that therefore it is an
unquestionable Duty. We have then good reason to divide from you about it.

Quest. 32.
We demand wherever you read of the practice of laying on of hands by
Christians, before the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit were given, to enable
for the Work of the Ministry? If you say it was practiced before, then we
desire that you would show us where it was practiced?

And if it was not practiced it was either because it was not commanded before,
or else it must needs be that ^hey were all negligent of their Duty, which is
uncharitable to conceive; or else it must needs be that though Christ did
command it, yet they were to suspend their practice of it till they had
received the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit. If you say it was commanded
before Christ did ascend, but the practice was suspended during the absence of
the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, because there was no reason why the
Apostles should lay hands on others, in order to the reception of the
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, when they had not received those Gifts
themselves.

Then we further demand, If that laying on of hands could be proved a Command
in the sense you contend for, whether we may not be excused from either doing
or receiving of it NOW, while the extraordinary Gifts are absent, both from him
that administers it, and they that receive it?

But if you shall say, This Objection lies against Baptism, as well as laying
on of hands; then we demand how that can be? Since Baptism was practiced before
the extraordinary Gifts were given, so was not this laying on of hands: Baptism
was administered by them that never did Miracles, so was not laying on of hands:
Again, Baptism was practiced on them that had received the Gifts of the holy
Ghost before they were baptized; but where do you read of any that having first
received the holy Ghost before laying on of hands, that afterward had laying
on of hands administered unto them? So that till this doubt be removed, what
ground have you to divide about it?

Answer.
1. What if we grant that laying on of hands was not practiced before the
Spirit was given, ^y which they were endowed with power from on high, to put in
practice laying on of hands, and all other practical Duties? And what if we say
that laying on of hands, and also other Duties that were commanded by Christ
after his ^assion, and before his Ascension, were all suspended till the
Apostles were endowed with power from on high, and during the absence of the
Spirit; yet not for the reason you give, but for reasons we have and shall
give, when they shall meet with due place.

2. That there is a Command for laying on of hands, is sufficiently proved, and
therefore ^our not receiving it Now, though the extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit be absent, will not be excused. Let us unfold this Mystery: For you
hereby secretly conclude, that they that administered laying on of hands then,
had the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit; but no man has the extraordinary
Gifts of the Spirit now; therefore we may be excused from receiving laying on
of hands now. We say if this be good reason, it will lay aside, as not
practical, the whole Doctrine of Christ, thus: They that ^reached Repentance
and Faith, the Doctrine of Baptisms, and Laying on of Hands, the Resurrection
of the Dead, and eternal Judgment, then, had received the extraordinary Gifts
of the Spirit: No man has the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit now? Therefore
all men may be excused from preaching and from he^^ing the Doctrine of
Repentance, Faith, (...) the Doctrine of Baptisms, of Laying on ^ hands, the
Resurrection of the Dead, et^^nal Judgment, now. And what is the tende^cy of
such reasoning, but Infidelity and Ath^ism? And whereas you think to be excused
from laying on of hands, because the extraordinar^ Gifts of the Spirit are not
given now; we (...) that will not excuse you before Christ at his appearing,
because you crave excuse upon a fa^^^ bottom; supposing that the extraordinary
Gif^ of the Spirit was the only end of the practi^^ of the laying on of hands;
yet was it not, (...) the reception of the Spirit only was as a common end
assigned, Act. 8.15. of prayer and la^ing on of hands, and not this or that
Gift thereof, ordinary or extraordinary: Though it is true the extraordinary
Gifts of the Spirit were give^ upon prayer and laying on of hands; God
appearing so eminently in that Appointment, did be^^ witness and confirm it to
be part of that word spoken by the Lord, Heb. 2.4. yet was those Gifts never
propounded as the end of laying on of hands no more than they were promised to
them tha^ obeyed Christ by repenting, and being baptise^ in his name, Act.
2.38, 39. and 5.32. The^^ though the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit (...)
not now given, that will not excuse your disobedience to Christ, in not doing
or receivin^ ^ now. And truly the reason (if we may so ^all it) that you make
your Plea, does lie against ^aptism, and all other Gospel-Duties, as we ^^ewed
before.

But then you demand, How that can be, since ^aptism was practiced before the
extraordinary ^ifts were given?

We say the Baptism of John was practiced be^or the extraordinary Gifts were
given.

But then you say, Baptism was administered by ^^em that never did miracles, so
was not Laying on ^f Hands.

We grant you John baptized and did no mira^^e; but how do you know laying on
of hands ^as not administered by them that never did mi^^cles? What miracle did
Ananias do? ^ct. 9.

Again, you say, Baptism was practiced on them (...) had received the Gifts of
the holy Ghost before ^^ey were baptized; but where do we read of any ^^at
having first received the holy Ghost before lay^ng on of hands, that afterward
had laying on of ^ands administered to them?

We say that neither we nor you read that any ^^d received the Spirit before
laying on of ^ands was first administered to them, saving Cor^elius and his
household, Act. 10. who indeed ^eceived the Gifts of the holy Ghost before
^aptism, or laying on of hands either; but that then? What if the like instance
is not to be read, the Scripture being silent in the Ca^^ whether Cornelius and
his Household had layin^ on of hands administered to them? Will the lessen the
Authority of any part of the Doctrine of Christ, and make void and null (...)
Apostolical and Primitive Practice?

Further, Though what you demand is not to b^ read, yet let us tell you that
what you say wi^^ lie as full in the reason of it against Baptism, (...) you
conceit it does against laying on of hands because the Gift of the Spirit in
the promise ^ it, is annexed to Baptism, as the Gift of the Spirit was assigned
in laying on of hands, as the end of it: Now Cornelius and his Household ha^ no
reason to be baptized in Water, because the^ had first received and possessed
that, which where baptized they could not lay claim to any thing more than the
promise of; no reason, we say, but the Authority of the Lord Jesus, who ha^
commanded it: And therefore though they had received the Spirit before they
were baptized* yet must they be baptized in Water, in obedience to Christ's
Doctrine and Command. So i^ like manner, if Cornelius and his Household mu^^ be
baptized, though he had first received the Spirit, which Gad had annexed the
promise of t^ Baptism; then must they be bound in Duty (...) well to submit to
laying on of hands, thoug^ the Spirit be assigned as the end thereof, an^ they
had first received the Gift of the Spirit before laying on of hands, from the
same reason of obedience to Christ's Doctrine and Command, though we do not read
it was administered unto them.

4. But what is this to your Case? Do any of you pretend to have such a measure
of the Spirit as Cornelius had; or so much, you need not that any should
administer laying on of hands, that you might have more, and so think to be
excused doing or receiving it? O^ do you doubt whether it be your Duty to
practice it, because the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit are now absent? Your
Doubts now being removed, we have the same ground left we ever had, to divide
from you about it, till you shall remove our ground by doing and receiving it.

Quest. 33.
Whether it be not uncharitable for you to say we ^^ppose or deny laying on of
hands, because for the reasons implied in the former Questions, we question
your practice of it, with respect to its being a Duty incumbent upon all
Disciples? May you not as well say, That those people that believe not that
Christ died for all, do deny the Death of Christ, because they do not believe
he has died for all; as (...) may say we deny laying on of hands a Duty,
because we do not believe it a Duty for every Man and Woman that is baptized?
And may you not as ^^ll say, They denied the Priestly Office of Christ, (...).
5. that were ignorant of many things that related thereunto, as say that we
oppose a Doctrine of Christ, because we are ignorant of something relating to
it, which for the reasons implied in the former question, we cannot yet
understand? And further, may we not as truly say, Many of you deny Christ, and
so have not God, because they deny he took Flesh of the Virgin Mary, as say we
deny a Doctrine of Christ, because we deny, or rather doubt, of laying on of
hands on all Disciples, Men and Women, as you practice it?

Answer.
1. To say the Truth, is not to be uncharitable; and when we say you oppose or
deny laying on of hands, as you have done more than twenty years, is not to be
(we hope) uncharitable: For that laying on of hands we practice, you do deny
and oppose, though you may color your opposition under the pretense of doubts
and questions, and under the pretense of owning laying on of hands to heal the
Sick, or to set Men apart to Office in the Church, though not on all baptized
Men and Women, that they might receive the Spirit: Nor is your reason by which
you would wipe off that blemish sufficient, for we may not as well say that
those people which believe not that Christ died for all, do deny the Death of
Christ; because the^ do believe he died, and died for them, and more too: But
you do not believe that layin^ on of hands on baptized Believers as such, t^^
^^ey might receive the Spirit, is the duty of any.

2. Neither can it be said, that the Hebrew Church denied the Priestly Office
of Christ, because they were dull of hearing, and could not receive those great
Mysteries thereof that were hard to be uttered, Heb. 5.11. And though you
pretend you are ignorant, yet we think you would not take it well should we set
you down for such. And as for what you may say, say your pleasure; and say if
you will, many of us (if you say true) deny Christ took flesh of the Virgin
Mary: We can say, and say truth, that many of you deny Christ, and have not
God, because you deny him to be God of one Substance with the Father; and say
that he is a created being, and took his beginning in the Womb of the Virgin,
besides your denying laying on of Hands on all Disciples, Men and Women, as we
practice.

Quest. 34.
Did you ever come to us, or send any to us, to lay Hands upon us, and we
rejected you? why then should you reject us?

Answer.
When we first received laying on of Hands, we were with you, and continued
reasoning, ^^d persuading you to receive the truth; but (...) then opposed us,
and it; yea, and at length ^e hardened and believed not, but spoke evil of the
way, and then we departed and separated from you; and know no reason we have to
come, or send to you to lay Hands on you, except you repent, and receive the
truth heartily in the love of it, until then we have reason to reject you.

Quest. 35.
Do we not practice laying on of hands upon Officers, and are not many willing
to submit to it a Members for peace and accommodation sake, and together with
you wait upon God for further light in this matter? why then should you impose
believing of it on us as a Command upon all Disciples both Men and Women: I,
and such a Command as is essential to Communion and Church Membership, when you
have no such Command nor Example in all the Scriptures, either that it was
practiced upon Men and Women that were Baptized, or that it was judged
essential to Communion, or that it was ever practiced, but on the account of
the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, or that it was ever administered on any,
if they had received the gifts of the Spirit before?

Till these sober Scruples are removed, and the Duty of Laying on of Hands
proved essential to Communion, what ground have you to refuse Communion with us?

Answer.
We know not whether you practice laying on of Hands upon Officers or no; but
if you do, what Command have you for it? Nor are those terms for peace and
accommodation sake sufficient, Christ has no need to be beholding to you;
Where do you read that any were received to, or practiced any Gospel Ordinance
upon those terms? We must therefore, if you receive it from us, impose it upon
you as a Command upon all Disciples both Men and Women, because it is so, as
appears Acts 8. for the Apostles practiced no more, in Holy and Divine
Adoration and Invocation, than what they were taught and commanded by their
Lord and Master Christ to do; yea, and such a Command (or rather Duty) it is,
that is essential to Communion, and Church Membership, we having both Command
and Example in the Scripture, as we have showed; and it would ^e but
reiteration to show it here again, nor was it practiced upon the account of the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, the Scripture no where assigning them as the
end thereof.

2. And if the Scripture be silent in the ^ase of Laying on of Hands on
Cornelius and his House, it does not follow but that he did receive laying on
of Hands after he had received the Spirit, as well as his being Baptized ^n
Water after he had received the Spirit, ^here being the same weighty and
pressing rea^ons for both, viz. Christ's Doctrine and Command. We do not know
when you will say your sober Scruples are removed: for Laying on of Hands is
proved to be essential to Communion; therefore we have ground to refuse
Communion with you.

Quest. 36.
Are you not divided among your selves in this matter? have not some of you
said Laying on of Hands was for Confirmation? Others, that it was for the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit? Others, that it was for the Spirit in any
measure?

Answer.
We know not any that says, That Laying on of Hands was for the extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit, but you and others of your mind; and if some do say that
Laying on of Hands is for the receiving the Spirit in any measure; and others
will say it was for Confirmation; there is not much difference between them: we
say then, we are not divided among our selves about laying on of Hands.

Quest. 37.
Have not others of you both Printed and Preached, that Laying on of Hands is
one of the sever Pillars that Wisdom builded her house upon, Prove. 9.1. and may
not the Church of Rome as wel^ prove her seven Sacraments from hence, as you
prove Laying on of Hands? Besides, do you (...) by thus expounding the Word of
God create sever Principles instead of six you talk of? and may y^^ not as well
say that because the New Jerusalem Wall had twelve Foundations, that therefore
the Church must have twelve Fundamentals, without which she cannot be a Church
communicable?

Is not this making the Word of God like the Lesbian Rule, who having built
crooked and irregular, so as the Work was not conformable to the Rule, went and
made their Rule conformable to their Work?

Answer.
1. What if some of us have from those Pillars Wisdom builded her house upon,
Prove. 9.1. alluded to the Foundation Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.1, 2. and of
the Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20. But if you shall say that Heb. 6.1, 2. makes mention
but of six Principles, and Prove. 9.1. mentions seven Pillars; we hope you that
say Christ is the Foundation, and those Principles cannot be a Foundation, nor
no part of the Foundation of Christianity, will not be against it, if some of
us do say, that Christ being the Chief Cornerstone in that Foundation, Heb. 6.
and so that text, Prove. 9.1. may allude to seven.

2. And pray, is there not as good a harmony and analogy between Prove. 9.1. and
Heb. 6.1. and Ephesians. 2.20. as you can have ground of proof from Numb. 18.19,
22, 23. and Deuteronomy. 34.9. That the Apostles, in diverse cases, laid on Hands, not
in conformity to a Command, but by way of accommodation to the laudable Customs
of the Jews, as in your 23d Question you do.

3. You go about to prove from those places, and conclude the Apostles did so;
but who do you know either by Printing or Preaching, undertake to prove that
laying on of hands is Commanded, or is a Duty, to be practiced from Prove. 9.1.
as you do to prove the other from those places mentioned above; something might
be offered from thence as is aforesaid, and by way of illustration. Then is
your talk but idle about Romes seven Sacraments, and the twelve Foundations of
Jerusalems Wall, and your Lesbian Rule; for who would make the Rule conform to
the Work more than you, which have built your house irregularly, and crooked,
and, so would if you could tell how, have the Word, which is the Rule, conform
to your Work.

Quest. 38.
And whereas the Scripture tells us of several laying on of hands, and we have
oftentimes demanded how you prove that the laying on of hands, as practiced by
you, is that spoke of in Heb. 6. you answer, if we would have a proof in so
many words, that says such a laying on of hands, as you practice is there
mentioned, we must seek one our selves, for you have none; then we demand,
whether you ar^ not very uncharitable to exclude any from the Communion of Gods
Church, because they cannot see that to be a Duty, which you have no plain Text
for the proof of, by your own Confession?

Answer.
1. As often as you have demanded, how we prove that the laying on of hands we
practice, is that meant Heb. 6. so often you have been answered; but you may
well blush for shame, that so falsely render what we have said in this matter.
Do we say, as you conclude, that we have no plain Text to prove laying on of
hands to be a Duty? where or when did any of us ever say so? You quote indeed
Gods Oracle and Christ's Doctrine, page 52. but it is page the 53. and there let
the most prejudiced Reader use but reason, see and judge whether you are not
most injurious to the truth and us; and let any impartial Reader weigh well
what is said before, in that Book, and they will find we have sufficiently
proved, that the laying on of Hands on baptized Believers, as such, is that
laying on of hands, mentioned Heb. 6. there said to be a Foundation-Principle.

2. It is true, there is no Text that does say in so many words, that that
laying on of hands Heb. 6. is the laying on of hands to heal the sick, nor that
to set men apart to Office in the Church, nor that it is Laying on of Hands on
baptized Believers; What then? Christ says, Go teach all Nations, baptizing
them, Matthew. 28.19. And the Scripture mentions several Baptisms; and there be
some that deny Baptism of Water; where have you a Text that in so many words
will say, That the Baptism of Water which you practice, is the Baptism-Christ
commanded, Mat. 28.19. You must confess you have none; and can it be fairly and
honestly concluded that therefore you have no plain Text for the proof of your
practice, as you do by us; let the Reader consult Gods Oracle and Christ's
Doctrine from page 44. to page 54. where it is sufficiently proved, That the
laying on of hands mentioned Heb. 6. is the laying on of hands on baptized
Believers, practiced by the Apostles, Acts 8.17. and 19.6. Then are we not
uncharitable, though we exclude you from the Communion of Gods Church, because
you do not do your Duty, which we have plain Texts, and sound Reason for the
proof of.

Quest. 39.
And whereas you say the Apostles practice must expound the 6th of the Hebrews
in this case as well as in Water Baptism; we answer so it shall. But then where
did they lay hands on Women, and where did they Command laying on of hands in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, as they did in Baptism, Acts 12.8. Acts 10.47.48.
and where did they lay hands ON any, after they had received the gifts of the
Spirit? but we do find they Baptized them afterward, I, and Commanded such to
submit to it in the Name of the Lord Jesus: produce us the like Instances, and
you say something.

Answer.
If the Apostles practice shall expound Heb. 6. as well as in the case of
Baptism, Then have you never a Text in all the Scripture that will in so many
words say, Christ meant Water Baptism, when he says, Go teach all Nations,
baptizing them, but must expound the Commission by their practice, and then how
unworthily have you done by the Truth, concluding as you do in the 38.
Question: But then, instead of doing what you say the Apostles practice shall
expound, you leave the matter, and ask where they laid hands on Women: Why we
told you that before, and you may read Acts 8. and then you ask, where they
Commanded laying on of hands in the Name of Christ? We will leave that to you
to determine in whose Name the Apostles did it and commanded it; and then you
ask, where did they lay on hands on any after they received the gifts of the
Spirit? though we have answered this twice before, but you never spoke one word
to that Case you so falsely render; and then as falsely conclude, that we confess
we have no plain Text for the proof of laying on of hands, but bid us produce
the like Instances, and we say something. Suppose there be not the like
Instances to be produced in all occasional Circumstances, or otherwise in
Baptism o^ Water, as is in those Principles of Faith a^^ Repentance; will all
that can be said for the Baptism of Water be nothing, except the^ can be
produced is many Instances agreeing ^ all respects to Baptism as agrees in
expressne^ of terms to Repentance and Faith? if so, an^ if Baptism of Water be
no Duty except as (...) foresaid; you will not be able, nor none else to give
such proof for water Baptism, nor some other practice you will own to enforce
the du^^ of it on any that shall oppose you. VV^ having said then so much for
laying on of hand as you will never be able to un-say from Scripture or Reason;
nor can answer, except it b^ by granting it to be by Scripture proved a
Foundation-Principle of Christ's Doctrine, and accordingly submit to it upon
Christ's terms, an^ then you will not only say, but do something.

Quest. 40.
Again, whereas you have both Preached (...) Printed that you cannot prove
laying on of hand^ as you practice it, any otherwise than by Inferen^ and
Deductions; how can you be so daringly confident as to call those things Gods
Oracles and Essentials of Religion, that are but your interpre^^tions of
Scripture, unless with the Church of Rome you will say the Church cannot err?

Not but that we believe many profitable truths may be collected and inferred by
consequence from Scripture, And Conjectures (as one well observes) if mannerly
observing their distance; and not impudently obtruding themselves, for
certainties, deserve (if not to be received) to be considered.

So that if Laying on of Hands in your sense should be a truth, yet it being
but conjecturally so; We Query, why it should be advanced into the number of
those express Duties which are essential to Salvation and Church Communion?

Answer.
How can you be so daringly impudent as to forge such an untruth, and say that
we have both Preached, and Printed, that we cannot prove laying on of hands as
we practice it, otherwise then by Inferences and Deductions? where is such a
thing Printed, or who ever Preached so, that has not turned back to his vomit,
in some degree, or has not outlived his love to those Principles he had
received, and was once built on? May you not be ashamed of this, when we have
again and again, by Printing, Preaching, and otherwise, proved laying on of
hands, as practice it, to be a Foundation-Principle of Christ's Doctrine, by
plain and uninterpreted Scripture, and without Inferences and Deductions, as
fully as any Duty that is practical, can be proved without them, and was never
refuted by you yet; how then can you stand in the face of God and his
Congregation when you dare do thus! Had there been upon you the feeling
thoughts of those Texts, Rev. 21.8. and 22.15. you would not have brought forth
such a Monster into the world; it being therefore false what you say, we dare
be so confident as to call laying on of hands as we practice it, one of the
first Principles of the Oracles of God, and an essential of Religion (without
saying with the Church of Rome, the Church cannot err) (we will leave that for
you to say) and with as much manners and modesty as the authority of so sacred
an Ordinance will permit.

Laying on of Hands then is a Truth, and such a one as is by Christ and his
Apostles (not by us) advanced (as you call it) into the number of those express
Duties which are Essential to Church-Constitution and Church Communion.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the Searchers for Schism did direct their Questions to the Baptized
Congregations under Laying on of Hands, and did expect an Answer from them, as
appears by the latter end of their Epistle, it may by some be thought strange
that I should undertake to Answer them, seeing they were propounded to the
abovesaid Congregations in general: That therefore which has moved me
thereunto, was partly the importunity of some Friends, it being some
considerable time after I saw their Questions ere I had any thoughts to offer
any thing in Answer to them (at least in so public a manner) thinking it was
more the Concern of some other of my Brethren to engage now than mine, because
I had once and again appeared in Print (according to my ability) in answer to
those gainsayers and opposers of laying on of hands; but they being silent,
whose Zeal for Truth should (as I might well hope and expect) have put them
with much forwardness upon the work, together with the report that went abroad
how many young and weak Christians were somewhat moved and stumbled, and others
that have declined (in some sort) the Truth, did boast and were encouraged, put
me upon this third Encounter, being not well able to forbear, having to this
day (praised be the Lord my God) remaining in me some love to Christ, and to
that sacred and precious Word of his, viz. Laying on of Hands, yea, and to the
souls of them who are ready to be tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, and among the rest by the blast which was blown from the Bellows of
those Questions, which their Authors pretend are for Conscience sake; but
however, whether they were for Conscience Sake, or for Strife and Contention,
this I can truly say, they are answered with good conscience to God and love to
the Authors of them, that God may be glorified by their obedience, and by the
establishing and confirmation of the Churches in the Doctrine of the Lord
Jesus; from part of which (at least) it both has been, and still is (the more
it is to be lamented) the endeavor of some, especially the Authors of these
Questions (who not only now, but heretofore have labored) to trouble the peace
of them which have obeyed that form of Doctrine which Christ taught, and was
delivered by his Apostles to the primitive Saints.

But let my ends and aims in what I have writ be what I say they are, yea, and
had I the Pen of never so ready and exquisit a Writer, yet must I not expect,
nor do, but to be smitten for my love and pains, by them who bend their tongue
like their bow for lies, but are not valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, it
being too commonly seen that he which departs from iniquity makes himself a
prey, when he that runs with a multitude to do evil shall have honor and
praise; but however I am esteemed, my comfort is I seek not the honor nor
praise of men, neither do I fear the slanderous tongues of any, mine only end
(as God knows) being their soul* eternal felicity, who shall carp at me, be
it the Inquirers or others; and therefore should they reward me with evil for
the good I intend them, they will in so doing wrong themselves and not me. I
will then leave the issue of these An^wers of their Questions to the Lord,
heartily desiring that Truth and Righteousness were embraced in sincere love,
by all them that name the Name of Christ, that there may be a departing from
Iniquity and Error, which is the cause of all Divisions, and then, and not till
then will the Wound be healed. Had the Searchers for Schism then considered
that their Disobedience to, and Error in a Fundamental-Principle, is the cause
why those under Laying on of hands can have no Communion with them (which I
hope this brief Answer to their Questions may help them to see) they would not
be so irrational to conclude that Schism should be found where Truth is obeyed
and walked in; but that it is more likely by far to be where Error and
Disobedience dwells, and such to be ^^e Dividers who refuse to obey, but no
more ^ow: only desiring the Lord to make my poor Endeavors a Blessing to the
Souls of them, and all others, and then I have my End.

VALE.

