CLARIOR E TENEBRIS: OR A JUSTIFICATION OF Two Books, The One printed 1680;
under the Title of The Grand Inquest. The Other in April 1682, under the Title
OF The Royal Favorite Cleared: WITH Several other Reasons in Vindication OF
HIS Royal Highness, Not so convenient in those Times to be published.

By J. G. of the Inner Temple, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring at the Harrow over against the Inner Temple
in Fleetstreet, 1683.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
YOU may wonder to see me in Print, thrice upon one Subject, and question me,
why not all at once, as well as to feed you with these farther Expectances?
Reader, I must give you this for an Answer; diseased Minds are like sickly
Bodies; if you give them not Preparatives, the Distemper and the Application
together may ruin the Patient: But to satisfy you, Britannia begins to mend,
and in a little time it is to be hoped will be in her right Wits again:
especially, since she is so much abated of her too credulous Opinions, and
finds by experience, that the dictates of her own Conscience runs counter to
what she has been, as it were, forced to believe from the mouths of her
Dissenting Brethren. There were many Symptoms of this crazed Distemper,
appearing long before these sullen humors broke forth, which were discernable
by the foulness of her Stomach, and her continual vomiting of Gall and Sedition
against the Government: And even then the Distemper run so high, it seemed the
Seedtime to Hellish Plots, and Mother to Rebellion: And then she brought forth,
and put out to Nurse this malicious Opinion, That the Duke was a Papist (when
he was praising God in the Bosom of our Church, and professing himself her
Champion) which Bastard Brat she would have laid at another door, because she
knew it was unlawfully begot, and that she might be called to a severe account
for so great a Scandal. But soon after, Britannia discovered her self, which
has given me the farther occasion to Print this last Treatise, and I hope it
will make our Paths more plain and easy; and receive that candor from, as is
intended to the present Government, by him, who is a well-wisher to his King
and Country.

Vale.

CLARIOR E TENEBRIS.
I Have not as yet been convinced of the least mistake in writing those two
Books, in the Title mentioned: though the Sectaries and Malcontents almost daily
print their Sophisms and false Maxims, by which they would induce the credulous
to a belief, that his Royal Highness is a Roman Catholic: But what they write,
has no other Warrant than what proceeds from themselves; an Argument too
inconsiderable to prevail against Truth, and as easily baffled, as the rest of
their nonsensical Opinions. Neither have I received any probable contradiction,
but instead of Arguments, have had bitter Railings and Revilings, and am my
self esteemed to be a Papist (though of no other Communion than that of the
Church of England) by those who are most malicious against the Duke, for
endeavoring to clear him of that aspersion, and for admonishing those that are
Papists, to return to the Government of the King, and to be humbled for those
of their Persuasion, who have made such bold attempts upon the Government; a
Test that may easily be taken, and save them from the danger that may ensue, by
reason of such wicked devices, which are not only sinful in themselves, but
teach others (who watch every opportunity to invade the Government) to rebel;
an example of which we lately had in Scotland, which put that Kingdom into a
great Consternation, and was the occasion of the King's sending an Army under
the Command of the Duke of Monmouth, to quell that unnatural Rebellion. Neither
do we want Examples at home, of the like nature, when Badges and Distinctions
were given for the Parties to be known by; Traitorous Associations, framed
Libels of the most scandalous nature dispersed, and the Government environed by
those who hate and do all they can to destroy it: And we are at this time to
bless God, for giving the King Wisdom and Courage to prevent an open Rebellion,
that was so unluckily hatched, and so traitorously nourished, that it did, as
it were, threaten and destroy at the same time, and made it manifest, that God
was on our side, or it could not have been prevented.

Now since the Roman Catholics have of late so much disordered our Government,
by endeavoring to supplant it, and opened a door by which other Sectaries and
Enemies to the King have been let in, to trample upon the Flowers of the Crown,
and to profane our holy things, I did think my self obliged in Duty and
Conscience, to print the Book called The Grand Inquest, etc. 1680. And the Book
called The Royal Favorite Cleared, etc. 1682. Wherein I do assert, that there
has not been any reasonable Arguments offered, by which it may be proved, That
his Royal Highness is a Roman Catholic: and therefore it must rationally be
conjectured, that all the Reproaches and Scandals that have been cast upon him,
as such, were more to serve the wicked designs of his enemies upon the King and
Government, than any real belief they had of his being a Papist: especially,
since neither the Roman Catholic nor Fanatic, have to this day one word to
justify themselves, in what they have so boldly and so vainly insinuated into
the credulous Multitude.

Therefore in pursuance of this Discourse, I shall observe to you.

First, What they seem to aim at, who desire and wish, that his Royal Highness
were a Papist.

Secondly, What they design, who would stigmatize the Duke with the name of
Papist.

Thirdly, What they would be at, that only fear him to be so?

Fourthly, What they aim at, who credit the Duke with their best belief,
notwithstanding his many sufferings, by reason of the extreme malice of wicked
men.

First then, Those who wish the Duke a Papist, must at the same time express
Zeal for God, wish the Conversion of Heretics, and the good of the Land: But,
that all this is only pretended, is plainly to be demonstrated, since the ways
they go about to effect their designs, have been by Plots, dark Intrigues,
Lyings, Perjuries, Murders, Treasons; and God, nor can, nor will, require
these things at their hands: Therefore it must be their wicked Mammon that
incites them to it, that so they may regain their long wished for and ill
gotten Lands, with many other unlawful and tyrannical Advantages, with which
they did formerly oppress these Nations, curb our Kings, and miserably drain
the Purses of the People, making St. Peter's Net a Drag to take Gold; not
Souls; and his Key to unlock the Door of their Treasure, not that of their
Hearts; in fine, they have signalized themselves to the World, by the odious
marks of Pride, Covetousness, and Letchery, which will be ever handed down to
succeeding Ages, by the still modern Examples of their lazy Monks, Friars, and
the rest of that Idolatrous Crew: Therefore it must be a pretended, or at
least, a misguided Zeal in them, who do believe* or endeavor to persuade the
World, That his Royal Highness is a Papist; that so they may have a better
color to perform what they go about, and make his Innocence, Justice and
Valor, a Cloak for their Wickedness, and as it were, sanctify their Crimes by
counterfeiting his Name, as a Party to their Black and Hellish Contrivances. So
fond are wicked men to have their Iniquity believed to be none, that if they
can but pretend to have persuaded the just into their Opinion, even they
themselves begin to think they have done no harm.

Secondly, What they design, who would stigmatize the Duke with the name of
Papist, is obvious in the Fanatic, who, conjoined with the Papist, endeavor
to effect the same thing, though with different Ends. The Jesuit makes use of the
Fanatic, as the Ape did of the Cats Foot; only, with this difference, the
Fanatic was willing to be made use of, though it were with the hazard of
burning, hoping, at last, to deceive the cunning of him, who exposed him; and
so the Jesuit, who had laid the Snare, was to be taken in his own Gin, together
with what he most endeavored to destroy (viz.) The present Government: And
this Jack Presbyter zealously concluded would set Whiggery on Horseback, make
Kings Elective, or bring forth their great Diana a Commonwealth, whose
practice is to imbrue their Hands in the Blood of Kings, Priests and Nobles,
that they may once more enjoy their Dignities and Estates and secure to
themselves, those Possessions by a more durable Tyranny. For that reason, like
eager Hounds, they pursue the Duke, and are ready with like Numbers to vote him
a Papist, though a Protestant `as to exclude him from the Succession, though
Brother to the King; by which associating Principle they seem to resemble the
Guise Faction, who, by the hand of Clement the Monk, murdered Henry the Third
of France, for being a Persecutor of the Roman Faith, though he lived and died a
zealous Roman Catholic; as Davila does at large recite in his History of the
Civil Wars of France. But what need we cross the Seas, when we have a Domestic
and more recent Example, that is able to convince the worst of men, in the
death of King Charles the First of ever Blesed Memory, who died a Martyr for
the Protestant Religion? And yet by our Covenanteers, (who may be said to be
the Spawn of that Holy League) he was branded with the Name of Papist:
Instances so pat and suitable to my purpose, that they cannot be passed over
without a particular Remarque. In vain therefore do those persons, who would
stigmatize the Duke with the Name of Papist, plead Statutes and Laws to
strengthen their Pretensions, when Laws and Statutes will not speak or act
according to their crooked and obscure Opinions: neither will their conceited
Numbers be able to justify them in the sight of God or Men.

Thirdly, What they would be at, who fear the Duke to be a Papist: Truly, it is
a very hard matter to guess at the meaning of their Fears, unless, it be
supposed like Foxes, they take their Ears for Horns, and therefore will run
with the Cornuted Company, thinking to find more safety from them, than under
the Protection of the Noble Lion, who seemed to have banished those only that
bore Arms against him.

Will any believe the cunning Papist* the scandalous Fanatic, or the malicious
discontented Statesman? then let them cry, as they do, the Duke is a Papist,
the King is Popishly affected, and so are the Ministry and Gentry, and that
Popery and Tyranny are coming in as a Torrent; but let these men consider, they
ought to be esteemed the greatest Plague of a Nation, and to be most severely
dealt with, who are such Weather-Cocks, that will turn with every Wind, and
give credit to such discontented Parties, that never think they are doing their
Duty, if they are not lampooning the Government, aspersing the King, the Royal
Family, and their best Friends; nay more, associating and contriving how to
give Law to their Superiors; tearing and rending from the Prerogative, what
should support the Crown in its due Glory and Splendour, and keep them in their
Allegiance.

Again, Have any received just Fears and Suspicions of the Duke's being a
Papist? if they have, yet, still they are but Fears and Suspicions, and are to
be corrected, if they will hearken to the King, who speaks otherwise in his
Speech to his Parliament, on the 6th. of March, in the 31st. year of his Reign;
and to two Acts of Parliament, the one made 25. Car. 2. the other 30. Car 2.
which likewise say otherways; so do the Scotch Clergy and Nation (who are as
little addicted to Popery as England is) witness the Letter from thence,
directed to his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, from Edinburgh the 9th. of
March, 1682. So do our Universities, and so do all those that seek Peace and
Truth: and whatever the Fears of these men are, yet it is to be hoped, that this
Truth will still prevail, in spite of all its Opposers; and then those wretched
Creatures, that run screaming about, and know not what they would have, being
filled with Fears and Jealousies, probably, may be some of them, that aim at a
General Pardon; and so render the late Plots (as much as in them lies)
ridiculous, by such a Solicitation, wherein their own Fears are as
demonstrable, as the others Crimes, and in the Crowd, though guilty, they may
pass away undiscerned, leaving the Taint upon those who remain squalling behind.

Fourthly, What they aim at, who credit the Duke with their best belief,
notwithstanding his many sufferings, by reason of the unparalled malice of
wicked men, must, I hope, at this time of the day, be esteemed Generous, and
extremely for the establishment of Religion and Loyalty; and if their numbers
be small, yet, that with the blessing of God, must be looked upon to exceed the
Numbers of their Enemies; for, if God be for them, who can be against them?

And if the Duke do not appear publicly at our Churches, it must be thought to
take off a Calumny, that otherwise would have been cast even upon the Church it
self, by those, who have been so lately ripe for Rebellion, and would therefore
have called our Clergy, Romish Priests; and our Service Book, the Mass, as they
have called the Duke Roman Catholic; and this is plain, since they have
already declared our Ministry and Gentry Popishly affected; and branded them
with the ignominious Names of the Dead Weight, French Pensioners, and Betrayers
of their King and Country.

And (speaking after the manner of Men) could they then have hearded the Duke
among the Clergy, who, like the blown Deer, was pitied, but could not be
assisted by his Companions, these cruel and Blood-thirsty men, would have
worri'd the whole Flock of Christ, and made it ere this, a Prey to the most
Barbarous People that were ever seen upon the face of the Earth.

But (speaking after the manner of Angels) Christ has said, his Church is built
upon a Rock, and that it shall never be destroyed: And therefore, we ought not
to trim the Business, who profess faith in Christ, and good will toward men,
lest it prove worse with us, who have enjoyed the Gospel above 1500 years, than
with Peter, who cursed and swore, and even in the High Priest's Hall, denied
his Master: or with those, who, to this day, usurp St. Peter's Chair, yet, still
lay under the Reproach of excluding the Faith, and making Good Works the only
way to Heaven.

But, by the Wisdom of our Governors, the Measures of our implacable Enemies
are broken: and (thanks be to God) there is now no danger of Spanish Pilgrims,
French Invasions, Romish Priests, or Geneva Presbyters: Nor of any that are so
malicious and base, as to detract from the Honor of the King, and his
Ministers of State, which gives me a Remarque of the Grandeur and Stability of
our Government, when those who stand at the Helm, are able to withstand
(through Generosity and Courage) the Calumnies and Slanders of their Enemies;
and by true Rules of Virtue, render themselves, as it were, Tempest Proof.

Yet, to prevent the Inconveniences that may arise hereafter, by the Ignorance
of simple People, who of late run too much after State Quacks, upon the least
motion of the Government, fearing it should lean to Popery or Tyranny: I say,
when any such popular Distemper shall happen, and the Nation stand in absolute
need of a Physician, I question not, but these several Applications will be as
well, if not better approved of; since the nature of the Disease, which tends
only to Faction and Sedition, will be so well known, that scarce one in the
whole College of our wise Physicians, but will easily apprehend it.

Thus I have endeavored to strengthen my former Impressions, with such farther
Reasons, as I did not think fit to make use of in those Times, lest, by
endeavoring to support, I might have contributed to the disadvantage of his
Royal Highness, whose Wisdom seems to be like that of Noah, who, after the
Flood began to abate, did not presently open the Gates of his Ark, but at a
Window sent forth a Dove, that brought him back an Olive Branch, by which he
had hopes the Deluge was retired into its proper place and boundary; and after
that, he sent out a second, that never returned again; which gave him assurance
the Insurrection of the surly Waves was appeased: And sometime after that, he
uncovered the Ark, and then the Heavens were clear, and the Earth, as when
created, seemed to rejoice; and God spoke to him to come forth, which he no
sooner did, than immediately he was seen to be upon his Knees, praising God,
and built an Altar, on which he sacrificed, and with which God was well
pleased, and said in his heart, he would not curse the Ground any more for his
sake.

And now lastly, for my self, who have undertaken these Discourses, under the
hardest circumstances imaginable (having none to encourage me but my own
Observations, and those, when ever argued, opposed by the Multitude, with the
greatest Heartburnings and Malice, that misguided Zeal could invent) though
Ignorance and Malice may sit upon, and censure this Treatise for a Time, yet I
have sufficient hopes, God will put it forth (at one time or other) with the
Comment of my honest meaning upon it, not tortured, and wire-drawn with false
or Ignoramus Expositions: And in the mean time, I hope wise men will take me
into their serious consideration, and conclude what I have wrote is my real
Opinion, not biassed with Flattery, as some say, or clogged with hopes of
Preferment, as others pretend; and then, what the Roman Catholic or
Roundheaded Whigs shall determine of me, whether as a Papist, for justifying of
the Duke, or an ill manager of my Pen, I shall not matter either, or all of
their Condemnations, since I see before me the whole frame of their
Proceedings, to be as it were, but one grand Mistake, and their Counsels to be
despised and rejected, like that of Achitophels; but as a man, I wish them not
the same Fate, and as a Christian, I hope they may live to make amends, or at
least, repent of their Contrivances, that so we may at last see our
weather-beaten Government freed from those Storms and Tempest that were ready
to overwhelm it, and unanimously magnify our God, who has brought us into a
safe Harbor, maugre all the power of outrageous and blood-thirsty men.

And now, having no more to say upon this Subject, other, than that no man is
infallible in his Opinion, I shall humbly beg, that I may be received by the
kind Reader, with that candor, as every one would expect to be dealt with in
the like nature. And (that every one laying his hand upon his Breast) would not
obstinately disbelieve his Friend, when in his own Conscience he cannot find
any thing to oppose him, even in his most secret thoughts.

Withal, I am not a little anxious, to think that these Discourses may seem
precarious by some, as well as prejudicial by others, to the interest of his
Royal Highness; but it is impossible to please all, or to escape without
censure in this detracting Age, though our Actions were regulated by the
strictest Reason. Yet what I have said, carries the face of so much Justice and
Honesty, that I would not change my Opinion, without greater Demonstrations
than I have yet had to the contrary: however, were I obliged to believe that
the Duke is a Papist (which no man yet has sufficient grounds to think) I hope,
I am so well satisfied in the exercise of our Protestant Religion, that I would
do every thing becoming an honest man and a good Christian; and then I am sure
I should never do evil, that good might come of it; which Observation I
recommend more particularly to those, who are so fond of the Bill of Exclusion.

FINIS.

