PAX VOBIS OR GOSPEL AND LIBERTY AGAINST ANCIENT AND MODERN PAPISTS.

BY E.G. PREACHER OF THE WORD.

DEDICATED TO THE RIGHT HONBLE THE LORD HALYFAX.

Stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not
entangl'd again with the yoke of bondage (Popery) Gal. c. 5. v. 1. Anno 1679.

THE PREFACE TO THE CHILDREN OF THE REFORMATION.
BE not concerned to know whose hand it is which holds the link, but follow the
light it gives: reach your hand to receive this Treatise, which marks the
shore, where the Ark of our Reformation, shattered by a deluge of troubles, may
rest; which is a Holy liberty to all and each Person to believe or not believe;
act or not act, as he pleases with a safe conscience acording the Principles of
our Reformation. We generally lament the convulsions which shake our Church and
State, through the diversity of opinions, professed by our several
Congregations; some remedies have bin applied to bring us to Peace and
conformity; but all have proved ineffectual: some of our Drs judge, nothing can
cure our disease, but a General Council or supreme Authority, to whose sentence
we should all submit; but this, besides that it is Popish, to grant any human
Power for to oblige our consciences against our jugdments in matters of
Religion; is but an imaginary remedy for a real Evil: for, it is not in the
Reformation as in Popery; in this there is a supreme Authority for to convene
the Pastors of diverse Kingdoms to a general Council; in our Reformation there
is none: Popery believes its Councils and Popes infallible; and therefore they
cannot but acquiesce, because an infallible sentence leaves no doubt of the
Truth; but in the Reformation, all Councils and human Authority are fallible;
and consequently their Decisions may be doubted of, and we are never certain of
the Truth.

Others judge, the remedy of our disease can be no other, but Pills of
persecution, penal laws, Acts of Parliament, Ordinances of Synods, forcing men
to conformity; but this has proved not only destructive to the peace of the
Church, but has shockt the very foundation of our Reformation: for if we must
believe under severe penalties what the State and Ecclesiastical Authority will
have us believe; then scripture must be no more our Rule of faith, but the
state and Church, which tells me what I must believe; and we must be deprived
of the right and power of interpreting Scripture and believing it in the sense
we think it to be the true; and yet our whole Reformation is cemented and was
first raised upon this Holy Liberty; That every one should read Scripture,
interpret it, and believe whatever he thought was the true sense of it; without
any compulsion or constraint for to believe either Church, State, Universitie
or Dr. if we did not judge by Scripture his Doctrine was true.

If Prudence had as great a share in our Conduct, as Passion, we should
regulat our future by the effects of our past actions; and if we will cast an
eye back to the transactions of later years, we will find this compulsion of
Men's Consciences has produced but confusion in our Church, and fatal
disturbances in our State; contrariwise, never did our Reformation enjoy more
peace, shined with more luster, and held its course with more happiness, than
when none was molested for his Profession, but every one had liberty to
believe and teach, what Doctrine and sense each one thought to be the most
conformable to Scripture. Confider the infancy of the Reformation, when God
raised Luther to repair the ruins of the Church; how of a sudden it spread it
self in Germany, France, Holland, Poland, Scotland and England, and by what
means? was it not by taking away all constraint of men's Consciences (used then
only in the Popish Church) our blessed Reformers taking to themselves and
giving to others, a Holy liberty for to teach and believe what ever they
judged to be the Doctrine and true Sense of Scripture, tho it should be against
the received opinion of the Councils, Church, Universities and Drs.? look into
the Reign of Edward the VI. then, did our Reformation flourish in England; and
was miraculously propagated by the Liberty of Martin Bucer, Cranmer, Ochinus,
Peter Martyr and others in teaching Calvinism, Lutheranism, Zuinglianism by
Scripture as every one understood it: Descend to the reing of Queen Marie;
then, the light of the Ghospel was eclypsed, because the flock was again
popishly compelled to believe, not what they judged by Scripture to be true;
but what the Pope and Church judged was such: Com down a step lower to Queen
Elizabeth's time; then, the flock recovering that holy liberty for to believe
what each one thought was the Doctrine of Scripture; the Reformation gained
ground; our several Congregations lived peaceably; for tho Protestancy was
established the Religion of the Land; others were not oppressed, nor their
liberty constrained by compulsions: step down a degree lower to king James his
time; the Reformation held its course as prosperoussy as in Queen Elizabeth's
time, because men's consciences were not oppressed; all Reformed Brethren had
full liberty to believe as they pleased; tho Protestancy was the Religion of
the King: look down a step lower to king Charles the first's reign; his Matie
carried with a godly zeal of restraining the diversity of opinions, begot by
the liberty enjoyed in his Predecessors times, would by new Laws and Ordinances
force the flock to an Uniformity of Doctrine, but our zealous Brethren the
Presbyterians, impatient of any constraint in affairs of Religion, and pleading
for the Evangelical Libetty of our Reformation, for to believe nothing, nor use
any Rites or Ceremonies but as each one judged by Scripture to be convenient;
they covenanted against his Majesty and Bishops; and the storm grew to that
height, that both Church and state were drowned almost in the blood of our
Reformed Brethren: lastly look upon our Realm as it is at present, the
symptom^ of disatisfactions which you may read and hear in the Coffie houses,
in public and private conversations; the sparkle^ of jealousies, which appear in
our land* the Cabals against our government; the animositie of divided parties;
the murmur and complaints of all; what is all this but the smoke of that hidden
fire of zeal, wherewith Protestants would force Presbytherians by penal Laws,
to profess their Tenets, Presbyterians exclaim against Protestancy as against
Popery; Quakers judge both to be limbs o^ Satan; Anabaptists look on all three,
as Children of Perdition; and no Congregation would give liberty for to
profess any Tenets but its own; in so much that if you consider all well, each
of our Co^gregations, are as severe Tyrants over our judgments and consciences,
as Popery was* and our Reformation comes to be in effect but an exchange of one
Italian Pope, for many English ones: for as in Popery, we must submit our
judgments to the Pope and Church of Rome, or be esteemed putrid rotten members;
and be shut out of heavens gates; and suffer Inquisitions, persecutions,
excommunications and what not; so among us, you must believe Scripture as
interpreted by the Church of England, or you are condemned by them; you must
believe Scripture as interpreted by the Presbyterians, or you are accursed by
them; you must believe as Anabaptists do, or you are damned by them; and not
one Congregation among us, but would root all the others out of the world, if
it could; and we do not fear that danger whereof S. Paul Gal. 5.15. warns us,
If we bite and devour one an other, let us take heed, we be not consumed one
of an other; giving us likewise a holsom advice in the same place, how to
prevent this evil; Stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage: The world did groan
under this heavy yoke in Popery; wherein our Rule of faith, was Scripture as
interpreted by the Pope and Church: Scripture was kept from the hand of the
flock: no man permitted to give or believe any interpretation or sense of it,
but what the Pope, Church and Fathers did approve: our reason, our judgments,
our consciences were slaves under this yoke, until that God raised our
glorious and blessed Reformers Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Beza and others who
took a holy Liberty, and gave v^ all liberty for to read and interpre^
Scripture: to believe no Doctrine, bu^ what we judged to be true by Scripture*
to believe any sense of it, which we judged to be true, tho contrary to all
the world: they took for their Rule of fait^ Scripture, and nothing else but
Scripture as each one of them understood it; thi^ same Rule of faith they left
to us, and ^ holy freedom and liberty of our judgments and consciences, that
any man o^ sound judgment may hold, and believ^ whatever sense of it, he thinks
to b^ true.

This therefore is the scope and end o^ my following Treatise; that, whereas ou^
Rule of faith, as J will prove by the unanimous consent of our whole Reformed
Church, is Scripture or Gods Wri^ten Word, as interpreted by each person of
sound judgment; that whereas b^ the Principles of our Reformation, n^ man is to
be constrained to believe an^ Doctrine against his judgment and conscience:
(otherwise why were not we left in Popery) it is impious, tyran^cal, and quite
against the spirit of the Reformation, to force us by Acts of Parliaments,
Decrees of Synods, invectives, and persecutions of indiscreet Brethren, to
embrace this or that Religion; that every one ought to be permitted to believe
what he please; if you think Bigamy to be the Doctrine of Scripture: if you
think by Scripture there is one Nature and four Persons in God; if you think
Transubstantiation to be true; if you judge by Gods Word there is neither
Purgatory nor Hell; finally whatever you think to be the true sense of
scripture, you are bound as a true Reformed Child, to believe it; that it is
quite against the spirit of the Reformation to censure, oppose or blame the
Doctrine or Tenets of any Congregation, or of any Doctor of the Reformed Church;
because, that any Doctrine professed by any Christian Congregation, whatever
(the Popish excepted) or that ever was delivered by any man of good judgment of
the Reformation, since the beginning of it, until this day, is as truly and
really the Doctrine of the Reformation, as the Figurative Presence or kings
supremacy is. Consequently Protestants are deservedly to be checked for
persecutin^ Quakers; Quakers, for murmuring again^ Presbyterians; these, for
their invectiv^ against Anabaptists and Socinians; A^ are very good; and you
may lawfully according the Principles of our Reform^tion believe them, or deny
them.

This Evangelical liberty of believin^ any thing, which we judge to be the
sen^ of scripture, tho all the rest of the worl^ should judge it to be a
blasphemy, the most distinctive sign of the Refo^mation from Popery; for
Papists are the Children of Agar the slave; they liv^ in bondage and constraint
to believe at Doctrine, which the Pope and Church pr^poses to them; and if a
learned man ^ university should judge it to be contra^ to Scripture; he must
submit his judgment to that of the Pope, or be co^demn'd as an Heretic: in our
Reform^tion, we are the Children of Sara t^ Free; our Rule of faith is
Scripture ^ each Person of sound judgment in the Church understands it; if we
do n^ like the Doctrine of the Pope, Church ^ Council, we may gainsay them all,
an^ hold our own sense of Scripture: ^ enjoy the Prerogative of Rational
cre^tures, we are lead by our own reason, which God has given us for our
conduct, and are not like Beasts, constrained to follow that of others. We
follow the Rule given us by S. Paul Romans 14. He who eats, let him not despise
him who does not eat; and he who does not eat, let him not despise him who
does eat, for God has received him: that is to say, he who believes let him
not check him who does not believe, as he does: and he who does not believe,
let him not blame him who does believe: but let each one believe, or not
believe as he thinks best in the Lord: This holy liberty and freedom is the
Spirit of God, for, where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty, 2. Cor. 3.
says the great Apostle: The Lord inspire to our Parliament that now sit^ upon
a perfect and new settlement of Gouvernment and Religion, to follow the
footsteps of our first renowned Reformers: to enact that there may be no other
Rule of faith, but that which we received from our Reformers, and which is laid
down for us in the 39 Articles of the Church of England: that is, Scripture as
each one best understands it, without regarding the judgment, sense, or
interpretation of any but the pure Word of God, as we understand it: and to
enact Penal Laws against any so bold and uncharitable, as to censure or blame
the Tenets of any Congregation, be it Lutheranism, Presbytery, Arianism,
Judaism or Paganism: or any Doctrine whatever, that any man of sound judgment
thinks in his conscience to be the sense and Doctrine of Scripture.

Three things make me hope, that this Treatise will be wellcom to the well
inclined and pious Reader of our Reformed Church: first, that there is not one
author quoted in this book, but our own Doctors, learned and godly Children of
the Reformation; and this J observe, that my Reader may know there is not a Jot
of any Doctrine here but what is of the Reformation; and also advertise our
Writers and School men, how much, they discredit our Reformed Church, by
making so much use of Popish Drs and Books in their Writings; as if we had
not great and learned men of our own; if we look into our Bishops and
Ministers libraries; we shall meet but books either of confessedly Papists, or
strongly suspected of Popery; and you shall hardly meet in any of them, the
works of Lurher, Calvin, Beza, or any of our own authors, if you do not meet
some Comedies, or Romances: if you read our Modern Writers, you shall find
their books to be stuffed with arguments stolen from Stapleton, Peron,
Bellarmin, and other Popish Drs. whereas they ought to take their Doctrine from
Luther, Calvin and our other first Reformers, Apostles raised by Gods heavenly
Spirit; Oracles by whose mouths and pens he delivered the pure and Orthodox
Doctrine of the Ghospel; heavenly Fontains, from which we ought to drink the
Doctrine of the Reformation: therefore, J have made a particular study, for the
comfort of my Reader, not to profane this Treatise with any quotation of any
Popish Writer, none but our own Drs.

Secondly my Reader will be pleased with this Treatise, because J do not oblige
him to believe the contents of it: if he mislikes any Doctrine couched in this
book, let him not believe it; if he likes it, let him believe it; what J
pretend is, to maintain his liberty for to believe or not believe what he
please and that none can say black in his eye, for believing whatever he judges
to be the sense of Scripture; let all others think of it what they will; for,
our Rule of faith, as J will prove, being Scripture as each Person understands
it, who can be so bold as to check you for teaching and believing what you
understand scripture to say? some Doctrins there are in this book delivered by
Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Beza, and others; which our Church of England and
some others do call blasphemies, and scandalous Tenets; and their irreverence
and arrogance is run so far: as to condemn those blessed men, for teaching
such Tenets, and say that they swerved from the truth; and had their
fraileties, in so much, that many of us are ashamed to own those great men to
have been our Reformers and leaders: this is an impiety altogether
insupportable, it cannot be suffered with patience, that such Apostolical men,
who were undeniably our first Masters of the Reformation, should be so vilified
and abused: therefore J do prove, that there is no Doctrine delivered by them, but
is to be esteemed and called the Doctrine of the Reformation: and can be
according the Principles of the Reformed Church, believed and taught by any
Reformed Child: for what is our Rule of faith in the Reformation, but Scripture
as each Person of sound judgment vndestands it? consequently what is the
Doctrine of the Reformation, but what any Person of sound judgment understands
to be of Scripture: whatever Doctrine therefore, Luther, Calvin, or others
judged to be of Scripture: how can you deny it to be the Doctrine of the
Reformation: or blame them for teaching and believing it? if you do not like
it: the most, you can in justice do, is not to believe it: but you cannot
justly say its not the Doctrine of the Reformation, because it is Scripture as
understood by Persons of good judgment: nor can you in justice blame them, or
any other for believing it, if they like it: for, must not we believe, what
we judge in our conscience to be the Doctrine of Scripture?

Lastly my Reader will be pleased with the sincerity and plain dealing of this
Treatise: as much as we are all offended by the dissimulation and double
dealing of our Modern Writers, whose aim and scope in the books they give out
Seems to be nothing else, but to say so^what whereby they may be thought t^ be
no Papists, and nothing is less foun^ in their Writings, than the pure and
orthodox Doctrine of the Reformation^ and what is to be bemoaned, that you^
hardly see in the houses or hands of the flock the works of Luther, Calvin, o^
our other first Reformers, they are hi^ from us, to keep us in ignorance of the
true Reformed Doctrine, and we see bu^ Bramhal, Tillinson, Tailor,
Stillingfleet Thorndik and such others, whose Doctrine is neither Popery, nor of
the Reformation, but a new compound of both they do so mangle the questions
controverted with their scholastical subtilities and distinctions, as if they
were ashamed to own openly our Tenets and did endeavor to get the opinion o^
moderat sober men with the Papists by drawing as near as their Interest ca^
permit them, to their Doctrine. Ask them, if we be obliged to believe the
Doctrine and sense of scripture delivered by a general Council? our first
Reformers resolved roundly that we are not: nay Luther, says expressly we are
bound to gainsay, and work against the Decrees of any Council: but our Modern
Doctors answer with a pretty Distincction, There Is a civil obligation, quoth
one, but no obligation in conscience: There Is an obligation in conscience, says
an other, provided you do not believe they are infallible: you may believe they
are infallible objectively or terminatively, says an other: but not
subjectively: they are infallible in fundamental points, says an other, but
not in inferior Truths. An other will come yet, and say they are absoluty
infallible in all Articles, and thus by little and little, the Papists gain
ground against us, and the luster of our Reformation is clouded by the
cowardliness, or insincerity, or hiprocisy of our Modern teachers. 1. Kings 18.
How long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him: but if
Baal, then follow him: Luther, Calvin, Beza and our other first Reformers were
raised by God to teach us the purity of the Ghospel: let us not be ashamed to
follow their Doctrine: to speak, preach, and believe as they did: Therefore, J
do propose their Doctrine in this Treatise in its native colors, that if you
like it, you may believe it, and if any be so bold as to Say you believe falls
or sca^dalous Doctrine, you must answer: i^ the Doctrine of the Reformation,
because its Scripture as understood b^ Persons of judgment, and the great
Oracles we had: and if you do no^ like it, you may deny it, but bewa^ never to
blame or check any other for believing it: this is the Holy liberty o^ the
Ghospel and of our Primitive R^formation.



FIRST DIALOGUE.
ISMAEL. I have read your Preface and Principles, and me thinks you drive to
establish a new Religion; for that unlimited liberty, which you assert for to
believe or not believe whatever we please with a safe Conscience, is not
allowed by any of our Reformed Congregatio^s; and it were to be wished you
should rather stick to some one of the Congregations now established, than to
erect a new one for we have but too many already.


Isaac. The Lord forbid* I should think or speak otherwise then as becomes a
true child of the Reformation: If you will oblige me to believe Scripture as
interpreted by the Lutheran Church (the like I say of any other Congregation)
and deny the Tenets of all others, what difference betwixt me and a Papist in
the electi^ of my Religion? for the Papist's Religion must be no other, but
Script^ as interpreted by the Pope and Co^ci^ my Religion must be Scripture as
int^preted by the Lutheran Church, a^ no other; my judgment and Conscie^
therefore is as much constrained as t^ of the Papist; and our separation fr^
Popery will com to be but an exchan^ of one slavery for another; in the our
judgments and Consciences w^ slaves to the Pope and Councils ^ this, we are
slaves to the Luthe^ Church: We became a Reformat^ by shaking of the yoke of
Pop^ from our judgments, and leaving the free for to believe Scripture as w^
the assistance of Gods spirit, each o^ best understands it; and if we ^
continue a Reformation, we must ^ submit again our judgments to a^ other, but
retain that blessed liber^ we recovered for to believe the Te^ of any
Congregation. I confess this ^bertie is not allowed by any one p^ticular
Congregation, as you obser^ but you must also grant me, that ^ allowed and
taken by the whole bod^ of the Reformation, for in this who^ body, as it
comprehends Protestants, Lutherans, Presbyterians, etc. one Congregation
believes what the other denies, and in any of them a man may live with a safe
Conscience (which you will not deny;) therefore any man has full liberty for
to believe or deny with a safe Conscience the Tenets of any Congregation: hence
it follows (and to my grief I speak it) that no particular Congregation, be it
of England, France, or Germany, has the true spirit of the Reformation, in
doting so much upon their particular Tenets, as to think they cannot be as
well denied, as believed; and in looking upon them with so passionat eyes, as to
censure, check and force others to believe them: you shall see by this
discourse, that the true spirit of the Reformation is not in any one particular
Congregation separatly taken from the rest; for each particular Congregation
constrains as much as it can, all people to believe its own Tenets: Protestancy
would have us all to be Protestants, and would root Lutherans out of the world
as well as Popery; Lutherans would, if they could, draw all to their own Nett;
Presbytery esteems itself to be the best of all, and would crush Protestancy if
it could: This then i^ the spirit of each particular Congregation, a Limiting,
confining spirit to some particular Tenets with an exclusion of all others; but
look on the whole Body of our Reformation, a^ it includes all Reformed
Congregations distinct from Popery; there i^ a holy extension of spirit and
liberty for to be either Lutherans, Presbyteriants, Protestans, and any thing
but Popery, and whatever any Congregation may say of an other, but all
unanimously agree that the spirit of the Lord is in the whole body of the
Reformation, since therefore that in this whole Body there is a latitude and
liberty for to profess diverse and opposit^ Tenets, and that each Tenet is
believed by one, and denied by others* we must grant that this holy liberty
for to believe or deny any Tenets we please, is the true spirit of our holy
reformation.

It Is not therefore to be wished, as you do, that I should stick to any one
particular Congregation or Tenets; for such a restriction is mere Popery; and
your bemoaning the multiplicity of our Congregations is profane and Popish: No,
its a blessing of the Lord upon our Reformation, for which we shall never
sufficiently thank him, that we see it divided into so many Godly branches. In
the house of my father, said Christ, there are many mansions Joan. 14.2.


Ismael. By your discourse you seem to allow that we may with a safe conscience
change Religions as often as we please, and be to day a Protestant, to morrow a
Lutheran, next day a Presbyterian, and so run over all.


Isaac. I know you will be startled at my answer, for J am not ignorant that
all men apprehend it to be absurd to change and run over so many religions; but
truth must be declared though it may seem a scandal to the Jews, and a folly to
the Gentiles: Its therefore the Doctrine of the Reformation that we may with a
safe conscience be to day Protestanrs, to morrow Lutherans* in France Hugonots,
in Hungary Antitrinitarians, in Poland Socinians, ad in London of any Religion
but Popery.


Ismael. For shame you foully impos^ upon the Reformation; there is not an^
Congregation that teachs such a scandalous and absurd Doctrine.


Isaac. By your favor, I love the Reformation as the apple of my eye and will
never yield to any in my zeal^ for its honor and doctrine; J am so fa^ from
imposing upon it, that I will evidence your error in denying this to b^ its
Doctrine, and it will appear tha^ whoever will deny it to be very lawful to
change Religions as time and occasion requires, must renounce the bes^ and
fundamental Principles of our Reformation, and must impiously condem^ the
practice of our first Reformers.


Ismael. How will you make it ou^ that this Doctrine is grounded upon the
fundamental Principles of our Reformation; whereas there is not on^ Congregation
of ours, but abhorrs it*


Isaac Sr. You may well perceive by the tenor of my discourse that J am piously
and charitably jealous with each particular Congregation, and tha^ my drift is
to show that each of them, none excepted* swerves from and transgresses against
the true spirit, and solid Principles of the Reformation, as will further
appear in this discourse.

Its v^contestedly true that the Rule of faith of the Reformation, is Scripture
as the humble of heart assisted with the spirit of the Lord understands it; for
Lutherans will never admit their Rule of faith to be Scripture as interpreted
by the Church of England, but as interpreted by themselves; nor will England
admit Scripture to be their Rule of faith as it is interpreted by the
Presbyterians; but as interpreted by the Church of England: so that the Doctrine
of each Congregation is but Scripture, as interpreted by them, and whereas all
these Congregations jointly compose the whole Body of the Reformation, and each
Congregation is truly a member of the Reformation; the Doctrine of the
Reformation coms to be Scripture, as each Congregation, and person of sound
judgment in the Reformation (says the Church of England in her 39. Artic.)
interprets it. This being an vnco^trouled truth; what man of ever so sound a
judgment, but may read to day Scripture, as interpreted by the Lutheran Church,
and judge in his conscience that interpretation and Doctrine to be true:
consequently he may with a safe conscience profess that Religion; soon after he
may meet Calvin's books, and charmed with the admirable strength of his reasons
and glosses upon Scripture, he may judge in his conscience, he is to be
preferred beforre Luther* and so may lawfully forsake Lutheranism for
Calvinism; then again he hits upon Scripture as interpreted by the Church of
England, whose Doctrine ravish's him with that decency of Ceremonies, that
majesty of her lyturgie, that harmony of her Hiera^chie; he is convinced its
better that Calvinism, and embraces it: Then again he reads the works of Arius,
and convinced by the energie of his argument^ and texts of Scripture produced
by him, may alter his judgment and become an Arian. Wherein can you say does
this man transgress against the Doctrine or principles of the Reformation? Does
he forsake the Reformation because he forsakes Lutheranism for Calvinism? No
sure; for Calvinism is as much of the Reformation as the other: Is not
Protestancy as much the Doctrine of the Reformation as Presbytery? tho he
changes therefore one for the other, he still holds the Doctrine of the
Reformation: Is not the Doctrine of the Reformation Scripture, not as
Protestants only, or Presbyterians only interpret it, but as any Congregation
or man of sound judgment holds it? It is therefore evident that according the
Doctrine and principles of the Reformation, he may with a safe conscience change
Religions, and be to day of one, to morrow of an other until he runs all over.
Point me out any Congregation (the obstinat Papists excepted) who will dare
say, I cannot live with a safe conscience in any other Congregation but in it
self; all other Congregations will laugh at it; Why then may not I lawfully
forsake any Congregation, and pass to an other? And be in England a Protestant,
in Germany a Lutheran, in Hungary an Antitrinitarian or Socinian.


Ismael. It Is against the grain of man's reason to believe that we can with a
safe conscience change Religions, as you say: If you be a Protestant, and you
judge it to be the true Religion; you are bound to stick to it, and never to
change it.


Isaac. If I did discourse with a Papist I would not wonder he should say it
against the g^ain of man's reason t^ believe it lawful; but I admire tha^ a
Child of the Reformation, be he o^ what Congregation he will, should b^ so
ignorant of his principles, as to sa^ a man cannot change Religions when he
please: nor do I undertake to prov^ against the Papist, that this is lawful
but I undertake to prove it lawful against any Reformed Child, or for^ him to
deny the principles of the R^formation. Is it against reason the a man may read
to day Scripture, ^ the Lutherans interpretation upon i^ and like it very well;
and that he should in this case embrace that Religion Is it against the grain
of man's reason that this same man should next year^ afterward hit upon Calvin's
work^ upon Scripture, and after better consideration, think his Doctrine to
surpass that of Luther, and could not he then (being obliged to choose the
best) forsake Lutheranism and stick to Calvinism? And is it against man's reason
that he in following years may meet other books of Arians, Socinians, etc. and
do the like? Have not we many examples of his in our best and most renowned
Reformers? Did not Ochinus that great light (says B. Bale) in whose presence
England was happy, reading Scripture judge the Reformation to be better then
Popery, and of a Capuchin friar became a Reformed; after some years reading
Scripture he judged Judaism to be better than the Reformation and became a Jew:
Did not Martin Bacer one of our first Reformers of England and composers of our
lyturgie, reading Scripture, judge Lutheranism to be better than Popery, and of
a Dominica^ friar became a Lutheran? soon after reading Scripture, he judged
Zuinglianism to be better than Lutheranism, and became a Zuinglian; not long
after he became a Lutheran again as he confesses, Epist. ad Noremb. and in
Comment. in 10.6. and 16. Matt.
and forsook Lutheranism the second time, and returned again to Zuinglianism
as Sklusser: says. Theol. Calvin. l. 2. fol. 70.
Did not Cranmer one of our first Reformers also of England, and composers of
the 39. Articles, a wise and Religious man profess Popery i^ Henry the VIII.
time and compose ^ book in defense of Real presence; the^ in Edward the VI.
time upon bette^ consideration be professed Zuinglianism and writ a book
against Real pr^sence; then again in Queen Mary'^ reign, being sentenced to
death, he declared for Popery; but seeing his recantation could not preserve
his life, he renounced Popery and dyed a Zuinglian. I would tire your patience
i^ reading and mine in relating the number of our prime, and most renowne^ as
well first Reformers, as Learne^ Doctors, who without any scruple cha^^ed
several times their Religions; no^ in te Principles of our Reformation ought
they to be blamed: for when our Rule of faith is Scripture as wit^ the
assistance of Gods spirit we understand it, who doubts but we may t^ day judge
sincerely Luther's sense of i^ to be true, to morrow we may rea^ with more
attention and judge Ari^^ his sense to be true; next day that o^ Calvin, and so
of the rest: And do no^ think but that we have in England many Abettors of this
Doctrine: alas how many Bishops, Deans and rich Parso^s do we know and have we
known, who were Zealous Presbyterians and declared enemies of Protestancie in
our Gracious Soueraign's exile, and no sooner was he restored, and had
Bishoprics and Ecclesiastical dignities to be given but they became stiff
Protestants.

Observe the difference Betwixt the Papists and us, if of a Papist you become of
any other Congregation, the Popish Church excommunicats you; thou art Looked
upon as an Heretic, and Apostat, a strayd sheep; they will not admit you to
their communion or lyturgy; nay could they well avoid you, they would never
admit you to their Company; and why? Because they are fondly persuaded their
own is the only true Religion, and all others to be synagogues of Satan; and if
any of us will become a Papist, he must first abjure his former Profession: but
if of a Protestant you should become a Presbyterian, a Lutheran, Quaker or of
any other of our Societies, you are never Looked upon to be a jot the worse for
it; we are not a Whit scandalized at such change^ which we daily see; and it is
an ^ speakable blessing with what acco^ unity and charity, you may s^ at our
lyturgie and communion the Pr^testant, Presbyterian, Anabaptis^ Socinian and
Hugonot, all praysi^ the Lord in one Congregation in o^ Churches, none bid out
of the Church none excommunicated, no previo^ abjuration required of their
form^ Tenets, and there is nothing more f^quent among us then to go to t^
Protestant Lyturgy in the mornin^ in the evening to the Presbyteri^ especially
if our interest or con^nie^cie requires it: Can there be a m^ convincing proof
that we este^ it all alike what Religion and Ten^ we profess? let a Lutheran go
^ France; alas! he will never stick to^ to the Hugonots meeting and service let a
Protestant go to Germany, he^ go as cheerfully to the Luthera^ Church, as in
England to the Pr^testant: let a Hugonot or Presbyteria^ go to Hungary or
Poland he is we^com to the Antitrinitarians, and Soc^nians; and when any of
them retur^ home he will be as before.


Ismael. But can you prove this Doctrine by the testimony of any of our synods?
Did any teach that we may with a safe conscience change our Religion as you say?


Isaac. Yes I can: the Synod of Charenton in France held about the year 1634.
expressly says that for your salvation its all alike whether you be a
Calvinist, Lutheran or of any other Congregation of the Reformed, because says
this Venerable synod, they all agree in fundamental points, and the Lutherans
have nothing of superstition or Idolatry in their manner of divin worship.
Change then as often as you list; be a Lutheran, be a Presbyterian, be an
Anabaptist, by the mouth of this synod you are assured you will never miss to hit
right. And I pray can any synod of our times have more authority in point of
Doctrine than Luther our first Reformer, a man extraordinarily raised by God
(says the synod of Charenton) and replenisht with his spirit for to repair the
ruins of his Church? He teachs in parva Confess cerm. fol. 55. and in Colloq.
fol. 110.
the elevation of the sacrament is Idolatry, yet he did practice i^ and
commanded it should be practiced i^ the Church of Wittemberg to sp^te the Devil
Carolstadius: Giving you t^ understand that for just reasons, yo^ may teach now
one Religion, no^ an other. Zuinglius also whose virtu^ and Learning is known
to the work says To. ^. fol. 202.
that God inspired him to preac^ what Doctrine was suitable to the times which
as it often changes, you man often change your Doctrine: and consider you if it
be not therefore tha^ Christ our lord says his yoke is swe^^ and his burden
light (that is Religion because we can withdraw our Ne^^ from it, as time and
just reason requires.


Ismael. Could you give me any s^nod of the Church of England which delivers
this Doctrine, you would g^ near hand to convince me; for, the some particular
Doctors should hau^ taught or practiced it, does not prov^ it to be the Doctrine
of the Reformation.


Isaac. And what greater authoriti^ has a synod of England for to prov^ a
Doctrine to be of the Reformation than a synod of France which I have produced?
Or than Luther and Zuinglius our first Reformers inspired by God to teach us
the purity of the Ghospel? Was it not from Luther and Zuinglius that England
received the Doctrine of the Reformation? and if England be so bold as to say
they erred in this, what assurance can we have, but that they erred in the
rest? But since nothing will please you but a synod of England, you shall have
not one, but many. Can there be any synod in England of so great authority as
our wise and prudent Parliaments? Read our Chronicles and you will find, that in
few years time, they changed and established different Religions by public
acts of Parliament: In Henry the 8. Reign they voted for Popery, and made Acts
and Statuts against the Reformation; In Edward the 6. time they banished Popery
and voted for Zuinglianism; In Queen Mary's they pulled down this, and set up
Popery again; In Queen Elizabeth's, they decryed this, and set up not
Zuinglianism, but Protestancy; in the midst of her reign, they polisht this,
and added some new perfections to it; In King James and succeeding kings times,
Protestancy is of a different stamp from that of Queen Elizabeth's: Hear Dove
in his Exhort: to the English Recusants an. 1603. page 31. Henry the 8 had his
Lyturgie which was very good: Edward the 6. condemned it, and brought in an
other composed by Peter Martyr and Bucer: in Elizabeth's time, that was
condemned, and an other approved, and in the middle of her reign, her Lyturgy
was also misliked, and ^ new one introduced, we are so want^^ that nothing will
content us but novelties*


Ismael. Dove does not commen^ this Doctrine, for he calls that frequent
exchange of Religion Wantonness and love of novelty.


Isaac. Its no great matter what he says of it; my drift is but to convince you
that this is the Doctrine* and practice of the best Members of our Reformation;
even of England, and if you be convinced its the Doctrine of the Reformation;
you cannot deny but that it is good Doctrine: if Dove calls it wantonness, S.
Paul Ephesians. 4.22. Coloss. 3.9. and Romans 6.6. commends it, and exhorts us to put
of the old man with its deeds (that is Popery with its ceremonies) and put on
the new man (that is the Reformation) where there is neither Greek nor Jew,
Circumcision, nor Incircumcision, Barbarian, or Scythian, bound or free, but
Christ is all and in all: that is to say; where there is no distinction of
Protestants or Presbyterians, Socinians, or Arians; its all one which Religion
you profes^.


Ismael. But is there no Tenet of Religion which we are all indispensably
obliged to hold?


Isaac. Yes there is, and no more but one: we are bound to have faith in Jesus
Christ, son of God and Savior of the world. This is the substance of Christian
Religion; be an Arian, be a Presbyterian, be a Socinian or what you please, be
also plunged to your ears in wickedness of life, and manners, so you have faith
in Jesus Christ son of God and Redeemer of the world and live in charity you
will be a member of the true Church and be saved. Do not imagine this is any new
Doctrine invented by me; search the vulgar sort of our Reformed Brethren, you
shall get thousands of this opinion in our Realm; search the Books of our
Learned Drs, you shall find it in them also. Dr Morton in his much applauded
book dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, for which he deserved a Bishopric, The
Kingdom of Isr. page 9.
says: The Arian Curch is to be esteemed a true Church, because they hold the
true substance of Christian Religion, which is faith in Jesus Christ son of
God, and Redeemer of the world: and again in the same place sect. 4. whose
Title, is, Heretics are members of the Church, he says, whosoever believes in
Jesus Christ tho by wickedness of life, or Heresy in Doctrine they should err in
Doctrine, they are still true Members of the Church. Therefore our learnd Acts
and mon. page 36. lib. 3. c. 5.
Fox, Catal. tes^ium page 976. and 978.
Doctor Field^, and Illiricus say the Greek Church notwithstanding their error
in denying the Procession of the H. Ghost from the son, are holy members of the
true Church, because they have faith in Jesus Christ.


Ismael. Sure you will not say this Doctrine is of the Reformation or can be
safely believed.


Isaac. I do admire how you can doubt of it, and that it may be believed: for
what is the Doctrine of the Reformation but as we have said in our Principles,
Scripture as interpreted by any man of sound judgment in the Church? and were
not Doctor Morton, Fox, Field and Illiricus men of sound judgment, eminent
Learning, and Godliness? if-therefore this be Scripture as interpreted by them
how can you deny it to be the Doctrine of the Reformation?


Ismael. And what Jesus Christ are we obliged to believe in? for Jesus Christ
as believed by the Arians Socinians, Luther and, Calvin, is far different from
Jesus Christ, as commonly believed by the Protestans and Popish Church, we
believe in Jesus Christ the son of God, of one and the same substance and
nature with the Father; they believe in a Jesus Christ, son of God but of a
distinct and different nature and substance from the Father.


Isaac. Pish! that is but a nicetie; believe what you please, and what you
understand by Scripture to be true and have charity.


Ismael. I confess you have puzzled, but yet not wholly convinced me; were I but
persuaded that what you have discoursed is truly the Doctrine of the
reformation, J would cheerfully embrace it, and J will be better informed by
your self, but not tire your patience: we will meet again and pursue our
Discourse upon this subject.


II. DIALOGUE.
ISMAEL. Reflecting in my solitude upon your last discourse, J find it bottomed
upon a falls principle; for you suppose that what ever Doctrine is of Luther
Calvin, or any of our Learned, Drs, Synods, Parliaments, or Congregations, is
the Doctrine of the Reformation and may without any more proof or scruple be
believed by any Reformed Child; who but sees this is ridiculous, to fasten the
Doctrine and absurd opinions of each particular Dr, or Congregation upon the
whole body: this is the uncharitable and unreasonable art of the Papists, who
keep a great coyl with some exorbita^t opinions of Luther and Calvin, and would
persuade their Proselyts, they are the Tenets of the Reformation; whereas the
Reformation disclaims those opinions as much as the Pope does: and they do not,
poor people, observe how many absurd and scandalous Doctrins we meet in their
Casuists and Divins, which when we reproach them with, they answer its not the
Doctrine of their Church, but of some particular Drs; as if we might not with as
much justice as they, answer the same.


Isaac. Your reflection is good, and my discourse will fall to ground if I do
not prove that principle, which will be no hard task: Let us imagine we are
here a full synod of Protestants, Presbyterians, Hugonots, Lutherans,
Antitrinitarians, Anabaptists, Quakers, and of all and each of our
Congregations; our Reformation is not any of these Congregations with an
exclusion of the rest; but all of them jointly; for whatsoever Congregation
would say it self alone is the Reformation, and no other, would be hissed at by
the rest; and justly; because that our Reformation imports two points
essential^y: first a Profession of Christianity according the Rule of the Word
of God, and a detestation or abjuration of Popish Errors; and none of these
Congregations but does both.


Ismael. I know some of these, Pharisee like. despise others, and Look upon
them, not as Ref^rmed, but as putrid members; but the Lord forbid I should be
so deuoid of charity; I see no just challenge any can have to the Title of
Reformation, which all have not.


Isaac. Let us ask this synod by what Rule of faith does the Reformation walk?
what must a man believe for to be a true Reformed? Protestants will say, that
Scripture and Apostolical Tradition; but Protestants say of Papists; and
Presbyterians and Anabaptists say of Protestants; that many human inventions
are obtruded upon us as Apostolical Traditions; that we have no way to discern
the one from the other, and con^^quently Tradition, as being an unknown thing
unto us, cannot be our Rule: others will say that Scripture and the indubitable
consequences out of it, is our Rule, all will grant this: but then enters the
Controversy, if the consequences of Lutherans be such, and if the consequences
of Presbyterians be indubitable out of Scripture, and each Congregation will
say that their peculiar Tenets are indubitable consequences out of Scripture,
and the rest must allow it to be true, or deny such a Congregation to be of the
Reformation: Others will say that Scripture and the four first General
Councils, with the Apostles and Athanasius's Creeds are our Rule of faith; but
most of the assembly will no more admit the four first, than the subsequent
Councils, nor Athanasius his Creed more than that of Trent; nor will the
Quakers, Socinians and others value the Apostles Creed.

But there is none of all the Assembly, who will not admit Scripture that's the
pure written word of God, to be a sacred and full Rule of faith, because its
replenisht with Divin light and all Heavenly instruction necessary for our
salvation: and such as ad, as a part of our Rule of faith, the Apostles or
Athanasius his Creeds, or the four first General Councils, they will confess
that all they contain is expressed in Gods written word, and are but a
plainer, or more distinct expression or declaration of the Contents of
Scripture.


Ismael. Truly I must grant you this, that I have been often present at
several discourses of Protestants with Papists, and never yet could I hear a
Protestant make Councils, Tradition, or any thing else the Test of their
discourse but only scripture; not but that I could hear them say and pretend
in their discourses that Apostolical Tradition, and the four first Councils
were for them against Popery; but still their main strength and vltimat refuge
was Scripture; for when ever they harp upon that string of Tradition and
Councils, the Papists are visibly too hard for them, and then they run to
Scripture, than which there is no plus vltra. I have been also often at
several discourses betwixt Protestans, Presbyterians and our brethren of other
Congregations, and have observed that the Protestant, for to defend his
lyturgie, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, and her Episcopacy
against the others, could never defend himself by scripture alone, and placed
his main strength against them in Tradition, Primitive Councils, and ancient
Fathers, all which the others rejected and reproached the Protestant with
Popery, for making use of that weapon; that if thy would stick to those
Principles as their Rule of faith, they must admit many Tenets of Popery, which
they disavow; that nothing but scripture is a sufficient warrant and Rule of
faith: And I find by all I could ever well understand, that its the General
apprehension and belief of all the Reformation, that Scripture abundantly
contains all we are obliged to believe, and is our sole and adequat Rule of
faith, and that our recours to Tradition, Councils, Fathers etc. are but shifts
of some of our Drs. who being Non plust in their particular engagements, and
Sophistries, patch the incoherencie of their discourse with these rags of
Popery.


Isaac: I commend your ingenuity, but not that heat which transports you to
check our Drs for their glosses and particular Doctrins upon Scripture, which,
as the Manna relisht of all sorts of Victuals which the Eater^ fancied, admits
several senses according the different spirits and measure of light that God
gives to the Reader, and it is undoubtedly the the Spirit of the Reformation to
follow what sense of it he likes best, and not to check others for following
this or that as they please: Lutherans, Protestants, Presbyterians, etc. have
all for their Rule of faith Scripture, which each of them interprets in a
different sense; Luther for the Real, Protestants for the Figurative Presence;
Protestants for Episcopacy; Presbyterians against it; and so of others: and tho
each esteems his own sense to be the best, yet none, is so bold as to say the
others may not be saved in their own sense of it, or deny them to be true
Children of the Reformation; nay that Venerable Synod of Charenton, as I quoted
above, has declared that the Lutherans, tho opposite to them in their chief
Tenets, are their beloved Brethren and have nothing Idolatrous or superstitious
in their manner of Divin worship: the fundamental reason of all this is, that
our Rule of faith, is but Scripture as each Person of sound judgment
understands it.


Ismael. I grant all your discourse as to this particular; for its certain
Lutherans will not admit Scripture as interpreted by Protestants, but as
interpreted by themselves; and so of each other Congregation.


Isaac. If you admit our Rule is Scripture as each understands it; then you
must grant that our Doctrine of the Reformation is whateuer Doctrine each Person
of sound judgment understands to be of Scripture; and from this, it appears
plainly that my Principle whereat you bogl'd is true; That, whateuer Doctrine is
professed by any of our Congregations, Synods* Parliaments, Drs. or particular
Dr. of our Reformation, is to be truly reputed and esteemed the Doctrine of the
Reformation; which Principle being true; my discourse of yesterday is
undeniable, that you may change religions, as often as you please, and remain
still a true Reformed Child.


Ismael. But you have said that not only the Doctrine of each Congregation and
Synod, is the Doctrine of the Reformation; but also whateuer any one particular
Doctor teachs; and this seems to be very absurd.


Isaac. It Is not so absurd, as it is true; I Will prove by the Principles of our
Reformed Church, by the testimonies of our most Learned and Best Drs. and
Reformers, and by reason and experience that the Doctrine of any particular
Doctor among us, has as much right to be called and esteemed the Doctrine of the
Reformation, as Protestancy, Presbytery or Lutheranism; for, what is
Lutheranism, but the judgment of Luther a particular Dr, against the whole
Church of Rome? what is Calvinism, but what Calvin a particular Dr, judged to
be the sense of Scripture against that same Church? what is Quakery, but honest
Naylor's godly and pious sentiments upon Scripture. Its undeniably the
Principle of our Reformed Church, that our Rule of faith is Scripture as
interpreted, not only by Synods or Congregations, but by any Person of sound
judgment in the Church. No Congregation or Synod is to us a Rule of faith:
because all are fallible; but Gods Written Word, as each one understands it;
and if we do not like the sense of it delivered by any Council Synod or
Congregation, we may safely deny it: therefore our great Calvin l. 4* instit.
c. 9
says and proves with great energy of Scripture and reason, that we are not
obliged to the Decisions and Doctrine of any Council Synod or Congregation, if
after having examined Scripture, we do not find their interpretation and sense
of it, is conformable to the Word of God. Let Synods and Congregations say what
they will, if any particular Doctor thinks his own private sense of it to be
better, he may stick to it against them all, and be a good true Child of the
Reformation; as Arminius in Holland did withstand the Synods of Dordreet and
Delpht; as Luther and Calvin did against Rome. I will be free, says our
unparalleled Proto-Apostle Luther, To. 1. Edit. Ien. in Resolut.
I will not submit my self to the authority of Councils, Church, Drs
Universities or Fathers, but will teach and preach whateuer I think to be true.
Did ever any Apostle speak with more courage? and the blessed man acted with
no less; he knew full well the whole Stream of antiquity, Drs, Fathers and
Councils were against him, as he confesses himself, and dit not care a rus^ for
them all: Lay aside, says he, lib. de serve. Ar bit. cont. Erasm. edit. 1.
^ arms of Orthodox antiquity, of School^ of Divinity, authority of Fathers,
Councils, Popes, and consent of ages we receive nothing but Scripture; but s^
that we must have the authority of interpreting it.

Nor was it only Luther and Calvin spoke thus, but all our first blessed
Reformers; and why? because our Rule of faith is Scripture, not a interpreted
by the Church of England, (France will not admit it) nor as interpreted by the
Quakers, (the Anabaptists and Independents will not hear it) nor as
interpreted by Luther* (Calvin rejects it) nor as interpreted by Calvin
(Thorndic and Bramhal will not yield to it,) nor will Stillingfleet stand to
their interpretation; nor others to that of Stillingfleet. Finally our Rule of
faith is Scripture, not as interpreted by any, but as each Congregation Synod,
particular Dr, or man of sound judgment interprets it; and consequently what
ever Doctrine any man of sound judgment judges to be of Scripture, is to be
esteemed the Doctrine of the Reformation; and you may safely believe it, if you
like it, and remain still as truly a Reformed Child, as the proudest
Protestant of England.


Ismael. Can you prove that our Rule of faith is Scripture as any particular Dr
or person of sound judgment understands it?


Isaac. Behold how convincingly; first we have heard Luther, quoted but now,
say, We receive nothing but Scripture, but so as that we must have the
authority for t^ interpret it: hear him again; In Colloq. Mensal. fol. 118.
The Governors and Pastors haver powe t^ teach; but the sheep must give their
judgment whether they propose the voy^ of Christ, To. 2. Wittem. fol. 374. and
375.
or of strangers. And again: Christ has taken from the Bishops Councils and
Pastors the right of judging of Doctrine; and given it to all Christians i^
General; and the Rule is Scripture ^ each one will think fit to interpret i^
And consequently to this, we have heard him say above, I will be fi^ and will
not submit to Drs Councils, ^ Pastors, but will teach whatever think to be
true. Barlow; In Defens. Art. Reliq. Protest. page 199.
The Apostles have given to each particular t^ Right and power of interpreting
a^ judging by his inward spirit, what i^ True; its needless that either man ^
Angel, Pope or Council should instru^ you; the spirit working in the heart, an^
Scripture are to each particular person mo^ assured interpreters. Bilson Bishop
o^ Wincester says the same, In his true Differ. par 2. page 353.
The people must be discerners and judges of wha^ is taught. Our Religion has
no other Rule of faith (says our French Reformation by the mouth of Dumoulin,
Bouclier de la Foy*
Drelincourt, and the holy Synod of Charenton) but the Written Word of God, as
interpreted by us. Lastly says the Church of England in the 6th. Art. of their
39. We have no other Rule of faith but Scripture as each person of sound
judgment in the Church vndersta^ds it, and what is proved by it: and again in
the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of England page 103. which is but an
exposition of the 39. Articles. Our Rule of faith is but Scripture as each
Person of sound judgment in the Church understands it: Authority is given to
the Church and to each person of sound judgment in it, to judge in
Controversies of faith; and this is not the private judgment of our Church, but
also of our Brethren of foreign Countries


Ismael. J confess, not only these, but many other Drs abet your discourse, and
the General Vogue of our Reformation, is for Scripture as each one understands
it; but alas! you see well, that we can never settle any Religion or Church by
such a Rule of faith.


Isaac. You can never settle any but rhis, That every man may without le^ or
hinderance believe what he please: and why should not this be a good Religion?
if Scripture as each one understands it be not our Rule of faith; if we must be
constrained to believe Scripture not as we understand it; but as it is
understood by this or that Congregation; wh^ difference betwixt us and Papists*
They must believe Scripture as interpreted by the Pope, and Council^ have ever
so much light from God be ever so wise and witty, you mu^ depose your own
judgment, a^ submit to that of the Pope, Counci^ and Popish Church: to this
pass ^ are come also; we must believe t^ kings supremacy, Episcopacy,
F^gurative presence tho perhaps we d^ not judge by Scripture it be tr^ Doctrine;
we are constrained by Penal laws, and Acts of Parliament t^ believe them, as
Papists by the Inquisition; and why? because the Church of England understands
b^ Scripture, its true; and if you, repl^ you do not interpret Scripture s^
you will not be heard; you must submi^ and believe against your judgment: and
what is this but plain Popish Tyrany over men's consciences? Did Luther and
Calvin forsake the Pope and Councils, for to submit their judgments to any
other? No, but to follow Scripture as each one of them understood it: and tho
Luther was a man raised by God and replenisht with his spirit to repair the
ruins of the Church; yet Calvin did no more submit to him, than Luther did to
the Pope; nor did Zuinglius submit to Calvin, but followed his own sense of
Scripture; nor did Oecolampadius submit to Zuinglius; but every one searched
the Scripture, believed and taught what they thought to be true; and thus we
became a Reformation of Popery: if therefore we will continue a Reformation,
and walk by the spirit of our first blessed Reformers; we must not be
constrained to believe any man's sense of Scripture: we must believe whateuer we
think to be true, and have no other Rule of faith but Scripture as each one
understands it.


Ismael. And what then? what do you infer from this discourse?


Isaac. This consequence, that whereas no true Child of the Reformation, be he
of what Congregation you will, can justly deny our Rule of faith to be
Scripture as any Person of sound judgment interprets it; it follows unavoidably
that the Doctrine of the Reformation is, Whatever any Person of sound judgment
interprets to be the true sense of Scripture, and whatever Luther, Calvin,
Beza, or any other of sound judgment in the Reformation, since its first rise
until this day, taught to be the true sense of Scripture, is to be called and
esteemed the Doctrine of the Reformation, tho to others of this or that
Congregation it may seem to be wicked and scandalous Doctrine*

And now let me answer to an objection you made against this Principle in our
entrance to this discourse: you objected that many Papish Drs and Casuists
delivered scandalous and base Doctrins, which the Papists will not admit to be
the Doctrine of their Church, tho deliverd by Papish Drs; and thence you
pretended, that the particular sentiments of private Drs of the Reformation are
not to be called the Doctrine of our Church. But be pleased to observe the
difference betwixt Popery and our Reformation; the Rule of faith in Popery is,
Scripture as interpreted by the Pope and Council, or their Church; they will
admit no other; consequently no Doctrine is to be called Popery but what is
judged by the Pope and his Church or Council to be the sense of Scripture; and
if any Dr or Universitie holds any sense contrary to theirs; it is to be called
the Doctrine of that particular person, and not the Doctrine of the Popish
Church; because their Rule of faith is not Scripture as interpreted by any
Person of sound judgment; but as interpreted by their Pope and Council. But
whereas our Rule of faith in the Reformation, is Scripture as each person of
sound judgment interprets it; whatever Doctrine or sense is said by any man to
be of Scripture, is justly to be called the Doctrine of the Reformation: for
example, Melancton, a man of sound judgment, great learning, and of an upright
conscience, taught Bigamy to be the Doctrine of scripture; Beza taught, the
Lords supper might be administered in any kind of victuals, as well as in bread
and wine: Calvin taught, that Christ despaired on the Cross, and suffered the
pains of hell after his death: why then, let all the Bishops and Universities
of England condemn this Doctrine; let all the Synods of France and Germany decry
it; the Doctrine will be still of the Reformation; because its Scripture as
interpreted by men of sound judgment.


Ismael. The heat of your discourse has tired you; and my memory i^
sufficiently laden with what yo^ have said; let me digest it in my private
retirement, and we will mee^ again.


Isaac. Content; carry with yo^ these three points, which I have proved
convincingly: first our Rule of faith is Scripture, not as interpreted by this
or that, but by an^ man of sound judgment; secondly i^ follows hence that the
Doctrine of the Reformation, must be and ought to be called whatever any man of
sound judgment says is the sense of scripture: thirdly it follows, we may
change Religions as often as we please.


III. DIALOGUE.
ISMAEL. I remember well the summary of your last discourse, given me in three
points; and I find the second to be absurd, and repugnant to reason: you will
never persuade it, tho you have pleaded for it with great energy; what? if a
silly Woman, Cobbler, or other tradesman read Scripture and give their sense of
it, that, forsooth, must be called the Doctrine of the Reformation? and it shall
be lawful for them to believe it against the Doctrine of the whole Church?


Isaac. Do not limit Gods infinite goodness, by measuring his mercies toward
his Creatures with your narrow apprehensions: take notice he says, he has
chosen the weak and contemptible of the world for to confound the strong ones:
I confess unto you Father, Matt. 12.
that you have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them to the little ones. And therefore he choosed poor simple fishermen to be
his Apostles: ^ know it is the practice of Papists, and from them your Church of
England borrows it, to despise the Ministeri^ of Women, tradesmen, and
illitera^ people in preaching teaching and interpreting Scripture; Tim. 2.
but S. Paul tell us The word of God is not bound that is to say, is not
entayl'd on the learned, rich, or great ones, the Wind blows where it
lists: Io. 3.
o^ Bishops and Ministers would make ^ Monopoly of the Word of God, and have
themselves to be the only Retailers of it; for to have some plausible title for
to enjoy great Rents and sheare the flock: but we have seen, as well among the
Quakers, a^ in other Congregations, filly Women and Tradesmen replenisht with
Gods Spirit, preach and expound the great Mysteries of our Religion with as
much of good success and edification of the Auditory, as any Penny-booke Man in
England.


Ismael. It seems you approve the Ministry of Women and silly Tradesmen for
preaching and teaching the flock; and if so, you will overthrow our Hierarchy of
Bishops and Ministers.


Isaac. It matters not much for you to know, what I approve or condemn; but to
know what the Doctrine of the Reformation is; It Is this; that none can teach,
preach, administer Sacraments, or exercise Ecclesiastical functions if he be
not in holy Orders, Bishop, Minister or Deacon; for the Church of England
teachs it, and you may believe it if you please. You may also deny it; and say,
any Woman or tradesman has as much power for to preach and administer the
Sacraments as the richest Bishop in England: this also is the Doctrine of the
Reformation as well as the former, because Quakers* Presbyterians, Brownists;
Anabaptists, etc. believe and teach it, and they are men of as sound judgments,
and as good Reformeds as Protestants; nay the most learned of our Reformers
teach and commend the power of Women for to exercise Spiritual functions, and
administer the Sacraments: In lib. ad Corin. c. 11.
Saumaise, Peter Martyr, and In Explan. Art. 17.
Zuinglius expressly defend the Priesthood as well of Women as of Men: and
Luther proves it efficaciously; The first office of a Priest says he, is to
preach, To. 2. de Minist. Eccles. inst^t fol. 369 and lib. de Capt. Babyl. c.
de Ordin. and lib. de abroganda Missa.
this is common to all, even women; the second is to baptize; which is also
common to women; the third is to consecrat the bread and wine, and this also is
common to all as well as to men and in the absence of a Priest, a woman may
absolve from sins as well as the Pope, because the words of Christ, whateu^^
ye shall untie on earth, shall be untied in heaven, were said to all
Christians.

And when so eminent men ha^ not said it, reason and Scripture convinces it;
Reason, because that our Rule of faith being Scripture a^ each Person of sound
judgment understands it, many women undoubtedly are of sound judgment, and why
should not their interpretation of Scripture pass for the Doctrine of the
Reformation, as well as that of our Bishops and Ministers: Scripture, because
we read the Samaritan Woman was the first who preached the Messiah to the
City of Sama^ia, and Christ commanded Mary Magdalen to go to preach his
Resurrection to his Disciples, and we know by our Cronicles that our glorious
Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, did not only govern the state, but was a
great Apostoless in Church affairs.


Ismael. To what purpose then, have we Bishops and Ministers, who enjoy so
vast reuenews, if any man or woman can preach and administer the Sacraments as
well as they.


Isaac. You may believe, Bishops and Ministers are very needful for the
service of the Church; for they being commonly learned witty men, and having
Wyves, they come to instruct their wyves so well, that the good women com in a
short time to be as learned as their husbands, and as nimble and quick in the
Ecclesiastical Ministeries as they, if they were permitted to exercise them; as
some Authors of credit relate unto us, that a Gentleman of Constance, writ to
his friend in a Village (about thre^ leagues distant from that City, whose
inhabitants were for the mos^ part of our Lutheran Reformation the good Pastor
exhorted his floc^ to prepare for Easter Communion and that none should presume
t^ come to the holy Table, but should first confess and receive absolutio^ of
his sins: Easter holy days being come, such a multitude flockt to confession,
that the Pastor could not satisfy the devotion of so great a cro^ he called
his wife to help him, f^ to hear Confessions, and give absolutions, in which
Ministry the goo^ Lady did labor with great satisfaction of the Penitents;
but neith^ the Pastor nor his virtuous Conso^ being able to dispatch so great a
multitude, he called his Maid Servant who did work in the holy Minister with
as much expedition as her Master. But for all this, the Church o^ Scotland,
France and all England (Protestants excepted) will tell yo^ that Bishops and
Ministers are no^ needful; nay that they are very prejudicious to the
Reformation and State; To the Reformation, because this Hierarchy with the
Bishops Court, surplices Corner Caps, and other trumperies, puts the flock in
mind of Popery, whereof its a perfect resemblance; and whylst the Papists see
our change from them, comes to be almost no more but to substitute new Priests
and Bishops in their own place, for to manage more conscienciously the Rents
and reuenews which they profanely abused; and that those Rents and revenews are
still in the hands of an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; they live in hopes of
recovering them some day, when our Bishops and Ministers will come to be as bad
^tewards of them as they were; and that the flock will be weary of them, and
call back the Ancient Possessors: ^ts therefore perhaps the Emissaries ^f the
Pope do incessantly blow in ^ur ears; how ill our Ecclesiastical ^evenews are
bestowed, for to main^ain wyves and Children, Pomp and ^anitie of Bishops and
Ministers; no ^ess than in Popery. To the State, they seem to be prejudicious,
whera^ any but a Bishop or Minister, would think, it would be more advantagiou^
to the Commonwealth, that the king should have those Revenews for to maintain
his fleet and army, and eas^ thereby the subjects of subsidies an^ taxes, than
that a handful of Bishop and Ministers should have them specially when others
can preach an^ teach as well as they, for nothing, b^ the pleasure of being
hea^d.


Ismael. But do not you see it would be a Sacrilege that the king should
deprive the Clergy of their Church Revenews.


Isaac. And do not you know, the almost all our Congregations do hol^ our
Clergy to be no true Clergy, b^ as mere laymen as you or I; the admit no Clergy
or Episcopal Car^cter; But Elders chosen by the Congregation: and if they be no
tr^ Clergy, they have no right to the Church Revenews, and its no sacr^ledge to
deprive them of them. The Popish Clergy in Henry the VII time, had visibly a
greater right ^ them, than ours now have: s^ neither the king himself nor any
other did doubt of their Right, and now most of our Congregations, do absolutely
deny any Right in our Clergy to those Rents; because they are no Clergy: yet
none will be so bold, as to accuse Henry the VIII. of sacrilege, for having
taken the Church Livings from them, for to put them to better use. And why
should we dare say, our king would commit any, for depriving our Clergy of
those Rents: believe he can lawfully do it; or believe he can not, you will be
still a good Child of the Reformation. Believe what you please.


Ismael. This is a ticklish point; let us leave it to the consideration of our
wise and prudent Parliament; and be pleased to answer to my doubt; how can we
live in peace and tranquillity in Religion, if our Rule of faith be Scripture
as each one understands it: I remember a discourse started in the house of
Lords, not many years agon, by his Grace the Duke of Buckingam; he desired to
know, what was it to be a Protestant; wherein did Protestancy properly consist?
the Bishops, who were present looked one upon an other, and whether, they
feared the difficulty of the question, or that for modesty's sake, each
expected to hear an other speak first^ they stood sylent for a while; at last
the ice was broken by one; others followed; but hardly any two agreed; and all
that the Duke could gather out of their several answers, was that our Rule of
faith, was Scripture as each one vndestood it; and Protestancy nothing but
Scripture as interpreted by the Parliament and Church of England: whereupon he
concluded, We are these hundred years very busy for to settle Religion, and
for ought I perceive, we are as unsettled now as at the beginning: And truly
he had great reason; for, Religion and faith is nothing else, but that sense of
Scripture, which each Person of sound judgment understands; and as it is
impossible we should all jump and agree in one sense and meaning of the text,
so its impossible we shall ever be settled and agree in Religion.


Isaac. The reason of our vnsettlement hitherto and at present, is the violent
efforts, what by persecutions, Acts of Parliaments, and other oppressions; what
by Invectives, intrigues, and cabals of the Church of England, to draw all to
be Protestants; of the Presbyterians, to make us deny Episcopacy; and of each
other Congregation, to force us to their respective Tenets: and whylst this
constraint and severity is used against men's consciences, its in vain to expect
peace or settlement in our Reformed Church: but let us follow our Rule of
faith; let cach one believe as in his conscience he best understands Scripture;
let us all believe what we please, and be permitted so to do; and we shall
without doubt enjoy perfect peace and Tranquillity: believe you Figurative
Presence, if you will; let the Lutheran believe his Real Presence, if he likes
it; and let me believe no Presence at all, if I judge there is none; why will not
you permit me to follow that Rule of faith which the whole Reformation, even
the Church of England gives me in her 39. Articles, Scripture as each Person of
sound judgment understands it. To say, we can never have settlement in
Religion, whylst this arbitrary interpretation of Scripture is permitted, is to
speak like a Papist: this the Pope and Papists said to our first blessed
Reformers; and the Popish Church says this day to us; that we ought to submit
our judgments to the Church and Councils; that we ought not to believe what
sense we think to be true, but what the Pope and Councils propose unto us; and
if Luther and our other Reformers did not do ill, in follwing their own sense
and interpretation of Scripture against all the world, why do you blame me or
any other for following their example?


Ismael. When you speak of our Reformation and Congregations, I hear you
reckon the Arians, Socinians, and Antitrinitarians among them; sure you do not
believe they, or such like ancient condemned heretics, were of the
Reformation; for we Protestants do believe the Mystery of the Trinity against
them, and will never own them to be our Brethren.


Isaac. And, do not you believe Episcopacy against the Presbyterians; some
Canonical Books against the Lutherans; Supremacy against the Quakers, and
Infants Baptism against the Anabaptists; and yet you own them as your Brethren
and godly Congregations of the Reformation; or if you will deny them, they will
also scorn you, and say they are more of the Reformation than you are; and why
will not you own the Arians, etc. as your Brethren tho you believe the Trinity
against them? you say they are old condemned Heretics: and does this language
become a Child of the Reformed Church? by whom were they condemned? was it not
by the Popish Church, which also condemns us, and says we are as much
Heretics as they; and as we ought not to be so called, and judge the Pope and
Councils sentence against us to be bold, uncharitable, and injust; so we must
say of the Arians, Pelagians and others condemned by them. You say Protestants
will never own them to be their Brethren; God forbid the Protestant Church
should be so uncharitable to their fellow Christians, and so injust to
themselves. B. Morton,) as I cited in my first Dialogue) as learned a man a^
the Church of England bred, says the Arian Church is a true Church, and will
say no less of the others: but what need we the testimony of any, for what
reason so convincingly proves; They who walk by one and the same Rule of faith,
are of one and the same Religion, therefore Lutherans, Protestants,
Presbyterians and Independents do esteem themselves to be of the same faith and
Religion, because they all have the same Rule, which is Scripture ^ each
Congregation understands it also notwithstanding the difference and variety of
Congregations in Popery; they hold all but one faith as they say; because they
have al^ but one Rule of their belief, which is their infallible Pope and
Church but it is evident that those which yo^ call, Ancient condemned Heretics,
have one and the same Rule of faith with our Reformation; for ours is Scripture
as each Person of sound judgment understands it; without any obligation of
holding the sense of it delivered by Pope, Church, Councils or any other;
therefore our first blessed Reformers did not care what sense of it, the Church
or Pope did hold when they began to preach the purity of the Ghospel; but each
of them interpreted it as he thought fit in the Lord, and so purged the Church
of many Errors: This is the very self same Rule of faith, which Arians,
Pelagians, Nestorians, and others, peremptorily condemned by Rome as Heretics,
did follow and walk by: each of them read and interpreted Scripture, preached
and believed what sense of it they tought to be true, tho they knew it was
against the Doctrine of the Church, looking on Scripture alone as their Rule of
faith, without any regard of the Pope, Church, Councils, or Fathers: The Church
of Rome proud and impatient of any opposition, condemned them as Heretics for
not submitting their judgments to her; for taking Scripture as they understood
it, and not as the Church and Councils understood it, for their Rule of faith;
and if this be a crime, we are as guilty as they; we are equally nocent or
innocent; we are both Heretics, or none is; we are therefore concerned in
their honor and ought to defend the integrity of their procedure against the
Common enemy which is the Pope^ they were Reformers of the Church in their
times, as we are in ours and whereas thy have the same Rul^ of faith; so they
have the same Religion with the Reformation.


Ismael. Then, you will say Ari^nism is the Doctrine of the Reform^tion, and we
may lawfully believe i^


Isaac. I say God's Unity in Nature and Trinity in Persons is the Doctrine of
the Reformation, because the Protestant, Lutheran, and H^gonot Church, judge by
Scripture i^ is true; and if you judge also b^ Scripture its the true Doctrine,
yo^ may believe it: I say also if yo^ judge by Scripture this Mystery is not
true, you may safely deny it according the Principles of the Reformation, and
be still as good a member of the Reformed Church, as they who believe it; for
whoeuer believes what he judges by Scripture to be true, is a true Reformed:
and, that the denial of the Trinity is as much the Doctrine of the Reformation
as the belief of it; it appears not only because it was the Doctrine of the
Arians, who as I proved are truly of the Reformed Church; but because it was
taught by the greatest Ligths of our Church: In Harm. in Math. c. 26 verse. 64.
and i^ admonad Polan. in Tract. Theolog. page 794.
Calvin says the text, My Father is greater than I, must be understood of
Christ, not only as he is Man, but also as he is God. And that the Council of
Nice did abuse the text: Comm^nt. s^. per Ioanc. 10.
My Father and I are one, for to prove the Unity of both in Nature; whereas it
only signifies their Unity by conformity of Will. Again he says Epist. 2. ad
Polon. in tract. Theol. page 796. That prayer, Holy Trinity one God have mercy
of us, is barbarous, and does not please me. And ads In Act. Serueti page 87.
The son has his own substance distinct from the Father. His Disciple Danaeus
l. cont. ^enebrar.
says, its a foolish insipid prayer: and our great Apostle Luther (who as Fox
witnesses, was the Chariot and conductor of Israel, and a man extraordinarily
raised and replenisht with Gods spirit, to teach the purity of the Ghospel)
caused that prayer to be blotted out of the Litanies. In Postil. Major. in
e^arrat. Evang. Domin. Trinit.
That word Trinity, says he, sounds coldly; my soul hates that word
Homousion, and the Arian did well in not admitting it. Lastly Ochinus that
great Oracle of England impugns this Mystery with a strong discourse: lib. 2.
Dial. 2.
We are not obliged to believe, says he, more than the Saints of the Ancient
Testament, otherwise our condition would be worse than theirs; but they were
not obliged to believe this Mystery; therefore we are not obliged. Examine I
pray the works of these eminent Drs. where I quote them; consider if they be
not, not only men of sound judgment, but men extraordinarily raised by God,
(says the Synod of Charenton; the chariots and conductors of Israel, says
Fox: men to be reverenced after Christ, says our Dr Powel, and Apostolical
Oracles sent to teach us the purity of the Gospel; and conclude, its an
undeniable Verity that this is the Doctrine of the Reformation, whereas it is
Scripture as interpreted by such men: O! but England France and Scotland
believes this Mystery; well? and what then? that proves that the Mystery is
also the Doctrine of the Reformation, because whateuer any Man of sound judgment
thinks to be Scripture, is its Doctrine; but is England or France alone the
whole Reformation? are not Luther, Calvin, Danaeus, Ochinus as well of the
Reformation; and men of as sound judgment as they? since therefore they
understand by Scripture there is no Trinity, its the Doctrine of the Reformation
also that there is none: believe it or deny it, which you like best, and you will be
still of the Reformed Church.


Ismael. By the Principle you run upon, you may say any blasphemy is the
Doctrine of the Reformation; for there is hardly any so execrable, but some Dr of
ours has delivered and taught it.


Isaac. The Principle I run upon is this, Scripture as each Person of sound
judgment interprets it, is our Rule of faith: judge you, if that be not a good
Principle in our Reformed Church; whereas this is the Rule of faith given us by
the 39. Articles and generally by all our Drs as I proved in my first Dialogue:
this being our Rule of faith and Reformed Doctrine, its evident, that whatever
Doctrine is judged by any Person of sound judgment to be contained in Scripture,
is the Doctrine of our Reformation: some Persons of sound judgment say the Real
Presence is expressed by Scripture; this therefore is the Doctrine of the
Reformation; others say, only Figurative Presence is taught in Scripture; this
also is the Doctrine of the Reformation; some understand by Scripture, there is a
Mystery of the blessed Trinity; this therefore is the Doctrine of the
Reformation; others understand there is no such Mystery; this also is the
Doctrine of the Reformation: so that whether you believe or deny this or any
other Tenet controverted, you will still hold the Doctrine of the Reformation.


Ismael. Calvin Harm. in Evang. Mat c. 26 verse 39. etc. 27 verse. 46. and lib.
2. Instit. c. 16 sect. 10. and 1^.
says Christ prayed unadvisedly, the Eve of his Passion; that he uttered words
whereof he was afterward sorry, that in his passion he was so troubled of all
sides, that ouerwhelm'd with desperation, he desisted from invoking God, which
was to renunce all hopes of salvation: And says he, In Luc. par. 2. hom. 65.
and in Joan. hom. 54.
if you object us absurd and scandalous to affirm Christ despaired, I answer,
this desperation proceeded from him as he was man, not as he was God. And this
is not only the Doctrine of Calvin, but of Brentius, In Math c. 26.
Marlotus, In Recogn. page 376.
Jacobus Minister (quoted by Bilson) and of Beza* will you say this is the
Doctrine of the Reformation, or that we can without scruple believe it? Also
Calvin says, lib. 2. Inst. c. 16. fact. 10. and seq.
That Ch^ist's corporal death was not sufficient for to redeem us, but that
after having despaired on the Cross, he suffered the death of his soul; that is
to say, that his soul after his corporal death, suffered the pains of the
damned in hell. And says he in the same place, they are but ignorant doltish
brutish men, who will deny it. Luther also teachs the same Doctrine: To. 3.
W^ttemb. in sp. 16.
As he suffered with exceeding pains the death of the Body, so it seems he
suffered afterward the death of his soul in hell: Epinus in ps. 16.
a learned Lutheran says, Christ descended into hell for thee, and suffered
not only corporal death, but the death and fire of hell. Mr. Fulk and Parkins
avow this is also the express Doctrine of Illiricus, Latimer and Lossius. Also
Lurher In Conses. majori de Coena Dn^i.
most impiously affirms, that not only the human nature of Christ dyed for us,
but also his Divin nature: see Luther's words quoted at large by Zuinglius, To.
2. in respo^s. ad Confess. Luth. fol. 458.
and Hospinian: In Histor Sacram. par. ^. fol. 57.
If you say such scandalous blasphemies may be safely believed, you will render
you^ Christianity suspected; and if yo^ say, that they are the Doctrine of the
Reformation, or that they may be believed according the Principles ^ the
Reformation; you will make the Reformation and its Principles t^ be hated by
any good Christian.


Isaac. If I walk by the Rule o^ faith of the Reformation, I Will prove my self a
true Reformed Child; and if I prove my self to be a Reformed Child, my
Christianity cannot be justly suspected. What Tenet have you related of all
those which you call blasphemies and scandals* but has been judged by those
Eminent Drs. of our Reformation to be express Scripture, or conformable to
Scripture; and since our Rule of faith is Scripture as each person of sound
judgment understands it, and since the Doctrine of our Reformation is but
whatever any such Person of sound judgment, judges to be expressed in, or
proved by Scripture; its evident that all those Tenets are undeniably the
Doctrine of the Reformation: I say then, and will say without any offense to my
Christianity, or blemish to our Reformed Church; that those Tenets are the
Doctrine of the Reformation and may be as safely believed by any Child of it, as
Figurative Presence, supremacy, or Two Sacraments: and let not any Bigot
pretend to freghten me from this Doctrine by calling it blasphemy and impiety;
No, its Scripture as interpreted by our renowned Reformed Doctors; therefore
its no blasphemy: let any man convince me, that our Rule of faith must not be
Scripture as each Person of sound judgment understands it; and he will convince
that this cannot be justly called the Doctrine of the Reformation; but whylst
that Principle and Rule of faith stands unshaken, nothing that is taught by any
Person of sound judgment to be the Doctrine of Scripture, but is to be called
our Doctrine, and may be safely believed.

You say that whoeuer has any love for Christianity, will hate the Reformation
and its Principles, if they give liberty for to believe such blasphemies: but,
can any mother be more indulgent to her Child than the Reformation is to us?
such as think those Tenets to be blasphemies, the Reformation gives them leave
not to believe them; and if any judges by Scripture, that they are not
blasphemies but pure Doctrine; as Luther, Calvin and others did, they have
liberty for to believe them. He who denies them, cannot in charity check them
who believe them; nor can they who believe them, check those who deny them,
whereas each follow our Rule of faith, and believe what they judge by Scripture
to be true. And if you or your Church of England cry out Blasphemy, Blasphemy,
against all that you judge to be falls; why do not you cry blasphemy against
Presbyterians, Lutherans and other Congregations from whom you dissent? and
what difference betwixt you and the Church of Rome? the folly of this is to
call Heresy and blasphemy all that is not her own Doctrine: and all that your
Church of England mystikes, must be fanaticism, blasphemy, and impiety? must
our Rule of faith be Scripture as the Church of England understands it, and not
otherwise? Presbyterians and Lutherans will never allow it: if therefore our
Rule of faith be Scripture as each Person understands it; any Person of sound
judgment in the Reformation, may without scrupule believe what he understands
to be the Doctrine of Scripture.


IV. DIALOGUE.
ISMAEL. You still insist upon that Principle that our Rule of faith, is
Scripture as each Person of sound judgment understands it; and from that
Principle will follow many absurd consequences destructive of piety and
Religion.


Isaac. That Principle is not invented by me; its of our holy Reformation; if J
did discourse with a Papist J would prove the Principle to be true and Gods
express Word; but since J discourse with a Reformed Child, J suppose, and not
spend my time in proving it: this Principle then, being an unquestionable truth
in our Reformation, no Reformed Child must be so irreverent and bold as to say,
that any Doctrine which clearly and unavoidably follows out of it, is
blasphemous or impious, for that would be to condemn our Principle by which we
walk: Ex vero non sequitur nisi verum: from a true Principle nothing can follow
but true Doctrine: can you deny, but this was the Rule of faith and Principle of
our first blessed Reformers, and of the Church of England mentioned in her 39.
Articles? if therefore they judged, and if any other judges by that Rule and
Principle, that those Tenets which you call impious and blasphemous be true
Doctrine; they cannot be blamed for believing them.


Ismael. I confess our first Reformers did speak so, but J say such Errors and
impious Doctrins cannot without irreverence be called the Doctrine of the
Reformation and cannot without impiety be believed; because our Reformation, at
present condemns and detests those blasphemies, for we must grant, that our
Reformation in its beginning was not in its full perfection of Doctrine; God
began it by Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius and others: those great men ha their
fraylties; they did ouerlash in some things; and what they said amiss, Gods
heavenly spirit inspired to the Church from time to time to correct it, and has
at length brought our Church to that purity of Doctrine, and fullness of
perfection which now it enjoyes: Nothing is to be called now the Doctrine of the
Reformation, but what is now believed by our Congregations, and none of them
believes those execrable Tenets you related.


Isaac. you wrong the Reformation very much, in saying it had not its full
perfection in the beginning, its rather to be thought, that that polishing and
refining of it in ensuing years with new perfections, and correcting the first
draught of it by our first Reformers, has been a corruption of it with some
mixture o^ Popish errors and superstitions: for all religious Congregations,
and Pretenders to piety, are at the first beginning in the height of their
perfection, and in progress of years they decline and decay from their
primitive Spirit into errors and corruption of manners: Religious Congregations
are not like Arts and Sciences, wihich by time and experience receive new
perfefections; but like chimnies, which grow daily blacker by continual smoke
and fire: witness the Jewish Church and law, in its beginning, flourishing and
holy, but corrupted in progress of time by Traditions of men and superstitions
of Pharisees: witness also the law of the Gospel in those happy times of the
Apostles, holy and pure, but corrupted after some years by errors of Popery: Jf
we be to seek for the pure and Orthodox Doctrine of the primitive Church; ought
not we to be said by the Apostles, men raised extraordinaryly by God and
replenisht with his Spirit to teach us the Gospel? and if we be to seek for
the pure and Orthodox Doctrine of the Reformation, ought not we to be said
rather by Luther, Calvin, Melancton, Zuinglius, Beza and our other first
Reformers, than by a few Ministers and Bishops of England, who, tho they be
wise and pious men, yet they are not of that stamp as the others. And if our
present Congregations presume to correct them, and say they ouerlasht in their
Doctrine; will not the Papists say; if they have been such scandalous Masters
and falls teachers, why did you receive their Reformation, and as they erred so
grossly in such prime articles of Christianity, why do not you fear and
suspect, they have also erred in the rest? secondly the Papists will say, if as
they reformed us, you reform them; then you must expect and permit that others
may reform you; and forsake your Doctrine, as you forsake theirs.


Ismael. I wish you could make out, that the Reformation was in its full
perfection in its beginning; had you read some Writers of ours; perhaps you
would judge otherwise; Dom 1. Adventus, and libr de Proph. Christi.
Musculus, a learned Lutheran writes thus, Thus it is with us at present, that
if any be desirous to see a great rabble of knaves turbulent Spirits,
deceitful persons, Coseners and debauch men, let him go to a Ci^ty where the
Ghospel is purely preached, and he shall find them by multitudes; for its more
manifest than the day light, that never were there more unbridled and unruly
people among the turks and other infidels than the Professors of the Reformed
Ghospel. In Postill. super Evangel. Domi. 1. Advent. and Dom. 26. post Trinit.
Luther himself says as much; The world grows daily worse, and men are now
more covetous, revengefull, and lycentious than they were in Popery. Mr. Stubs
Moriu^^ to Good Works in the Ep^st. Dedic*
says no less: After my travells round about all England, I found the people
in most parts proud, malicious, ambitious and careless of good works: Mr
Richard Geferie in his Sermon at St. Paul's Cross printed in: 1604. I may freely
speak what I have plainly seen, that in Flanders ^ever was there more
drunkness, in Italy more wantonnes^, in lury more hypocrisy, in Turkey more
impiety; in Tartary more iniquity, than is practiced generally in England, and
particularly in London. Certainly our Reformation at present deserves a better
caracter; never did the Alehouses and Taverns complain more heavily of want of
trading; which is a proof of our Sobriety: the Churches which we see a building
in London, is a good testimony of piety; and we are so far from any smack of
hypocrisy, that you shall not see in all London the least appearance of Virtue
so hiddenly its kept from mortal Eyes, but what you may meet in our honests
Quakers.


Isaac. I confess our Congregations as now they are, are very good both in
Doctrine and manners; but I say also, that the Doctrine and manners of our
Reformation at its first beginning was as pure, as holy, and as true as now it
is, or ever it will be. Nay supposing and granted, their manners and Doctrine
were so corrupt as those Drs. mention; I say that amidst all those vices, their
life was as holy, innocent, blamless and pure as yours is now: and that you may
be convinced of this truth, know that Calvin expressy teachs: lib. 3* Inst c.
4. sect. 28.
We believe, the sins of the faithful (he means of the Reformation) are but
venial sins; not but that they deserve death, but because there is no damnation
for the Children of Grace, in as much as their sins are not imputed to them;
And again lib. 4.
he says, We can assure ourselves, Inst. c. 7. sect. 2.
we can no more be damned for any sins, than Jesus Christ himself. Luther In
loeis common class 5 c. 27.
is of the same opinion, As nothing but faith does justifiy us, so nothing but
incredulity is a sin. Again To. 2. Wittem. de capt. Babyl. fol. 74.
No sin is so great that it can condemn a man; such as are, damned are damned
only for their incredulity: Whitaker, de Eccl. cont. Bellarm. co^f. 2. quaest 5
No sin can hurt a man who has faith. The same is taught by Wotten, Fulk,
Tindal, and Beza. Its therefore the Doctrine of Scripture, as interpreted by
these Persons of great and sound judgment, that incests, murders, intemperance
or whateuer else you call a sin (incredulity excepted) either is no sin at
all, or but venial sins, which do no harm, nor cannot damn the children of the
Reformation; if therefore our Brethren lived in the beginning of the
Reformation, as those authors relate; they lived according Scripture as
interpreted to them by men of sound judgment, and this being our Rule of faith
and manners, they did not ill but very well in following it.


Ismael. They were men of the Reformation, its true, who taught these errors,
and dissolution of life and good manners; in so much they swerued from the
spirit holiness and purity of the Reformation, and must not be believed nor
commended: look upon the Reformation as now it is, and you will not find any
such scandalous Doctrine or corruption of manners.


Isaac. They were not only men of the Reformation; but the greatest Oracles of
it, which you will not match with any of our present congregations; and its not
pardonable in any Reformed Child to say, such Oracles extrordinarily raised by
God to teach the purity of the Ghospel, should have taught either Errors in
Doctrine, or dissolution of manners: they taught what in their conscience they
understood by Scripture to be true; if you will not be so irreverent as to say
that they were knaves, Who spoke and taught against their conscience and
kno^ledge. Therefore they taught the Doctrine of the Reformation purely and
truly: the consequence is euident^ for, what is the Doctrine of the Reformation,
but what wise learned men of sound judgment think and understand by Scripture
to be true? why is figurative Presence the Doctrine of the Reformation, tho
denied by Lutherans, (who are Reformed also) but because wise learned men judge
by Scripture as they understand it, its the true Doctrine? or can you give me
any other Rule of faith, by which we may know what Doctrine is of the
Reformation, and what not, but Scripture as each Person of sound judgment
understands it? or what Rule can you give for to know what is good or evil to
be don, but Scripture as understood b^ such Persons: if therefore Luther,
Calvin and the other Drs. J quoted judge by Scripture that Doctrine, and manner
of life to be true and good; why may not we say its the Doctrine of the
Reformation: if you or the Church of England, or Scotland judge that Doctrine to
be false, and that manner of life to be a dissolution and corruption of
manners: why; you are men of sound judgment, you understand Scripture so; that
will be the Doctrine also of the Reformation, you may believe it: but you must
not deny that Luther and Calvin's Doctrine also is of the Reformation, because
they were men of as sound a judgmen as you.

You transgress haynously against modesty in saying those sacred Organs of God
swerued from the spirit and holiness of the Reformation; which having no other
Rule of faith but Scripture as each Person of sound judgment understands it;
it is Spirit and holiness consist in framing our life and Doctrine to that Rule,
as our blessed Reformers and Reformation in its beginning did; believing those
Tenets, which you call Errors and blasphemy; and living that life which you
call Dissolution and corruption of Manners; because they judge by Scripture, as
they understood it, that Doctrine and manner of life was true, innocent and
good; and if you like it as they did, you may believe, and live as they did,
and be a good Child of the Reformation: consider I pray all the works and
Doctrine of Luther, (the like I say of our other first Reformers) the three
parts of his Doctrine is against Popery, and They say, all are Heresies and
blasphemies; the rest is contrary to the Church of England, and she says, this
is also Errors and blasphamie, so you conspire with the Papists to destroy the
credit of our first and best Reformer; and betwixt you both, you vnplume him of
all his Feathers, and leave him not a bit of good Doctrine.

But I will stand to the Spirit, and Principles of the Reformation and
Congregations as now they are, since that you do so much boast of its purity
and great Perfections; and I will prove that Doctrine, and manner of life, may
be believed and followed lawfully standing to its Principles: for if the Spirit
of the Reformation be at present among us, we must not be forced, as in Popery
to believe against our proper judgments, what others believe by Scripture to be
ttue and holy; but what each one thinks in his own conscience to be such;
because even now at present, our Rule of faith, is Scripture as each person of
sound judgment understands it, and this is the same Rule which Luther and the
Reformation in its beginning had: this holy liberty is the best jewel, the
greatest perfection, and most glorious prerogative the Reformation has: if
therefore now at present any man judges by scripture, that he can marry ten
wyves at a time; that he can kill his own son as Abraham intended; that he may
commit incest with his own Daughter, as Lot did; that there is no sin but
incredulity, as Luther believed; nor any Mystery of the Trinity of Persons in
one nature, as Calvin believed: with what justice can the Church of England say
a man does not believe and live as becomes a Reformed Child, or that his
Doctrine and life is scandalous? whereas he lives and believes as he understands
by Scripture he may or ought to do, which is the Rule of faith of the
Reformation, even of the Church of England? the Church of England says, the
Lutheran Doctrine of the real Presence, is not the Doctrine of Scripture; that
the Presbyterian Doctrine against Episcopacy, is not the Doctrine of Scripture;
that the Anabaptist Doctrine against infants Baptism, is not of Scripture; and
yet you permit them all to live in peace; you confess they are true Children of
the Reformation, tho dissenters from you; why? because they follow Scripture as
they understand it, and this is our Rule of faith: and why will not you say,
the belief and life of that other man is also of the Reformation, tho absurd it
may seem to you; since he believes and lives as he judges by Scripture he may:
it follows therefore plainly that this is the Doctrine of the Reformation.


Ismael. I confess our Rule of faith in the Reformation, is Scripture as each
person of sound judgment understands it: but you cannot doubt but that its
needful to moderat and curb this liberty, or it may run too far: for if
every man be lycenc't to believe and teach every thing he fancies to be
according Scripture; as there is no Doctrine so execrable but some ignorant
Reader may hit upon a text, which, ill understood, may seem to favor it; so
there will be none but may be believed, and called the Doctrine of the
Reformation: for example Beza Epist. 2* 2. and 25.
teaches, (and says its also the Doctrine of Calvin, Saumaize and Geneve,) that
the Lords supper may belawfully administered in any kind of victuals as well as
in bread, and wine; in Eges, flesh, fish, etc. Where there is no bread and
wine, says he, we may duly celebrat, if instead of them, we use, what we
usually eat and drink. And again in the same place; If there be no water at
hand, and that baptism' cannot be with edification differed I would baptize in
any other liquor:


Isaac. and why should not it be lawful to any Reformed to believe this,
whereas its Scripture as interpreted by a man of so sound a judgment? but I do
not in any wise like that opinion of yours and of the Church of England, that
its convenient to limit and curb men's judgments least they may run too far:
this is the Policy of Rome; They will not permit an arbitrary interpretation of
Scripture, alleging forsooth, for inconveniencie, the multitude of absurd
Doctrins which the word would swarm with, if such a liberty were granted: No,
No* far be it from any true Reformed Child to mislike or blame that all people
should interpret Scripture, and believe what they judge by it to be true: and
if what the judge to be true, should seem to you falls and scandalous; do not
you believe it, but let them believe it, and they will be of the Reformation,
because they follow our Rule of faith.


Ismael. To. 5. wittem: sermon. de Matrim. and in 1. ad Corint. 7.
Luther, Consil. Theol. par. 1 page 648. and 134.
Melancton, In Epist Paul. ad Phil. and in 1. ad Tim. 3.
Musculus, lib. 2^ Dial. 21.
Ochinus, lib. de Repud. and Divort. page 123.
Beza and others teach the lawfullness of Bigamy or multiplicity of Wives, and
prove it with the example of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: and Ochinus expounding
the text of S. Paul; It behooves a Bishop to be a man of one Wife: The
prohibition says he, is not to be understood so, that a Bishop should have but
one wife at a time for certainly he may have many, but S. Paul's meaning is,
that he ought not to have too many wyves at a time; that is to say ten or
twenty.


Isaac. And will you deny this to be the Doctrine of the Reformation, whereas its
Scripture as interpreted by men of so eminent and sound a judgment?


Ismael. The synod of Geneve; Canon. ^enerales Geuuen. 1560.
and the Chap. 13. art. 31:
Ecclesiastical Discipline of France printed at Saumure, has decreed, that a
wife whose husband is a long time absent, may have him called by the public
Crier, and if within a competent time he does not appear, without any further
enquiry, the Minister may license her to marry an other, or marry her himself.


Isaac. J say, all honest Women may practice this Doctrine without scruple or
shame, whereas its Scripture as interpreted by that thrice holy synod: but let
seamen beware how they undertake long voyages, for fear their Wyves may take
other husbands in their absence.


Ismael. Luther To. 5. Wittem. sermon. de Matrim.
teachs its lawful to a wife, if her husband does not please her, to call her
Man servant, or her neighbor; which Doctrine they say is come to the ears of
our London Sisters; and he gives the like liberty to the husbands, if their
Wyves be pettish and humorsom. If the husband says he, cannot correct the
humorsomness of his wife, he may imagine she is dead, and may marry an other
because its not in the power of a Man to live without a Woman, nor in hers to
live without a man.


Isaac. This is Scripture as interpreted by Luther, and consequently must not
be denied to be the Doctrine of the Reformation; nor can any of our Reformation
be justly punished or blamed for practicing it, if he judges by Scripture it be
true, (as Luther did) for this is our Rule of faith. But Luther never gave this
liberty, but upon condition, that the husband or wife should first make their
complaint before a Magistrate, for to have a redress of their injury and
discontent: but this condition seems too combersom to the modesty of our
sisters; they do no^ submit to it, but do themselves justice without any
address to the Magistrate. To. 5. Wittemb. sermon. de Matrim.
I know also that not only Luther, but Bucer, In Scriptis Anglic de Reg Chr. l.
2. c. 26. and in Math c. 19
Melancton, in Consil. Theol. par. 1 page 648^ and 134.
Ochinus, Dial. 200. and 204 in Epist. s. Paul. ad Tim 3.
Musculus and Calvin^ do tea^h that a Man who finds his wife in Adultery, may
cast her of by Divorce and marry an other; and our french synods have ordered
thi^ Doctrine to be put in their Ecclesiastical Discipline, so that its the
Doctrine of Scripture as interpreted by these Persons of sound judgment, and
consequently of the Reformation: you may therefore believe and practice it; l.
4. Inst. c. 19. sect. 37.
our Sisters, particularly our Ministers wyves, were much alarmed at this
Doctrine, Discip. Eccl c. 13.
and say its a damnable Heresy: believe as you please.


Ismael. sermon de Matrim.
Does not Luther say it^ impossible a young man of 20 years can live without a
woman; or a young maid of 18 years, without a man^ whereby all Parents may
believe their Daughters of that age are defiled, if not preferred in due time:
sure you will not say this is the Doctrine of the Reformation.


Isaac. And who doubts but tha^ its the Reformed Doctrine; Scripture as
interpreted by so sound a judgment: the contrary Doctrine is also of the
Reformation, and you may believe it because our glorious Queen Elizabeth dyed a
Virgin; and its credibly reported some few fellows of Oxford and Cambridge live
continently.


Ismael. But what do you think of a Child Christened in Popery by a Monk or a
Friar, ought he to be Christened again in our Reformation? and what if a Popish
Priest or Friar did become of our Reformed Church, can he lawfully marry, whereas
he made a vow of Chastity?


Isaac. As to the first Quere, its the Doctrine of the Reformation declared by
many french Synods and recorded in their Ecclesiastical Discipline, that he must
be Christened again, because the first baptism was Null: its also the Doctrine
of the Reformation declared by the Church of England and many Synods of France,
that the first Baptism is sufficient and valid: believe which you please. It Is
also the Doctrine of the Reformation, that Infants baptism is not at all
needful (nay nor Lawful say the Anabaptists) so says Calvin lib. 4 Inst. c.
15. sect. 20. and 21.
Zuinglius, Beza and many others, its likewise the Doctrine of our 39. Articles
Act. 27.
; and our holy Synod of London Can. 29.
that Infants baptism is lawful and needful. Believe which you like best;
both are of the Reformation.

As to the second Quere, its the Doctrine of the Reformation that Priests and
Friars are obliged to the vow of Chastity which they made in Popery, and cannot
marry; this is the Doctrine of many of our Brethren and particularly of lib. 2.
Eccles. Polit. page 103.
Hooker, In Tim. c. 50.
Marloratus, Budellus and In defens. Hoo keri art. 8
Couel; who say the Papish vows of Poverty, Obedience and Chastity are
commendable and ought to be kept. You may also believe this is wicked Doctrine,
and that they may take wives notwithstanding their vow of Chastity, as well as
Benefices notwithstanding their vow of Poverty: believe which you please; both
Doctrins are of the Reformation; but the best is to say they can marry; for if
marriage and benefices were denied them, no Priest or Friar would ever embrace
our Reformed Doctrine: We know our great Zuinglius himself would not at all
preach the Gospel unto the Suitzers, until that he presented a petition for
himself and his companions, (all Priests and Friars) extant yet in his 1. Tom.
page 110. and obtained the contents of it, which was to have Wyves; Nor can we
doubt this to be the best Doctrine, whereas Luther, Beza and almost all our other
Reformers, were Priests and Friars, and the first step they gave in the
Reformation was to Marry: the Papists and some weak Brethren were much
scandalized at Luthers marriage, and Erasmus his rallerie upon it was much
solemnised, Luther yesterday a Monk, to day a husband, and next day a Father,
because that honest Cate Boren, his virtuous Bride, was hapily delivred of a
louey Boy eight days after he married her: but the Servant of God did not
regret the action, which proves that he judged by scripture it was very lawful.


V. DIALOGUE.
ISMAEL. You know I have been born and bred in our holy Reformation, and a
Church of England man; you tell me I may believe this or that, and whateuer I
please; I would gladly settle once for ever, and resolve what J may, and ought
to believe, and not to be every day carried away with every wind of Doctrine:
let me, to that purpose propose unto you, and hear your resolution of some
doubts. What do you think, have not we a Church on earth established by Christ,
wherein we are to live and serve him, and believe her Doctrine?


Isaac. J will give you no other instruction nor answer but the pure Doctrine of
the Reformation; which when you have heard, you may determine as you like best,
what religion to embrace; but know this, that after you have determined with
yourself to believe this or that; you may with a very safe conscience alter
that resolution next day after, and believe the quite contrary to what you
resolved to believe, if upon better consideration you think the contrary to be
true; this is the liberty of the holy Reformation as J proved in my first
Dialogue.

As to your present doubt J answer, its the Doctrine of the Reformation, that
it was Jesus Christ the son of God who established the Church; you may believe
it therefore: It Is also the Doctrine of the Reformation, that it was not Jesus
Christ the son of God who established the Church: that this is the Doctrine of
our Reformation its apparent; for its Scripture as interpreted by Ochinus a man
of sound judgment, whom all Italy could not match, says Calvin; in whose
presence England was happy, and unhappy in his absence, says B Bale: Ochinus
speaks thus, In Praefat. Dialog.
Considering how the Church was established by Christ and washed with his blood;
and considering again how it was vtter^y overthrown by Papacy; I concluded
that he who established it, could not be Christ the son of God, because he
wanted providence; and upon this reflection he renounced Christ and became a
Jew: And no man can say but that he acted and behaved himself like a true Child
of the Reformation in so doing; for he followed scripture as he understood it;
and as he was a true Reformed Child in forsaking Popery, because he understood
by Scripture, that the Reformation was better; so since he understood by
reading Scripture more, that Judaism was better than the Reformation, he acted
like a good Reformed, in chosing that which he understood by Scripture to be
the best: this is the Reformations Rule of faith: do you, if you please, as he
did, and you will be as good a Reformed as he.

And if you choose to believe that there is a Church established on earth by
Christ, you must beware never to believe or persuade yourself that we are
bound to believe her Docctrin, or live in her, if you do not judge by scripture
that she teachs the Doctrine of Christ: This is the most essential point of
Popery; An obligation of submitting our judgments to the Church, and believing
her Doctrine without any more examine; and in this the Church of England is much
like the Popish Church, which by acts of Parliaments and other severities,
would oblige all men to believe her Doctrine Rites and Ceremonies: No, God has
given us scripture for our Rule of faith; as we forsook the Popish Church,
because we discovered by Scripture her many Errors in Doctrine; so we are not
bound to believe the Doctrine of any other Church, but as we find by scripture
her Doctrine is true. Do, and speak as Luther to. 1. Edit. Jen. in Resolut. I
will be free, and will not submit to the authority of Councils, Popes Church or
university; to the contrary I will confidently teach whatever I judge to be
true; whether it be Catholic Doctrine or heretical; condemned or approved.


Ismael. Must I not believe that the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, delivered to his
Apostles and the Church is true Doctrine?


Isaac. The Reformation teaches it is, and you may safely believe it: You may
as safely believe it is not, in the Principles of the Reformation; because it
teaches that Christ erred in Doctrine and manners: Vere Pharisaei e^ant viri
valde boni, says Luther; sermon. de 50. Artic. in summa summarum.
and Christus minime debuit eos taxare: and Calvin says, its a folly to think
he was not ignoran^ in many things; In Harm super ^uc. c. 2.
lastly David Georgius Epito^. Cent. 16. par. 2.
(a Man of God and of a holy life says Osiander) writes. If the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles had been true and perfect; the Church which they
planted had continued, but now it is manifest that Antichrist has subverted it,
as it is manifest in Papacy; therefore it was false and impe^fect. See these
words quoted in the history of David George printed by the Divins of Basile,
at Antwerp an. 1568. both Doctrins are Scripture as interpreted by men of sound
judgment; a Child of the Reformation, may believe which he will.


Ismael. Is it not the Doctrine of the Reformation that the Apostles were
infallible in their Doctrine! much more must we believe that Jesus Christ was
so.


Isaac. Yes it is; you may believe it: and its also the Doctrine of the
Reformation that they were not infallible, neither in their written or
unwritten Doctrine; so, many of our most renowned Drs speak; and whatever any
men of sound judgment judge to be true by scripture, is the Doctrine of the
Reformation: Zuinglius, Tom. 2. cont. Catabapt. fol. 10.
one of the greatest Oracles of our Church says; It Is a great ignorance to
believe any infallible authority in the Ghospels or Epistles of the Apostles;
Beza not inferior to Zuinglius, blotted out of S. John the history of the
Woman Adulteress* judging it a fable. Clebitius Victoria verit. a^g. 5.
affirms, that Luk's relation of Christ's passion is not true, because it does
not agree with that of Matthew and Mark, and more credit is to be given to two,
than to one. In cap. 2. ad Gal.
Calvin says, Peter consented to, and added to the schism of the Church, to
the overthrow of Christian liberty, and Christ's Grace. de Eccles cont.
Bella^m. Cont. 2. q. 4.
Whitaker sais, It Is evident that after the Descent of the Holy G. the whole
Church, even the Apostles, erred; and Peter erred in Doctrine and Manners To. 5.
Wittem. ^n 1554. and in Epist. ad Gal. c. 1.
Luther says Peter lived and taught extra Verbum Dei; and Brentius In Apol.
Co^f. c. de Council.
his disciple says, that Peter and Barnabas, together with the Church of
Jerusalem erred after receiving the H. Ghost. If our Rule of faith be Scripture
as each Person of sound judgment understands it, undoubtedly this must be the
Doctrine of the Reformation, and may be believed by any Reformed, since its
Scripture interpreted by such renowned men.


Ismael. This is most wicked Doctrine, I Will never believe it.


Isaac Jf you think by Scripture its wicked, do not: follow your Rule of faith,
Scripture as you understand it: but if an other understands by scripture (as
those authors did) that the Doctrine is good, give him leave to believe it;
he will but follow his Rule of faith; Scripture as he understands it.


Ismael. I would gladly know which are the true Canonical books of scripture.


Isaac. The Reformation teachs and you may believe with the Church of England
that S. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews; those of James and Jude; the 2. of S.
Peter; the 2. and 3 of S. John, are true Cononical Scripture; the Reformation
also teachs they are not Canonical, because Lutherans deny them; believe which
you like best. But if youl' live in peace, and out of all strife with
Protestants, Lutherans, and others, who dispute, if this or that be Canonical
Scripture; your rediest and speediest way will be, to say there is no true
Canonical Scripture; Scripture is no more to be regarded than other pious
books: if you say this is not the Doctrine of the Reformation; read Hossius de
expresso Verbo Dei, and lib. de Haer. where he relates this to be the Doctrine
of the Swi^feldians, as good Reformeds, as the best of us: they say, that we
are not to regard any instruction from man or book, but Gods immediate
inspiration, which speaks secretly to our hearts; for which they allege
those comfortable words of the prophet, I will hear what my Lord my God speaks
in me: for say they, the book which we call Scripture, is a creature, and we
must not seek for light and instruction from any creature, but from God the
Father of Lights. This is Scripture as interpreted by men of sound judgment:
any Child of the Reformation may believe it.


Ismael. I thought to settle my mind in my choice of some Religion, and you go
the way to beat me from all; for if you renvers the authority of Scripture,
what warrant shall we have for any Religion? God forbid the Reformation should
deny the true Canon, or the infallible truth of Scripture; and let all the
world say the contrary, I will constantly revere and believe it is Gods
infallible word.


Isaac. How can you say I beat you from all Religion, when I directly persuade
you to follow the Rule of faith of our Reformation, Scripture as each Person of
sound judgment understands it; let this be your Religion, if you will be a true
Reformed; Whateuer you judge in your conscience to be true; let the Church of
England, or France or any other say and believe what they will; you are to
believe but what you judge by scripture to be true, and this is the Religion of
the Reformation.


Ismael. J would gladly know, if it be lawful to chop or change the text?


Isaac. It Is the Doctrine of the Reformation, that you cannot, because God has
forbid to add to, or take away from his word: and therefore we condemn the
Papists for their Traditions, obtruded upon the flock as the Word of God: It Is
also the Doctrine of the Reformation, and the practice of our best Reformers,
when the text does not speak clearly enough, that for to refute Popery and
establish our own Doctrine, we may add or diminish a word or two; which is not
to change the Word of God, but to make it speak more expressly: as when Luther
had a mind to preach Justification by faith alone; finding the Text said but,
Man is justified by faith, he added the word Alone, and made the Text very
clear against Popery, which formerly was somewhat obscure: Zuinglius being to
teach the Figurative presence of Christ in the Sacrament, found the Text, this
is my Body, to be too pat against his Doctrine; and instead of Is, put in, this
signifies: The Church of England being to preach the kings Spiritual
Supremacy, could not convince the obstinat Papist by the Original text which
said 1. Pet. 2 submit yourselvts unto every human creature for the Lord's
sake, whether it it be the king as excelling, or to, etc. But in king Edwards
time they altered one word, and made the text thus, submit yourselves to every
Ordinance of man, whether it be to the king as being the cheef head, and the
following impressions of the Bible the year 1557. and 79. say, To the king as
supreme. And so the true Ductrin is clearly convinced out of Scripture: as
also the Lawfullness of Priests marriage^ for the text before the Reformation
said 1. Cor. 9 have not we power to lead about a Woman sister; and now our
Bibles say, have not we power to lead about a Wife being our sister: hence
its evident according the Doctrine and practice of our Reformation, that when
you have a mind to establish a Doctrine which you judge to be true, you may
change the text and make it speak to your sense and meaning, provided you
judge your sense to be true.


Ismael. What do you think of Justifying faith? does faith alone justify us?


Isaac. It Is the Doctrine of the Reformation, that without charity it cannot,
because S. Paul says 1. Cor. 13. if I have faith so as to move mountains, and
have no charity, I am nothing, It Is also the Doctrine of the Reformation, that
its impious and wicked to say, faith alone without charity does not justify;
this is Scripture as interpreted by Luther a man of sound judgment: In cap. 2.
ad Gal. and sermon. Angl: page 204.
Who say, quoth Luther, that faith alone tho perfect it be cannot, justify
without charity; say impiously and wickedly; because faith alone without any
good works does justify. Believe which Doctrine you please, both are of the
Reformation.


Ismael. Luther was insolent in checking the Doctrine of S. Paul.


Isaac. Probably he did not reflect that it was the Doctrine of the Apostle; and
if you will have it to be a check of S. Paul, Luther In Epist. ad Gal c. 1. and
2. and Tom. 5.
will answer for himself Be it, says he, that the Church, Augusti^ or other
Drs, also Peter and Paul, W^ttemb. an. 1554. soi. 29.
nay and an Angel from heaven should teach otherwise than as I teach, yet my
Doctrine is such that it sets forth Gods glory; I know I teach no human, but
Divin Doctrine.

It Is the Doctrine of the Reformation that faith alone without any good works,
and notwithstanding all sins you are guilty of, does justify you: this is
Scripture as interpreted by Luther, who says, nothing can damn you but
incredulity, as nothing but faith can save you; of Whitaker, Wotten fulk and
Beza whose words I related in our precedent Dialogue; which J believe you
remember, and J need not repeat.

Jts also the Doctrine of the Reformation, that good works are meritorious of
grace and glory; lib. 5. de Eccl. Polit. sect. 72.
Hocker and Harmonia confess: Page 495. and ^73.
say its the Doctrine of scripture; and what any Person of sound judgment judges
to be the Doctrine of scripture, he may believe it; for this is our Rule of
faith: its like wise the Doctrine generally of all our Church, that good Works
are not at all meritorious: Tindal (called by Fox Acts. and Mon* page 514
a Man of God and a constant Martyr) judges this to be so true that in his
treatise de Mammona iniquitatis he says, Christ himself did not by all his
good Works merit the glory: and tho the scripture says expressly he did; Calvin
lib. 2* Inst. c 17^ sect. 6.
affirms, that its a foolish curiosity to examine, and a rash proposition to say
Christ did merit.

Jt's the Doctrine of the Reformation, that tho good works be not meritorious,
nor have not the least influence in our justification or salvation; yet they
are absolutely needful for both; in as much as that true faith cannot be
without good Works; because they are the marks and signs of a living faith, by
which alone we are saved; this is the judgment of the Church of England
expressed in the 11. and 12. Article, of the 39. and of Melancton in locis
Commun. de Bonis operibus, and you may believe it: You may also believe, and
its the Doctrine of the Reformation, that good Works are so far from being
needful, that they are prejudicious and hurtful to our salvation, and the
best way to be saved is to do no good Work at all; this is scripture as
interpreted by Jlliricus, Flaccius, Amsdorfius quoted in Act. Colloq. Aldeburg.
page 205. and 299. and Luther In Comment. in cap. 2. ad Gal.
was so deeply persuaded of this truth, that tho Christ said, If ^hou wilt
enter into the kingdom of heaven, keep the Commandments: Luther says, its an
obstacle to our Salvation to keep them: Where it is said, quoth he, that faith
in Christ does indeed justify us, but that it is necessary also to keep the
Commandments, there Christ is denied, and faith abolisht; because that which
is proper to faith alone is attributed to the Commandments. And again To. 1.
Proposit. 3.
says he, if faith be-acompanied with good Works, its ^o true faith; that it
may justify it must be alone without any good Works. This is Scripture as
interpreted by such Eminent and sound men; and consequently the Doctrine of the
Reformation; and who doubts but that any Doctrine of the Reformation may be
believed. Hence forward, when you hear the preacher exhort you to good Works,
you may believe him, if you please, and have a mind to spend your moneys;
because he preaches the Doctrine of the Reformation: or you may laugh at him,
and believe not a word he says, because he preachs against the Doctrine of the
Reformation.


Ismael. These are dangerous and scandalous Tenets destructive of piety and
Christianity; and let Luther and those Authors you quoted say what they please,
the Reformation, nor no honest man will ever believe such abominable Doctrine.


Isaac. J do not say that the Children of the Reformation are obliged to
believe them: they may believe as you do, that all are wicked Tenets: but if
Luther and the others cited, judge in their conscience these Tenets to be the
Doctrine of scripture, and if Peter, John or James like their interpretation; I
say they may according the Principles of our Reformation believe them, and be
as truly Reformed Children as you: for our Rule of faith is Scripture as each
Person of sound judgment understands it, and in believing those Tenets, because
they judge them to be the Doctrine of scripture, they stick fast to, and follow
our Rule of faith: why is Figurative Presence, and the kings supremacy the
Doctrine of the Reformation; tho denied by Papists, Lutherans and Presbyterians?
but because the Protestants judge its the Doctrine of scripture: if therefore
those great Authors I quoted, and any other with them judge those Tenets to be
the Doctrine of Scripture, they can be justly called the Doctrine of the
Reformation: must Protestants be forced against their judgments to deny Real
Presence and supremacy, because Lutherans say its wicked Doctrine? and why must
Luther, Jlliticus, Flaccius and others be forced to deny those Tenets, tho
Protestants or Papists judge them to be damnable I let each one believe what he
thinks to be the Doctrine of Scripture, and he will still be a true Reformed
Child.


Ismael. Does not our Reformation teach that it is possible to all men assisted
with Gods Grace to keep the Commandments?


Isaac. This is the Doctrine of the Church of England, and consequently of the
Reformation: It Is also the Doctrine of the Reformation delivered out of
Scripture as interpreted by Luther, Calvin, Willet and several others, that its
impossible to any man, assisted with what Grace soever to keep the
Commandments. None has ever yet, says our great Calvin, lib. 2. instit. c. 7.
sect. 5.
and God has decreed none shall ever keep the Commandments: Again, Harm. Evang.
in Luc. c. 10. verse. 26.
The law and Commandments were given us, to no other end but that we should be
damned by them, in as much as that it is impossible for us to do what they
command. The same Doctrine is taught by Luther in several places of his Works,
by Willet, In Synop. Papismi page 564.
and by our Brethren the Gomarists of Holland, and many of our french Synods.
Believe which you please, both Doctrins are of the Reformation.

Jt's also the Doctrine of Luther and Calvin, that God does not cast men into
hell because their sins deserve it; nor save men because they merit it; but
merely because he will have it so: He crowns those who have not deserved it
says Luther, lib. de servo. Arbit cont. Erasm.
and he punishes those who have not deserved it: it is Gods wrath and severity to
damn the one, it is his Grace and mercy to save the other. Calvin also, lib. 3^.
Instit. c. 21. sect. 5. and 7! etc. 22. sect. 11. and cap. 23. sect. 1.
Men are damned for no other cause but because God will have it so; he is the
cause and author of their damnation; their damnation is decreed by God when
they are in their Mother's womb, because he will have it so; this is also the
belief of our Gomarists in Holland, of many french Churchs, and of several
learned Calvinists: tho the Church of England denies this Doctrine, none will
dare say its not the Doctrine of the Reformation, because its Scripture as
interpreted by such Eminent men of our Church.


Ismael. J will never believe such execrable Doctrins; nor will J ever be of
any Congregation which believes them.


Isaac. J do not advise you to believe them; but to give others leave to
believe them, if they think them to be the Doctrine of Scripture; as Luther,
Calvin, Willet, Gomarists and others do: you must not, if you be a true
Reformed Child hinder any man from believing, nor be displeased with him for
believing what he judges in his conscience to be the Doctrine of Scripture, for
this is our Rule of faith: Will not you be of the Congregation and Religion of
those, who follow Scripture as their Rule of faith, and Believe what they judge
in their conscience to be the Doctrine of Scripture?


Ismael. Yes J will, and am of such a Congregation, for this is the Rule of
faith of the Reformation.


Isaac. Why then, you must be of the same Congregation with the Gomarists,
Luther, Calvin and the others, who believe those which you call execrable
Doctrins, because they follow Scripture as they understand; and believe those
Doctrins, because they judge them to be of Scripture: you both follow the same
Rule, one goes one way, and the other an other, and both are of the
Reformation. The Church of England understands by Scripture that God is not the
Author nor cause of sin, that he does not force us to sin; who doubts but that
this is there fore the Doctrine of the Reformation? But Calvin, Brentius, Beza
and several others understand by Scripture; that God is the cause and author
which forces our Will to sin; that man, and the devil, are but Gods instruments
to commit it: that murders, incests, blasphemies, etc are the works of God,
that he makes us commit them: and who doubts but this also is the Doctrine of
the Reformation being Scripture as interpreted by such eminent and sound
judgments? God says Calvin, Lib. 2. inst. c. 4 sec. 3 and l. 1. c. 18 sect. z
and l. 3 c. z3 sec. 4. Lo. 1 de deprovid. c. 6. in Synops. page 563. In
manifest. stratag. Papist.
directs, moves, inclins and forces the Will of man to sin; in so much that the
power and efficacy of working, is wholly in him; man, nay and satan when he
impells us, Being only Gods instruments which he uses for to make us sin.
Zuinglius, Willet, Beza teach the same.


VI. DIALOGUE.
ISMAEL J am weary of hearing such horrid blasphemies; my heart trembles to
hear you say, that such abominable Tenets may be believed according our Rule
of faith and Principles of our Reformation: I beseech you let me hear no more
of such stuff: J conceive very well that men's judgments and consciences are not
to be constrained to believe or deny this or that Tenet, because the Pope or
his infaillable, forsooth, Church will have it so;


Isaac. and must they be constrained to deny or believe because the fallible
Church of England or France will have it so?


Ismael. No, J do not say they must, have patience, and hear me speak a
while: J say that Scripture must be our Rule of faith, and not any Pope, or
Church, or Congregation; and that we are no to be forced by any to believe,
but what we understand to be true by Scripture; and that if we judge by
Scripture any Doctrine to be falls and contrary to Gods Word; we must not be
forced to believe it: but we must not abuse this liberty: that we should have
liberty for to believe or deny supremacy, figurative Presence, Communion in
one or both kinds, and such other inferior Truths controverted among
Christians; and that each Congregation may in such Articles, believe as it
understands by Scripture to be true, may pass; and its practiced in our
Reformed Churchs: But that we should run so far, as to have liberty by our
Rule of faith to believe or deny the Fundamental and chief Articles of
Christianity, as the Trinity, Incarnation, Divinity of Christ, etc. that
liberty ought not to be given: our Reformation very wisely and piously permits
the Lutherans to believe one thing, the Presbyterians an other, the Protestants
an other, and so of the rest: and all are true Reformed Children, because each
of them believes as they judge by Scripture to be true: but the Reformation has
never given, not never will give liberty to interpret Scripture against the
fundamental articles of Christanity: we must be moderat; and keep our rambling
fancies within compass, and if any should judge and interpret Scripture in
favor of any scandalous and abominable Tenets against Christianity and good
Manners, he must be checked, and not commended: this moderation the Church of
England uses and will never permit the contrary.


Isaac. J percevie a great deal of Popish blood to run in your veins, and
that if you and your Church of England, were in p^ower at the beginning of our
Reformation, we should never have had a Luther, Calvin, Beza, or such other
noble and renowned Reformers: by what J gather from your discourse, J do not
see the breath of an inchs difference betwixt the Church of Rome and you and
your Church of England; for the Church of Rome will not stick to grant, that
Gods Word alone is her Rule of faith, but so that none must believe any sense
of it, but as she believes it, nor interpret any text, but receive her
interpretation of it: The Church of England has Scripture for her Rule of
faith, and gives us liberty for to interpret, understand, and believe some
texts of it, as each one thinks best; and so permits Presbyterians to deny
Episcopacy, Lutherans to deny Figurative Presence, etc. and confesses they are
all her Brethren of the Reformation, but she will give no liberty at all for
to interpret other Texts, but all must understand them as she does, or all must
be heretics and damned men: No, that text, My father and I are one, must be
interpreted to signify the Unity in Nature of the Father and son, as the
Church of England believes; none must interpret it otherwise: so that the
difference betwixt the Popish Church and that of England is; the first gives us
no liberty at all: the second gives us some liberty; the first robs us of all;
the second but of the one half: the Rule of faith in Popery is Scripture as
interpreted by the Pope and Councils; the Rule of faith in England as to some
Articles is Scripture as interpreted by the Church of Enggland; and as to other
Articles, Scripture as each Person of sound judgment understands it: and thus
Protestants, are but half Papists, and half Reformed, and both these
ingredients will never make a good compound.

Let any vnbyass'd and impartial man judge if the Church of England proceeds
justly in this: for if our Rule of faith be Scripture as each Person of sound
judgment understands it, as she mentions in her 39. Articles* and as the whole
Reformation believes, if we are not to be constraind, to believe any Church,
Council, or man's sense of Scripture, if we do not judge by the Word of God its
true; by what authority Rule or reason, can the Church of England give me
liberty to understand and believe some texts as J please; and deny me liberty
for to understand and believe others, as J judge by Scripture they ought to be
understood? J pray observe well this discourse: here are Luther, Calvin, Beza,
Zuinglius and our other first Reformers; they interpret some texts against the
Doctrine of Rome, and others against the Doctrine of the Church of England: they
are praised for the first, and esteemed Apostolical Reformers, because without
any regard of what the Church of Rome said, they freely taught and believed
what they judged by Scripture to be true; why must not they be praised and
esteemed true Reformers also, for not regarding what the Church of England or
any other says; but teach the impossibility of Gods Commandments, the
sufficiency of faith alone, and all those other Tenets which you so much
mislike, since they judge by Scripture, that to be the true Doctrine: are they
bound to submit their judgments to the Church of England more than to that of
Rome?


Ismael. But in those Tenets they do not only contradict the Church of England;
but all Christian Churchs and Congregations; for all will say those are wicked
and scandalous Doctrine.


Isaac. And if they judge by Scripture that those Tenets are not such, but
sound and good Doctrine, may not they believe them, tho all the world and ten
worlds did gainsay them? is not Scripture our Rule of faith, and are we to
regard what any Church or all Churchs say, further than we find by Scripture
that they say well? But being these Tenets, which you call horrid blasphemies
displease you I Will change my discourse; and because I see you are Popishly
inclined, J will show you how by the Principles of our Reformation, you can be
as good a Papist as the Pope; one principle excepted, wherein you must dissent
from the Church of Rome, if you intend to remain a true Reformed Child.


Ismael. You promise too much, and more than J desire to know; J don't desire
to have any Communication with the Pope, I know by the Writings of our Authors
what kind of beast he is.


Isaac. By your favor, you may believe the Popes are worthy, honest, and godly
men; many Drs. of our Reformation, and our Travelers to the Court of Rome give
this testimony of them? you may also believe, that Popes and Cardinals are
knaves and Atheists, who look on Scripture as a Romance and deny the
Incarnation of Christ, for Calvin says so, l. 4. Inst. c. 7. sect. 27.
and would never have said it, if it had not been true: but beware not to
speak so in Rome, or they will lodge you where honest Tailor the Quaker was; nor
in Spain, or they will stop your mouth with an Inquisition faggot.


Ismael. J care not what the Pope or Cardinals are; but J would gladly know,
what religion and Congregation you are of; for whereas you are my immediate
instructor; it behoues me to know what religion you have.


Isaac As to my Religion, I doubt not but that my Readers will be divided in
their judgments of me; if a Papist reads me, he will swear I am an Atheist; but
J hope he will not pretend to be infallible as his Pope: if a Protestant, heel
say, I am a Papist; and that my drift is to cast dirt upon his Church: the
honest Quaker will say, I am a profane man; others perhaps will say I am of no
Religion, but a despiser of all; and our Congregations are so uncharitable that
likely none will accept of me, because I say all religions are very good: a sad
thing that a man must be hated for speaking well of his neighbors; and that
each one must have all the world to be naught but himself: this then is my
Religion, To suffer persecution for justice and truth; to render good for evil;
to bless those who curse me; and speak well of all congregations, whylst they
speak all evil against me: reflect well upon what J discoursed hitherto, and
you will find, J am as great a lover of the Reformation as they who may think
me its enemy; and read my following discourse and you will find I love Popery
as well as the Reformation: the Spirit of God makes no exception of Persons.


Ismael. You promised to prove by the Principles of the Reformation, that we
may believe all the Tenets of Popery, and remain still of the Reformation: how
can this be?


Isaac. You remember I excepted one Principle of Popery, wherein you must
necessarily dissent from them: and if you deny this one Principle, you may
believe all their others Tenets as well as the Pope; and be as ^ood a Child of
the Reformation as Luther.


Ismael. What Principle is this, which you seem to make the only distinctive
sign of a Reformed, from a Papist.


Isaac. Listen a while: a Papist is not a Papist because he believes Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, Indulgences, and the rest of Popish Tenets, but because he
believes them upon the testimony of the Pope and Church, because they assure
him they are revealed Truths: if a Papist did say, J believe these Tenets
because I myself do judge by scripture that they are revealed; and not, because
the Pope and Church say they are; he would be no Papist: The Papist believes
the Mystery of the Trinity, the Incarnation and passion of Christ: the
Protestant believes the same Mysteries; yet the one is a Papist and no
Protestant; the other is a Protestant and no Papist. And why? because the
Papist believes them upon the testimony of the Pope and Church, the Protestant
believes them upon the testimony of Gods Written Word: believe then whatever
you please of Popery, provided you believe it, because you judge by Scripture
its true, and not because the Pope or the Church says it; you will never be a
Papist but a perfect Reformed.


Ismael. If this discourse be solid, you may hedge in all the Articles of
Popery into our Reformation.


Isaac. If you peruse the works of our Reformed Drs you will hardly find any
Article of Popery, but has been judged by many, or some of our best Reformed
Drs, to be the true Doctrine of scripture; and whereas any Doctrine which any
Person of sound judgment understands by scripture to be true may be justly
called the Doctrine of the Reformation; it follows that hardly is there any
Article of Popery, for which we see so many persecutions againsts subjects,
and such troubles in our Parliaments, but is truly the Doctrine of the
Reformation.


Ismael. Show me some examples of this.


Isaac. The Veneration of Relics and Saints dead bones, is generally believed
by us to be mere Popery and superstition; therefore we made no store of Luther
and Calvin's bones, tho we know them to be as great Saints as any in the Popish
Church: but Veneration of Relics and Saints bones, is the Doctrine of our
Reformation; for whatever is set down and commended by our Common Prayer book,
must be undoubtedly esteemed our Reformed Doctrine and practice, and our common
Prayer book printed since our Kings happy restoration, in its Calendar sets
down a day to the Translation of S. Edward king of Saxons Body in the month of
June; and dedicats an other to the translation of the Bodies of S. Martin and
Swithin, in the month of July.

The Veneration and use of the Sign of the Cross, is flat Popery in the
judgment of all our Congregations; yet any Reformed Child may laudably and
piously use it; whereas our Common Prayer Book in the Administration of Baptism,
commands the Minister to use it, saying, We sign him with the sign of the
Cross, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed, to confess the faith of
Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his banner against Sin, the world
and the Devil. And in our calendar printed since his Majesti's restoration,
its called the Holy Cross.

Our Congregations generally believe, its Popery to keep Holy days (except the
Sabbath day) and Saints days; to fast Lent, Vigils, commanded, Emberdays, and
fridaies; and all this is recommanded to us in our Common Prayer book, and the
Minister is commanded, in the Administration of the Lords Supper, to publish
the Holy days of the week, and exhort us to fast; and surely, he is not
commanded to teach, or exhort us to any thing, but to the Doctrine of the
Reformation: It Is true the Students of our Colleges of Oxford and Cambridge,
are much troubled with scruples in this point: these Pauperes de Lugduno, are
compelled to fast all fridays throughout the year; and its not hungar that
makes them complain, but tenderness of Conscience, because they fear its
Popery.

It Is a Popish error, we say, to believe that Penance, or our penal works of
fasting, almsdeeds, or corporal austerities, can avail and help for the
remission of our Sins, and satisfying Gods Justice: No, we say, penal works,
serve for noting; all is don by Repentance; that is to say, by sorrow of heart
for having offended God. This is the Doctrine of Danaeus, Willet, Junius and
Calvin, who says Francis, Dominick, Bernard, Antony, and the rest of Popish
Monks and Friars, are in hell for their austerities and penal Works: for all
that, you may very well believe, and its the Doctrine of the Reformation, that
Penance and Penal Works, do avail for the remission of our sins, and are very
profitable to the soul; for, our Common Prayer book in the Commination
against sinners, says thus; In the Primitive Church, there was a godly
Discipline, that at the beginning of Lent, such as were notorious Sinners, were
put to open penance, and punished in this world, that their souls may be saved
in the day of the Lord. And our Common Prayer book wishes, that this Discipline
were restored again; and Surely, it does not wish that Popery were restored;
therefore its no Popery to say, that Penance or penal Works, do satisfy for
our sins in this world, and avail to save us in the other.


Ismael. I know, many of our Congregations, mislike much our Common Prayer
book for these Popish Tenets; but what do you say of the grand errors of
Popery, can a man be a true Child of the Reformation, and yet believe the Popes
Supremacy; deny the kings supremacy; believe Transubstantiation and Communion
in one kind; are these Tenets, the Doctrine of the Reformation, or consistent
with its Principles?


Isaac. The kings supremacy is undoubtedly the Doctrine of the Reformation;
because its judged by the Church of England to be of Scripture: yet not only
the Quakers, Presbyterians, Anabaptists, and other Congregations, judge its not
of Scripture, but as erroneus a Tenet, as that of the Popes supremacy; Calvin
6. Amos, says; They were unadvised people and blasphemers, who raised king
Henry the VIII. so far as to call him the head of the Church; but also that no
Civil Magistrate can be the head of any particular Church, is the Doctrine of the
Centuriators cent. sept. page 11. of Cartwright, Viretus, Kemnitius and many
others; who doubts then but that in the Principles and Doctrine of the
Reformation, you may deny the Kings Supremacy, tho the Church of England
believes it. The Popes Supremacy is the Doctrine of Popery; who doubts it? but
its also the Doctrine of the Reformation, for many of our Eminent Drs. have
judged it to be the Doctrine of Scripture; as Whitgift, In Defens. etc. page
373.70. and 395.
who cites Calvin, and Musculus for this opinion: but its needful we relate
some of their express words, I do not deny says Luther, In Respons t^edecem
Propos.
but that the Bishop of Rome, is, has been, and ought to be the first of all; I
believe, he is above all other Bishops, its not lawful to deny his supremacy:
Melancton in Epist. ad Card. Belay Episo. Pariens.
says no less that the B. of Rome is above all the Church; that it is his
Office to govern, to judge in controversies, to watch over the Priests, to keep
all Nations in conformity and unity of Doctrine: Somaisius, In Tract, Euchar. ad
P. Sermondum
The Pope of Rome has been without controversy the first Metropolitan in
Italy, and not only in Italy, nor only in the West, but in all the world, the
other Metropolitans have bin chief in their respective districts, but the pope
of Rome has bin Metropolitan and Primat, not only of some particular Dioces, but
of all. Grotius In ^not. supe^ Nouum Testam. cap 10. Matthew. and soepe alibi.
has expressly the same Doctrine and proves this supremacy belongs to the Pope de
Iure Divino. J pray consider if these Drs. be not men of sound judgment, and of
eminent learning and credit in our Reformation, and if our Doctrine be Scripture
as such men understand it, consider I say with what justice can this Doctrine be
called Popery more than Reformed Doctrine.

As for Transubstantiation, it contains two difficulties; first if the Body of
Christ be really in the Sacrament; and this Real presence, the Lutherans defend
to be the Doctrine of Scripture, as well as the Papists; why then should it be
called Popish, more than Reformed Doctrine? the second is, if the substance of
bread, be in the Sacrament together with Christ's Body: Lutherans say it is;
Papists say it is not, but that there is a Transubstantiation, or change of the
whole substance of bread, into the Body of Christ; but hear what Luther To. 1.
Edit. Ie^ae. l, de Capt. Babyl.
says of this that we call Popish Doctrine? I give all Persons liberty to
believe in this point, what they please, without hazard of their salvation,
either that the bread is in the Sacrament of the Altar, or that it is not.
Would Luther have given this liberty, if Transubstantiation had not been the
Doctrine of the Reformation as well as any other? Westph. defens 2. Orthod. ^it.
Calvin Admonit. 2. ad
also and Beza Lib. de Coena Domini.
affirm, that Luther's Doctrine of the coexistence of Christ's Body and the
bread, is more absurd, than the Popish Doctrine of the existence of the Body
alone; if therefore we be true Reformed, and safely believe the Doctrine of
Luther, which is the most absurd; much more will we be of the Reformation, by
believing that of the Papists, which is less.

Communion in One kind, is the Doctrine of the Reformation, no less than
Communion in both: for besides that Luther says, lib. de capt. Babyl. c. de
Euchar.
They sin not against Christ, who use one kind only, seeing Christ has not
commanded to use both; and again, Epist ad Bohemos in declarat. Euch. and in
serm^ de Euch.
tho it were an excellent thing to use both kinds in the Sacrament; and Christ
has commanded nothing in this, as necessary, yet it were better to follow peace
and Unity, than to contest about the kinds; but also Melancton; in Council.
Theol. ad Mareh. Elect. de vsu vtriusque speciei page 141.
who in the opinion of Luther surpasses all the Fathers of the Church; expressly
teachs the same Doctrine: and the Church of England Statut 1. Edward VI.
commands. That the Sacrament be commonly administered in both kinds, if
necessity does not require otherwise; mark, he says but Commonly; and that
for some necessity it may be receved in one; lastly the sufficiency of one kind
in the Sacrament, is plainly set down by our Reformed Church of France in her
Ecclesiastical Discipline printed at Saumur, chap. 12. art. 7. The Minister must
give the bread in the supper to them, who cannot drink the Cup, provided it be
not for contempt. And the reason is, because there are many who cannot endure
the taste of Wine: wherefore it often happens among them, that some persons, do
take the bread alone: and truly if some of our Ministers in England, do not give
better wine than they are acustomed, who very irreverently serve that holy
Table with naughty trash, its much to be feared, that our flock will also
petition to be dispensed with in the Cup; because there are some of so delicat
Palats, that they cannot endure the taste of bad Wine. Now, you may admire the
injustice of the Papists in condemning our Reformed Doctrine and Doctors as
Heretics, whereas those Tenets are believed by many of us, as well as by them;
and the groundless severity of our Congregations in exclaiming against that
Doctrine; it being the Doctrine of the Reformation, whereas so many eminent men of
our own, judge it to be of Scripture.


Ismael. Whereas I see people persecuted by the Church of England for these
Tenets, I can hardly be persuaded they are the Doctrine of the Reformation: at
our next meeting we will pursue this discourse; the Bell rings for morning
Prayers; A Dieu.


VII. DIALOGUE.
ISAAC. You come from Church, as I guess by the Common Prayer book I see in
your hands, I pray let me see the Calendar of it; if it be a la mode nouvelle,
which was made by the Church of England, since his Majesty's restoration.


Ismael. Why? have you met any thing in it, which shocks you?


Isaac. Shock me? No Doctrine or practice of any Congregation, or man of sound
judgment of our Church can shock me; you know, I plead for liberty to believe
and practice as each one judges by scripture to be true and good. But I observe
in your Calendar, you have a day consecrated to S. Ann in the month of of July;
I would gladly know, what Ann is this, which the Church of England honors so
much?


Ismael. It Is Ann, the Mother of the Virgin Mary.


Isaac. Is It possible? J thought it was Ann Bolen the mother of our Virgen
Elizabeth: J am sure the Church of England, is more obliged to her, than to the
other: but as you have put here the Mother of the Virgin Mary, why did not you
put in also Elizabeth mother of the great Baptist; and the Angel Gabriel, as
well as Michael?


Ismael. J know not indeed.


Isaac. Nor do J know, if it be not, because that Elizabeth and Gabriel made
the Popish Ave Maria, as Scripture relates; but can you tell, as the Church of
England put in your Calendar, S. George, S. Andrew and S. David, Patrons of
England, Scotland and Wales; why did not she put in S. Patrick Patron of
Ireland?


Ismael. J cannot tell; what may be the reason, think you?


Isaac. J know not, if it be not that he forfeited his place for his
Purgatory; for tho the others were as deep in Popery as he,) if we believe
the Papists;) but the Parliament passed an Act of Indemnity for England,
Scotland and Wales after the kings return to his kingdoms; and thereby the sin
of Popery was forgiven to their Patrons; and no act of Indemnitie was past for
Jreland, whereby Patrik is still guilty; if it be not, that the Seven
Champions of Christendom tell us S. Patrick was S. George his footman, and it
was not thought good manners, to put him in the same rank with his Master.


Ismael. For shame, if not for piety, forbear, J cannot endure to sully sacred
things with profane Ralleries; the Calendar is a holy institution of the
Church, and ought to be reverenced.


Isaac. And so is Episcopacy, surplices, Bells, Organs, and Corner Capps; yet J
hope you will give Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Quakers, etc. leave to laugh at
them: and be still as good Children of the Reformation as you: if you esteem
them to be sacred and holy, reverence and honor them; J commend you for it; if
others judge otherwise let them follow their humor; each one as he fancies,
says the fellow kissing ^his Cow; this is the holy Liberty of the
Reformation, Scripture as each one understands it.


Ismael. Let us return to our last discourse; how is it possible, that those
Tenets of Popery, should be the Doctrine of the Reformation, whereas we see the
Church of England so severely persecut the Professors of them?


Isaac. Do you think a Doctrine is not of the Reformation, because its denied by
the Church of England? or because she persecutes the Professors of it? do not
they persecute all non Conformists, as well as Popery? persecution is no proof
of a Doctrine to be bad; it is but the effect of a blind zeal armed with power:
for to know certainly if a Doctrine, be of the Reformation, you must try it by
our test or Rule of faith, which is the Written Word of God; and whateuer any
man of sound judgment, of a sincere and humble heart judges to be contained in
Scripture, or an indubitable consequence out of it; that man, may believe that
Doctrine, let all others judge of it as they list; and by so believing will be a
true Child of the Reformation; wherefore, since that the Church of France, that
of England in Edward the VI. time, Luther, Melancton, Grotius, and the other
authors J quoted, do judge Transubstantiation, Popes Supremacy, and Communion
in one kind to be the Doctrine of Sctipture: we must call it the Doctrine of
the Reformation; and if you judge as they did, you may believe that Doctrine,
and be still of the Reformation, as well as they.


Ismael. Can you show me any other Tenet of Popery, which you can call the
Doctrine of the Reformation.


Isaac. Alas! you can hardly show me any Tenet of Popery, but what is its
Doctrine; what Doctrine more Popish than that of Confession and Absolution from
sins? yet its as truly the Doctrine of the Reformation, as Figurative Presence:
for not only In Disput. Theol. page 301.
Lobechius, in Conciliat loc. Scrip. loco. 191.
Altamerus, In locis Co^mun. To. 1. de Potest. Eccl.
Sarcerius and in Apol. Confess. Aug. art 13. and l.b. 1. Epist. page 234.
Melancton say, its a Sacrament: but the Church of England in our Common Prayer
book, declares that Priests have not only the power of declaring their sins to
be forgiven to the Penitents, but also the power of forgiving them: and sets
down the form of Absolution, which the Minister is to use; Our Lord Jesus
Christ, who left power to the Church, to absolve all sinners which truly
repent, of his mercy forgive thee and thine offenses; and I by his authority
committed unto me, do Absolve thee from all they sins: the ministers of the
Diocese of Lincoln in their Survey of the book of Common Prayers, checked this
Doctrine as Popery, and petitioned to have it blotted out; but could not
prevail; whereby we are given to understand, its the Doctrine of the
Reformation.

It Is Popery, we say, to call Extreme Unction, Confirmation, and Holy Order of
Priesthood, Sacraments: and who can justly deny all this to be the Doctrine of
the Reformation? for Calvin In cap. 5. Epist. lac. v. 4.
says, I confess, the Disciples of Christ did use Extreme Unction as a
Sacrement; I am not, says he, of the opinion of those, who judge it was only a
Medecin for corporal diseases: Calvin lib. 4. I^st. c. 14. sect. 5.
also, and with him our Common Prayer book and all our Divins say, a Sacrament
is nothing else, but a Visible sign of the invisible Grace we receive by it;
and they say with In modest. Exami^.
Couel, in Eccl* Polit. l. 5. sect. 66.
Hooker and others that this definition fits exactly Confirmation; wherefore the
Ministers of the Diocese of Lincoln, checked the Common Prayer book, for giving
the Difinition of a Sacrament to Confirmation. In locis Co^mun. tit. de Numero.
Sacram!
Melancton, in perpet. R^gim. page 109.
Bilson In Eccl. Pol^t lib. 5. sect 77.
Hooker and lib. 4. Inst. c. 29.
Calvin expressly teach, that the Order of Priesthood, is a Sacrament. And when
men of so emine^t judgment of our Reformation teach, this to be the Doctrine of
Scripture, who doubts but that it is of the Reformation.


Ismael. By this, you destroy the Doctrine of the Reformation, of two Sacraments
only.


Isaac. Destroy it? God forbid: Because the Church of England says, there are
but two Sacraments, I say its the Doctrine of the Reformation, there are but
two: and because so many eminent men judge by Scripture there are more, J say
its the Doctrine of the Reformation there are more, that is to say six, Baptism,
Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extrem Unction and Holy Order: and every
likely our Bishops and Ministers, for their Wyves sake, will not stick to grant
that Matrimony also is a Sacrament.


Ismael. But can you say, that Prayers to Saints and Jmages, Prayers for the
dead, and Purgatory, are not mere Popery, and in no wise the Doctrine of the
Reformation?


Isaac. Without doubt, those Tenets are Popery; but all the world knows, the
Lutherans use Jmages in their Churchs and pray before them; and the ^oly synod
of Charenton has declared, as we said in our first Dialogue, that the
Lutherans have nothing of Superstition or Idolatry in their manner of Divin
Worship; this is also the Doctrine Epit. Colloq. Mo^tisbel.
of Jacobus Andreas, In Centur. Exercit. Theol. page 270.
Brachmanus, Exam. par. 4.
Kemnitius, Luther and Brentius quoted by Beza in respons. ad acta Colloq
Montisbelgar. par. 2. in Praefat.
and why should not a Doctrine judged by such eminent men to be of Scripture, be
called the Doctrine of the Reformation? Prayers for the dead and Purgatory, is
Popery confessedly; but alas, it is taught expressly by Urbanus, Regius In locis
co^mun c. 18. and 19.
Bucer, ^n script. Angl. page 450.
Zuinglius, To. 1. in Explan. Art. 90. and Art. 60.
Melancton, in Apolog. Confess. Aug.
Luther, To. 1^ Wittem. in resol. de Indul. concl. 15.
the Common Prayer book in king Edwards time printed 1549. and many others of
our learned Drs, and what can you call more properly the Doctrine of the
Reformation, than what such men teach to be the Doctrine of scripture: And tho
our Brethren, Quakers, Anabaptists, Presbyterians and Protestants judge Prayers
to Angels and Saints to be nothing else but Popery: yet our Common Prayer book
has the same Collect or Prayer to Angels in S. Michael's day, that the Popish
Mass Book has, and desires that the Angels may succor and defend us on earth:
and prayers to, and intercession of Saints is taught by Luther, Epist ad Spalat.
Bilneus and Latimer quoted by Fox Acts. and Mon. page 46^. and 1312.
and consequently its the Doctrine of the Reformation.


Ismael. If all these Popish Articles, may be safely believed by the
Reformation, and be the Doctrine of our Reformed Church, as well as of Popery;
what difference then betwixt us and Popery: or why are we called a Reformation
of Popery, or why did we separat from them?


Isaac J have told you already, that our difference from Popery, is not,
because we must deny what they believe, for we believe as well as they the
Unity and Trinity of God, the Jncarnation of his son, etc. but in this, that
the Papists believe because the Pope and Church says this is true revealed
Doctrine: but we believe not because any Church, Pope or Doctor says so, but
because we ourselves judge by scripture it is so: for if a Papist did say, I
do not believe this is a revealed Truth, because the Pope and Church says it
is, but because I find by scripture it is; he would be no Papist: believe then
whatever Doctrine you will, either Popery, Judaism, Protestancy, Arianism or
what else you please, provided you judge by scripture it is true, and that you
believe it, not because this or that Church, Congregation, or Drs believe it,
but because yourself judges it to be true; you will be a true Child of the
Reformation: And this is the reason why we are called a Reformation, and why
we separated from them, because they would have us take for our Rule of faith
Scripture as interpreted by them; and believe, not what we judge to be the
Doctrine of Scripture, but what they judge; and this is also the Reason why
Ptesbyterians are jealous with the Church of England; why Anabaptists forsake
Presbyterians, why these are forsaken by Quakers, because each one would have
the world judge as they do, and persecute and trouble one another, which is
quite against the Spirit of the Reformation, for where as our Rule of faith is
no Church, Congregation or man, but Scripture as each one understands it; it
follows that by our Principles, every one must be permitted to believe whatever
he pleases; and by so doing, he will be a true Child of the Reformation.


Ismael. The Church of England nor any of our Congregations, will never believe
any of those Popish Tenets.


Isaac. The time may come, that they may believe them all, and be still as good
Reformeds as now they are: for if the Pope and his Church should to morrow deny
and excommunicat those Tenets, which now they so steadfastly believe (and I hope
they will some day) then it would be a pious and virtuous action in all Reformed
Children, to believe them all, as much as now they deny them: and let us
pretend what other reason: we please: but its very certain that the strongest
reason we can have to deny those Articles, is because the Pope and his Church
believes them, and consequently, if the Popish Church, would but deny them, we
might and ought to believe them: you will think this a Paradox; but listen to
our Apostolical and Divin Luther: To. 2. Germ* fol. 214.
If a general Council, says he, did permit Priests to marry; it would be a
singular mark of piety and sign of Godlyness in that case to take Concubins,
rather than to marry in conformity to the Decree of the Council, I would in
that case command Priests not to marry under pain of damnation. And again says
he; de formula ^issa and To. 3. Germ.
if the Council should decree Communion in both kinds; in contempt of the
Council, I would take one only kind or none. See these words of Luther quoted
by our learned Hospinian in hiftor. Sacram. par. 2. fol. 13.
and Jewel In replica co^t. Hardingum.
and see its not only my Doctrine but of great Luther, that in case the Pope and
Council deny all the Tenets, they now believe; we may, and it will be a pious
godly action to believe them, and make as many Acts of Parliament for them, as
now we have against them. But what is the matter? me thinks you become pale some
thing troubles you, speak, what is it?


Ismael. It Is the horror J conceive against your discourse, my countenance
cannot be in a calm, when my mind is in such a storm and confusion; pursue no
more: you said enough, that J should curse the day J have ever seen you, or
heard that, which you call Holy Liberty, which is but a prostitution of
Consciences, a profanation of all that is sacred, and an open gap to all
impiety in Doctrine and manners: but J hope the Lord has given me that profound
respect and attache to our holy Reformation, that I shall not be beatten from
it by all your engines, able to inspire a contempt and hatred of it to any
weak Brother: for who would live a moment in it: if such impious Tenets, such
sandalous and blasphemous Doctrins were of it, or were unavoidable sequeles out
of its principles: No, No, the Principles of the Reformed Church, are sound and
Orthodox, and no Doctrine can follow from them, but what is pure and true.


Isaac. Let me tell you, J have as tender a love for the Reformation, as you:
and J will maintain the holy Liberty J assert, cannot justly be called a
prostitution of Consciences; for, you dare not deny but this is an Orthodox and
sound Principle, that our Rule of faith is Scripture as ^ach Person of sound
judgment understands it; that it is lawful for each person of sound judgment
to read it, to give his judgment of the true sense of it, and to believe and
hold that sense of it, which he thinks in his Conscience to be true; is there
any prostitution of Consciences in this Doctrine? or is it not the Doctrine of
our Reformation?


Ismael. All this in true, the prostitution of consciences leyes not there; but
in the scandalous and blasphemous Tenets, which you pretend that follow out of
that Rule of faith.


Isaac. But you wrong the Reformation in calling such Tenets blasphemies and
scandals: for since our Rule of faith is Scripture as each Person of soud
judgment understands it; if this Rule of faith be good and sound; if it be
religious and holy; any Doctrine that is conformable to this Rule, must be good,
sound, religious and holy; this being our Rule of faith and manners, its
cleerer than day light, that all and each Tenet which J rehearsed in all my
former discourses, are consormable to our Rule of faith; for our Rule is,
Scripture as each man of sound judgment understands it. our Doctrine therefore
must be, what any Person of sound judgment understands to be the Doctrine of
Scripture. This is an evident sequel out of that Principle, and whereas there
is not one Tenet of all those which J rehearsed, whether they concern Doctrine
or Manners; but was judged by the Doctors, which J cited for it, to be the
Doctrine of Scripture; it follows vnauoiably, that there is not one Tenet of
them, but is the Doctrine of the Reformation: therefore you must be forced to
either of these two; either to say that our Rule of faith, by which such
Doctrins are warranted, is naught, wicked and scandalous, and leads to a
prostitution of consciences and Manners; or that all those Tenets, are good,
sound, pious, and no prostitution or corruption of our consciences: for, pick
and choose out the Doctrine which you think to be the most wicked and scandalous
of all those J rehearsed; you cannot deny, but that it was taught by the author
J quoted for it, and judged by him, to be the Doctrine of Scripture: and if no
Doctor hitherto had believed it, you or J, or some other person of sound
judgment, may judge it to be the Doctrine of Scripture: either of both then, you
must be constrained to grant: or that the Doctrine of the Reformation, is not
what each Person of sound judgment understands to be the Doctrine and sense of
Scripture, which is as much as to say, that our Rule of faith must not be
Scripture as we understand it, but that we must believe against our own
judgment and conscience, what others say is the Doctrine and sense of Scripture:
or you must grant that all and each of those Tenets J rehearsed, is the Doctrine
of the Reformation, tho you, or this, or that man may judge them to be
blasphemies and scandals


Ismael. J confess our Rule of faith in the Reformation is Scripture as each
Person understands it; for all our Reformed Churchs, with the Church of England
inher 39. Articles do give us this Rule of faith: I confess consequently out of
this Principle, that we must not believe what Doctrine or sense of Scripture
others judge to be true and orthodox, if we do not ourselves judge it to be
such, for we must not be forced to believe against our judgments: lastly I
confess we may safely believe, whatsoever Doctrine we seriously judge to be
Doctrine of Scripture, but provided, that such a Tenet or Doctrine be not plainly
against Scripture, and be not plain and downright impiety and blasphemy.


Isaac. And in case you, or the Church of England, Rome, France, or Germany
judges a Doctrine to be blasphemous and against Scripture, and Luther, or Calvin
or J, or an other, judges it is good Doctrine and conformable to Scripture; to
which judgment must J stand? must J believe yours against my Conscience and
knowledge* or must not J believe my own? is it not the Principle and practice
of our Reformation, that J must believe what J judge in my conscience to be
Scripture, and not what others judge, if they judge the contrary? when Luther
began the Reformation, did not almost all Christians, and the whole Church
believe Purgatory and Prayers to saints to be the Doctrine of Scripture; and
did not he, very commendably, deny it against them all, because he judged by
Scripture it was not? will a Presbyterian believe Episcopacy because the Church
of England says its the Doctrine of Scripture; no, but deny it because himsef
judges it is not.


Ismael. Its true, each one may lawfully believe what himself judges to be the
Doctrine of Scripture; provided he be a godly well intentioned man, humble and
meek in Spirit; provided secondly, that what he understands to be the sense
and Doctrine of Scripture, be not absurd and impious in the judgment of all the
rest of the faithful: for, let a man be ever se learned and godly, if he gives
an interpretation of Scripture, which is denied by all the Church, he must not
be followed


Isaac. Your first Prouiso is very good, and J hope you will meet no Doctor of
all those J quoted for those Tenets, which you call blasphemies, who was not a
learned, godly humble and well intentioned man, who will be so bold as to deny
it of Luther, Calvin, Beza, Zuinglius, etc. Your second Proviso is not just,
and in it you overthrow the whole Reformation, and our Rule of faith; for this
being, as you granted, Scripture as each Person of sound judgment vndestands
it; whateuer interpretation or sense any man of sound judgment understands to
be of Scripture, he may safely and piously believe it, tho all the rest of the
world should judge it to be impious and blasphemous; otherwise our Rule of
faith, must not be Scripture as we understand it; but as it is understood by
others: and whereas no Tenet, of all those J rehearsed, but was judged to be the
sense and Doctrine of Scripture by some of those eminent Drs. I quoted; it
follows, they might have safely believed them; and if you or J judge as they
did, we may also believe as they did, and be still of the Reformation.


Ismael. It Is wicked and pernicious to say, any particular Person may believe
his own private sense and interpretation of Scripture, if it be judged by all
others to be naught; and therefore the Church of England, prudently and wisely,
puts a stop and bridle to the extravagant and rambling imaginations of
particular Persons; they must conform themselves, and believe but what the
Church judges may be safely believed.


Isaac. Pray Sr., since when is it commendable to constrain men's judgments to
believe, not what each one thinks best, but what the Church thinks may be
safely believed? was this commendable in the beginning of our Reformation, when
our blessed Reformers began to teach their private judgments against the Church
then established? if it was; then the Church of Rome is to be commended, for
persecuting and excommunicating our first Reformers; and if this was not, nor
is not commendable in the Church of Rome; why is it commendable in the Church
of England? this is a piece of Popery, whereof the Church of England is guilty,
and for which all our Congregations are jealous of her: be it known to you,
our other Congregations, Lutherans, Calvinists, Anabaptists, etc. are as truly
and godly Children of the Reformation as the Church of England; and they will
not submit to that Popish tyranny, nor suffer any curb to their judgments, but
will have our Rule of faith to be but Scripture, and each one to understand,
and believe it, as he thinks best in the Lord.


Ismael. J confess, other Congregations will admit no such curb, nor bridle to
their judgments, but follow Scripture as they understand it; but the Church of
England has a reverent regard for the sense and interpretation of it given by
the Primitive ages, Fathers and Councils; and that we prefer before the private
interpretations of particular Persons.


Isaac. And just so said the Popish Church to Luther and our first blessed
Reformers; and if that had been well d^n; we should have had, neither
Protestancy, nor any other Reformation: but you confess at least, that the Rule
of faith in all other Congregations, is but Scripture as each Person
understands it, and each person may consequently believe his own sense of it,
and deny the sense of any other if he does not like it: then you must confess,
that in all other Congregations, except the Church of England, any Reformed
Child may believe any sense and Doctrine, which any Person of sound judgment
judges to be Scripture, if himself likes it, tho all the rest of the world may
think it naught; and whereas you cannot deny, but that all and each Dr. quoted
by me for those Tenets, which you call blasphemies, were sound and able
judgments; you must confess, that it is a necessary sequel out of their Rule
of faith, that in all other Congregations they may piously and safely believe
all those Tenets, and be still true Children of the Reformation.


Ismael. J confess if they speak coherently and stand to their Principles,
they may believe them safely; but as J hate those blasphemous Tenets, I abhor
and detest also that Principle and Rule of faith of other Congregations, from
which such Tenets are unavoidable sequeles.


Isaac. Good Ismael; you forget what you have hitherto all along avowed, and
you are quite astray from the Doctrine of the Reformation: you have often
granted me, that our Rule of faith is Scripture, not as this or that
Congregation, Doctor, or Church, but as each Person of sound judgment
understands it; and now you tell me you hate and detest that Rule, because that
out of it, there follow strange and blasphemous Tenets? you say, the sense and
interpretation of the primitive ages, Church and Fathers must be prefered
before the interpretation of any private Person or Congregation; and what think
you of our whole Reformation, and particularly of our 39. Articles of the
Church of England, which allow no other Rule of faith but Scripture as each
person of sound judgment understands it? what say you of Luther, Calvin, Beza,
and the rest of our first Reformers, who preferred their own private sense and
interpretation of Scripture, before that of the whole Church? what say you to
the Presbyterians, who prefer their own sense and interpretation of the Bible,
before that of the Church of England? what say you of all the Congregations of
the Reformed Church, each one of which, holds its sense and Doctrine of
Scripture, different from all the rest? I grant, there ought to be a respect
for the judgment and interpretation of the Text, given by the Primitive Church
and Fathers; but if a Doctor, or man of sound judgment, replenisht with Gods
Spirit, reads Scripture with an humble heart, and pure intention, and judges
by it, that Bygamy is lawful; that there is no Mystery of three Persons in one
Divin Nature; that Christ despaired on the Cross, etc. tho these Doctrins be
quite against the judgment of Fathers, Church, and Councils, he may believe
them, and be still a true Reformed Child, because he follows our Rule of faith;
and if he must deny these Articles, because others decry them; then he must go
against his own judgment and conscience, for to conform himself to them, and
his Rule of faith must not be scripture as each man of sound judgment
understands it; but as the primitive Ages, Church, and Councils understand it;
and this is Popery.


Ismael. Prethy friend Jsaac, let us give over: all that your discourse drives
at, by what J can perceive, is either to beat me from the Reformation by
showing me the absurdity of its Rule of faith; or oblige me to believe
scandalous and blasphemous Tenets as necessary sequeles out of that Rule: I am
a Child of the Reformation, and never will be otherwise.


Isaac. The Lord, who is the Searcher of hearts, knows, you misconster my
intentions: how can you say I inte^d to beat you from the Reformation; do not
J insist and persuade you to stick fast to its Rule of faith, and acknowledge
no other but Scripture, as you understand it? how can you say, J oblige you to
believe falls and scandalous Tenets? to the contrary, J advise you not to
believe them, if you judge by scripture they are falls and scandalous: what my
discourse drives at is, that you should not censure, blame, or call any Doctrine
blasphemous, scandalous, falls, or heretical (Popery excepted) for, tho you
judge by Scripture it is not true; an other will judge it to be the true sense
and Doctrine of the Text; and if he does, he may with a safe conscience believe
it, and ought not to be blamed by you or any other for believing it; if you do
not like that Doctrine, do not believe it; but let the other believe as he
judges by Scripture he may, and let every tub stand on its own bottom.


Ismael. Once more I beseech you give over; J will not discourse any more with
you.


Isaac. Nay Dear Ismael, I see you are troubled, and I will not leave you in
that perplexity: be pleased to listen to three points I will propose unto you,
and you will not miss to find satisfaction in either of them.


Ismael. Let Us hear them.


Isaac. Will you believe Scripture, as it is interpreted, and in that sense
which the Church, Councils, and Fathers propound unto you?


Ismael. J will not be obliged to that; for I may judge by Scripture that sense
and interpretation of it, to be falls and erroneous; and I will not be obliged
to believe any thing against my judgment and conscience; that is Popery.


Isaac. That Is well, in so much you follow the footsteps of Luther, Calvin, and
our other fist Reformers, who would not believe what the Church believed in
their time, nor regarded not, what the Papists alleged out of the Councils
and Fathers against them; because they held themselves obliged to believe
Scripture as they understood it, and not as it was vndestood by others: Will
you then believe Scripture in that sense and interpretation which yourself
judges to be true, tho the Church, Councils, and all other Congregations, judge
it to be falls and erroneous; and give the like liberty to all others?


Ismael. That Is dangerous; for it would follow, that any man might believe
without check or blame, the greatest blasphemies imaginable, if he judges them
to be the sense of the Text.


Isaac. Why then, since that the first does not please you, for fear of
constraining your judgment Papist-like; and the second displeases you, for the
scope it gives for to believe any thing, or nothing; your best way will be to
lay Scripture aside, whereas Christ has forgot, or neglected to appoint us some
assured means for to know, what sense of it he would have us believe.


Ismael. And what Religion shall J profess, if J lay Scripture aside?


Isaac. The same which now you have by Scripture; that is to say, whatever you
judge to be the true Worship of God: be sure to profess a reverence for
Scripture, and seem to believe its the Word of God; least you may scandalize
weak Brethren; pretend allwaies that your sentiments are grounded upon the
Text; but betwixt you and God, believe whatever you think to be true, worship
God, as you-judge he is to be worshipped, and that is the way to live in peace: do
you think but that those Noble Spirits, which they call the Wits of England,
have a good Religion? in public they speak reverently of the Bible, but we
know what they have, and do declare in their private discourses, that its but a
Romance or mere fiction: Do you think but that there was a Religion in England
before it saw Gregori's Emissaries, Austin and his Monks? what need therefore
of a Bible for to have Religion? Were not the Swinfeldians a religious
Congregation and of the Reformation to, yet they cared not for Scripture, but
grounded their belief upon Gods inspiration and inward speech to the heart?


Ismael. If I were not well acquainted with you, and had not very convincing
proofs, and signal testimonies of your piety, solid Religiosity, and
Christianity, I would judge you by this last piece of your discourse, to be an
impious Atheist or Pagan: and J wonder that so good a Christian, as I know you
to be, should speak so irrevently of the Bible, and so much in commendation of
Paganism as you do: There was indeed a Religion in England before they knew
what Scripture was; but that Religion was Paganism, which Austin and his
Companions happily banished from our Land.


Isaac. Happily? do you call an exchange of Paganism for Popery (introduced by
Austin) a Happiness? is it not generally believed in our Reformation, and most
strongly proved of late, by that incomparable Wit and Penman Doctor
Stillingfleet, that Popery has as much of Idolatry, as Paganism: our land
therefore had in Paganism, as good a Religion, as it received by Austin in
Popery: does not this our noble Champion, and most of the Scribes of the Church
of England teach, that Popery is a saving Religion, that we may be saved in the
Church of Rome? if Popery (not withstanding it be Idolatry, as they say) be a
saving Religion; how can they deny but that Paganism is also a saving Religion?
what need had our Forefathers therefore to abandon Paganism? why was it not
left in the land?


Ismael. Whatever may be said of Popery, it cannot be denied, but that
Christianity is better than Paganism: the expulsion therefore of Paganism by
Austin was a Happiness, because by it Christianity was introduced, and
established in our Kingdom.


Isaac. Alas Ismael, if England had bin as well informed of the merit of
Paganism, when first Christianity was preached, it had never exchanged the one
for the other.


Ismael. What, not Paganism, which adored a Multitude of Gods, for Christianity
which adores but one? Not Paganism, which adored Jupiter, Saturn, Venus, etc.
who were Devils and Evil Spirits, or wicked Men, who caused themselves to be
adored, for Christianity, which adores the only true, immortal and eternal
Deytie?


Isaac. You speak with the vulgar sort; and believe as you have bin instructed
by your Ancestors: I confess, the Apostles, and Ancient Doctors of Christianity
do teach, that the Gods of the Gentiles were Devils or Evil Spirits; I confess
also, all the Christian World since the first preaching of the Gospel, was so
persuaded, grounded upon Scripture, which in several places says, the Gods of
the Gentiles were Deuds, grounded upon the Doctrine of the Apostles, and their
Successors the Fathers of the Church, and the World being persuaded by the
Apostles, by the Doctors, Fathers, and Preachers of Christianity, that the Gods
which the Pagans adored were but Devils, which by sorceries, and marvelous
works deceived mankind, and made themselves to be adored as Gods, all men were
ashamed to adore but Devils, forsook Paganism, and embraced Christianity. And
all was but a mere Policy of Popery, to cast so much dirt and calumny upon
Paganism, and make its Gods but Devils, for to introduce and establish
Christianity; Dr. Stillingfleet in his Charge of Idolatry against the Church of
Rome, Page 40. and 41. says plainly, that the Pagans are charged with more
than they were guilty of; page 7. says that Jupiter adored by the Pagans, was
so far from being an Arch-Devil, in the opinion of S. Paul, that he was the
true God, blessed for ever more: that the Pagans adored but one suprem and
Omnipotent God, which they called Jupiter, and which they did believe to be
neither a Devil, nor a Man, but a true, and the first and chiefest of the Gods;
and that the rest of the Gods, which they adored, they looked upon them, as
upon Inferior Deyties, and gave them no other adoration, but such as the
Papists give to their Saints.

If therefore the Pagans adored the true God under the name of Jupiter, and the
other Gods but as inferior Deyties, as the Papists do their Saints; was it not
injustly don by the Ancient Fathers and Teachers of Christianity, to have
imposed upon the World, and made us believe the Pagans adored but Devils and
Evil Spirits? have not the Pagans Right and justice on their side, for to
plead before our wise and religious Parliament, that Paganism may be restored,
or at least tolerated, and Jupiter, with the rest of the Gods, may be adored,
as formerly they were; first because Paganism is no more Jdolatry than Popery,
as Dr Stillinfleet, Mr Burnet and other Reformed Writers prove convincingly;
secondly, because that Paganism having bin banished out of our Land upon the false information of our first Teachers, that it was an Adoration of Devils, or
Evil Spirits, and wicked debaucht Men, who by counterfeited wonders, and
cheat, gained the Peoples adoration; since that Dr Stillingfleet, Mr. Burnet,
and other Reformed Writers will make it out, that the Pagans adored no Devils,
but One, true Omnipotent, suprem God, blessed evermore, which they called
Jupiter, and the rest of the Gods as inferior Deities, as Papists do their
Saints; and will prove that the Pagans were charged by the first DDrs of
Christianity, and by all our Ancestors, with more than they were guilty of; why
should not Paganism be restored again to the Land, and heard to speak for
itsselfe, and Dr Stillingfleet and his zealous companions be lycenc't to plead
for them, and for holy Jupiter, so foully misrepresented by Antiquity, as to be
believed an Arch-Devil, whom Dr. Stillingfleet will prove to have bin, a true
God blessed for ever more.


Ismael. The more J discourse with you, the more J am perplexed in mind; J bid
you a Dieu, and do confess J carry with me from your discourse, a dislike of
what I have bin hitherto, an vnsettlement in my persuasion, and a compassion of
the poor Pagans, so unjustly banished from our Nation, if what Dr Stillingfleet
says, be true: he is a learned, religious, and diligent searcher into
Scripture; the Ancient DDrs and Fathers of the Church reading Scripture, judged
and taught, that Jupiter was a Devil, as well as the rest of the Gods which the
Gentiles ad^red; Dr Stillingfleet and other Reformed DDrs reading Scripture
judge he was no Devil, but the true God, blessed for ever more; any Child of the
Reformation may believe either of both, and put Jupiter in our Litanies, as
well as Jesus Christ, and offer Sacrifice to him as formerly our Ancestors did;
for whatever any man of sound judment judges to be the Doctrine of Scripture,
may be safely believed, and is the D^ctrin of the Reformation: as for my part,
I see our Wise Parliament sits now upon a new settlement of Gouvernment and
Religion, and I will not resolve upon any Religion, until I see what it
concludes. If Dr Stillinfleet be so zealous, as to put in a good Word for
Paganism before the Religious Assembly, he may find Abettors, and as the
Parliament cherishes Dr Oats for the extirpation of Popery, so it may cherish
Dr Stillingfleet for the introduction of Paganism, and the erecting of Temples
and Altars for holy Jupiter, his true and evermore blessed God; and if he be
successful in this undertaking, as for exchanging Presbytery for Protestancy,
he was promoted to the Deanery of S. Pole, so by changing Christianity for
Paganism, he may expect to be his Holy Jupiter's heigh Priest, in London
Capitol, and reign with him everlastingly in the other life, in case he
believes there is an other.


FINIS.

