TWO LETTERS From the LORD Pieter de Groot, TO THE States of HOLLAND AND
WEST-FRIESLAND, And to the Governors of ROTTERDAM: In Vindication of his
Reputation, and the Occasion of his Retiring to Antwerp. Dated August the
first, 1672.

With Allowance. August 24, 1672.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Jonathan Edwin at the Sign of the Three
Roses in Ludgate Street. 1672.

(...) and the Affection of the Inhabitants, in such a manner that I should
have needed no other Aid, Assistance and Security, for my Safety. But I have,
God help and forgive those that are the occasion thereof, found more cruelty
and rage in the midst of my Native Country, and in the City wherein I was
born, (where to my Knowledge I never gave any man the least occasion of
discontent) than ever was used amongst People of one and the same Nation: My
House has been set upon several times, as well by night as by day, my
Messengers dragged along the Streets, my Children threatened, my Self and my
Followers on a Sunday coming from the Stadt House in Sermon time assassinated
with drawn Knives, insomuch that nothing but the miraculous hand of God could
have delivered me from apparent death. And yet, my Noble, Great and Mighty
Lords, all these dangers have never moved me to prefer my Safety before the
Welfare of my Country, or to spare my Person or Estate, so long as I believed
that my poor Service might be advantageous to it, or that there might be more
madness than design mixed with this boisterous Work: always judging that the
duty of a faithful Governor is to oppose the Common Insurrections in a State
by private Consultations and Debates But after that I evidently perceived out
of the Reports and Propositions which were made in your Noble, Great and Mighty
Lordships Assembly, that the general Danger would be changed to a particular
one, and by the exposing of my Person make a Sacrifice to the Communalty: I
believed that that which hitherto might in me have passed for a sincere and
faithful Intention, would henceforward be accounted Carelessness and
Imprudence; and therefore judged that I was bound as well in respect of my
Family, as for the defense of my Honor, to secure my self from the violent
hands of my Enemies, and to retire so long till I might return into my native
Country without Danger, and according to my Duty perform the Services of your
Great and Mighty Lordships. I have therefore retreated into Brabant, with
Intention, if I be too hotly pursued, to seek my Safety farther, till I meet
with a Place where I may live secure and without Molestation. Nevertheless,
assuring your Great and Mighty Lordships, that I will never stain my former
Fidelity, which is clouded by these troublesome times, by any Action that shall
prove prejudicial to my native Country, disadvantageous to your Great and
Mighty Lordships, derogating from my Reputation, or contrary to the Opinion,
which I am assured that all Honorable and Worthy Governors have of me. This I
judged my Duty bound me to make known to your Great and Mighty Lordships,
whilst I with a sincere Heart implore the Almighty God to grant your Great and
Mighty Lordships a laudable Regency, Peace from without, Unity within, and
accordingly the good Inhabitants all manner of Happiness.

Dated in Antwerp, August 1, 1672. Underneath stood Your Noble, Great and
Mighty's Humble and Obedient Servant, Signed, P. de Groot.

The SECOND LETTER.
Noble, Honorable, Wise, and most Prudent LORDS;
My Lords,
ALthough my Return into my native Country was not so timely as I could have
wished, yet I have time enough to see, that the Disorders which have been there
for some Weeks past, proceeded from no small occasion; and that the good
Governors were very ill treated: yet I have nevertheless (though in my
Conscience) with many others, well knowing that my Deportment (which may
sufficiently be justified) had not given the least occasion thereto, patiently
endured the Outrages committed on my House, Family, and Person in respect of
the Public, so long as the Commotions were frequent: But after that I found
the Danger would be distinguished, and deliver up my Person as a Victim to the
tumultuous Communalty, I judged that it was time that I secured my Safety by my
Retreat, as well in respect of my Care due to my innocent Children, as also to
be the better able to defend my Reputation (which I esteem equal with my Life)
before the whole World; which will need little Trouble, when my Actions
agreeing with the Orders from the States, shall by some of the Members be
examined. I have suddenly retreated into the Spanish Netherlands, that I might
not give the least occasion of Dislike to my Enemies, with intention to return
and perform my Duty so soon as I am assured that your Noble and Honorable
Lordships are in condition and inclined to protect me and assure my Safety,
which is proper and necessary for the meanest Inhabitants, but more especially
for Governors. So committing your Noble and Honorable Lordships to the
Protection of the Almighty God, I remain

From Antwerp, Aug. 1, 1672. Noble, Honorable, Wise and most Prudent Lords,
Your Noble and Honorable Lordships Most humble Servant, P. de Groot.

FINIS.

