New EXPERIMENTS, And Useful OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING Seawater MADE FRESH,
According to the Patentees Invention: In a Discourse Humbly Dedicated to His
Majesty the KING of Great Britain, etc.

By a Fellow of the College of Physicians, and of the Royal-Society.

Printed Anno Dom. 1683

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent Majesty
May it please your Majesty,
THe making Seawater Fresh, has of late bin much discoursed of, and is of
great Consequence, not only with respect to Merchant-ships, but also, as I
conceive, to your Majesty's Navy and Garrisons, and to Sea-Port-Towns in all
parts of the World, where good Water is wanting.

All that is proper to be said upon the Matter, will lie in making good these
three Assertions.

I. That Seawater may easily, safely, commodiously, in sufficient quantities,
be made Fresh for all common Uses at Sea.

II. That so done, it is as wholesome to be Drunk, and used about Diet, as any
other Water now in use at Sea.

III. That being so, the advantages are such, as will much more than
countervail the charge and trouble about it.

FOR the Truth of the First, we have the Reputation of the Gentlemen who have
your Majesty's Patent for it, and their Interest also to assure Us. By an
Instrument scarce a yard over, which may stand under the Deck of any Ship, or
very well in the Cook-room, and all Smoke and Fire avoided; they can make about
ninety Gallons in twenty four hours: Which at the largest Allowance, of three
quarts to a man, being kept at constant working, will serve about a hundred and
Twenty men; although two quarts a day, or three pints, in time of scarcity, is
counted a good allowance for one man.

We are likewise assured, that it may be done with ease and ordinary
attendance: For although the Sea be Salter in some places than in others, yet
the Operation is the same; neither is there any difference betwixt that which
comes first, and last. And whatever is to be put into the Engine with the
Water, may as easily be done, as Salt or Oate-Meal into Pottage: So that one
man may serve both to make the Drink, and for other uses of the Ship.

By Mr. Boil we are also assured, That Sea Water thus made Fresh, is as
Wholesome to be Drank, as any Water about the Town, in its best condition. And
by an Ingenious Physician of the College, a proper comparison has been made
betwixt This, and the best Water. And so many of the College, as were desired,
have not doubted to give it under their Hands, That they were satisfied of the
Wholesomness of this Water.

Notwithstandi^ which, to give the World a little more express proof of the
matter; I shall, with your Majesty's leave, undertake the same; which I think,
I may the more properly do, because I have no share either in the Profit of it,
or in the Credit of the Experiment.

Now, all the Signs, which either Physicians, or common Experience, have given
of the best Water, are these; viz. Clearness, Thinness, Sweetness, Softness,
Lightness, Durableness, and Pureness or Simplicity; with all which good
qualities, if this Water stands in the first rank, I suppose no rational man
will further d^^^te whether it be Good, or Oo.

The Clearness hereof, although it may be pretty well observed in a good
Flint-Glass; yet I considered, that as there are degrees of Heat and Cold, of
which our Bodies being unsensible, can only be judged of by a Weather-glass: So
there may be degrees of Perspicuity, which the Eye, unless assisted, will not
easily reach; as may appear by this easy Experiment.

If a few drops of Claret be put into Fresh Seawater, (such as is made by the
Patentees, and with which I made This, and all the following Experiments) they
will give it a kind of Light Hiacynthine Red* But if the same quantity of
Claret be dropped into as much River-water, and that after the Water has stood
in a Cistern to settle a considerable time, it will look Muddy; as if a drop of
Ink had been put into it; the Claret discovering those Opacous parts, which
before were not easily discerned.

The same is likewise an argument of the Thinness of this Water. As is also the
Preparation of it by Fire; for the very Boiling of Water, is one way
recommended by Hyppocrates, and commonly used for the Attenuating of it; that
is, the Separation of any Gross and Heterogeneous parts, which swim therein,
and upon Boiling use to Subside: And the greatest part of Rainwater, which is
as Thin as any, is Distilled from the Sea.

Its Sweetness recommends it, both as to the Smell and Taste; for the best Water
has no Scent, neither has this any. And so for the Taste; it is true, a little
Alkaline Salt, in the opinion of some Water-Drinkers, gives a kind of Sweetness
or Savouriness to Water, as Salt to their Pottage; for which cause, I have
known them to prefer Pump-water before any other sort. But the best Water, and
that which is generally, both by Water-Drinkers and others most esteemed, is no
otherwise Sweet, than in being very Soft upon the Tongue, and rather Insipid;
and such is this Water.

Neither does it excel in Sweetness or Softness to the Taste alone; but also to
the Touch: Of which quality, Dyers and Laundresses (who are very Critical at
their Finger-ends) make the best Judgment in mixing their Water with Soap. But
a different degree of Heat, or proportion of Soap, will alter the Case: And
therefore, to make the Trial exact, let half a Pint of Pump-water be Warmed to
a convenient degree, and half a Dram of Common Soap dissolved therein; in
doing of which, it will be very difficult to raise a good Lather; the Water
underneath it will look muddy and unequal, as if it were Curdled, and when the
Lather falls, it lies on the Water, or any thing it is put upon, like Grease,
yet feels Harsh.

The same quantity of Soap and River-water, and the Water Heated to the same
degree, make a high Lather, and that in a short time, and the Water also under
it, is equal and Clear.

In all which respects, this Fresh-Sea Water does not only equal that of the
New-River or Thames, but excels it: For besides, that, it is rather Clearer
when the Soap is dissolved; it also makes as strong a Lather, in a shorter
time, and with less Soap; insomuch, that the Woman I caused to make the Trials,
and compare them, not knowing whence I had any of the Waters, guessed that
above a pound and a quarter of Soap, would not go so far with Thames Water, as
a pound would do with this Fresh-sea-water.

Another Circumstance is, That if the Water be extraordinary Good, it will make
a very good Lather without being Heated, which this Water will also do.

This same Water is also as Light as any common Water whatsoever; as may best
be proved by a Water-Poise, which the Italians commonly use, when they would
try the Lightness, and therein the Goodness of their Water. For this purpose I
marked the neck of one with several Degrees equally distant, Immersed it in the
seven following Waters; wherein it sunk less or more, according to the Gravity
or Lightness thereof.

In the Pump-water in Chancery Lane, (a Heavy Water) it hardly dips to the
first, or lowermost Degree.

In the Pump-water in Christ's-Hospital, just to the lowermost.

In the Conduit-water in Cheapside, to the second, or near it*

In Thames-water, New-River-water, Water distilled from Spring Water, and in
Fresh Seawater, to the third, or there about. So that it is as Light, as
common Water distilled,

Neither is there any Water more Durable or Uncorruptible: For all Corruption
in Water, shows it self one of these four ways; either by some ill Taste or
Smell, or by becoming Muddy or Turbid, or by gathering some Skin, or Bubbles at
the Top, or by letting some Sedement fall to the Bottom; none of all which
happens to this Water, though some of it has been kept, both in and out of
the Sun for nine Months; and without all doubt, would continue so much longer.

The last mentioned quality of the best Water, was, its Purity; that is,
Simpleness, or Homogenity of Parts.

I deny not, but rather contend, That there is a certain Aerea^ Nitre
incorporated with all Water; of a different nature from Nitre commonly so
called, and such as by no means yet known, can be visibly separated from the
Water: From hence, chiefly it is, I conceive, that Water obtains its Cooling
quality; and that when it Freezes, it is not because it is then only
impregnated with this Nitre; but because then the Air being Surcharged, throws
off a greater quantity into it: As when Water is Sweetened or Seasoned with a
little Sugar, it does not follow that there is none in it, because not enough
to make it Candy* So there is of this invisible Nitre in Water, always enough
to Season it, though not to make it Candy, or turn to Ice.

Now allowing this Nitre, that Water which in all other respects is the most
Simple; is also justly to be esteemed most Wholesome, and always has been so.
For as the Humors of the Eye, which is the Instrument, and the Air the Medium,
by which we discern all Colors, ought to be themselves perfectly Transparent
and Colorless: So Water, which is only a Vehicle to our Food, should be it
self the most Simple, and freest from all manner of Qualities, besides those
proper to it as Water. For if it be desired at any time to be Embued with any
other Quality; it is with respect to some Medicinal Use, and not Common Diet.

Now this Purity, or Homogenity of Parts, does eminently belong to this Fresh
Seawater, as I shall make it appear several ways; and therewithal, show the
Reason of its other Good Qualities; especially, of its Softness, Lightness and
Incorruptibility.

And first, the reason of its Softness, is its Purity; or its being undefiled
with any kind of Corrosive Salt, whether Alkaline, Marine, or Acid.

For upon Evaporating of any hard Pump-water, most Spring-waters, and
River-waters, in a Glass-Vessel, or one very well Glased; it is evident, that
the former contains a considerable quantity of Salt: A Gallon from the Pump in
Chancery lane, which is the Saltest-Water in this City, will yield near three
Drachms: Not of an Alluminous Salt, as is commonly thought, but an Alkaline,
with the Taste and other properties of a Lixiviall Salt.

That Spring-waters, though they yield more or less of the same Salt; yet in a
far less quantity, and that River-waters yield the least of all: Of which three
sorts of Waters, the first are the Hardest, the last the Softest of any in
common use; yet excelled by Fresh Seawater, as appears by one of the foregoing
Experiments.

Neither is there any Marine-Salt herein. For whereas half a Pint of this Fresh
Seawater, or of River-water, and half a Dram of common Soap, will of
themselves make a very good Lather: If but twelve or thirteen Grains of common
Salt be added to the Water before the Soap be dissolved therein, it will
Curdle, and the Lather fall like Grease upon it, as if it were some Harsh
Pump-water.

Nor yet any Acid: For if you put but seven or eight drops of Oil of Vitriol
into half a Pint of River-water, though you increase the former quantity of
Soap, yet it will never make any Lather at all.

Or to come yet nearer; should any suspect that some kind of Spirit of Salt may
come off with the Water; if but seven or eight drops of Spirit of Salt be put
to half a Pint of River-water, it will, in the same manner, hinder it from
making any Lather. Nay, if but two or three drops be put into it, they will
have the same effect.

So the reason why Fresh Seawater, as prepared by the Patentees, is so extreme
Soft, is its Purity, or freedom from all manner of Salts, save only that Aereal
Nitre, which is common to all Water, and chiefly contributes to its Cooling
quality.

Or if any one should be so Pertinaceous, as to say, that yet there may be one
Grain, or part of a Grain of Salt, or one drop or part of a drop of Spirit of
Salt; should thus much be granted, then in the same quantity of Thames-water,
there is as much, or more; this being a Softer Water, than even Thames-water it
self.

The Purity of this Water is also argued from its Lightness. The perfect
Dissolution of any Salt, or Earth, in Water, in never so small a quantity,
adding weight to it. So, for Example, if half a Dram of common Salt be
dissolved in a Pint of River-water, the Water-Poise will dip no lower into it,
than into any Harsh Pump-water. So that in a Pint of such Water, there is about
half a Dram of Salt and Limy-Earth, more than in River-water: For although
such Water be as Clear or Transparent as any Distill'd-Water; yet in the
Evaporation, some portion of Earth is always precipitated together with the
Salt.

So likewise, if half a Dram of Oil of Vitriol, or Spirit of Salt, be put to
a Pint of River-water; the Water-Poise will dip therein, but to the same
Degree, as if the same quantity of Salt had been put into it.

Since therefore the Gravity or Lightness of Water, depends upon the
Dissolution of more or fewer Salt, Acid, or Earthy parts therein: And that
Fresh Seawater is rather Lighter than River-water, and as Light as any common
Water Distilled, as has before been proved: The one is as pure and free from
all kind of Salt, Acid, or Earthy parts, as the other.

From whence, and from its being void of any Taste or Smell, it is also easy to
conclude how it is so Permanent and Incorruptible: For in this Case, there can
be no Corruption without Fermentation; nor any Fermentation, where there is no
Sulphur, nor any other Fermenting Principles to be any way discovered: So that
as the Simplicity of this Water, is the reason of its Duration: So this, with
the Premises, an evident proof of its Pureness and Simplicity; which still may
be further confirmed by the following Experiments.

Take about half an Ounce of Syrup of Violets be Dissolved in half a Pint of
some Harsh Pump-water; in a short time, the Water turns the Syrup to a Muddy
Green Color: This I have known to happen to some Apothecaries, as much to
their loss, as their wonder, from whence it should proceed. But the reason was,
though they took sufficient care in picking their Violets; yet not in the
choice of their Water.

Put a few drops of Oil of Vitriol, or Spirit of Salt to the same quantity of
River-water, and then let the same proportion of Syrup of Violets be dissolved
therein, and it presently turns Purple.

But if the Syrup be dissolved in River-water alone; it turns neither Green,
nor Purple, but holds its Blew Color perfect; and so it does the like, if it
be dissolved in Fresh Seawater.

Observing this, I proceed to make the like Experiment with Claret Wine, which
I mixed with several sorts of Water, in some good quantity, as I did the
Syrup: But without any discernable difference between them.

But considering that the Color of Claret being very full and strong, might
require a much greater proportion of Water to overruled it: I put three
Spoonfulls of Pump-water into a Flint-Glass, and dropped into it not above seven
or eight drops of Claret; which being well mixed, I perceived, that in a little
time after, the Color, instead of being changed, was wholly vanished, and the
Water become as Clear, as before the Claret was dropped into it. The Alkaline
parts in this Water, destroying the Acid, and therewith the color of the
Claret*

The same number of Drops, being mixed with the same quantity of
Lambs-Conduit-Water, in a Glass of the like Metal, Bigness and Shape; the
color in a short time, did almost, but not wholly vanish,

Mixed in like manner with River-water, it gives a few Permanent Rays of Red,
but Muddy; as was before observed, and is here again to the present purpose.

But being mixed in the same proportion, and Glass, with River-water Distilled,
gives it a Light, Clear, and Permanent Hiacynthine Red.

And the same Curious and Durable Red, it likewise imparts to Fresh Seawater.

From whence, and all that has been said before, it appears, To have the
Clearness and Durableness of Spring Water; the Lightness or Softness of Rain or
River-water, the Sweetness and Simplicity of that which is Distilled: And in a
word, all the good Qualities of the best Water, without any bad one: Which may
serve to satisfy any Reasonable man, not only to make Trial of it; but also to
prefer it before any other now in use at Sea.

Yet because men will hardly be brought to leave a known Road, though a bad
one; for a better unknown, till they see some body go before them: Therefore,
to discharge all manner of scruple, I must not omit to add, that there are
several Persons of Quality, and others, who have Drunk often and liberally of
this Water; and though not much used to Drink Water, yet have received no
prejudice thereby. And amongst them, some Water-Drinkers; whom I take to be the
most proper Judges in the Case, and who give the Character of it, To be very
Wholesome; and that it will quench the Thirst, as well as any other ordinary
Water.

The Feazibleness of making sufficient quantities of Seawater Fresh, and the
Wholesomness hereof, being granted: The Advantages which will arise from the
use of it at Sea, are very obvious, with respect, both to Profit and Health.

And first, as to Profit, Suppose the Voyage to be made to Surrat; for which,
one Butt of Water, for Drink alone, is the ordinary Allowance for one man. The
quantity being always laid in, not only according to the length of this or any
other Voyage; but also for a Reserve in case of a Calm; which, if it happen
not, they have commonly more than enough. So that if we suppose a hundred men
to be in the Ship, they will require so many Butts for Drink. Whereas, if there
be no Water laid in, but only an Instrument to make it, as there is need: The
Coals to work it a day and half, that is, to make about a Butt (126. Gallons)
of Fresh Water, may be allowed to be something more than a Bushel, which will
be the most; or for a hundred Butts, to be about a hundred and ten Bushels. So
that one Butt containing fifteen Bushels; a hundred and five Bushels will lie
in the room of seven Butts. By which means, about thirteen parts of fourteen
now taken up for Water, will be gained for Stowage; saving that there must be
some few Cask for receiving the Water as it is wrought off from the Engine. And
the like computation, or near it, may be made with respect to any other Fuel,
which may also be used as well as Coal. Besides which, the saving the Charge of
the Butts, will be very considerable; the Price of a Butt being twenty
Shillings, being bound with Iron.

Besides which, there are other particulars, relating to Profit, and the
preventing of Damages both at Sea, and in Seaport Towns; upon which the
Honorable Mr. Fitzgerald in his late Book, does very Pertinently insist.

I shall therefore conclude with the second great Advantage which will hence
arise, and that is; in point of Health. It Is true, that Thames-water, when
first laid in, has the repute of no Unwholsom Drink. And generally, though not
always, good care is taken in laying it in, both at the best time, which is at
half Ebb: and in case of great Tides, above the Bridge, sometimes as high as
Chelsey. And though it Ferments and Stinks in the Voyage, yet grows Sweet
again: And, as they say, does not Stink all at one time

Notwithstanding which, there are very few, who would choose a Suspicious
Water, that may have Spring Water, if they will, or that which is as good; or
better, if it be true, which some say, That in a large Voyage, even some
Spring-waters will Ferment a little. For the mixing with Wine, or any other
use, it would be no small pleasure to the Captain of a Ship, to be sure of that
which is the best. And it is as a Rule among the Seamen, that good Water shall
be valued, and go as far as Brandy, when they Club together for a Bowl of Punch.

In point of Health; peradventure, while the Thames-water is in the height of
its Ferment, even the Seamen may forbear to Drink it. Yet we have no reason but
to believe, when that is over, before the Water be thoroughly recovered, it
often goes down well enough with them; who living in so Thick and Moist an Air,
and having their Mouths always Fired with Salt-Meats, cannot be very Critical
either in their Taste or Smell. So that though the Scent and Taste of the
Water, with respect to the Seamen, is not much to be regarded, yet their
constant Drinking of a Fermenting Liquor, though but for some days, may be of
ill consequence, and for that time, the more incline them to Calentures and
other Feavors; especially near the Line, where they are more subject to them,
and the Water to its highest Ferment. For the maintaining whereof, there is a
considerable stock of Matter in the Water, how simple soever it may seem to be.
Insomuch, that after any long Voyage, it will Burn or give a Flash. Whereas
Fresh Seawater, being free from all manner of Inflammatory and Fermenting
Principles; it can no way conduce to the production of the forementioned
Diseases, but will rather prevent them.

But supposing Thames-water were always Wholesome; yet the Water in many other
places, where Ships are often forced to take it in, is found to be very bad,
and to make the men Sick. An English Ship, the Faulkon, in a late Voyage to
Surrat, being upon the Coast of Malabar, was there forced to take in Water: Of
which, the men who Drank, were taken with Fluxes and Fevers of that ill
nature, that of about eighty five in the Ship, thirteen, or near one sixth
part, died in a short time, and some languish'd long under dangerous Distempers.

And sometimes Ships are brought to that want of Water as neither to have good
nor bad; as in a long Calm: Which though it does not often continue so long as
to Kill the men; yet, besides the anguish of Thirst, it sometimes makes way for
diverse Diseases, as a Surfeit, Dysenteries, or Cholick, upon the first
Immoderate Drinking.

Sometimes also, it is an occasion of great danger both to Men and Ship. Not
long since, a Ship went to Sea, betwixt Chester and Dublin, pretty well
provided with Water. But meeting with a Calm of some days, the Passengers were
forced to Row several Leagues to the Welsh shore; in which time, if a Storm had
happened, the Passengers had been lost in the Boat, and the Ship in all
likelihood had been lost for want of the Hands that were made use of in the
Boat.

Nay it has been known, that a whole Ship of men have Perished for want of
Water. About five years since one came in Laden with Tobacco from Virginia, in
which all the Passengers were found dead; having declared in a Writing which
they had Nailed upon the Mast, That they had Perished for want of Water. All
which Mischiefs will be avoided by the constant supply of Fresh Seawater.

And not only in point of Drink, but also in Meat; most of which now Eaten is
extreme Salt. For which, all the care they have at Sea, is to Soak it before it
is Boiled; not in Fresh Water but in Salt. For if they should use Fresh Water,
they must lay in near double the quantity, the Meat being commonly shifted once
in four hours, for three of four times. They say, indeed, that the Soaking of
it in Salt Water, fetches out the Salt better than in Fresh. And for the first
or second Soaking, I believe it may; yet also, that a Soak or two in
Fresh Water afterward, will do best: Which, to keep the Meat from Stinking, as
at that time it is apt to do, may be done so much the sooner.

But many times the Seamen are put to straits, as not only to Soak but also to
Boil their Meat in Salt Water. Which instead of taking any Salt out of it, does
rather add to it; because the Boiling of the Seawater, makes it to become
Salter.

Now from such Diet, as this, what can be expected, but besides the highest
Scurveys, a a Foundation also for Dropsies and diverse other Diseases, of which
the Patients either die quickly, or are hereby so far weakened, as with respect
to the Public, to be worse than dead: For a man that is dead, is but one man
lost; but one that cannot work, is not only lost himself, but also spends upon
the Labors of another. All which mischiefs will be very much prevented, by
having of fresh Water enough for all uses at hand.

And this, not only by emendation of bad Meat, but moreover in altering the
very way of Diet: For where there is fresh Water, good Victuals may be made at
any time without Flesh. This, with Bisquet, Wheat, or Rice, and a little Sugar,
or Butter, will make very good Food.

I have thus comprised all that is necessary to be said upon this matter, in as
few words as I could, that I might not seem to mis-spend those precious minutes
whereof your Majesty has so few to spare: nor should I have presumed to have
entrenched on them at all, had not your Majesty already judged this subject
worthy your Royal consideration, for the great Usefulness it may be of to Your
Forts on Land, and Your moving Castles in the Sea, where also You are
Sovereign, and the Advantage it must certainly bring to Navigation, that great
Medium that Unites the far distant Parts of your Empire, and makes the whole
World in a manne^ pay Tribute to the Throne of Great Britain. Those that see
the Wonders of God in the Deep, when they find Relief in a Necessity, by which
they must have perished without this Art; will praise your Majesty's Goodness
and Care, not only of your own People, but of all Mankind; and will justly
account it a Miracle that you have raised a never failing Spring of
Fresh-Waters in the midst of the Ocean.

FINIS.

