A SHORT VINDICATION OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE Church of England. Endeavoring
to Prevent all Future QUARRELS AND DISCONTENTS.

PHIL. II. 14. Do all things without Murmurings and Disputings. LONDON, Printed
for R. C. and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, 1689.

TO THE Most Illustrious PRINCESS, Her Royal Highness ANN, Princess of DENMARK.
MADAM,
I Humbly Confess, It is a great Presumption in Me, to Offer any thing to a
Person of so Great Majesty and Judgment; but the Assurance I have of Your
excellent Disposition to favor the Meanest Thing from a good Intention
(besides the Greatness of Your Charity toward many of my Relations) gives me
this Encouragement.

I am confident of Your Highnesses readiness to promote the Peace of All
People; which makes me conclude, That whatever is tending thereunto, will be
graciously Accepted.

One of Your Deceased Servants has often told me of Your Highnesses Zeal to
God, and to Your Country; which nothing here below can sufficiently Requite;
therefore I doubt not, but the Almighty will give You the Fruits of Peace,
which can only answer so much Piety and Goodness.

It is impossible, but there must be Diversity of Opinions so long as the World
endures; Men's Dispositions being generally as various as their Tempers and
Complexions; but methinks this should not cause Difference in Affection, which
is the only thing that gives Occasion to our needless Quarrels and
Superstitious Scruples: To prevent which, it must be the Work of Heaven only.

And so far as it may be lawful for me to Judge. I think there can be Nothing
more proper than to consider, how agreeable the Constitution of Our Church is
to the Commands of GOD; which all must of Necessity comply with, if they would
but lay aside all Passion and Prejudice, which has all along given Birth and
Growth to our Divisions. And it is sad to think, That our Gall-less Religion
should by this means he Entitled to so much War and Bloodshed.

It is a Blessed Thing to be an Instrument of Peace, and the least Hopes of
promoting it is very pleasing to the Minds of all Good Men; and I am sure Your
Highness will to the uttermost Encourage it, having always the Fruits of it in
Your own Breast.

That Your HIGHNESS may always continue Steadfast and Unmovable, (as You have
hitherto done) and in the End obtain Everlasting Life, is the Hearty Prayer of,

MADAM, Your Highnesses Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant, THOMAS GRICE.

A SHORT VINDICATION OF THE Church of England. ENDEAVORING To Prevent all
Future Quarrels and Discontents.
GOD Almighty (tho Man by his Disobedience had pulled off the Seal of the
Indenture which he had made with him) was pleased to renew his Covenant for the
Salvation of lost Mankind: He was pleased also to give forth a Commission to
certain Elected Persons, to proclaim unto him the grand Instance of his Divine
Love, and his Gracious Goodness; namely, What it is he has done for them, in
and by his Son Jesus Christ; and withal to assure Mankind, (that unhappy Seed
of Adam) that the Merits of Christ's Blood are sufficient, through Grace, to
effect their Reconciliation with their offended God: And that they believing
the Power of his Resurrection, and committing themselves to him, by submitting
to the Motions of his Holy Spirit, and by Faith, placing their Affiance upon
his gracious Promises, may obtain an Eternal Inheritance among the Blessed,
through the merciful Mediation and Merits of his Son Jesus Christ.

But since these Holy Men (whom God had thus Commissioned) are fallen asleep,
the vigilant and watchful Enemy of Mankind, Satan, has prevailed by his sly
and deceitful Subtilties, not only to bring in a Counter-Doctrine, and to
commit High Treason against the Royalty, Love, Goodness and Sovereignty of the
Son of God, by altering, changing, and contradicting his Gospel-Proclamation,
to the great obscuring and dishonoring of his Name, and grand Prejudice of the
Sons of Men; but also has employed many to pretend unto their Brethren, that
they have a more Seraphical Understanding, and a greater insight into the Word
of God, than the Apostolical Doctrine holds forth, making the World believe,
that Religion is nothing else but a Politic Engine; and the Precepts of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, to be nothing else but Human Arts and Constitutions;
and the Apostles and Evangelists, not Men inspired by the Holy Ghost, but
Statesmen employed to make these Constitutions to take effect in the World.

But not only this did the Satanical Subtilties of the Devil effect, but also
he induced many to neglect the Fundamental Principles of Religion; to spend
their whole time about Discipline, Ceremonies, and Circumstantial Points: And
in this their fierce and eager pursuit, the Spirit of Error not suffering them
to be content with those Rules, and that clear Light, which so brightly shines,
and is so eminently refulgent in the Word of God; They are led by their own
foolish Fancies, daily creating in them diversity of new Opinions; and so
falling into Sects and Schisms, and by their Divisions and Mental Reservations,
they preserve not the Unity of the Holy Spirit; but, like so many discontented
Members separating themselves from their Body, they become monstrous in the
Profession of their Religion, breaking the bond of Peaceable Love, and falling
off from the Communion of Saints, as if it were no Article of their Creed; and
being in love with their Inventions and New Opinions, they contend for them as
Fundamental Tenets: And not only so, But malign and uncharitably Asperse those
that dissent from them therein, tho never so Conscientious and Religious, as if
they Professed not the same Faith, yea, served not the same GOD, nor believed
in the ^ame Jesus Christ.

Thus by their dissatisfied Curiosities, by their groundless and pragmatical
Disputations about Religion, they pretend (without Legal Authority or Approved
Reasons) to induce a Reformation into our Church. And thus these Pretending
Brethren breed great Factions and Seditions in the Commonwealth of Israel, and
raise such Storms and Tempests as endanger even the Shipwreck of the Church: To
prevent which Disturbances S. Paul gave this Advice, Do all things without
Murmurings and Disputings: And that for these several Reasons.

First, Because whilst we are Disputing about Controversies of Religion, by the
Suspicion of the Truth, we omit the Honor of God* and neglect the observing of
his indispensable Commandments. Secondly, Because in Doubting there is no
Progress nor Satisfaction. Thirdly, Because no Moral Evils are Secret or
Unknown. Fourthly, Because the Tradition of the Scriptures is Infallible,
therefore the Truth of them is so too. Fifthly, Avoid Disputing out of a
respect to the Example of Christ our Savior, who was so far from a different
Apprehension of things, that he condescended unto, and willingly complied with
any reasonable Terms. Of these in their Order.
First, Forbear Disputing, because whilst we are so, we omit the Honor of God.
Men refusing to stand to the Determinations of the Church, and submit to the
Constitutions and Actions of those who are the Ruling part thereof, and the
only lawful Magistrates, do Cavil oftentimes about the least necessary Points
of Religion and Divine Worship; and forget to Honor God for the glorious
Nativity and Incarnation of his Son; for the Merits of his Death, and the Power
and Efficacy of his Resurrection, whereby they are brought (by a lively Hope)
to be justified by the Righteousness and perfect Obedience of Christ in the
Court of Heaven, and are at last Capacitated through the Merits of his gracious
Mediation, to be reconciled to God, and consequently to obtain Everlasting
Salvation.

They forget to praise God, for the several Offices of his Son Jesus Christ.

First, For sending him to be our High Priest and Mediator; that by the
Sacrifice of his Blood, and by the only Merit and Intercession of the same our
High Priest, Divine Justice might be satisfied, and Man (notwithstanding his
Transgressions and Contra-Walkings to his Divine Ordinances) might be presented
at Peace before God; he accepting the Righteousness of his Son, and thereupon
disabling his own Justice from making any further Demands.

Secondly, For sending his Son to be our Prophet, to Instruct his Church, by
revealing unto it the Way and Means of Salvation; in communicating unto the
Members thereof, that Grace and Redemption which he has purchased for them
from his Father, Romans 5. 17. in declaring the whole Will of his Heavenly Father
unto them. Whence we may learn, That it is a gross and intolerable Error in
Men, to think that our Savior Christ has not delivered all things pertaining
to the necessary Instruction and Government of the Church, but left them to the
Traditions and Intentions of Men: And that we may rest abundantly satisfied
with that Doctrine which he has communicated unto us, let us leave off all
Murmurings and Disputings.

But then again; As in the time of Cavilling and Disputing we omit the Honor
of God, so also we neglect our indispensable Duties: We make no progress nor
proficiency in our Duty; God's Services are left undone, his Will unfulfill'd,
his Ordinances neglected, the Conditions and Promises of his Covenant not
thought upon; but his Mercies are slighted, his Grace is rejected, his Goodness
undervalu'd, and his Name so often in our Disputes talked of, that his Nature is
almost quite forgotten.

Thus whilst we are Disputing; whilst we are in our Angelical Raptures, as we
think them; whilst only in our own vain and foolish Conceits we are carried
like Elijah in a Fiery Chariot (in our hot Disputings) even unto Heaven; we
rather keep our selves distant from the Union and Communion of Jesus Christ,
and deprive our selves of that Mercy and Salvation, which by an humble
Submission, through Faith unto God, we might have obtained.

Thus by our Disputings and Cavillings about Religion, about the Way to our
Heavenly Jerusalem, we at least make no progress, and (I am afraid) too often
miss of our intended Journey. Which brings me to my

Third Reason, which is, That we should do things without Disputing, because no
Moral Evils, relating to Ecclesiastical Constitutions are secret or unknown,
among all things that concern the Interest, or are serviceable to the Cause of
Religion, and the Service and Worship of God.

There Is nothing that makes a greater Blustering and Hurly-burly, or gives a
greater Affront to the unpeaceable, unquiet, and unreasonable Temper of those
who are devoid of the Spirit of Conformity and Allegiance, than Ceremonies and
Censures of the Church, which (how allowable and conformable to right Reason)
is easily proved and reconciled from the several Uses and Ends, for which they
were instituted and ordained; And,

First, Concerning the Ceremonies of the Church.

Now that the Ceremonies of the Church are things in themselves merely
Indifferent, and so no direct part of Worship, is a Truth acknowledged and
declared, since that they are only Ecclesiastical and Human Constitutions. And
the Doctrine of Common Prayer, and of the Homilies (speaking of Ecclesiastical
Ceremonies) expressly declares, That they are for a godly Discipline and Order,
which may be changed and altered, and therefore are not to be accounted equal
with God's Law, which is altogether unalterable.

And again, our Articles assert, That our Church has Authority to change and
abolish Ceremonies ordained by Human Authority, that all things thereby may
tend to Edification: All which shows, that there is no Holiness placed in them,
and that they are in themselves no direct part of Divine Worship. Yet the
observation of Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, tho things in themselves merely
indifferent, and left only to the Determination and Appointment of the Church,
so far as they make for Order and Decency, may render our Services more
acceptable to God.

Thus in our Religious Adorations, all comely and reverend Gestures, as
Kneeling, Standing, Lifting up our Hands and Eyes, Silence in the Service of
God, and such like Decent Rites, which are not determined particularly as
necessary Duties; yet, as they include a Reverence of God and his Ordinances,
as they are an obedient Respect to that Command, That all things be done in
Decency and Order: Lastly, As they include a subjection to the only Lawful
Magistrate, and a desire of the Churches Peace, are things which may be highly
serviceable to the Cause of GOD's Glory, and the Honor of his Religion: Whence
we may observe, That all irreverent and unbeseeming Gestures; all
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies and Rites of Religion, repugnant to the Word of God,
or not warrantable by the general grounds thereof; such as are not for Order,
Decency, or Edification in general; that all Will Worship, whereby we make any
thing a part of God's Service, which is not commanded by himself, or has
Episcopal Authority in it, tho it has never so great a show of Godliness in it,
yet in that it leans to Man's Wisdom, is altogether forbidden and unlawful,
Col. 2. 23.

Secondly, Tho these External Rites and Ceremonies be never so good and
innocent in their own Nature (as being neither owned as our necessary Duties,
or used as the Papists use them, namely, as operative Means to convey Grace to
our Souls in and by themselves alone;) yet the admitting or introducing too
many, would be very prejudicial to the Cause of Christian Religion; as by
causing us rather to attend those External Rites, than to mind our Spiritual
Duties; and by carrying our Affections from that inward and Spiritual Worship
and Adoration, by which alone God is glorified, and our Souls Eternally saved.

Thirdly, That no Power is to be admitted in the Church, to prescribe any other
Forms of Worship repugnant to God's Word, or contrary to good Order and Decency.

Since therefore these Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, tho things in themselves
altogether Indifferent, yet (as for matter of use) are allowable, in that they
make for Decency, Order, and Edification; and in that thereby the Mind is
better holden in the thing affected, and better helped and furnished in Inward
Worship, when the Mind and Body are both joined together in the same Religious.
Exercise and Adoration.

If then, I say, to use them be a thing not contrary to right Reason, and
thereby we do no Dis-service to the Cause of Religion or Divine Service; then
consequently to use and observe them is a thing morally good. Which being
granted, it necessarily follows, That not to submit to the Determinations of
the Church; not to communicate with the Members thereof, by a Submission to him
who is the only lawful and Supreme Magistrate; not to conform to Episcopal
Constitutions, or (if necessity requires) to Actions of General Synods or
Counsels, which make or tend to Uniformity, Order, and Edification,
consequently is a thing Morally Evil, and does as naturally appear to be Evil,
as the contrary appears to be good: For, if Obedience and Conformity be Moral
Virtues, it necessarily follows from the Suggestions of Natural Reason, that
the contrary, viz. That Rebellion and Nonconformity are Moral Vices. Therefore
avoid Cavillings, for there needs no Disputing, since that no Moral Evils
(relating to Ecclesiastical Constitutions) are secret or unknown.

But I shall now pass from the Ceremonies of the Church to the Censures thereof.

That Censures (as they are Judgments of the Church for ratification of the
Threats of the Gospel against the Abuses thereof) are indispensably necessary,
and therefore good and convenient, as does most evidently appear.

First, Their use is this, That as Magistrates (by the Laws of the
Commonwealth) do exercise their Justice, by inflicting and dispensing
Punishments to the Offenders, according to the nature of the Crime: So the
Spiritual Censures are are necessary to the Church, both to help the Godly, and
restrain and extirminate out of it the Profane and Irreligious Party, as the
Penal Laws of the Magistrate in the Commonwealth.

But then their necessity does farther appear, since in the Church of God there
are of all sorts, both Holy and Unholy, Obedient and Disobedient, it is
impossible (without Correction) to preserve good Order therein; especially to
restrain the Sons of Disobedience from Offending or Slanderng their Profession.

From whence we may learn, That they who upon this Pretense, viz. That God
forces no man to come unto him, to serve or Worship him; therefore if they
will retain Communion with the Members of the Church; If they will submit to
the Constitutions and Determinations of it; If they will Assemble and Meet
together, to invoke and call upon God's Name, to condole and publicly confess
their Sins and Infirmities with them, to ask and beg Forgiveness at the hands
of God; or, in a word, to serve and worship God, or do any Religious Act, they
may, if they please or will; but so to do, they are not obliged, forced, or
compelled.

I say, That they who upon this Pretense contemn, and think the Censures of the
Church useless and unprofitable, or things not warrantable from God's Word; but
only Acts and Constitutions of Men forward and ambitious of exercising
Authority, and therefore by them they are no whit debarred, (tho nevertheless,
whom the Church separateth from the Outward Seals, they are also deprived of
the Inward Graces;) I say, That these Men are senseless and unreasonable, like
them in the 20th of S. Matthew, that refuse to bear the Yoke of Government, and
to have a Sword in the Commonwealth.

But furthermore, There are many among us, who affecting or aspiring to the
Celestial Supremacy, always endeavor either to induce a Reformation into Our
Church, or else to institute a new Religion; and this they would fain do, by
pretending, that they (and none else) are the true Tribe of Levi, sufficiently
wise to be their own Priests, to Teach and Administer themselves; fitter to
Instruct, than to Learn; to Teach, than be Taught; to Govern, than to be
Governed; and thus they go merrily on in their foolish Conceits; and being
possessed with the Spirit of Disquiet, they seek to gratify their Envy, by
procuring and causing the Jurisdiction of the Clergy to be Voted and Crieddown,
and the power of the truly lawful Ministers of God to be Reviled, that they
themselves might be exempted from Canonical Obedience, and so become
Independent.

And this they do by Courting the People, and pleading the Cause of a Godly
Party; and telling them, that their Priests take too much upon them, in
studying for foolish and useless Ceremonies, strange and unnecessary Censures
for them; whereas they are all Holy, yea, very Holy every one of them. And who
do you think these Men are? Why, these are they who are only Zealous and
Devout, the seeming Godly Party: And yet a People so silly, that when they come
to Encounter, they are sure to be sufficiently Baffled, and to have themselves
and Religion sufficiently exposed to Contempt; and upon all manner of Attacks,
either wounded with a secret Dislike of their own Religion; or else oblige
themselves to a stupid and brutish Wilfulness and Obstinacy.

It Is from hence we hear of so many, so often, and so easily seduced; and that
is the time, viz. when Men fall off from the Rational Way, and sink into Blind
and Ignorant Devotion; from whence we may date most of our great Ills of
Rebellion, and privy Conspiracy. In a word; From whence even all those Devout
Fooleries, which so much encumbered the World, had their first Rise.

Therefore since that Ecclesiastical Censures (as appears from what has been
said) are warrantable, and also of indispensable Necessity, for the Good and
Government of the Church, they are therefore to be dispensed and born without
Murmurings and Disputings.

Fourthly, Do things without Disputing, Because the Tradition of the Scriptures
is Infallible, and therefore the Truth of them is so too; wherefore there needs
no Reasoning or Contention about their Doctrine, or the Truth of their
Information. There are many Men in the World, who by their Profane Discourse,
which they themselves call Wit, would fain Hector all Religion out of the
World, by deriding all Attempts which tend to its Rational Justification.

And this they do by making the World believe, That Religion is nothing but the
Fear of some invisible Power, feigned in the Minds of some fearful Foolishly
devout Men; and that the Bible is of no force as a Law Divine, but only there
where it is made to be so by Laws Civil and Political. But that the Authority
of the Scripture is altogether Divine and Infallible, and the Matter therein
the immediate Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, I shall (to take away all
Cavilling and Disputing) sufficiently convince and demonstrate by these
following Reasons.

Now the Authority of the Scriptures must either depend upon the Authority of
the Church, or else God must be the Author of them; but the Authority of the
Scripture can no way depend upon the Authority of the Church; because to
believe the Scripture is a work of Faith, but the Church cannot infuse Faith.

Again, Any Authority which the Church has, must be proved by the Scripture;
therefore the Scriptures depend not upon the Church.

Now, that God is the Author of them, and that the Truth of them is
unquestionable and infallible, we may easily be convinced from these Reasons:

First, From the Doctrine of them; The Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of
GOD, his Resurrection and Ascension, after his Death and Passion; the Union of
his Divine and Human Nature into one Emmanuel; Three Persons and Subsistences
in One GOD, and GOD to become Man, are things that the finite Capacity of Man
cannot reach, being far beyond the narrow Sphere of his Understanding.

Secondly, From the Matter about which they Treat; They promise Eternal Life to
the Faithful and Obedient, and Eternal Woe to the Disobedient; They prescribe
Laws for the Thoughts, which none but God can pierce; They require Sacrifice,
but prefer Obedience; They enjoin Fasting, but it is from Sin; They forbid
Lusting, and Coveting; which Exactions and Prohibitions are not to be found in
Human Laws, but only in his who searches the Heart, GOD Almighty.

Thirdly, From the continuation of the Wonderful Prophecies, foretelling things
to come (so long Marked out before) with their Circumstances; not doubtful
(like the Oracles of the Heathen,) but such as had in all their Times certain
Performances; and therefore unto what may we attribute them, but the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost? Thus was the Messiah promised to Adam Four
Thousand years before he was born. Thus was the Rejection of the Jews, the
Calling of the Gentiles, the Kingdom of Antichrist foretold; all things coming
to pass aright, without any failing or mistake; the fulfilling of which
Promises cannot be ascribed to any, but the Infinite GOD, who grasps all
Seasons and Times, and with the same infinite Eye, beholds all things present,
past, and to come.

Fourthly, From the quality and condition of the Penmen and Writers of them;
some of whom were never trained up in the Schools of Men; and yet in their
Writings show that depth of Wisdom, which the most Learned Philosophers could
never attain unto: And then the Matter of the Holy Scripture being altogether
of the Heavenly Doctrine, and savouring nothing of Worldly and Earthly
Affections; but every where condemning the same, declaring the GOD of Heaven to
be the Inspirer thereof.

Whence also farther (to avoid all occasions of Questioning and Doubting, or
rather of Cavilling and Disputing) we may learn by the way, That since the
Scriptures do receive indispensably their Authority, not from the Church, but
from the only perfect and True GOD, that thereupon being themselves holy,
perfect, and true, as he is, are also sufficient for the knowledge of Christian
Religion; that they do most plentifully contain all Doctrines necessary to
Salvation: Whence it follows, we need no unwritten Verities; no Traditions,
no Inventions of Men, no Canons of Councils, no Sentences of Fathers; much less
the Decrees of Popes, to supply any supposed defects therein, or to give us
more perfect Directions in the Worship of GOD, or in the Way of Life, than are
expressed in Canonical Scripture.

We may also learn from hence, That the Authority of the Scripture being
Infallible, the Rule thereof is indispensably true and sufficient to make us
wise unto Salvation; and consequently, that there is to be learned out of it a
Rule both of Faith and Works for our Instruction, by the ordinary Means of
Reading and Praying, to which GOD promises the assistance of his Grace, Jam. 1.
5. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him; for the Sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of GOD is given unto us by the Holy Ghost, both to
defend our Faith, and overcome all our Spiritual Adversaries, viz. together
with all false Prophets, Heretics, Schismatics, and such like, Ephesians. 6. 17.
Therefore the Scriptures, the immediate Inspiration of the Spirit of Truth, the
Holy Ghost, are not to be canvas'd up and down, or any way (as we please)
altered; their nature being as unchangeable as their Author; therefore leave
off reasoning, and do all things without Disputing.

But Fifthly and Lastly, Avoid all Strife out of the Example of our Savior
Christ. Our Savior had the Spirit of Godly Constancy in him; His Carriage was
always Civil and Urban, Humble and Candid, Quiet and Peaceable toward his
Church; he was so far from the Spirit of Nonconformity and Contention, of
Morosity and Disobedience, that he rather condescended unto and complied with
any National Terms, than sought to work Disturbance and Faction, Separation and
Division among his Apostles.

Therefore let us stand to the Determination of the Church, and of Wiser Men
than our Selves; Let us stand to the Constitutions and Actions of our Bishops,
the only Lawful Magistrates; Let us still retain Communion with the Church, and
Members thereof; that by Peaceable Living, Uniformity of Conversation, the
Honor of GOD's Name, the Cause of his Religion, the Interest of his Service
and Worship may be promoted and advanced.

In a word, Let us join with the Apostle, and do all things without Murmurings
and Disputings, that we may be blameless and pure, the Sons of God without
rebuke, in the midst of a naughty and crooked Generation; that at last we may
enjoy the Fruits of Peace and Obedience, viz. Eternal Life and Glory; through the
Merits and Mediation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

