SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Brasillian Root, CALLED Ipepocoanha: Imported
from the INDIES: SHOWING Its Wonderful Virtue against VOMITING and LOOSENESS.

Written by a Physician in the Country to the President of the College of
Physicians in London.

London Printed, etc. 1682.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Brasillian Root: SHOWING Its Wonderful Virtues
against Vomiting and Looseness. In a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Being frequently importuned by Esquire Boil to make Experiments upon Indian
Simples, and to give an Account of my Observations and Success to some London
Physicians, and knowing you to be very Curious in Medicine, I take this
Opportunity to Communicate to you what wonderful Virtue I have found in the
Root called Hypepocoanha, which has done such Wonders in France and Flanders
in the Cure of Dysenteries and Lyenterial Fluxes, Diseases proving very fatal
both to Fleets and Armies, as well as unto Cities and Countries.

This Famous Root has an admirable Quality to blunt those Acidities which
irritate Nature, and stimulate the Expulsive Faculty, it stays all violent
Excretions of the Guts; and this it does not by astringency but by its
Cleansing Quality, expelling those Venomous Particles which were lodged in the
Intestines, and afterward by its Balsamic Properties heals and comforts the
Bowels, and repairs those Breaches which the Enemy has made.

I knew an Old Gentleman who fell into a Malignant Distemper for many Days, and
was brought so low, he could not turn in his Bed, and had considerable
Quantities of Blood mingled with his Stools, a black Thrush in his Mouth, with
an intermittent Pulse, after all other Methods proved insufficient, I gave him
the Tincture, Spirit and Extract of this Root in all his Liquid Alliment, and
he found wonderful Relief, and recovered Health and Strength.

A young Man who was miserably afflicted with frequent returns of Pains in the
Bowels, and upon every change of his Meat or Drink was put into a Scowring, so
that all his Nourishment was lost, and he could not sleep, being disturbed by
frequent Motions to Stool, and it had washed away all his Flesh, and reduced
him to a mere Skelliton. I gave him the Medicines made with the Root, and
nothing else, and his Distemper abated, and his Strength returned, and he is
now alive and in good Health.

The Reason why I reduce most Indian Drugs into the form of Tinctures, Spirits
and Extracts, is to preserve their Virtues, which else are apt to perish and
Decay by Time and change of Climate.

This Root is not without the Approbation of good Authorities of Travelers and
Physicians. A famous Doctor in Scotland wrote me a Letter of some great Cures
he had wrought with it amongst Children, who were brought unto the brink of the
Grave by Looseness and Gripings in the Guts; it has carried off all that Green
Choler wherewith they are extremely molested, and thereby prevented many
Distempers caused thereby.

I knew a Gentlewoman who was brought into a very weak Condition by a Disentery
or Looseness, she had taken many Glysters made with very proper Ingredients, her
Physicians thought she had an Ulcer in her Bowels, which might be the Occasion
of her frequent Relapses; I gave her Drops drawn out of this sovereign Root,
sometimes in Wine and Water, and sometimes in Milk and Water, and she quickly
recovered, and has had no returns of her Distemper many Months.

I could give twenty more Instances of Cures wrought by this Remedy, but these
I think are sufficient for any Physician to make trial of it when the vulgar
Methods fail; but some Men will not think it for their Interest to approve of
what they don't prescribe themselves; but I take you to be a Man of more
Honesty and Candor, and design more to do good than to get Money.

I very well remember that Sir Charles Scarborough told me that a Physician in
France had done great Cures with it, and kept it as a Secret a long time, and
when it came to be known to be so effectual against all sorts of Fluxes, the
Secretary of State to that Kingdom gave order that all the Physicians and
Chyrurgeons belonging to the Hospitals and Army should be furnished with it.

Piso and Margrave have given particular Descriptions of it, and I am told that
the Germans Ephemerids gives an Account of it as an infallible Medicine. See
the 20th. Volume.

FINIS.

