AN IDEA OF A PHYTOLOGICAL HISTORY Propounded. Together with a Continuation of
the ANATOMY of VEGETABLES, Particularly prosecuted upon ROOTS. And an Account
of the VEGETATION of ROOTS Grounded chiefly thereupon. By NEHEMIAH GREW M. D.
and Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by J.M. for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1673.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord Viscount BROVNCKER THE PRESIDENT, And to
the rest of the Fellows of the ROYAL SOCIETY.
Right Honorable and most Illustrious,
IF the Dedication of Books were not in use, yet here I think I might have been
a precedent. The promotion of Phytological Science is one part of Your Work;
and it is You have called me to the management of this part, for some time have
entrusted me herein, and by Your most benign and candid acceptance of what I
have performed thus far, have encouraged me hereunto: I therefore present but
Your own into Your hands.

The great Honor and Advantage of Your Fellowship, I first obtained by
Mediation of the late most Reverend Bishop of Chester; whom I cannot name
without saying thus much of him, That He was a Person of that eminent and happy
Worth, which as it was too good to fear envy, so is it too great to need an
Elogie.

With Him it was You were pleased to approve of me for that Undertaking which I
have here begun. Had I consulted my own abilities altogether, I should scarcely
have ventured upon it; seeing very little for which I could think well of my
self, saving that I had learned upon good grounds, to think of You with
greatest Honor. But I also considered, That to insist hereon too much, might
be a reflection upon Your Judgments, who had thought fit to make choice of me.
And, That You were not more the Patrons of Wit, than of Industry, and of all
who shall endeavor to find out, or to confirm the Truth of Things. Withal, I
looked upon Nature as a Treasure so infinitely full, that as all men together
cannot exhaust it; so no man, but may find out somewhat therein, if he be
resolved to Try.

In compliance therefore with Your Commands, I have hereunto devoted my self.
These adding force to my own desires of being somewhat instrumental to the
improvement of Medicinal and and other wholesome Knowledge: if peradventure, as
we increase herein, we may become better and more happy. As to which
Improvement, though I could not hope, yet I would not despair. I have already
prepared the Soil, and made some Plantation; what remains behind, and the
Vintage of the whole, will depend much upon the continued Influence of Your
Beams: for how unpromising soever the Stock may be, yet the Fruit cannot but be
somewhat matured upon which You are pleased to shine. I am also confident, that
the same Nobility and Goodness which accept the endeavors, will likewise
pardon the faults, of

Your most humbly and most sincerely devoted Servant Nehemiah Grew.

THE PREFACE.
HAving diverse years since directed my thoughts toward the Anatomy of
Vegetables; what Observations I had from time to time occasionally made, I
published some time since. In making whereof, I proceeded from the Seed sown,
throughout all the Parts, to the Seed again. Subjoyning to the Anatomy of every
Part, my thoughts of their oeconomical Uses thence deduced.

Hitherto I had examined the Parts chiefly by the bare eye: some few
Observations excepted, which were made by the Microscope. And this I did, to
the intent I might make proof, both for my self and others, how far it is
possible to go with the eye, without the help of Glasses: purposing afterward
to make the utmost use of those also.

Immediately after the Publication of These, a Discourse from the Learned
Malpighius (to whose most ingenious and accurate industry the World is much
beholden) was presented to the Royal Society upon the same Subject, December. 7.
1671. and Dated at Bononia, November. 1. 1671. By whose Suffrage I was glad to
see the Truth of my Observations all along confirmed; his very little differing
from mine, though He has every where made use of the Microscope. As for the
Air-vessels, (which he calls the Fistulae Spirales) although I have long since
taken notice of them, as those which, being much larger than the rest, are more
easily discoverable; yet the manner of their Spiral Conformation (not
observable but by a Microscope) I first learned from Him, who has given a very
elegant Description of them. He communicates not many of his thoughts of the
oeconomical Use of the Parts. And some Things observable of the Parts of the
Flower, Fruit, and Seed, not there found, He may possibly reserve by him
amongst others. I could heartily wish He would have published his Discourse,
but that He is unwilling to, before it be furnished with Figures: for which
reason I thought good to give this account of it.

Presently after the Impression of my first Endeavors, I resolved upon a
further prosecution of them. The Series of my Thoughts and Observations
following thereupon, I have distributed into three Parts, and in obedience to
the Command of the Royal Society have now made public. Which I have the more
willingly done, that others may hence take occasion the better to consider,
what they have to do as well as I. For we may as well commit the Government of
the World, as the Management of Philosophy to any one: and much better, since
Things are far more numerous than Men, and no less various and out of sight.

For the first, it is as comprehensive as I could at present make it. I doubt
not, but that further Means and Inquiries may be suggested; and perhaps no way
better than in the prosecution of these: the generation of Experiments being
like that of Discourse, where one thing introduces an hundred more which
otherwise would never have been thought of.

The second is the prosecution of what I had before begun, and purpose to
continue, both of the Root, and all the other Parts. For this I apologize not;
for what I here represent, are neither Words, nor probable Things; but both the
real and the visible Works of God.

As to the last, I only desire it may be remembered, That while I speak of
Natural Causes, and particularly of those of Vegetation, I intend only the
Material ones, which (whatever others, besides the first, be assigned) we must
allow to be so qualified as to become instrumental thereto; unless it be denied
that there is such a Thing as a Material Cause.

If it be asked why I insist so much on These, whilst I am silent of the
Existence, Nature, and Energy of the Anima Vegetalis, the Vis formatrix, the
Vis Motiva, or other Immaterial one? To this, because I am willing to suppose
the Question soberly propounded, I answer; That it is not for that I have had
no thoughts hereof; but because I do not find they do so well answer the Scope
whereto I am more obliged: for the investigation of the Nature of any other
Secondary Causes, than such as are Material, cannot be so useful to one that is
considering the Nature of a Disease, or Compounding or Applying a Remedy
thereunto. And if any of the Principles or Discourses of Cartesius, Gassendus,
or others about Material Causes, may, upon a right Judgment made, be found
culpable, I am not about to answer for them.

THE CONTENTS.
THE FIRST PART.
UNto what degree the knowledge of Vegetables is arrived, page 1. Wherein
defective, 2. Why concluded to be so, 2, 3. Yet capable of Improvement, 3. And
worthy of it, 4. Diverse Instances given wherein; first of the Organical Parts,
as to their external Accidents and oeconomical Uses, 4, 5, 6. Then of their
Contents, Qualities, and Powers, 7. And an Improvement of this part will
further that of diverse other parts of knowledge, whereof Instances are given,
8, 9. In order whereto, five general Means are propounded. The First, a
particular and comparative Survey of whatever is of more external consideration
about Vegetables, 10, 11. Instanced as to their Figures, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Proportions, 14, 15. Seasons, 15, 16. Places, 16. Motions, 17. The Second, a
like Survey of the Organical parts by Anatomy, as that which is very necessary,
17, 18, 19. In what manner to be prosecuted, both without and with the
Microscope, 19, 20. What thereupon to be observed, 20, 21, 22. And what from
observation made probably attainable, 22. The Third, a like Survey of the
Contents of Vegetables; their several Kinds, 23. Of all which, their
Receptacles, 24. Motions, 24. Qualities, 25. Consistence, ibid. Colors,
Smells, and Tastes, 26. Where also the same Qualities are to be inquired into
as generally belonging to Vegetables, ibid. As their Colors, 27. Odours, 27,
28. Tastes, 28, 29, 30, 31. Also their Faculties, 31, 32, 33. All these to be
further examined by Con^usion, Agitation, Frigifaction, Agitation, Infusion,
Digestion, Decoction, Destillation, Arefaction, Assation, Vstion, Calcination,
34 to 39. By Composition with other Bodies, 39. And by Compounding the
Experiment it self, 40. What hence attainable, 40, 41. The Fourth, a like
Survey of the Principles, as well as of the Contents, of the Organical Parts,
41, 42, 43 Whence will be attainable a further knowledge of the Modes of
Vegetation, 43, 44. Of the Qualities of Vegetables, 44, 45. And of their
Powers, 45, 46, 47. The Fifth, a like Survey of those Bodies either from which
these Principles are derived, or wherewith they have any communion; which are
four in general, scil. Earth, and all solid Receptacles, 47, 48. Water, and all
liquid Receptacles, 48, 49, 50. Air, 50. And Sun, 51. A Sixth general Inquiry
omitted, 51. The Conclusion, 52, 53.
THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I.OF the Figures of Roots in general, 54, 55, 56. Of their Motions, 56
to 59. That of Descent proper to very many other kinds besides the Bulbous, 57.
Demonstrated, 58. The immediate Cause hereof, ibid. What hence resolvable, 59.
And of their Ages, 59. How Bulbous Roots are perennial, 60. How other
descending Roots. And what thence resolvable, ibid. CHAP. II.Of the Skin. Its
external Accidents; and Original, 61. Compounding Parts. Whereof the one
Parenchymous, consisting of Bubles, 62. The other Lignous, consisting of
tubulary Vessels, 62, 63. CHAP. III.Of the Bark. Its Original; and external
Accidents, 64. Compounding Parts. Whereof the one Parenchymous, compared with a
Sponge, 65. The Bubles hereof observed by a Microscope, 65, 66. Their Sizes,
Positions, Content, 66, 67. The Diametral Portions of this Parenchymous part,
67. Their various Extension, Original, Distance, Continuation, 67, 68. Their
Number, Size, Bubles, 68. Content, 69. The other part lignous, consisting of
Succiferous Vessels, 69, 70. The Braces of these Vessels, 70, 71. The Vessels
conjugated into Threads, 71. But no where Inosculated, ibid. Nor Ramified, but
distinct as the Fibers of a Nerve, ibid. Their Kinds, denominated from their
Contents; as Lymphaeducts, 72. Lacteals, etc. 73. Whence their Content of a
white or other like color, 73, 74. Of diverse kinds in the same Root often, if
not always, 74. Their different Number, 75. Size or Capacity, 75. Their various
Situation, 76, 77, 78. CHAP. IV.Of that Portion of the Root next within the
Bark. Its Compounding Parts, 79. The one Parenchymous; its Original, 79.
Position or Configuration, 79, 80. Texture, 80. The other part Lignous. Usually
compounded of two kinds of Vessels. The one Succiferous, either at present, or
originally such, 81. The other Air-vessels. Both of them as to their Braces,
Conjugations, Configurations agreeing in general with those of the Bark, ibid.
Their Braces how different, 82. The Structure of the Bark, and more visibly of
this Portion of the Root compared with that of a Muscle, ibid. The various
Position of the Succiferous Vessels herein, 83. Of the Air-vessels, 83, 84, The
various Number and Size of the Air-vessels, 84, 85. Compared to Nerves, 86. The
Spiral position of the parts whereof the said Air-vessels are composed, ibid.
What further observable of these Spiral parts, 87, 88. What that Wool is which
appears upon breaking the Leaves and other parts of many Plants, ibid. The
Contents of these Vessels, 88, 89. CHAP. V.Of the Pith. Not common to all
Roots, nor in some to all parts, 89. Its various Size, 90. And Shape, ibid.
Succiferous Vessels sometimes and in different manner mixed with the Pith, 90.
The Original of the Pith, 91. The Pith of the same substantial nature with the
Parenchymous part of the Bark, and of the same Texture, scil. composed into
Bubles, 91, 92. The various Size, Position, and Shape of the Bubles, 92. The
Pith a R^^e mirabile, the sides of all the Bubles being made up of interwoven
Threads, 92, 93. And these Threads of most extreme small Fibers, 93, 94. The
Situation or Continuation of the Threads, 94, 95. The Texture of all the other
Parenchymous parts of the Root (or of a Plant) likewise Fibrous, 95. How these
Fibers subservient to the making the Braces and Threads or Conjugations of the
Vessels, ibid. Out of these the secondary Air-vessels probably formed, 96. What
hence inferrible of the parts both of Plants and Animals, ibid. The Contents of
the Pith, 97.
THE THIRD PART.
ALL true Philosophy necessarily asserteth a God, 98, 99. And secureth our
veneration of Him, 99. And of his Laws, 100. And of his Mysteries, 100, 101.
And of Providence, 101, 102. Nature being one universal Monarchy, 102, 103.
Visible, as in all other particular Oeconomies, so no less in that of
Vegetables, 103. If we consider. How the Soil is prepared, by Rain, Sun, Wind,
Air, and their several successions, 104, 105, 106. The Use of the Parenchyma of
the Bark, 106. The Principles of the Sap herein why less discernable, 107. The
Uses of the Skin, 107, 108. A further Use of the Parenchyma of the Bark, 108.
One Use of the Bubles, ibid. The Principles of the Sap how, and of what kind
adherent to the Fibers of the Bubles, 109. With the Principles of these Fibers
how the Sap tinctured, ibid. The Principles of the Sap how, and of what kind
agglutinated to the Succiferous Vessels, 109, 110. The Sap how refundent from
the same Vessels, 110. How agglutinated to the Parenchymous Fibers, ibid. To
the Air-vessels, 111. How and of what kind trajected into their Concaves, ibid.
The Use of the Braces, 111, 112. Of the Diametral Portions, 112, 113. The Uses
of the Pith, 113. The Organical Parts why void of taste, smell, and color,
114. Whence the Succiferous Vessels tough, 114, 115. And the Parenchymous parts
friable, 115. How the Succiferous Vessels grow in length, Cylindrical, and
hollow, 116. The Lactiferous, how and why wider, 117. How the Air-vessels are
formed; grow wider as they grow older, and as they stand deeper in the Root,
118. How the Parenchymous parts become fibrous, and the Fibers disposed into
Bubles, 119. How all stitched up together, 120. The Situation of the
Air-vessels whence, 120. And of the Succiferous, 120, 121. The Motion of the
Air-vessels toward the circumference of the Root whence, 121. And whence
various, 121, 122. Whence many of the succiferous left behind the Air-vessels
in the Pith, 122, 123. Whence the eruption of Strings, the Leaves, and Trunk,
123. How Roots variously sized, 123, 124. How variously shaped, as slender or
thick 124. And how the Pith made as the Root thickneth, 124, 125. Whence the
Root long, 125. Whence less or more stringie, or Ramified, 126. And how Strings
and Branches made, ibid. Whence Root-Buds, 126, 127. How diversely situated,
127. Whence the Root Cylindrical or Pyramidal, 127, 128. How Roots variously
moved, as in a level, 128. Or perpendicularly, ibid. How they grow deep, 129.
Or shallow, ibid. How they descend, ibid. Descend and ascend sometimes
together, 130. How variously Aged; Perennial, ibid. Biennial, or thereabout,
131. Annual, 131, 132. The Contents of Vegetables whence various, 132. The
Content of the Parenchymous Fibers how made, 132, 133. Whence the Diametral
Portions filled with Air, 133. Whence the Pith, ibid. The Content of the
Lymphaeducts how made, 134. Of the Lactiferous Vessels, ibid. And of the
Aerial, 134, 135. The Content of a Vine, Corn, etc. whence so little oleous, of
others more, 135, 136. Some Observations of the Odours of Vegetables, 136, 137.
Of their Colors, 137 to 140. And of their Tastes, 140 to 144.
AN IDEA OF A PHYTOLOGICAL HISTORY Propounded. THE FIRST PART.
IF we take account of the degrees whereunto the knowledge of Vegetables is
advanced, it appears, That their Descriptions, Places, and Seasons are with
good preciseness and curiosity set before us. Likewise, that we are informed of
the Natures and infallible Faculties of many of them. Whereunto so many as have
assisted, have much obliged their Posterity.

By due reflection upon what they have performed, it also appears, what they
have lest imperfect, and what undone. For the Virtues of many Vetegables are
with much uncertainty, and too promiscuously ascribed to them. And of the
Virtues of many they are altogether silent. And although, for the finding out
and just appropriation of them, they have left us some Rules, yet not all. The
Descriptions likewise of many are yet to be perfected; as also their Draughts,
especially as to their Roots. And their proper ranks and affinities much
undermined. But for the Reason of Vegetation, and the Causes of all those
infinite varieties therein observable (I mean so far as matter, and the various
affections hereof are instrumental thereto) almost all men have seemed to be
unconcerned.

That nothing hereof remains further to be known, is a thought not well
calculated. For if we consider how long and gradual a Journey the knowledge of
Nature is, and how short a time we have to proceed therein; as on the one hand,
we shall conclude it our ease and profit to see how far others have gone before
us: so shall we beware on the other, that we conceive not unduly of Nature,
whilst we have a just value for those who were but her Disciples and instructed
by her. Their time and abilities both being short to her, which as she was
first designed by Divine Wisdom, so may her vast dimensions best be judged of,
in being compared therewith. It will therefore be our prudence, not to insist
upon the invidious question, which of her Scholars have taken the fairest
measure of her; but to be well satisfied, that as yet she has not be
circumscribed by any.

Nor does it more behove us to consider how much of the Nature of Vegetation
may lie before us yet unknown, than to believe a great part thereof to be
knowable: not concluding from the acknowledged, much less supposed
insuccessfulness of any men's undertakings; but from what may be accounted
possible as to the Nature of things themselves; and from Divine Providence, by
infinite ways conducting to the knowledge of them. Neither can we determine how
great a part this may be; because it is impossible to measure what we see not.
And since we are most likely to under-measure, we shall hereby but entrench our
endeavors, which we are not wont to carry beyond the Idea which we have of our
Work.

And how far soever this kind of Knowledge may be attainable, its being so far
also worthy our attainment will be granted. For beholding the many and elegant
varieties wherewith a Field or Garden is adorned, who would not say, That it
were exceeding pleasant to know what we see; and not more delightful to one who
has eyes, to discern that all is very fine; than to another who has reason, to
understand how. This surely were for a man to take a true Inventory of his
Goods, and his best way to put a price upon them. Yea it seems, that this were
not only to be partaker of Divine Bounty; but also, in some degree, to be
Copartner in the Secrets of Divine Art. That which were very desirable, unless
we should think it impertinent for us to design the knowing of that, which God
has once thought fit to do.

If for these and other reasons an inquiry into the Nature of Vegetation may be
of good import; it will be requisite to see first of all what may offer it self
to be inquired of, or to understand what our Scope is; that so doing, we may
take our aim the better in making, and having made, in applying our
observations thereunto. Amongst other inquiries therefore, such as these
deserve to be proposed. First, by what means it is that a Plant, or any part of
it, comes to grow; a Seed to put forth a Root and Trunk; and this, all the
other parts to the Seed again; and all these being formed, by continual
nutrition still to be increased. How the Aliment by which a Plant is fed, is
duly prepared in its several parts; which way it is conveyed unto them; and in
what manner it is assimilated to their respective Natures in them all. Whence
this growth and augmentation is not made of one, but many differing degrees,
unto both extremes of small and great; whether the comparison be made betwixt
several Plants, or the several parts of one. How not only their sizes, but also
their shapes are so exceed^ng various; as of Roots, in being th^^k or slend^r,
short or long, entire or part^d, stringed or ramified, and the like; of Trunks,
some being more entire, others branched, others shrub'd; of Leaves, which are
long or round, even edged or escallop'd, and many other ways diff^rent, yet
always flat; and so f^r the other parts. Then to inquire, what should be the
reason of their various Motions, that the Root should d^scend; that its descent
should somet^mes be perpendicular, sometimes more level; that the Trunk does
ascend; and that the ascent thereof, as to the space of time wherein it is
made, is of different measures; and of diverse other Motions, as they are
observable in the Roots, Trunks, and other parts of Vegetables. Whence again,
these Motions have their different and stated Terms; that Plants have their set
and peculiar seasons for their spring or birth, for their full growth, and for
their teeming, and the like. Further, what may be the causes as of the seasons
of their growth, so of the periods of their lives; some being annual, others
biennial, others perennial; some perennial both as to their Roots and Trunks;
and some as to their Roots only. Then, as they pass through these several
seasons of their lives, in what manner their convenient feeding, housing,
clothing, or protection otherwise, is contrived; wherein in this kind and
harmonious economy, one part may be officious to another for the preservation
of the health and life of the whole. And lastly, what care is taken, not only
for themselves, but for their posterity; in what manner the seed is prepared,
formed, and fitted for propagation: and this being of so great concernment, how
sometimes the other parts also, as Roots in putting forth Trunks, Trunks in
putting forth Roots, yea in turning oftentimes into Roots themselves; whereof I
shall in the following Discourse give some instances: with other Heads of
Inquiry of th^s kind.

Nor are the Natures, Faculties, and Contents of Vegetables less various, or a
particular inspection hereinto of less concernment. For since all, or most,
seem to grow in the same manner, with one Sun, one Rain, indifferently well
upon one Soil, and to outward appearance to have the same common parts; it may
be asked, How it comes to pass, that their liquors, or other contained parts
are of such different kinds, one being watery, another winy, a third oily, a
fourth milky, and the like. How also there is such a variety in their sensible
qualities, as their Colors, Tastes, and Smells; what those Materials are,
which are necessary to the being of these qualities; and those formalities
wherein their Essence does consist; as what it is that makes a Plant or Flower
to be white or red; fragrant or fetid; bitter or sweet; or to be of any other
color, smell, or taste. In like manner their Faculties and Powers, what that
is or those things are by which they are constituted, as whence one becomes
purgative, another vomitory, a third Diaphoretick, etc. These, I say, with many
other particular inquiries depending hereupon, as they cannot but much oblige
the reason of man to be obsequious to them; so by bringing in at least some
satisfaction with no less reward it. Especially if it be withal considered,
that besides our satisfaction as to the Nature of Vegetation, some further
light to diverse other parts of Knowledge may likewise hence arise.

For since the present Design will engage us to an accurate and multifarious
observation of Vegetables; we may hereby be enabled to range and sort them with
more certainty, according to the degrees of their affinity. And all Exoticks,
Plants or parts of Plants, may probably be reduced to some such Domestics,
unto which they may bear the best resemblance. Again, it may frequently conduct
our minds to the consideration of the state of Animals; as whether there are
not diverse material agreements betwixt them both, and what they are. Wherein
also they may considerably differ, and what those things are which are more
essential to their distinguishment. And besides, not only to compare what is
already known of both, but also by what may be observed in the one, to suggest
and facilitate the finding out of what may yet be unobserved in the other So
also the consideration of the Colors, Smells, and Tastes of Vegetables, may
conduce to the Knowledge of the same Q^alities in general; or of what it is
that constitutes them such in any other body: not as they are actually received
by sense; but so far as such Materials or external Circumstances are requisite
to their becoming the adequate objects thereof. It may lead us also to inquire
into further ways of Cultivation, with respect to the whole Plant, or to the
Flower, Fruit, or other part: To amend them as to their Sizes, Colors, Tastes,
Fruitfulness, or otherwise: To think of other ways of Propagation, or to apply
those already known to other Vegetables than has been used. Likewise the
knowledge of their Mechanical uses may hereby be enlarged; both as to the
reason of their use, in such particular Trades and Manufactures, already known;
and the discovery of other uses yet unknown. As also their Alimental, with
respect both to Meats and Drinks; the preparation of some, and the finding out
of others. But especially their Medicinal; some Vegetables which have hitherto
been neglected, may be applied to use; the preverted uses of some, and the
confused uses of others may be rectified. What may best correct their
Malignancies, or enforce their Virtues; when needful to add the preparations of
Art to that of Nature; how to enlarge those of Art, and rectify those which
are indeed inartificial, may hereby be better conjectured. The knowledge of all
which, that we may know how far it is accessible, and what probable approaches
may be made toward it; those several means I have thought of, and suppose
necessary thereunto are next to be proposed.

Reflecting then upon the present Design, and seeing this to lie wide; we shall
in the first place conclude the Means attending thereon should do so likewise.
Wherefore although some may present themselves unto us as more promising; yet
let us suppose what others also were they hereunto engaged, each according to
his sense and Genius, would possibly make choice of. Believing, that although
considering men may vary in the approval of their own sense and notion; yet not
always merely, because it is their own, but because each may probably see
somewhat more in his own, than others do. Wherefore it will be our surest
Logic to conclude, not because no Mean may be approved by all, that all should
be rejected; but rather because each may be approved by some, that therefore
all be made choice of.

And first of all, whatever is of more external consideration, as the Figures,
Proportions, Motions, Seasons, Situations of Vegetables, and of their several
parts, should be observed. In doing which, a particular survey of all their
varieties should be taken. And then a comparison made betwixt these and the
several Plants or parts of Plants whereof they are the properties. To the end
we may, if possible, be thereby conducted to find out what other sensible, or
more recluse property any of them may agree together in. For it is not more
certain, that the three Angles of every Rectilinear Triangle, because all ways
equal to two Right Angles, are therefore, if put together, always the same:
than that one property agreeing to diverse Vegetables, should have one cause:
for although the scope and end may vary, yet the cause, as it is the cause of
that property, must be one: and consequently must also import some Identity in
the Nature of all those Vegetables wherein it acts. Wherefore by thus comparing
of them, we shall be able more exactly to state the Orders and Degrees of their
Affinities, better to understand both the Causes and Ends of their Varieties,
and more probably to conjecture of their Natures and Virtues.

First then the various figures of their several parts should be observed; and
that with respect both to the forms, and the positions by which their Roots,
Trunks, Branches, Leaves, Flowers, Fruits, and Seeds may vary or agree; and
those several Lines by which both the said Varieties are draw. In which of
these parts the agreement chiefly lies; this being both more observable, and
material in some of them, less in the Root, more in the Flower or Seed. And in
how many of these parts together, whether one, more, or all. By both which the
Orders and Degrees of Affinity may be accounted, either as to what we strictly
call Kindred, or else Analogy. Thus all Strawberries are 'akin together in the
first degree, with Cinquefoyl in the second, with Tormentil in the third, and
with Avens, etc. in others more remote. So Agrimony has alike Analogy unto
Strawberry, as Goats-Rue has to Claver; and Strawberry the like unto the Rasp,
as Goosberry to the Vine, or Burnet to the Rose. So all Pulse are not only of
kin in their several degrees to one another; but likewise to almost all kinds
of Trefoyls, as Melilot, Foenugreek, and the common Clavers themselves; as by
comparing not only their Leaves, but Flowers, Seeds, and Cods together may be
evident. For the several parts of the flower of a Trefoyl are so many more
Flowers, containing so many Cods of small Seeds, all in shape agreeable to the
Flowers, Cods, and Seeds of Pulse.

From hence likewise the Natures of Vegetables may be conjectured. For in
looking upon diverse Plants, though of different names and kinds; yet if some
affinity may be found betwixt them, then the nature of any one of them being
well known, we have thence ground of conjecture as to the nature of all the
rest. So that as every Plant may have somewhat of nature individual to it self;
so as far as it obtains any visible communities with other Plants, so far may
it partake of common Nature with those also. Thus the Wild and Garden Cucumers
have this difference, that the one purges strongly, the other not at all; yet
in being Diuretic, they both agree. The Natures of Umbelliferous Plants we
know are various; yet it is most probable that they all agree in this one, scil.
in being Carminative. The several sorts both of Corn and Grass are all 'akin;
there is no doubt therefore but that the seeds of Grass themselves (of Rye and
Oats it is tried) if it were worth the while to order them, as Barley, would
yield an inflammable Spirit. So likewise the several kinds of Pulse, as is
said: for which reason I question not, but that in some cases wherein Ciches
are esteemed a good Medicine, a Decoction of the better sort of Pease,
especially that we call Sugar-Pease, may go beyond them. As does also the
flower of Beans that of the seeds of Foenugreek, even there where they are
accounted excellent. So Tulips, Lillies, Crocuses, Jacynths, and Onions
themselves, with many others in their several degrees, are all allied. If
therefore Crocuses, Onions, Lillies agree in one or more faculties, then why
may not all the rest? as in being anodyne; or in some other common Nature,
whereby in their Vegetation, their parts are governed and overruled to one
common or analogous form.

The Proportions likewise amongst the several parts of Vegetables, for the same
reasons, deserve to be observed; the comparison being made both betwixt the
parts of several Plants, and the several parts of one. And here again, either
betwixt any two of the parts, or any one of them, and the whole besides, or all
the rest put together. So some larger Seeds, produce a small Root; as those of
Cucumer: and others smaller, produce one very great; as those of Briony. Some
Plants, as the Melon, though themselves but very slender, yet have a vast and
bulky fruit; others again, as Thistles, and many yet more substantial, have no
other fruit besides their seed. So the seeds of all Pulse, and especially the
Garden Bean, though very large, yet produce but a small Plant: but those of
Foxglove, Mullen, Burdock, Sun-flower, etc. being themselves much less, do yet
produce a far greater. And especially those seeds which are enclosed in the
thicker sort of Cover, (analogous to that I have elsewhere called the
Secondine) as that of Peony; whose seed so called, is only the Nest wherein the
true and real seed is lodged, no bigger than a little Pins head: which is also
observable of the seeds of diverse other Plants. These and the like proportions,
as they lie betwixt the several parts, should be noted: and to what plants or
parts especially, any of them may agree: comparing also in what other kind of
properties an agreement betwixt the said parts may be found: that so doing, we
may, if possible, amongst all their individual Natures, be instructed to single
out those common ones, which are concomitant to such agreeing properties.

The several Seasons also of plants and of their parts should be considered.
Observing at what particular times of the year any of them chiefly spring,
early or late. The times wherein they germinate; whether for some space only,
or all the year long. Wherein they spring after sowing; or flower after
springing, sooner or flower. Which flower the first year, or not till the
second. Which before the Leaves, or afterward. The maturation of the fruit or
seed, how long after the flower, and the like. All or some of which varieties
being laid together, we may probably conjecture the causes thereof; and the
Natures of the Plants in which they are seen; scil. as such a degree of heat
may be necessary for the fermentation, or the better distribution of the sap of
such a Plant, or the impregnation of the Air to be mixed therewith, or the due
disposing of the Soil to render the most convenient aliment thereunto.

The proper Places also of Plants, or such wherein they have from their seeds
or other way of propagation, a spontaneous growth, should be considered. And
that as to the Climate, whether in one colder, temperate, or more hot. The
Region, Continent, or Island. The seat, as Sea or Land, watery, boggy, or dry;
Hills, Plains, or Valleys; open, in Woods, or under Hedges, and the like. From
whence in like manner as from their seasons, their particular Natures may be
directed unto: in that so far as we may conjecture the nature of such an Air,
Soil, or Seat, we may also of such a Plant to which they are congenial.

So likewise, those many varieties observable in the Motions of Plants and of
their parts, both kinds and degrees; Ascending, Descending, and Collateral;
Rectilinear, and Spiral Motions, should be noted; to what Plants they agree,
and wherein any of them may be analogous to those of Animals. And in a word,
any other forensick properties of Plants. And then to compare them all
together, both being necessary. For thoughts cannot work upon nothing, no more
than hands; he that will build an house, must provide Materials. And on the
contrary, the Materials will never become an house, unless by certain Rules he
join them all together. So it is not simply the knowledge of many things, but a
multifarious copulation of them in the mind, that becomes prolifick of further
knowledge. And thus much for the first general Mean.

The next which I propose, and that a most necessary one, is Anatomy. For when
upon the dissection of Vegetables, we see so great a difference in them, that
not only their outward figures, but also their inward structure is so elegant,
and in all so various, it must needs lead us thus to think, That these inward
varieties were either to no end; or if they were, we must assign to what. To
imagine the first, were exceeding vain; as if Nature, the Handmaid of Divine
Wisdom, should with her fine Needle and Thread, stitch up so many several
Pieces, of so difficult, and yet so groundless a Work. But if for some end,
then either only to be looked upon, or some other besides. If for this only,
then this must be such as in respect whereof, her work is at no time, nor in
any degree frustrate; the contrary thereunto is most manifest. For although men
do every where with frequent pleasure behold the outward elegancies of Plants;
yet the inward ones, which generally are as precise and various as the outward,
we see how usual it is for the beholding of these to be omitted by them. And
besides, when we have observed Natures work as well as we can, it may be no
impediment to our best endeavors to believe, that somewhat of it will still
remain behind unseen. So that if to be seen, were the only end of it, it must
needs be wholly frustrate, as to the greater number of men, and in some part as
to all. Wherefore we must suppose some other ends of the said varieties, which
should have their effect, and so these not be in vain, whether men beheld them,
or not; which are therefore such as have respect to Vegetation: that the Corn
might grow so, and the flower so, whether or no men had a mind, leisure, or
ability to understand how.

If then the Anatomy of Vegetables be so useful a Mean, we ought not to
streighten it, but to force this as well as the rest to its utmost extent. And
therefore first of all, to go through all the parts, with equal care examining
the Root, Trunk, Branch, Leaf, Flower, Fruit, and Seed. Then to repeat or
retrograde the Dissection from part to part: in that although the best Method
of delivery, for clear discourse, can be but one, according to that of Nature,
from the seed forward to the seed: yet can it not but be useful for that of
Dissection to proceed to and fro; somewhat or other being more visible in each
several part, from whence still an Item may be taken for the ushering in the
observation of it in the other. To examine again, not only all the parts, but
kinds of Vegetables, and comparatively to observe diverse of the same size,
shape, motion, age, sap, quality, power, or any other way the same, which may
also agree in some one or more particulars as to their interior structure: and
to make this comparison throughout all their parts and properties. To observe
them likewise in several seasons of the year, and in several ages of the
Vegetables, and of its parts; in both which div^rs of them may be noted to
change not only their dimensions, but their Natures also; as Vessels do into
Ligaments, and Cartilages into ^ones sometimes in Animals. And to do all this
by several ways of Section, oblique, perpendicular, and transverse; all three
being requisite, if not to observe, yet the better to comprehend some things.
And it will be convenient sometimes to break, tear, or otherwise divide without
a Section. Together with the Knife it will be necessary to join the Microscope,
and to examine all the parts, and every way, in the use of that. As also, that
both immediate and microscopical Inspections be compared; since it is certain,
that some things may be demonstrated by reason and the eye conjunct, without
the Glass, which cannot be discovered by it; or else the discovery is so dark,
as which alone may not be safely depend^d on.

By these several ways of Inspection it will be r^quisite to observe their
compounding parts, as simply consider^d and as variously proportioned, and
disposed. As simply considered, to note their number, what, and whether the
same in all: their kinds, wherein different in the same, or diverse Vegetables:
Original, in part, or in whole: structure, as to their Contexture and their
Cavities; their Contexture, within themselves severally, and as joined
together: their Cavities, as to their size, shape, and number; in which a great
variety will be found. Next their Positions one amongst another, which are also
various; as Anterior, Posterior, Collateral, Surrounding, Mediate, Immediate,
Near, Remote; both as they respect the several parts, and the several po^tions
of one: And all these, as few or more, these or others of them may be diversely
compounded together. And then the proportions they bear one to another, whether
as to ^inority, equality, or ex^es^; each part compared with each, and that as
to the several degrees appearing in the said proportions; the vari^ties whereof
may be exceeding num^rous. For if we should suppose but four consid^rable parts
generally constitutive of a Vegetable, these four produce a variety four ways;
first, when one is unequal, and then it produces only four varieties; and
those two ways, scil. when one is greater, and the other three equal and less;
or when one is less, and the other three equal and greater. Secondly, when two
be unequal, and then they produce six varieties. Thirdly, when three be
unequal, which produces twelve varieties. Or lastly, when all four be unequal,
which produces twenty four: which general varieties may be further multiplied
by their several degrees.

From all which we may come to know, what the Communities of Vegetables are, as
belonging to all; what their Distinctions to such a kind; their Properties, to
such a Species; and their Peculiarities to such particular ones. And as in
Metaphysical or other contemplative matters, when we have a distinct knowledge
of the communities and differences of things, we may then be (...) to give
their true Definitions: so may we (...) ^ble possibly hereto do likewise; not
only to know that every Plant inwardly (...) another, but also wherein; so ^s
not more surely to define by the outward figure, than by the inward structure,
what that is, or those things are, whereby any Plant or sort of Plants may be
distinguished from all others. And having obtained a knowledge of the
Communities and Differences amongst the parts of Vegetables, it may conduct us
through a Series of more facile and probable Conclusions of the ways of their
causality, as to the Communities and Differences of Vegetation. And thus much
for the second general Mean.

Having thus far examined the organical and containing parts of Vegetables; it
will be requisite more designedly to observe those also which are fluid, or any
others contained in them: and that for our better understanding both of the
Nature of Vegetation, and of the said contained parts. And to make inquiry,
first of their kinds, as Spirits; both such as agree in general in being
vinous, and those that are special to particular Plants. Airs and Vapors; for
the existence whereof in all Vegetables there are certain Arguments. And for
the difference of their natures, as they are existent in several parts, there
are probable ones. Lymphas or clear Saps; Milks, Oils, Gums, Sugars, Salts, or
other concrete and fixed parts. Where by Salts I mean not such as are separated
by Calcination, but are distinctly existent in Plants in their natural estate,
and in some of them, as in the Roots of Iris, are discoverable, even without
the help of a Microscope. To which may be added such Mucilages, which though
not so properly contained within the parts, yet are found lying over them; as
over the first Spring-leaves of all kinds of Docks, betwixt the Leaves and the
Veil wherein they are involved.

Of all these should be observed, first their Receptacles, some of them being
proper to one, others common to two or more of them: since it is certain, that
some of them do transmigrate from one into another Receptacle, or that the same
Receptacle is filled with bodies of a quite different nature, at the different
seasons of the year, and ages of the Vegetable. And it is also very probable,
that two of some of them may sometimes be contained in one Receptacle at the
same time; as in Animals, the Lympha in the D. Thoracicus, and that and the
Chyle in the sanguineous Vessels.

Then their Motions; both natural, and such as may be effected by Art: and
those either by descent or ascent. And in ascending, through what different
Channels or parts of the Trunk; since it is certain, that there is a variety
both in respect of the season and of Vegetables. Where it will fall in to
observe the Tapping of Trees: As also their Bleeding: to what Trees it is
proper to bleed: in those to which it is, with what difference of celerity: and
when their peculiar season: for none will bleed at all times; neither will all
bleed at the same. And then their collateral motion, together with the mode of
their transition from one organical part to another.

Next their Quantities, either of one; as the comparison is made betwixt
several Plants, or betwixt the parts of the same: So the true Seed of all
Plants contains more Oil in proportion than any of the rest. Or else of
diverse as coexistent and bearing such a proportion one to another in the same
part: of most of which it may be known by their respective Receptacles. Yet the
computation must not be made from the number of the said Receptacles simply,
but as that is in conjunction with their capacity, and as their capacity is
proportioned to their surrounding sides; the sides of those of the least
capacity being usually as thick as those of the greatest: so that suppose ten
lesser, to lie within the compass of one greater; the content of these
altogether would scarce be equal to half the content of that one.

Also their Consistence; scil. of so many of them as are discriminable by
touch; in being soft or hard, thin or thick, mucilaginous, gummous, glutinous,
friable, etc. And these in their several degrees, in which there is a variety,
as in the Milks of some Plants, which are more dilute than that of others: in
their Lympha's or clear Saps, that of most being thin, of Cumfry and some
others mucilaginous. And by this to be compared in the same manner as by their
Quantity.

Likewise their Colors, Smells, and Tastes: The general and particular kinds
of all which should be noted. And to what contained parts, and in what variety,
they appertain. So the Milks of some are paler, as in Burdock; of others
whiter, as in Scorzonera; Citrine, in Angelica; Yellow, in Lovage. In some
Plants odorous, as in Umbelliferous; in others not, as in Cichoraceous: and in
most bitter, but with many diversities. And most Mucilages have little either
Color, Taste, or Smell, and the like. Here also the same Qualities are to be
inquired into, as in general speaking they are said to be belonging to a
Vegetable: since it is more than probable, that all Colors ^^^^^^pting white,
which is sometimes com^^^ both to containing and contained (...) all Odours and
Tastes which are more (...), and without a resolution of (...) Principles,
perceptible in a Vege^^ble^ ^re not ascribable to the organical o^ (...) parts,
but only to those contained in (...); as from diverse reasons hereafter may
(...).

And first th^^ (...); where, with respect to several (...) parts, they are
more changeable, (...) in Flowers; or constant, as green in Le^^es. Which, with
respect to several ages of one part, are more fading, as green in Fruits; or
durable, as yellow in Flowers. In wha^ parts more single, as always in the
Seed; or more compounded, as in the Flower; and in what Plants more especially,
as in Pancy. Which proper to Plants that have such a taste or smell, as both in
white Flowers are usually less strong. To Plants that flower in such a season,
as a yellow Flower, I think chiefly to Spring-plants. And to Plants that are
natural to such a Soil or Seat, as to Water-plants more usually a white Flower.
What, amongst all Colors, more common to Plants, as green; or more rare, as
black. And what all these varieties of Colors are upon Cultivation, but
chiefly in their natural Soil. To observe also with their superficial Colors,
those within: so the Roots of Docks are yellow, of Bistort red, of Avens
purple, but of most white. Where the inward and superficial Colors agree, as
in the Leaves; or vary, as in the other parts frequently. And in what manner
they are situated; some universally spreading, others running only along with
the Vessels, as in the Leaves of red Dock, and the Flowers of Wood Sorrel.

Next their Odours; what may be their principal Seat; whether one or diverse
seats in the same Plant. What the chief matter out of which they are
continually bred. What similitude betwixt the smells of diverse Vegetables, as
betwixt Baume and a Limon, the green Leaves of Meadow-sweet and the green Pills
of Walnuts. Or betwixt those of Plants and Animals, as the smell of green and
well-grown Carduus is like to that rank scent ab axillis nonnullorum spiranti.
Which have a more sensible smell, as most have; and which have less, as Corn.
Where the green Leaf is the most fragrant part, as in Musk-Cranesbill; where
the Flower, as in Roses; the Root, as in sweet Calamus. Where all the parts
have some odor, where some, or one only; as in Scurvygrass only the flowers;
and in Arum the Pestil only, for neither the Leaf nor Root has any smell, but
this is strong enough, not much unlike to humane excrements.

But especially their Tastes, which it much imports us more precisely to
distinguish; first by their general kinds; for the number even of these may be
computed greater than usually it is. I remember not that Heat and Acritude,
with respect to Taste, are distinguished; yet Arum Root is very pungent without
any proper heat, and Cloves are very hot without any proper pungency. So the
white Roots of Yarrow have a Taste hardly any other way perceptible, than by
causing a gentle glowing and continuing warmth upon the tongue. Also their
respondencies one to another; as that of Zedoary, and of the lesser Cardamoms
is somewhat like to Camphire. Likewise their degrees; in which there is a great
latitude, and may be extended from one to ten, or with easy distinction from
one to five; so the Root of Sorrel is bitter in the first, of Dock in the
second, of Dog-Rose in the third, of Dandelyon in the fourth, of Gentian in the
fifth: observing them not only as they vary in several kinds, but the several
Species of one, as in Cichory, Hawkweed, Dandelyon. And then their
Compositions; for Tastes are as truly conjunct in one part, as Colors: by
which the latitude is still greater; in that all kinds of Tastes, in all their
degrees, and in differing numbers may be variously compounded together: for the
most part two, as in the Leaves of sharp-pointed Dock, astringent and sour; in
Sorrel Roots astringent and bitter; and in Aloes bitter and sweet, the one in
the fifth, the other in the first degree, as upon an unprejudiced trial may be
perceived: and yet more evidently in the Gall of any Land-Animal. Sometimes
three, as in Agrimony bitter, rough, and sowrish; and in Agarick bitter, rough,
and sweet. And sometimes perhaps more: the sensible distinctions of all which
may lie almost as wide as of Plants themselves. Wherefore although it were
great rashness to take away the distinctions of Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry, Thin,
Gross, and other Qualities, in their several degrees, which the Ancients have
affixed to particular Plants; yet since they have done it to many of them with
much uncertainty, and that withal they are more properly the effects and
operations of Plants than their qualities; practical observation may therefore
approve it useful, to add these sensible ones of various Tastes, precisely
distinguishing their Conjugations and Degrees. Lastly, their several varieties,
and mutuations with respect to the subject wherein they reside, should also be
noted. As, of all Tastes found in Plants, bitter and sour are most common;
sweet and salt most rare. How they vary with the age of the Plant or part, as
the Roots of Radishes, growing up to seed, lose their strength; so most Fruits
are first sour, then sweet. What proper to the several parts of any one Plant;
so the Leaves of Wormwood are extraordinary bitter, the Root scarcely so at
all, of an hot, but quite different taste. What more common or rare to any
part; so no Root, that I ever tasted, is sour. And how they alternate in
several Plants; as the Root of Stock Gillow-flower is biting, not the Leaves;
on the contrary, the Leaves of the smaller Arsmart are biting, but not the
Root, and the like. To which we may add the difference of time wherein the
tastes of Plants are perceived; as those of Arum and Rape-Crowfoot are both
biting; but that of the first as it is slowly perceived, so it continues long;
that of the other quickly comes and quickly goes.

Amongst the other adjuncts of the contained parts, though not of these only,
the Faculties of Vegetables are to be reputed: for so the Rosin of Jalap, which
is purgative, is as truly contained in the organical parts of that Root, as
blood is in Veins. It will be requisite therefore to make particular
observation of these also. And first, what Faculties chiefly may reside in
Vegetables above others: so there is none of known use in Salivation, except by
holding in the mouth: although we may ask, why some amongst them may not (being
taken inwardly) have a power to evacuate by this, as well as other violent
ways? Where more universally spread over all the parts of a Vegetable, as in
Asarum. Where belonging chiefly or wholly to any particular parts or part; as
chiefly to the Root of Rhubarb; and only to the true and proper seed of Barbado
Nuts. Whether such faculties may be proper to such parts especially. What
conjunction they may have with tastes, or other qualities; so such as are
purging and vomitory, though some of them have a strong taste, yet the greater
part, and of those many of the stronger sort, have no taste, or not much; as
Senna, Jalap, Scammony, Hellebore, Asarum, and others. So also those that are
more sensibly tasted, are, I think for the most part, more or less bitter;
either simply, as Colocynthis; or bitter and astringent, as Rhubarb; or bitter
and sweet, as Aloe; or bitter, astringent, and sweet, as Agarick. Few are hot,
as Iris. Or simply sweet, as Manna. And though some may be subacid that are
mollifying or lenitive, yet no proper Purge or Vomit is sour. How likewise
their faculties and qualities may vary their degrees either differently or
together; so Aloe and Colocynthis are both bitter in the highest degree; yet
Aloe, which is also sweet, purges more moderately; Colocynthis, which is only
bitter, most violently. How far the faculties of Vegetables, as well as their
qualities, may be compounded, where, and which chiefly; as astrictive and
purgative in Rhabarb. W^^re this Question may be put, Whether diverse other and
yet more extreme faculties, (...) well as these of astrictive and purgative,
may not somewh^^e or other be also sound, or made, to meet: whereby the same
Plant, or preparation of it, may be most potent, and yet most innocent; the
malignity thereof exerting its power, and the virtue its sovereignty at the
same time. And lastly, what affinity there may be betwixt them, as most Plants
that are strong Purgative^, and especially Vomitories, I think are also
Sternutatory, as white Hellebore, Jalap, Tobacco: and on the contrary, such as
are Sternutatory, are some of the most proper and most potent Medicines for the
Head, Brain, and G^nus Nervosum, taken inwardly, and the like. And thus far a
particular observation of the Qualities and Faculties of the Contents of
Vegetables may proceed, as they are existent in their natural estate. From
which, although some probable conjectures may be made of their material and
formal Essences, and of the Causes of their determinate Varieties, or the Modes
of Vegetation necessary thereunto: yet will our conceptions hereof be more
facile, clear, and comprehensive, if by all other ways of observation they be
likewise examin^d, according as Experiment may be applicable to any of them.

As by Contusion; so some Plants give their smell not without rubbing, or not
so well; as the green Leaves of Stramonium, Scurvygrass, and many more: others
lose it by rubbing, as the flowers of Violets, Carnations, Borage, etc. others
yield it both ways, as Rosemary, etc. So some Apples mend their taste by
scoaping, and Pears by rolling, especially that called the Rolling Pear.

By Agitation; which does that sometimes by force, which Digestion does by
heat: so any cold Oil and a Syrup being in a due manner agitated together, of
two fluid bodies will become one consistent, as is known.

By Frigifaction; how far the Juyces of Vegetables, either without or within
them, may be any of them, or some more than others, subject to Cold: and
thereby to be deprived of their motion or natural consistence, or may suffer
alteration in their Color, Taste, or Smell.

By Infusion; where I mean Infusion only in simple water; and so to observe,
which of them may be dissolved herein, and how far; for some may be wholly,
some but in part, others not at all; or very little; which is proper to some
Milks as well as Gums. So what different Colors, Smells, or Tastes they
hereupon yield; which are found various, and in some very unexpected; as the
green Leaves of Bawm being duly infused in plain water, without any other body
added, tincture it with a pure and deep red, near that of Claret Wine, as I
have often tried.

By Digestion with Fermentation; either of the entire Vegetables, or of the
Juyces or other Contents; and these by themselves or with simple Water. And
hereby to note what difference may be in the strength, celerity, or continuance
of the Fermentation. Likewise how their Qualities may thereby be altered; as
the smell of Violet-flowers, from a most excellent fragrancy, may by Digestion
be reduced to an odious and abominable stink, like that of the black Mud of
Gutters, as I have tried more than once.

By Digestion with Calefaction; so the color of the Juice of Limons from
transparency (if that be a color) may be turned to a perfect red. Whence it is
that many are deceived in the preparation called the Tincture of Corals;
supposing the Corals to give the Menstruum its color; whereas the Menstruum
will obtain it only by Digestion without any Corals mixed with it.

By Decoction; either of Vegetables themselves, or of their Liquors; and to
observe what alterations follow. So Turpentine boiled becomes friable; Sugar
bitter and of a brown red. Turnips lose their biting taste, Onions their
picquancy; yet neither of them convey those self same qualities to the water.
The same may be observed in the Decoction of sweet Fennel-seeds, Aniseeds, and
others, losing much of their tastes themselves, and yet conveying very little
of them to the Liquors wherein they are boiled, the greater portion of their
volatile parts, and their virtue and taste therewith, flying away: whereof
therefore it is much better to make an Emulsion, than to decoct them, or to
make an Emulsion from them with their own Decoction, especially if the Medicine
be intended to be Carminative, as I have frequently observed. The Decoction
should also be carried on throughout all degrees to that of an Extract; by
which the qualities thereof sometimes are much altered; as in that of the green
Leaves of Violets, which from a kind of yellow, deepens at last into a dark
color as black as pitch, and that without the least Empyreuma.

By Distillations; both with the (...) Still, Alembick, Chapel, or open (...)
and to note what Vegetables thus give the^ smell or taste, and in what degrees
of strength either under or over their natural ones; as Mint, Pennyroyal, and
the like, which are Aromatic and hot, give their tastes perfect: but Wormwood,
which is Aromatic and bitter, gives it but by halfs, only as Aromatic, little
as bitter. And Carduus, though also so exceeding bitter, yet not being
Aromatic, scarce yields any taste at all. Also what Vegetables yield Oil
most plentifully; and what difference may be in those Oils as to their color,
weight, or otherwise, as that of Cloves is sometimes red, of Cinnamon lympid,
both ponderous. So to distill Juices, Gums, or other Contents with an hot fire,
and to see what bodies they yield, and of what qualities; as Turpentine is
known to yield besides its Oil a subacid Water, Vinegar an eager Spirit, as
that part may be called, which Chemists are wont to call the Phlegm.

By Arefaction; so Milks which are liquid and white in their natural estate, in
standing grow gummous, yellow, and otherwise different, so does that of
Scorzonera; and that of Fenil into a balsamical, but limpid Oil. So the Roots
of Arum upon drying lose much of the strength of their taste; but the contrary
may be noted of many other Roots, which upon drying increase it. Some being cut
and laid by, change their natural colors into red, purple, yellow, green, or
white; as Liquorish into white in some places, and Peony into red; and
sometimes into two, as Patience, into yellow and red.

By Assation; thus Apples by roasting eat more sour. The Root of Horse Radish
toasted tastes like a Turnep. Potatoes, Onions, and many other Roots and parts
have their tastes either altered or refracted; which chiefly and in what manner
should be observed. There is one alteration as remarkable as commonly known,
and is that which follows upon roasting or baking in one kind of the
Waldensian Pears, which for a Walden we corruptly call a Warden.

By Ustion; wherein some Vegetables lose their smell, as Roses; others keep it,
as Rosemary; and others mend it, as Lignum Aloes. To note not only the
alteration of their qualities, but what they yield; as Turpentine, which in
Distillation yields Oil and Water both lympid, upon Ustion shows nothing
but a black Soot. So Benzonie by Distillation Oil, by Ustion white Flowers, as
is known.

By Calcination; and here to obs^rve wherein the Caput Mortuum of one (...)
differ from or agree in nature with that of another; and also to compare these
with those of Animal bodies. As also in their quantiti^s. And to compare them
with what they yield by Distillation and Ustion as to both. Thus far they have
been tried simply or by themselves. They should also be examined.

By Composition; not only with Water, as in simple Infusions, etc. but with any
other bodies which may have a power of acting upon them, or upon which these
may have a power to act. And so to make Infusions, Destillations, Decoctions,
Digestions in diverse kinds of Liquors, as Vinegar, Urine, Spirit of H. H. Wine,
Blood, Milk, or others. So in Infusions some red colors are heightened by
acids, blews turned purple. So fetid Spirits may doubtless be rendered much more
grateful by being rectified once or twice with fresh Aromaticks. To observe
also what follows upon mixing the Liquors or other parts of Plants toget^er; as
Oil of Turpentine by Digestion with a Lixivial Salt extracteth thence a red
Tincture. Or with Salts, Earths, Metals, or any other bodies, as the Juice of
the green Leaves of Rose, Raspberry, Primrose, and diverse other Plants (I think
principally such as are astringent) expressed upon Steel, as it dries,
becomes of a purple color.

Lastly, by Compounding the Experiment it self, or joining two or more of them
upon the same matter: as Fermentation and Destillation, as is used for some
Waters. Infusion and Fermentation, as in making of Beer. Fermentation and
Coction, or rather Assation, as in making of Bread. Arefaction and
Destillation, as may be tried upon some Herbs, and with what difference from
what may be noted upon their being distilled moist.

Having proceeded thus far by all the above particular ways of observation; a
comparative prospect must be taken of them: by which at last the Communities
and Differences of the Contents of Vegetables may be discerned; the manner of
their Causation and Original partly be judged of; and wherein it is that the
Essence of their several Natures and Qualities does consist, in some measure
comprehended. And consequently both from the knowledge of their particular
Natures, and the Analogy found betwixt them, we may be able better to
conjecture and try what any of them are or may be good for. For certainly, we
shall then know more readily to apply things unto, and more fitly to prepare
them for their proper uses, when we first know what they are. Notwithstanding,
since the faculties of Plants do often lie more recluse; it is best therefore
not wholly to acquiesce in such Conjectures as their tastes or other properties
may suggest; but to subjoyn Experiment. In making which, and in passing a
Judgment thereon, many cautions, both in respect of the Plant whereof, and the
subject whereupon it is made, are requisite to be attended. Which yet, in
regard they result not so directly from the matter at present in hand, I shall
not therefore here insist upon. And thus much for the third general Mean.

Together with the Contents of the Organical parts of Vegetables, it will be
requisite to examine their Principles also, or the Bodies which are not so
properly contained in the said Organical parts, as immediately concurrent and
essential to their Being. And of these we are to observe, first their Number;
whether well reducible to five, six, seven, or more, or fewer: and the special
differences observable under any one general; since there are many bodies of
very different natures confounded under one name. Next their Conjugation; which
they are that either under or over those observable in animal or other Bodies,
are here joined together in a Vegetable; How far common to the Organical parts
of diverse Vegetables; or to the several Organical parts of one; or how far
different in them. Likewise their Proportions; which stand in the greatest,
which in the least, or in the meaner quantities, and in what degrees; both in
diverse Vegetables, and in the several organical parts of one. And then the
Concentration and Union of them altogether; as to the degrees of their
closeness or laxity; or the manner of their Implication and Coherency; or as to
their Location, one being more central, another more exposed and rampant over
the rest; or otherwise different. To examine these Principles by their Color,
Taste, Smell, Consistence, Fixedness, Volatily, Weight, Figures, or other
Accidents. And to these purposes, to go through the forementioned ways of
Experiment, as Ustion, Calcination, Destillation, etc. as any of them may
appear applicable hereunto. And to make Experiment not only upon the several
organical parts distinctly, but also upon the Principles themselves whereinto
they are resolved, as by mixing them with one another, or with other bodies, or
otherwise. I know it will be difficult to make observations of this kind upon
^he organical parts of Vegetables severally. Yet I have thought of some ways
whereby true and undeceivable ones may be made upon some of them; and probably
on the rest also: which yet, in regard I have not made much trial of them, I
shall not now mention.

The prosecution of what is here propounded will be requisite, to a fuller and
clearer view, of the Modes of Vegetation, of the sensible Natures of
Vegetables, and of their more recluse Faculties and Powers. First, of the Modes
of Vegetation. For suppose we were speaking of a Root; from a due consideration
of the properties of any part or parts thereof; it is true, that the real and
genuine Causes may be rendered of diverse other dependent properties as spoken
generally of the whole Root. But it will be asked again, What may be the Causes
of those first and independent ones? Which if we will seek, we must do it by
inquiring also, What are the Principles of those parts? For it is necessary
that the Principles whereof a Body does consist should be, if not all of them
the active, yet the capacitating Causes, or such as are called Causae sine qua
non of its be^oming and ^eing, in all re^pects both as to Subst^nce and
Accidents, what it is: otherwise, their existence in that body were altogether
superfluous, since it might have been without them: which if so, it might then
have been made of any other; there being no necessity of putting any
difference, if neither those whereof it is made are thought necessary to its
being. Wherefore if we will allow a Body, and so the organical parts of a
Vegetable to have Principles; we must also allow these Principles their
necessary use, and that the shapes, or other properties of the said parts are
as much dependent upon the Nature of these, as is the roundness of a drop of
Ink upon the fluidity of water ingredient to it.

Again, the Principles of the organical parts being known, we may from thence
obtain a further knowledge of the Natures and Causation or Original of their
Contents; since ^hese are not only included in the said ^^^anical parts, but
also created by them: (...) needs be so, whether we will (...) Principles of
these Contents to be (...) to their reception thereinto, or (...) nor
praeexistent, what can be clearer than tha^ the said parts give them their
exist^nce? And if praeexist^nt, yet in regard they are distin^uished, and such
only of them admitted in such sort into an organical part from amongst others,
as are apt to combine and mix together in such a form, and so to constitute
such a Liquor; it is as clear, that the existence, if not of those principles,
yet of that Liquor, is dependent on the said part.

And if by means of the said parts it is that their Contents become such and
such peculiar Mixtures; it is hence also manifest, that by the same means they
are of such distinct faculties and powers: Because the faculty or power of a
Body lies not in any of its principles apart, but is a resultance from them
all, or from their being in such peculiar sort and manner united and combined
together. So the principles of the purgative parts of a Root, as of Rhubarb,
although we should suppose them to be existent in the surrounding Earth, yet we
cannot say that that Earth, or the principles therein contained are purgative;
but only such as by being combined together in such a peculiar way may become
so. So the several parts of a Clock, although they are and must be all
praeexistent to it, and it is their form by which they are what they are
themselves; yet is it the setting together of such kind of parts, and in such a
kind of way only, that makes them a Clock. And since we see that the mixture of
two Bodies of two different quali^ies* as of two colors, will produce a third
color differing from them both, as blue and red do a murrey; why should not
two or more bodies of different natures also, be so combined together, as to
produce a third nature? Or wherefore may not that be allowed to be performed by
Nature, which by artificial compounding of Medicines or other Bodies is
designed, and often times eff^cted? I Will give but one instance; Water, Grease,
and an Alcalizate Salt may be easily so ordered as to be invested with new
qualities, nature, and powers; the Salt to lose its extreme fiery pungent
taste; the Tallow its smell; and being before unsociable with water, to mingle
therewith; neither Tallow, Salt, nor Water alone will fetch out a spot of
Grease, but all united easily do it; the same three parts united are, in some
cases, as in the Jaundies, an excellent Medicine, any of which given alone may
rather prove prejudicial than a Cure: and all this done only by duly boiling
them together into one body, which we call Soap.

Whence again, if it be such an union and proportion of such a sort of
principles which produces such a faculty; and that we may by any means come to
know what these are; we may possibly also attain to the knowledge of such Rules
as whereby any kind of Faculty may be made, as to compound such bodies which
are neither purgative nor vomitory, so together as to be invested with these
Faculties. And if to make them, then consequently to mend, exalt, strengthen,
and ennoble them with greater ease and certainty. And thus much for the fourth
general Mean.

Hitherto we have considered the Materials of a Vegetable only as ingredient to
it: there yet remains a fifth story to be ascended, which is to consider these
Materials also as they are derived from abroad: or as after they are received
and naturalized, they may with others yet abroad have any kind of
correspondence. And these are four in general, s^il Earth, Water, Air, and Sun,
all which in that they contribute so universally to Vegetation, and to
whatsoever is contained in a Vegetable, it is therefore requisite, that of
these likewise particular observation should be made.

And first of the Earth, and of all solid Receptacles of Plants. Where we are
to consider their several kinds, as Mellow, Sandy, Clayie, Chalky, and others.
Their Ingredients, as rank and mellow Earth with Sand, or with Clay, or Sand
with Clay, or altogether, and in what proportions. The Principles whereinto any
one of these Ingredients separated from the rest, and put to the Test of
Distillation, Ustion, Calcination, or other, either alone, or by mixture with
other bodies, may be resolved. And by their qualities, as Color, Smell, Taste,
etc. both Ingredients and Principles to be examined. To make trial of the
growth of Plants in all kinds of simple Soils; either Earthy or Mineral, as
Clay, Marl, Oker, Fullers Earth, Bole Armeniac, Vitriol, Alum, etc. or
Vegetable, as ro^ten Wood, Brans, Starch, or Flower, etc. or Animal, as Dungs,
pounded Flesh, dried and powdered Blood, and the like; that it may appear how
far any of these may contribute to the growth of a Plant, or to one above
another.

Next of the Water, and of all liquid Receptacles. Where the several kinds of
Water from Wells, Springs, Rain, and Rivers are by their qualities and
faculties to be examined, as these and by these their Principles either in
their natural state or upon digestion, or otherwise may be observable: since
plain Water it self is undoubtedly compounded of several Principles; the
simplicity thereof being argued, neither from its clearness and transparency,
for a solution of Alum, though it contains a considerable quantity of Earth
is yet very clear; nor from its seeming to have neither smell nor taste, for
Water drinkers will tell you of the varieties of both in different Waters.
Besides, if these qualities should be accounted rather fancy than sense, the
difference of Waters is yet more manifest from their different effects,
observed by Cooks, Laundresses, Brewers, and others that have occasion to use
them: for not to mix with Soap without curdling, not to boil meat tender, or
without coloring it red, and the like, are the vices of some Waters, not of
others, which yet would seem in color, taste, and smell to be the same. Trial
should also be made of the growth of Plants in all kind of liquid Receptacles,
as common Water, Snow water, Sea water, Urine, Milk, Whey, Wine, Oil, Ink, etc.
Or any of these with a solution of Salt, Nitre, Sal prunellae, Soap, or other
body. And hereby to observe what follows either in the Liquor, or in the Plant
it self: as if any fixed body being weighed before its dissolution in water,
and if the Plant set herein grows, the water being then evaporated, whether
the quantity of that dissolved body continue the same, or is lessened. So
whether any Vegetable will become Opiate by growing a considerable time in a
plain solution or Water-tincture of Opium, and the like. Which Experiments what
event soever they have, yet at least for our further instruction in the Nature
of Vegetation may be of use.

Next of Air; where it will be requisite to inquire, what sort of bodies may be
herein contained: It being probable, from the variety of Meteors formed herein,
and of Vapors and Exhalations continually advanced hereinto, that some or
other of them may bear an Analogy to all volatile bodies, whether Animal,
Vegetable, or Mineral. And to consider the peculiar nature of that body which
is strictly called Air. As also to try what different effects a diversity of
Air may have upon a Vegetable; as by setting a Plant or Seed either exceeding
low, as at the bottom of a deep Well; or exceeding high, as on the top of a
Steeple. Or else by exposing some Soil to the Air, which is assuredly free from
any Seed, and so as no Seed can light upon it, and to observe whether the Air
has a power of producing a Vegetable therein, or not: and the like.

Lastly of the Sun; as to which it may be considered, what influence it may
have upon the Plant it self, upon the Soil, or upon the Air. Whether that
influence is any thing else besides heat, or may differ from that of a fire
otherwise than by being temperate and more equal. Although it will be found
very difficult here to make any sincere Experiments. As for that of the
Collection of the Sunbeams by the help of Glasses in the form of a Magistery
or of Flowers, and such like, I desire to suspend my thoughts of them till I
see them. I will only say thus much at present, That I do not understand why
the Sun should not have some influence upon bodies besides by heat, if it may
be granted that the Moon has, for which it should seem there are some good
arguments.

We have thus far examined the Principles necessary to Vegetation; the Question
may be put once more, In what manner are these Principles so adapted as to
become capable of being assembled together in such a Number, Conjugation,
Proportion, and Union, as to make a Vegetable Body? For the comprehension
whereof, we must also know, what are the Principles of these Principles. Which
although they lie in so great an abyss of obscurity, yet I think I have some
reason to believe they are not altogether undiscoverable: How far they may be
so, I am so far from determining, that I shall not now conjecture.

This is the Design, and these the Means I propound in order thereunto. To
which I suppose they may all appear to be necessary. For what we obtain of
Nature, we must not do it by commanding, but by courting of her. Those that woo
her may possibly have her for their Wife; but she is not so common as to
prostitute her self to the best behaved Wit, which only practices upon it
self, and is not applied to Her. I mean, that where ever men will go beyond
fancy and imagination, depending upon the conduct of Divine Wisdom, they must
labor, hope, and persevere. And as the Means propounded are all necessary, so
they may in some measure prove effectual. How far I promise not; the way is
long and dark: and as Travelers sometimes amongst Mountains, by gaining the
top of one, are so far from their Journies end, that they only come to see
another lies before them: so the way of Nature is so impervious, and, as I may
say, down hill and up hill, that how far soever we go, yet the surmounting of
one difficulty, is wont still to give us the prospect of another. We may
therefore believe our seize will be imperfect after we have done all: but
because we cannot attain to all, that therefore we should endeavor after
nothing, is an inference which looks so much awry from the practical sense of
men, that it ought not to be answered. Nor with better reason may we go about
determining what may be done. The greatest designs that any men undertake, are
of the greatest uncertainty as to their success: which if they appear to be of
good import, though we know not how far they are attainable, we are to propound
the means, in the utmost use whereof only we can be able to judge: a War is not
to be quitted for the hazards which attend it; nor the Councils of Princes
broken up, because those that sit at them have not the Spirit of Prophecy, as
well as of Wisdom. To conclude, Although but little should be effected, yet to
design more can do us no harm: For although a man shall never be able to hit
Stars by shooting at them, yet he shall come much nearer to them, than another
that throws at Apples.

THE COMPARATIVE ANATOMY OF ROOTS PROSECUTED. THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I.
BEing to speak of Roots, it is requisite, for our better understanding of what
follows, that some things, as to their Figures, Motions, and Ages, be premised.

Roots are generally distinguished, as to their Figures, in being more Entire,
as is Liquorish; or parted, as St. John's wort. Parted either at the bottom, as
most Roots; or at the top, as Dandelyon and some others. Parted again, are
either Ramified, as Cumfry; or Manifold, as Crowfoot: both are parted, but the
former, by the subdivision of greater branches into lesser; these, when diverse
Roots have all their distinct original from one head. Some are straight, as a
Radish; others crooked, as Bistort. Smooth, as Bugloss; or stringy all round
about, as Columbine. Thick, as Rhubarb; slender, as the Vine. Long, as Fenil;
short, as a Turnep: which are distinct from great and little, in that these are
so called with respect to several Roots; those with respect to the several
dimensions of one. Short are stubbed, as Iris tuberosa; or round, as
Dracontium. Round are tuberous, as Rape Crowfoot; bulbous, as Onion. Where
note, That all bulbous Roots are as it were Hermaphrodites, or Root and Trunk
both together: for the strings only are absolutely Roots; the Bulb actually
containing those parts, which springing up, make the Leaves or Body; and is as
it were, a great Bud under ground. Roots, again, are plain or uneven: Plain are
Cylindrical, as Eryngo; or Pyramidal, as Borage* Growing smaller downwards, as
do most; or greater, as Skirrets. Uneven are pitted, as Potato's, where the
eyes of the future Trunks lie inward; or knobbed, as Jerusalem Artichoke, where
they stand out. These differences are also compounded: so some Roots are both
entire and smooth, as Peony; others entire, but stringy, as Clary. Some both
plain and knobbed, as Filipendula, Lilium non bulbosum, and others. And amongst
them all there are several degrees: all which, with other differences, by those
that undertake the Descriptions of Plants, are accurately to be noted: and in
Drawing these, and all the other parts, their sizes withal should be adjusted
by a Scale. But the differences above mentioned will serve for our present
purpose.

The Motions of Roots are also diverse. Sometimes level, as of Hops, and all
such as properly creep: sometimes perpendicul^r, as of a Parsnep: which is
diff^rent from straightness, for some straight Roots are level. Both of them
are either shallow, or deep: some run level, and near the Turfe, as wild
Anemony; others lower, as Dogs-Grass: some strike down but a little way, as
Stramonium; others grow deep, as Hors-Radish: which is different from being
long; for ^any long Roots are level, as Hops. Some again descend, as Tulips and
other bulbous Roots: which differs from growing downwards; in that here the
head of the Root is immovable; but in descending, the whole Root does locum
mutare, running deeper time after time into the Earth. Some also ascend
sometimes, and in some part appearing above ground, as Turnips. These Motions
are also compounded, both in respect of the several parts of the Root, and of
several times. So the main Root of Primrose is level, the stringy are
perpendicular. The Roots of most Seedlings grow downward and upward at the same
time. Those of Bistort, Iris, and some others, grow in part both downward and
upward at several times: whence it is that Bistort is crooked; and that some
parts of Iris Root appear oftentimes above the ground. And many are writhed or
twisted without being moved out of their place; which motion cannot be observed
but only by the oblique process of the Vessels, which we shall presently
describe.

The Motion of Descent has as yet been observed of Bulbous Roots only. But it
is common to many Roots besides, as those of Arum, Primrose, Ammi, Avens, Iris,
and others. For of the Trunks of these and many other Plants it is observable,
that gradually and continually descending below the surface of the ground, and
hiding themselves therein, they are thus both in nature, place, and office
changed into true Roots, which, by the continuance of the said motion in the
Trunk, also descend. This is more especially demonstrated by some, as by the
level and knobed Roots of Wood Sorrel, Primrose, etc. For the Leaves of these
Plants rotting off successively, and their Trunk gradually descending into the
Mould, each Basis of these Leaves is nourished with a more copious Sap, and so
swelled into so many knobs. The notice of this motion here, leads to the
discovery of the like in other Plants, where the Leaves fall off close by the
surface of the Trunk, as in Iris tuberosa, where only the seats of the perished
Leaves and the ends of their Vessels are obscurely visible.

The Cause of this Descent, so far as it is dependent on the inward
conformation of the Root, I shall hereafter show. But the immediate visible
one, are the String-Roots which these kind of Trunks frequently put forth;
which descending themselves directly into the ground, like so many Ropes, lug
the Trunk after them. Hence the Tuberous Roots of Iris, upon the rotting or
fading away of the String-Roots hanging at them, sometimes a little re-ascend.
Hence also the shape of some Roots is inverted; for whereas most are parted
downwards into several Legs, some are p^rted upwards into diverse Necks, as
Dandelyon and others. For these sending forth at the top several Trunk-buds,
the said Buds successively put forth new and cast their old Leaves, and
continually also making their descent, are at length formed into so many Necks
of three, four, five, or more inches long under ground.

Hence also we understand in what particular way some Roots become perennial.
Some are wholly so, as those of Trees, Shrubs, and diverse woody Plants. Others
in part, or by a new Progenies of Roots, from the old head or body, in the room
of those that die yearly, or after a certain time; as of Lilium non bulbosum,
Jerusalem Artichoke, Potato, Dog-stones, Monkshood, little Celandine, and
others: in which Plants, one or more of their Roots are firm, the other spongy
and superannuated, and partly by the ravine of the Trunk and other younger
Roots reduced to a consumption and death. With these Tulips and other Bulbous
Roots consort: for the several Rindes and Shells, whereof chiefly the Bulb
consists, successively perish and shrink up into so many thin and dry skins:
betwixt which, and in their center, other Leaves and shells being successively
formed, the Bulb is thus perpetuated. In the same manner the String-Roots also
succeed one another annually. So that at the end of diverse years, although it
be still looked upon as the same individual Root, yet is it in truth another as
to every particle thereof. Lastly, many other Roots are perpetuated by the
aforesaid descent of the Trunk, out of which it is still annually repaired, as
by the gradual perishing of its lower parts it is diminished; as the tuberous
Roots of Arum, Iris, Strawberry, Avens, etc. the extreme and elder parts
whereof first fade, and by degrees rot off. Whence also we see the reason of
the rugged and blunt extremities of these and some other Roots, as of that
Plant superstitiously called Devils-bit; which is not so originally, but part
thereof rotting off, the living remainder becomes stumped or seems bitten.
Thus far of the general Shapes, Motions, and Ages of Roots.

CHAP. II.
I Next proceed to the several Parts whereof a Root is compounded. The outer
part of all is the skin; which is common to all Roots. It Is diversely colored,
whiter in Skirrets, yellow in Dock, red in Potato, brown in Lovage, black in
Bugloss. Its surface sometimes smooth, as in Horsradish; rough, as in
Scorzonera. It Is of various size; very thin in Parsnep, somewhat thick in
Bugloss, very thick in Iris. Sometimes it is opacous, as in Thistle; and
sometimes transparent, as in Madder. Every Root has successively two kind of
skins: the one coetaneous with the other parts; and has its original from that
which involveth the parts of the Seed it self. The other postnate, succeeding
in the room of the former as the Root ageth; and is originated from the Bark.

This skin is usually, if not always, compounded of two kinds of bodies: which
also is probable of the coetaneous. The one parenchymous, and frequently
constructed of exceeding little Cells or Bubles; which in some Roots, as of
Asparagus, cut traverse, and viewed through a Microscope are plainly visible.
See the Figure. These Bubles are of different sizes, in Bugloss larger, in
Asparagus less; and sometimes they coincide and disappear. But in these and all
other Roots, even where these Bubles appear not, the Parenchyma of the skin is
of the same substantial nature with that other more vivid and bulky one of the
Bark: as is manifest from its being thence originated; and alike conformed, as
shall be seen; and not only adjacent to it, as a Glove is to the Hand; but
continuous therewith, as the parts of a piece of flesh are one with another.

Of this parenchymous body the skin consists chiefly, but not wholly; there
being many tubulary Vessels mixed therewith: which though hardly by the
Microscope, yet otherwise is demonstrable. For in tearing the skin, you shall
do it more easily by the length than breadth; because by the first way, the
continuity only of the Parenchyma is dissolved; but by the latter, both of this
and of the Vessels, these being posited by the length of the Root: So that as
by the smalness of the Bubles of the Parenchyma, the skin is dense; so by these
Vessels is it tough. Again, if you cut a Root traverse, and let it lie by for
some time, all the parts, where there are no Vessels, shrink below the surface
of the cut-end; but wherever these are posited, there is no shrinking; which
oftentimes evidently appears also in the skin: because the said vessels,
though, as the Bubles, they may coincide, yet they cannot visibly shorten or
shrink up in length; no more than a Straw, whose sides may yet be easily
crushed together. Further, the Root being cut traverse, if near the cut-end you
very gently press the side of the Root with the edge of your nail, the sap will
thereupon arise sometimes from the skin; in the same manner, as from any other
part of the Root where the like Vessels are posited. And although the sap may
likewise be expressed from the pith and other parts where sometimes there are
none of these Vessels; yet not without a solution of their continuity; which
here does not follow, as appears from the disappearing of the sap, together
with the intermission of the pressure, the said Vessels then dilating
themselves by a motion of restitution, and so sucking up the sap again.
Hereunto may be added the testimony of sight; the very Vessels themselves, in
many Roots, coming under an apparent view, and standing in the utmost surface
of the Root all round about, as in that of Liquorish, Columbine, Scorzonera,
and others. [ See the Figure of Scorzonera Root.] Which Experiments I have here
once for all more particularly set down, because I shall have occasion
hereafter to refer to them.

CHAP. III.
NExt within the skin lies the Bark. It Is sometimes yellow, as in Dock; red,
in Bistort; but usually, and in seedling Roots I think always, white. It is
derived from the seed it self; being but the extension or prolongation of part
of one of those bodies therein originally existent, and which I have elsewhere
called the Radicle. It is variously sized; sometimes very thin, as in Jerusalem
Artichoke, Goats beard, and most Trees; where it also retains the name of a
Bark or Rind. Sometimes it is more thick, and makes up the far greatest part
of the Root, as in the String-Roots of Asparagus, Dandelyon, and others. The
thinnest and the thickest are all analogous, and obtain the same general uses.
The degrees of its size amongst all Roots may be well reckoned about twenty,
and seen in the following examples, sc. Beet, Dropwort, Jerusalem Artichoke,
Orpine, Valerian, Goats-beard, Nettle, Brownwort, Columbine, Celandine,
Asparagus, Hors-Radish, Peony, Bryony, Eryngo, Borage, Lovage, Dandelyon,
Parsnep, Carrot: in which the Bark is considered absolutely, and not in
comparison with the other parts. See the Figures.

It is compounded of two Bodies. The one parenchymous; continuous throughout;
yet somewhat pliable without a solution of its continuity. Exceeding porous; as
appears from its so much shrinking up in drying. The pores hereof are
extended much alike both by the length and breadth of the Root; therefore it
shrinketh up by both those dimensions more equally. And they are very dilative;
as is also manifest from its restorableness to its former bulk again, upon its
infusion in water: that is to say, it is a most curious and exquisitely fine
wrought Sponge. Thus much the eye and reason may discover.

The Microscope confirms the truth hereof, and more precisely shows, That these
pores are all, in a manner, spherical, and this part nothing else but an
infinite Mass of little Cells or fixed Bubles. The sides of none of them are
visibly pervious from one into another, but each is bounded within it self: So
that the Parenchyma of the Bark is much the same thing, as to conformation,
which the froth of Beer or Eggs is as a fluid, or a piece of fine Manchet as a
fixed body. The sides also of these Bubles are as transparent as those of
Water. [ See any of the Microscopical Figures.]

But their size is usually much smaller; and their posture more regular. In all
Roots they are so small, as scarcely without the Microscope to be discerned:
yet are they of different sizes both in the same and in diverse Roots; the
varieties whereof amongst all Roots may be reduced to about ten or twelve, some
of those in Dandelyon being of the smallest, and in Bugloss of the greatest. [
See the Microscopical Figures.] They are posited for the most part at equal
height; and piled even one over another: so that oftentimes they visibly run in
ranks or trains both by the length and breadth of the Root, as in the Root of
Bugloss or Dandelyon split through the middle may be seen. Although they are
usually spherical, yet sometimes and in some places they are more oblong, as in
the outward part of the Bark of Bugloss. [ See the Microscopical Figure.] These
Bubles are sometimes best seen, after the Root, being cut traverse, has layn
by a while to dry.

They are the Receptacles of Liquor; which is ever of a limpid color; and I
think always more thin. They are in all Seed-Roots filled herewith; and usually
in those also which are well grown, as of Borage, Radish, etc.

This parenchymous part is, in many Roots, of one uniform contexture; as in
Asparagus, Hors-Radish, Peony, Potato, and others. In many others it is as it
were of a diversified woof; the Bubles being, though regular, yet either in
shape, size, or situation different in some parts hereof from what they are in
other intermediate ones. For these parts are like so many white Rays streaming,
by the diameter of the Root, from the inward edge toward the circumference of
the Bark; as in Lovage, Melilot, Parsnep, etc. They are, though not in direct
lines, continued also by the length of the Root; so that they are as it were so
many Membranes by which the other parts of the Bark are disterminated. Compare
the Figures.

The continuation of these diametral Rays or Portions is diverse: sometimes but
half through the Bark, or somewhat more or less, as in Melilot. Sometimes, and
usually running quite through to the very skin, as in Parsley: wherewith the
skin seems to have a closer communion, and in this and the like Roots, to be
originated especially there from. They usually stand at an equal distance in
the same Root; but with respect to diverse, their distance varies; so less in
Parsnep, greater in Angelica. They are commonly rectilinear, as in Lovage; but
sometimes winding to and fro, as in Carrot, Burnet. See the Figures.

They are not always of one size: in a Carrot exceeding slender, and scarcely
discernable; in others thicker, as in the three greater ones of Melilot, common
Chervil. Both by their distance and size they are also less or more numerous,
some only as they are nearer, some as smaller, others as both. Sometimes they
are of the same thickness through the Bark from edge to edge, as in Lovage. See
the Figure. And sometimes are considerably spread or dilated toward the skin,
wherewith they are joined, and whereinto they more visibly run, as in Parsley.
See the Root it self. The Bubles of these diametral portions are sometimes
greater than those of the other parenchymous parts, as in Parsley; and I think,
sometimes less. Yet as there so here variously sized; to about six or eight
degrees; and those of Parsley about the third, fourth, and fifth. Their figure
is sometimes more oblong; and their direction or respect more toward the
center of the Root.

As the other parenchymous parts of the Bark are the Receptacles of Liquor, so
these (where they are) of Air. This is argued from their being more white, and
not transparent, as such Roots and parts use to be, which are more copiously
and equally filled up with liquor: as the pith of Elder, which in the old
stalks is white, was once, and by being well soaked, will become again
transparent. And from their being more dry and void of liquor; whereupon their
bubles, which cannot be vacuities, must be filled with more or less Air, mixed
with the sap or the vaporous parts thereof. This is more observable in those
diametral Portions which terminate upon and run into the skin.

The Bark is not only of a diverse woof, but, as is said, of a compounded
substance; there being a certain number of Succiferous Vessels, fewer or more,
in some place or other, mixed with the parenchymous part above described; and
some way or other are demonstrable in all Roots: as by the toughness of the
Bark in being broken by the breadth: by the visible continuation of the said
Vessels through the length of the bark in the resemblance of small threads: and
by the rising up of the sap in the traverse cut of the Root, in such places of
the Bark, where these threads terminate: as the existence of those of the Skin
was proved Chap. 2.

These tubulary Threads run not through the bark in direct lines, but are
frequently braced together in the form of Network; the parenchymous parts
every where filling up the spaces betwixt the braced threads; as in Burnet,
Scorzonera, etc. the bark being paired or striped off is apparent. See the
Figures. They seem at first, where they are braced, to be inosculated, so as to
be pervious one into another: but a more accurate view, especially assisted by
a Microscope, discovers the contrary. Neither are they wond any way one about
another, as threads are in a Rope: nor implicated, as in ravled Yarn or the
knots of a Net: but only contiguous or simply tangent, as the several Cords in
the Braces of a Drum: being thus joined together by the parenchymous parts, as
in speaking of the Pith will be understood how. Yet do not always the same
threads belong and keep entire to one brace; but are frequently parted into
lesser threads transposed from brace to brace. Nor do they always, in whole or
in part, presently after their contingence, mutually fall off again; but
oftentimes run along collaterally joined together for some space, as in
Jerusalem Artichoke. These braces are of various number in diverse Roots; more
frequent in Jerusalem Artichoke, less in Scorzonera, more rare in Cumfry. The
threads likewise are variously divaricated; sometimes more where the braces are
frequent, as in Jerusalem Artichoke; and sometimes less where the braces are
rare, as in Scorzonera, Dandelyon: And in all Roots more frequent toward the
inner Verge of the bark. See the Figures.

By what is said it is partly implied, That these threads are not single
Vessels; but a cluster of them, twenty, thirty, or more or fewer of them
together. Yet as the threads are not in the braces; so neither are the Vessels,
in the threads, inosculated. Nor yet twisted; but only stand collateral
together; as the several twires of the Silkworm do in slieve-silk. Neither are
these Vessels Pyramidal, so far as the Glass will discover, or from probable
reason may be conjectured. Nor ramified, so as to be successively propagated
one from another, after the manner of Veins: but Cylindrical, and distinctly
continued throughout the length of the Root, as the several fibers in a Tendon
or Nerve.

These Vessels are of diverse kinds in diverse Roots: of the different natures
whereof, of, although there may be other ways whereby to judge; yet so far as
by inspection, we may do it chiefly by the diversity of those liquors which
they severally contain. Sometimes they yield a Lympha; and that thin, as they
do in a Parsnep; especially those that make a Ring at the inward extremity of
the bark. See the Root it self. That this clear sap ascends only from these
Vessels, is certain; because no liquor will do so from any parenchymous part,
as Chap. 2. has been said. And because it is of a different nature from the
sap contained in the bubles of the Parenchyma; although of the same color, yet
sensibly more sweet.

Sometimes they yield a thick and mucilaginous Lympha, as in Cumfry, as
appears by its tenacity. From the mucilaginous Content of these Vessels it
is, I suppose, that the sap contained in the bubles is rendered of the like
nature, so far as it approaches hereto; which sometimes is more, as in
Marsh-mallow; and sometimes but little, as in Borage: For in pressing out the
liquor of this Plant, and then heating it over an indifferent fire; the far
greater part hereof remains thin; only some certain strings and little bits
of a gellied substance ^re mixed herewith; which I suppose, were originally the
proper liquor of these Lymphaeducts.

Oftentimes these succiferous Vessels yield a milky or white sap; and sometimes
yellow, and of other colors; as in Sonchus, and most Cichoraceous Plants; in
Angelica, and most Umbelliferous; in Burdock, and diverse Thistles, to which
that is 'akin: in Scorzonera, Common Bells, and many other Plants not commonly
taken notice of to be milky. The milky saps of all which, although they differ
in color and other qualities, yet agree in being more oily; it being the
mixture of the oily parts with some other limpid liquor, but of a different
nature, which causes that color. In the same manner as common Oil and a
strong Liquamen Tartari shaked in a Bottle together, presently mix into a white
Liquor: and although they will for the greatest part separate again; yet some
of their parts without any boiling, or so much as the least digestion with
heat, by agitation only, or standing together for some time, incorporate in the
form of a thin milky Soap, which will also dissolve in Water. I suppose
therefore that it is the volatile Salt chiefly of these Plants, which being
mixed with their Oil, renders this Liquor of a white or other color. Sometimes
the Oil will separate and discover it self: for if you cut a Fenil root
traverse, after it has layn some days out of the ground; the same Vessels,
which in a fresh Root yields Milk, will now yield Oil.

All Gums and Balsams are likewise to be reputed the proper Contents of these
Vessels: for these and Milks are very near 'akin. So the Milk of Fenil, upon
standing, turns to a clear Balsam; of Scorzonera, Dandelyon, and others to a
Gum. And in the dried Root of Angelica, etc. being split, the Milk, according
to the continuation of these Vessels, appears, as blood clodders in the
Veins, condensed to an hard and shining Rosin. See the Roots themselves.

These succiferous Vessels are not only of diverse kinds in diverse Roots, but in
the same. Whether in all, I doubt: but in some it is certain they are: For if
you cut a Fenil root traverse, both milks and limpid sap will presently ascend,
and upon accurate inspection appear thereupon distinctly. [ See both the Figure
and the Root it self.] Whether all Roots have Lymphaeducts, it is also
doubtful; but most probable that they have, more or fewer, standing for the
most part in a Ring at the inner Verge of the Bark: the sap whereof may be so
far off common Nature in all Roots as to be clear and less oily.

The Quantity of these Vessels is very different: In Borage, Peony, Bistort but
few; in Asparagus fewer: in Parsnep, Celandine many; in Fenil, Marsh-mallow
many more: and betwixt these extremes there are many degrees, as by comparing
the Roots of Horsradish, Turnep, Briony, Skirrets, Parsley, Goats-beard, and as
many more as you please, may be seen. See the Figures. There are two ways of
judging of their number; either as their extremities are visible upon the
traverse cut of the bark; or as the bark is diversely brittle or tough, being so
from the various number of these Vessels therein, as Chap. 2. has been said.

The quantity of the ascending Sap, is a doubtful argument, whether of the
number or size of these Vessels. For it is common to most milky Roots, for the
Milk to ascend more copiously: yet in some of them, the Vessels seem not to be,
in proportion with the parenchymous part, so numerous as in some other Roots,
where the ascending sap is less; as by comparing the Lacteals of Dandelyon and
the Lymphaeducts of Fenil together may appear: so that it should seem, that the
bore of the lacteal Vessels is greater than that of the Lymphaeducts.

The Situation of these Vessels is various and elegant. Sometimes they are
posited only at the inner edge of the bark, where they make a Ring, as in
Asparagus. In which place and position they stand in most, if not in all,
Roots, how variously soever otherwise they are posited. This Ring is either
more entire, as in Eryngo, Brownwort, Valerian, etc. or it is a pricked Ring,
as in Butterbur. Sometimes they are chiefly posturd in a Prick-ring toward the
outward part of the bark, as in Peony: and some are pricked all over the bark,
as in Melilot. In others they stand not so much in pricks, as portions or
Columns, as in Cumfry. In others again they all stand in in more continued
lines, either Rays or diametral, as in Borage; or Peripherial, as in Celandine.
The Rays are not equally extended in all Roots: in Parsnep toward the
circumference of the bark; in Bugloss about half way. In Borage, the rays are
more continuous; in a Carrot, more pricked. Here also the pricks stand in even
lines; in Lovage they are divaricated. Of which, and those of some other Roots,
it is also observable, that they are not all properly pricks, but most of them
very little circles, which, after the Milk has been frequently licked off, and
cease to ascend, are visible. See the Figures. And note, that in observing
all Milk-vessels, the Milk is to be taken off, not with the finger but the
tongue, so often till it rises no more, or but little. And some Roots may also
be soaked in Water, whereby the position of the Milk-vessels will be visible by
the darker color of the bark where they stand.

The Rays sometimes run more parallel, and keep several, as in Monkshood; and
sometimes toward the circumference of the bark they are occurrent, as in
Eryngo: here in a termination more circular, and in Bryony angular, or in the
form of a Glory; as also in Horsradish through a Microscope. The peripherial
lines are in some more entire Circles, as in Dandelyon; in others made up of
shorter Chords, as in Potato, Cumfry, and the smaller part of the Root of
Monkshood. In some the pricks are so exceeding small, and stand so close, that,
to the bare eye, they seem to be continous Rings, which yet through the
Microscope appear distinct, as in Marsh-mallow and Liquorish. See the Figures.

Sometimes Columns and Chords are compounded, as in Burnet; Pricks and Chords,
in Potato; Rays and Rings, in Monkshood; where the Ring is single. In Fenil
there is a double or treple order both of Rays and Rings, the Lymphaeducts
standing in Rays and the Lacteals in Rings. And in Marsh-mallow the Vessels are
so posited as to make both those kinds of lines. In Celandine they seem all, to
the bare eye, to stand in numerous Rings lying even one within another. See the
Figures. As also in Dandelyon; in which yet, being viewed through a Microscope,
there is an appearance of very many small Rays, which streaming from the inner
Verge of the Bark, cross three or four of the smaller Rings, and there
terminate. See the Microscopical Figure. Whence it should seem, that Lymphatick
Rays and milky Rings are so far mixed together; only the Lympha being
confounded with the Milk cannot be discerned. And where the milky Vessels are
evacuated, or at such seasons wherein they are less full, diverse milky Roots
will yield a clear Liquor at the inner Verge of the Bark, where, at other
times, they seem to yield only Milk. And this is the Description of the Bark.

CHAP. IV.
THat Portion of the Root which stands next within the Bark, is also
compounded of two bodies, Parenchymous and Lignous. The Parenchymous is of the
same substantial Nature with that of the Bark: and is originated from it; being
not only adjacent to it, but all round about continuous therewith, even as that
is with the skin; the Parenchyma of the Bark being distributed, from time to
time, partly outward into the skin, and partly inward into this.

The position of the several parts hereof is different. For the most part they
have a diametral continuation in several Portions, running betwixt as many more
of the Lignous parts from the circumference toward the Center of the Root. In
the Roots of some Plants they are more observable, as in Cumfry; which leads
to the notice of them in all others both of Plants and Trees. See the Figure.
Sometimes part of this parenchymous Body is disposed into Rings, as in Fenil.
The number and size of which Rings differ; in Fenil they are in some places
broader, but fewer; in Beet they are narrower, but more. See the Figure. The
diametral portions are in like manner much varied; in Cumfry, Celandine larger;
in Beet, Bugloss, meaner; in Borage, Parsnep more and lesser; and in most woody
Roots, streaming betwixt the pith and the bark as so many small Rays. Their
continuation is also different; in some Roots to the Center, as in Columbine;
in others not, as in Parsnep. See the Figures. And sometimes different in the
same Root, as in the Vine. See the Microscopical Figure.

The Contexture of these parenchymous Portions is sometimes uniform, as in
Bugloss, Peony; and sometimes also, as it is in the bark, different; in part
more sappy and transparent, in part more white, dry, and airy, as in Carrot,
Lovage, Scorzonera, and others; which yet cannot be observed without a wary
view. See the Figures. But their general texture is the same being all made up
of many small bubles: which are of different sizes, like those of the bark; but
for the most part smaller. Their shape likewise is usually round; but sometimes
oblong and oval, as in Borage; or oblong and square, as in the Vine.

The Lignous part, if not always, yet usually, is also compounded of two kinds
of bodies, scil. Succiferous and Air-vessels. The Succiferous are, as far as
discernable, of the same conformation and nature with those of the bark, and in
the transverse cut of the Root, do oftentimes, as those, emit a Liquor. They
are also Braced; and many of them run in distinct Threads or portions
collaterally together. The Air-vessels I so call, because they contain no
Liquor, but an airy Vapor. They are more or less visible in all Roots. They
may b^ distinguished to the bare eye from its parenchymous parts by their
whiter surface; and standing more prominent, while those shrink below the
transverse level of the Root, upon drying. They are frequently conjugated
diverse of them together; sometimes fewer, and for the most part single, as in
Asparagus; sometimes many, as in Hors-Radish. See the Microscopical Figures.
And their Conjugations are also braced as the threads of the Succiferous
Vessels. But they are no where Inosculated: nor twisted one about another; but
only tangent or collateral. Neither are they Ramified, the greater into less;
but are all distinctly continued from one end of the Root to the other.

Their Braces, as those of the Succiferous Vessels, are also of various number;
in Cumfry, Scorzonera more rare; in Borage more frequent; as by stripping off
the bark of such Roots where it is easily separable, may be seen. See the
Figure of Scorzonera. And they often vary in the same Root; so in Borage,
Scorzonera, etc. they are more frequent in the Center and next the bark than in
the intermediate space, as by splitting those Roots down the middle does
appear. See the Figures. They also vary from those of the succiferous Vessels;
those being usually more frequent, as in Jerusalem Artichoke, than these of the
Aerial. See the Figures.

Betwixt these braced Air-vessels run the parenchymous parts above described,
as they do betwixt the succiferous in the bark. See the Figures. An agreeable
structure hereto may be observed in the parts of a Muscle; wherein some, more
membranous and white, are posited and knit together in the form of Lozenges or
close Network: others, more red, or soft, fill up all the interjacent spaces,
and have a counter-process or continuation; the one by the breadth or thickness
of the Muscle, the other by the length. The same structure is likewise visible
in Tendons, but more difficultly

The position of both these kinds of Vessels is various. The Succiferous are
sometimes posited in diametral lines or portions, as in the Vine: Sometimes
oppositely to the Aerial, as in Beet; each Ring herein being double, and made
both of Sap and A^r-vessels. In Nettle the Succiferous run cross the Aerial in
several, five, six, seven, or more Rings. In Bryony the several Conjug^tions of
the Aerial are surrounded with the Succiferous. In Patience the Succiferous are
disposed, besides Rays, into many small Rings of different sizes sprinkled up
and down, and not having one common Center: within diverse whereof Aerial are
included: especially within those which are drawn not into Rings, but as it
were straggling Hedges. See the Figures.

That also of the Air-vessels is various and elegant. In Ammi, ^ilium non
bulbos^m they make a Ring. In these a pricked Ring; in Peony a Ring of Rays; in
Valerian a Ring of Pricks and Rays. In others they make not Rings, but longer
Rays, extended either toward the Center, as in Scorzonera; or meeting in it,
as in Columbine. In Beet they stand in several Rings, and every Ring made of
Rays. In Cumfry the Rays and Rings are separate, those stand without, these
next the Center. In Celandine they are of a parallel, in Monkshood of a wedged
form. In Borage the position of many of them is spiral In Horse Radish, they
stand more confused neither in Rings nor in Rays; yet their several
Conjugations are radiated: with very many other differences. See the Figures.

The Q^antity of these Vessels, as to the space they take up in the Root, is to
be computed two ways, by their Number or S^ze. Their Number may, in some Roots,
and in some measure, be judged of by the bare eye, having frequently a whiter
surface than the other parts. As also their Size; the bore of these Vessels
being greater than that of the Succiferous in all Roots; especially some. For
if you take the Roots of Vine, Fenil, Dandelyon, Plum-tree, Elder, Willow, etc.
and lay them by for some time to dry; and then having cut off a very thin slice
of each transversly, if you hold up those slices before your eye, so as the
sight may be trajected through the said Vessels, they hereby become visible, as
notably different both in number and size.

But undeceitful and accurate observation of both their Number and Size must be
made by the Microscope; and so they will appear to be much more various. In
Bistort, Skirret, they are very few; in Beet very many: betwixt which extremes
there are all degrees; as in Orpine, Monkshood, Scorzonera, great Celandine,
Peony, Borage, Fenil, etc. may be seen. So their Size in some is extreme small,
as in Strawberry, Bistort, Valerian; in others very great, as in Asparagus,
Bugloss, Vine. They are also of several sizes in the same Root; but in some are
less varied, as in Lilium non bulbosum, Asparagus, Bugloss; in others more, as
in Bryony, Lovage. Amongst all Roots they vary by about twenty degrees; as by
comparing the Roots of Vine, Thorn, Apple, Bryony, Lovage, Fenil, wild Carrot,
Saxifrage, Parsley, Peony, Horehound, Cinquefoyl, Strawberry, etc. together,
may be seen. See the Figures of so many of them as are drawn.

In some Roots they are small and few; as in Jerusalem Artichoke; in others
small, but many, as in Horseradish: in Bugloss they are great, but few; in
Vine great and many. So that the proportion which those of a Vine, their number
and size being taken together, bear to those of Jerusalem Artichoke, may be at
least ^s fifty to one. See the Microscopical Figures. Of the smallest kinds, as
those of Cinquefoyl, Jerusalem Artichoke, and the like, it is to be noted, that
they are scarce ever visible in the fresh slices of these Roots, but after they
have layn by a while, at last by a good Glass, clear light, and steady view,
are discernable.

In some Roots the greater of these Vessels stand in or next the Center, as in
Taraxicum; in others next the circumference, as in Horse Radish. Sometimes each
of them is from one end of the Root to the other, of a more equal size, or more
Cylindrical, as in Marsh-mallow; but usually they widen more or less from the
top to the bottom of the Root, as in Thorn-Apple; about the top whereof they
are for the most part but of the sixth, seventh, and eighth magnitude, some of
the fifth, but none of the third; but about the bottom they are most of the
third and fifth: whence it is manifest* that some of them are, in the manner of
Veins, somewhat pyramidal: yet their ampliation proceeds not toward, but
from their Original, as in N^rves.

Of these Vessels the learned M^lpighius has observed; Componuntur (says he)
expositae sistulae Zona tenui and pellucida, velut argentei coloris l^mina,
p^rum lat^; quae, s^^raliter locat^, and extremis l^teri^us unita, ^^ubum,
interius and exterius aliquantulum ^sp^rum, ^ffi^it.

To whose observation I further add, That the Spiral Zone, which he so calls,
is not one absolutely entire piece; but consisting of two or more round and
perfect Fibers standing collaterally together: and according as fewer or more
of these Fibers happen to break off, from their spiral location, together, the
Zone is narrower or broader; usually narrower in the Trunk, and broader in the
Root.

Of these Fibers it is also observable, that they are not Inosculated side to
side, but are knit or stitched together by other small^r ones; those being as
it were the Warp, and these the Woof of these Vessels. Yet I think the several
Fibers are not interwoven just as in a Web; but by a kind ^f wreath or st^^ch,
as the several plates of a Mat. A clear and elegant sight of these fibers, and
of their interweftage, by splitting a Vine root, or a piece of Oak, may, in the
sides of their greater Air-vessels, be obtained; having altogether the
resemblance of close Needle Work.

The Spiration of the Fibers of these Vessels may be more easily observed in
the Trunk than in the Root; and better in younger Plants; and not so well by
cutting as splitting, or tearing off some small piece through which they run,
their conformation being by this means not spoiled, Yet this way they are seen
chiefly unresolved. But in the Leaves and tender Stalks of all such Plan^^ as
s^^w upon breaking a kind of Down or Wool, they may be seen resolved and drawn
out, and that sometimes even to the naked eye, an in^h or two in length; this
Wool being nothing else but a number of Fibers resolved from their spiral
position in these V^ssels, and drawn out in length, and so clustered together
as so many Threads or little Ropes; appearing thus in most Vegetables, but
especially in some, as Vines, Scabious, Squills, and others. See the Plants
themselves. The process of their spiration is not, so far as I have observed,
accidental, but constantly the same; scil. in the Root by South from West to
East; but in the Trunk contrarily, by South from East to West.

The Content of these Vessels is, as has already been intimated, more airy.
The proof whereof is, that upon a transverse cut of the Root, the Sap never
ascends there where these stand. Being also viewed through a Microscope, they
are never observed to be filled with liquor. Besides, a Root cut and immersed
in water, till it is in some part got into these Vessels, and then taken out
and crushed; the other parts will yield liquor, but these only bubles; which
bubles rise from some small quantity of Liquor mixed with the Air before
contained in the said Vessels. To which other arguments will arise out of those
things that follow. As also for this Content its not being a pure, but vaporous
Air. Whether these Vessels may not, in some Vegetables, and at some times,
contain Liquor, is doubtful. Thus far of the Lignous Part.

CHAP. V.
WIthin the Lignous Part lies the Pith. This part is not common to all Roots,
for some have none, as Nicotian, Stramonium, and others. Yet many which have
none or little throughout all their lower parts, have one fair enough about
their tops, as Mallow, Borage, Dandelyon, and the like. See the Roots. And in
many others there are Parenchymous parts, of the same substantial nature with
the Pith, visible from the top to the bottom, as in Beet, Fenil, etc. See the
Roots and Figures. The size of the Pith is varied by many degrees easily
reckoned an hundred; in Fenil, Dandelyon, Asparagus but small; in Horsradish,
Valerian, Bistort great. See the Figures. The shape hereof in the lower parts
of most Roots is pyramidal; but at the tops various, according to the different
distribution of the Vessels, as in Carrot, Hyperbolical, in Parsley Oval; as
appears in cutting the Roots length-ways. See the Figures.

The Pith, for the most part, especially in Trees, is a simple body: but
sometimes it is, as the Bark, compounded, some certain number of Succiferous
Vessels being mixed herewith; as in Jerusalem Artichoke, Horsradish, etc. upon
a traverse cut, by a strict view, may be discerned. See the Figures. Their
position is sometimes confused, as in Carrot; and sometimes regular, as in
Parsley, appearing by the traverse cut in Rings, and in cutting by the length
in Arches. See the Figure.

As all the other parts of the Root are originated from the Seed; so sometimes
is the Pith it self. But sometimes it has its more immediate derivation from
the Bark. Hence it is, that many Roots which have no Pith in their lower parts,
have one at their top, as Columbine, Lovage, etc. See the Roots. For the
parenchymous parts of the Bark being by degrees distributed into diametral
Portions, running betwixt those of the Lignous body, and at length meeting and
uniting in the Center, thus constitute the Pith. In the same manner, at the top
of some Roots, the Pith is either made or augmented out of the Parenchymous
Rings above described, these being gradually distributed to and embodied in the
Center; as in Fenil and some other Roots, their lower and upper parts compared
together, may be seen.

From hence the Pith appears to be also of the same substantial nature with the
Parenchyma of the Bark, and with the diametral Portions, and that they are all
one body differing only in shape and place. As also from its being continuous
with the diametral Portions, in like manner as these are with the said
Parenchyma. And from its Contexture, which by a Microscope appears to be the
same in all; this being also made up of bubles: which the learned Mr. Hook
first showed me of the Pith in the Trunk of Elder. And I ha^ing before
demonstrated that the Bark and diametral Portions were of one substantial
nature with the Pith; (As also all the other Parenchymous parts of a Plant, in
the Leaves, Fruit, etc. as I have elsewhere described them) I conjectured they
were (...) of the self same Contexture; and acc^rdi^gly, having viewed them
through a good Glass, I found they were.

The Bubles of the Pith are of very different sizes: seldom less than in the
bark, as in Asparagus; usually much bigger, as in Horsradish. They may be well
reckoned to about fifteen or ^wenty degrees; those of Jerusalem Artichoke of
the largest; of Valerian, Horsradish, of the meaner; in Bistort, Peony of ^he
smallest. See the Figures. Their position is rarely varied, as it is oftentimes
in the bark, but more uniform, and in the transverse out, equ^^ly respective to
all parts of the Root: yet being (...) one over another, in the long ^ut (...)
^o run in direct trains by the (...) the Root. Their shape also is u^^a^ly m^re
circul^r; but sometimes somewha^ (...) the larger kinds, as in Jerusal^^
^^^^choke. See the Microscopical Figure.

Thus far the contexture of the Pith is well discoverable in the Root. In the
Trunk farther and more easily. Yet since I am giving the Description hereof, I
shall therefore further illustrate it by Examples from thence: And to what has
been observed, I further add, That the sides by which the aforesaid Bubles of
the Pith are circumscribed, are not mere paper skins, but so many several ranks
or piles of exceeding small Fibrous Threads, lying for the most part evenly one
over another from the bottom to the top of every Buble, and running cross, as
the Threads in the Weavers Warp, from one Buble to another; which is to say,
That the Pith is nothing else but a Rete mirabile, or an infinite number of
small Fibers admirably complicated together; as by cutting the Pith with a
Razor may be seen.

All Vegetables exhibit this spectable not alike distinctly, those best with
the largest Bubles. Nor the same Pith in any condition, but best when dry;
because then, the Sap being voided, the spaces betwixt the fibrous Threads, and
so the Threads themselves are more distinctly discernable. Yet is it not to be
dried after cutting; because its several parts will thereupon coincide and
become deformed; but to be chosen while the plant is yet growing, when it may
be often found dry, yet undeformed, as in the Trunks of common Thistle,
Jerusalem Artichoke, etc.

These Threads, so far as I can observe, are not single Fibers, but usually
consist of several. Nor are they simply collateral, but by the weftage of other
single ones, in their natural estate, knit together; much after the same manner
as the Spiral Fibers of the Air-vessels. This connection I have no where so well
seen, as in the white bottoms of the Bubles of a Bulrush, being cut traverse;
wherein they have the appearance of very fine and close Needle work.

The single fibers are seldom and scarcely visible, except by obliquely tearing
the Pith; by which means they will appear, through the Glass, broken off
sometimes a quarter or h^lf an ^nch, or an ^nch in length; and exceeding sm^ll
beyond the Threads. In Bulrush they are sometimes d^scernable in cutting by the
length. These Fibers and the Threads composed of them, being for the most part
so pellucid, and closely situate, they frequently seem to make one entire body,
as a piece of Ice or a film of Water it self: or even as Animal Skins sometimes
show, which yet are known and commonly allowed to be Fibrous.

The situation of these Threads, is contrary to that of the Vessels, as those by
the length, so these chiefly by the breadth of the Root, or horizontally from
one edge of the Pith to the other. They are continued circularly; whereby as
often as they keep within the compass of the several Bubles, the said Bubles are
round; but where they wind out of one Buble into another, they mutually
intersect a Chord of their several Circles, by which means the Bubles become
angular.

The Contexture likewise both of the Parenchymous part of the Bark, and of the
diametral Portions inserted betwixt the Lignous, is the same with this of the
Pith now described, that is Fibrous. Whence we understand, How the several
Braces and Threads of the Vessels are made: For the Vessels running by the
length of the Root, as the Warp, by the Parenchymous Fibers running cross or
horizontally, as the Woof, are thus knit and as it were stitched up together.
Yet their weftage seems not to be simple, as in Cloth; but that many of the
fibrous Threads are wraped round about each Vessel, and in the same manner are
continued from one to another; thereby knitting them altogether more closely
into one tubulary Thread; and those Threads again into one Brace: much after the
manner of the Needle Work called Back Stitch, or that used in quilting of
Balls. Some obscure sight hereof may be taken in the threads of Cambrick in the
use of a Microscope; but it is most visible in the Leaves and Flowers of some
Plants. The Delineation of these things I shall therefore omit, till we come
hereafter to speak of those parts.

From what has been said, it may be conjectured; That the Air-vessels
successively appearing in the Bark, are formed, not out of any fluid matter, as
are the original ones, but of the Parenchymous Fibers; sc. by changing them
from a spherical to a tubulary, and from a circular to a spiral posture.

From the precedents it is also manifest, That all the Parenchymous parts of a
Root are Fibrous. Whence it is probable, That all the parenchymous parts of
Animals are likewise fibrous, even of the Glandules and of all the Viscera:
which yet through the fineness of the work, and less consistency of the parts,
may here be more difficult to observe.

And lastly, That the whole body of a Root consists of Vessels and Fibers.
And that these fibers themselves are tubulary or so many more Vessels, is most
probable: There only wants a greater perfection of Microscopical Glasses to
determine. Whence it is also probable, That all the parts of an Animal, even
Bones themselves, upon the original formation of the Foetus, are composed of
Vessels; or at least of Vessels and Fibers. For which conjecture I have further
grounds which I shall not now mention.

The Contents of the Pith are, sometimes Liquor, and sometimes a vaporous Air.
The Liquor is always limpid, as that of the Parenchymous part of the Bark; and
in nature not much differing from it. The Air is sometimes less, and sometimes
more vaporous than that of the Bark. By this Air I mean that which is contained
in the Bubles. Within the Concaves of the Fibers ^ suppose there is another
different one: So that as in the Bubles is contained a more aqueous, and in the
Vessels a more essential Liquor; so sometimes in the Bubles is contained a more
vaporous, and in the Fibers a more simple and essential Air.

An Account of the VEGETATION OF ROOTS Grounded chiefly upon the foregoing
ANATOMY. THE THIRD PART.
TO philosophize, is to render the Causes and Ends of Things. No man therefore
that denies God can do this truly: For the taking away of the first Cause
makes all things contingent. Now of that which is contingent, although there
may be an Event, yet there can be no Reason or End: so that men should then
study that which is not. So the Causes of Things, if they are contingent they
cannot be constant: for that which is the Cause of this now, if it be so
contingently, it may not be the Cause hereafter; and no Physical Proposition
grounded upon the Constancy and certainty of things could have any foundation.
He therefore that philosophiseth, and denies God, plays a childish game.

Wherefore Nature and the Causes and Reasons of things duly contemplated,
naturally lead us unto God, and is one way of securing our veneration of Him;
giving us not only a general demonstration of his Being; but a particular one
of most of the several Qualifications thereof. For all Goodness, Righteousnes^,
Proportion, Order, Truth, or whatever else is excellent and amiable in the
Creatures, it is the demonstration of the like in God: for it is impossible
that God should ever make any thing not like himself in some degree or other:
these things, and the very Notion which we have of them, are Conceptions
issuing from the Womb of the Divine Nature.

By the same means we have a greater assurance of the excellency of his Sacred
Word; that he who has done all things so transcendently well, must needs speak
as well as he has done. That He who in so admirable a manner has made man,
cannot but know best what his true Principles and Faculties are, and what
Actions are most agreeable thereunto; and that having adorned him with such
beauteous and lovely ones, it is impossible he should ever put him upon the
exercise of those Faculties in any way deform^d and unlovely. That he should do
all things so well himself, and yet require his Creatures to do otherwise, is
unconceivable.

And as we may come hereby to rectify our apprehensions of his Laws, so also
of his Mysteries. For there are many things of the manner of whose existence we
have no certain knowledge, yet of their existence we are as sure as our senses
can make us: but we may as well deny what God has made, To be; as what he has
spoken, To be true, because we understand not how. And the knowledge of Things
being gradually attained, we have occasion to reflect, That some things we can
now well conceive, which we once thought unintelligible: I know therefore what
I understand not, but I know not what is unintelligible; what I know not now, I
may hereafter; or if not I, another; or if no man, or other Creature, it is
sufficient that God fully understands himself. It is not therefore the
knowledge of Nature, but the wanton phansies of men's minds that dispose them
either to forget God, or to think unduly of him.

Nor have we reason to fear going too far in the Study of Nature, more than the
entering into it; because the higher we rise in the true knowledge and due
contemplation of This, the nearer we come to the Divine Author hereof. Or to
think, that there is any contradiction, when Philosophy teaches that to be done
by Nature, which Religion and the Sacred Scriptures teach us to be done by God:
no more than to say, that the Balance of a Watch is moved by the next Wheel,
is to deny that Wheel and the rest to be moved by the Spring, or that both the
Spring and all the other parts are caused to move together by the Maker of
them. So God may be truly the Cause of This effect, although a thousand other
Causes should be supposed to intervene; for all Nature is as one great Engine
made by and held in his hand. And as it is the Watch makers Art, that the Hand
moves regularly from hour to hour, although he put not his singer still to it:
so is it the demonstration of Divine Wisdom, that the Parts of Nature are so
harmoniously contrived and set together as to conspire to all kind of natural
motions and effects without the extraordinary-immediate influence of the Author
of it.

Therefore as the Original Being of all things is the most proper demonstration
of Gods Power, so are the successive Generations and Operations of Things the
most proper demonstration of his Wisdom. For if we should suppose God did now
make or do any thing by any thing, then no Effect would be produced by a
natural Cause; and consequently He would still be upon the Work of Creation,
which yet Sacred Scripture assures us he rests from; and we might expect the
formation of a Child in an Egg, as well as in a Womb, or of a Chicken out of a
Stone as an Egg; For Infinite Power makes no difference in the things it
uses. But in that these things are not only made, but so made as to produce
their natural effects, here is the sensible and illustrious evidence of his
Wisdom: and the more complicated and vastly numerous we allow the natural
Causes of things to be, the more duly we conceive of that Wisdom which thus
disposes of them all to those their Effects. As the Wisdom of the King is not
seen by his in^erposing himself in every Case; but in the con^rivance of his
Laws, and consti^ution of his Ministers in such sort, that it shall be as
effectually determined of, as if he did so indeed. Thus all things are as
Ministers in the hands of God, conspiring together a thousand ways toward a
thousand effects and ends at one time; and that with the same certainty as if
he did prepose that omnipotent Fiat which he used at the Creation of the World,
to every one of them.

This Universal Monarchy, as it is eminently visible in all other particular
Oeconomies; so is it no less in that of Vegetables. Infinite occurrences and
secret Intrigues it is made up of, of which we cannot skill but by the help of
manifold Means, and those I suppose such as I have lately propounded. As yet I
have prosecuted only one of them, scil. Anatomy, and that not thoroughly
neither. So far therefore as Observations already made will conduct us, I shall
endeavor to go. And if, for the better clearing of the way, I have intermixed
some Conjectures, I think they are not merely such, but for which I have some
grounds, and which the Series of the following Discourse may be some proof of.

Let us say then, that the Root of a Plant being lodged in some Soil for its
more convenient growth; it is necessary the Soil should be duly prepared
thereunto. The Rain therefore falling and soaking into it* somewhat diluteth
the dissoluble Principles therein contained, and renders them more easily
communicable to the Root, being as a Menstruum which extracteth those
Principles from the other greater and useless part of the Soil.

And the warm Sun joined with the mollifying Rain, by both, as it were a
Digestion of the Soil, or a g^ntile Fermentation amongst its several parts,
will follow: whereby the dissoluble parts therein will rot and mellow; that is,
those Principles which as yet remained more fixed, will now be further resolved
and unlocked, and more copiously and equally spread themselves through the body
of the Soil.

These Principles being with the growth of Plants continually exhausted, and
needing a repair; the successions therefore of wet, wind, and other weather,
beat down and rot the Leaves and other parts of Plants: whereby (as Weeds which
are wont to be buried under ground) they become a natural Manure, and
re-impregnate the Soil; being thus, in part, out of their own resolved
Principles, annually compounded again.

Many of these Principles upon their resolution being by the Sun more
attenuated and volatilized, continually ascend into the Air, and are mixed
therewith. Where although they lose not their vegetable Nature, yet being
amongst other purer Principles, these also, depositing their earthy
feculencies, become more subtle, simple and essential bodies.

And the Air being of an Elastick or Springie Nature, pressing more or less
upon all bodies; it thereby forces and insinuates it self into the Soil
through all its permeable pores. Upon its own entrance, it carries also many of
the said Vegetable and essential Principles along with it, which together with
the rest are spread all over the body of the Soil. By which means, though a
less vehement, yet more subtle Fermentation, and with the least advantage of
warmth continuable, will be effected.

The Principles being thus farther resolved and subtilized, would presently
exhale away, if the Rain again did not prevent: which therefore falling upon
and soaking through the Soil, is as a fresh Menstruum saturate or impregnate
with many of them, and as it still sinketh lower, carries them along with it
from the superficial to the deeper parts of the Soil; thus not only maturing
those parts also, which otherwise would be more lean and cold; but therein
likewise laying up and securing a store more gradually and thriftily to be
bestowed upon the upper parts again as they need.

And Autumn having laid up the store, Winter following thereupon, does as it
were lock the doors upon it. In which time some warmer intervals serve further
and gradually to mature the stored Principles, without hazard of their being
exhaled. And the Spring returning, sets the doors open again, with warmer and
more constant Sun, gentle and frequent Rain fully resolves the said Principles,
and so furnishes a plentiful diet for all kind of Vegetables; being a
Composition of Water chiefly, wherein are resolved some portion of Earth, Salt,
Acid, Oil, Spirit, and Air; or other bodies of affinity herewith.

The Root standing in the Soil thus prepared, and being always surrounded with
a Bark, which consists chiefly of a parenchymous and spongy body; it will
thus, as Sponges do, naturally suck up the watery parts of the Soil impregnate
with the said Principles. Which Principles notwithstanding being in proportion
with the watery parts but sew, and also more essential, and though mixed yet as
yet little united; therefore in this parenchymous part, are they never much
discovered either by color, taste, or smell. As it is probable that some
distilled Waters which discover nothing to sense of the Plants from which they
are distilled, may yet in part retain their Faculties. And it is known that
many bodies, as Crocus Metallorum, convey many of their parts into the
Menstruum without any sensible alteration thereof. So Frost and Snow have
neither taste nor smell; yet from their Figures, it is evident that there are
diverse kinds of Saline Principles incorporated with them, or at least such as
are common to them and diverse kinds of Salts.

The entrance of this impregnate Water or Sap is not without difference, but by
the regulation of the intervening Skin; being thereby strained and rendered more
pure: the Skin, according to the thickness or closeness thereof, becoming
sometimes only as a brown paper, sometimes as a Cotton, and sometimes as a Bag
of Leather to the transient Sap, as the nature of it does require. By which it
is also moderated, lest the Bark being spongy, should suck it up too fast, and
so the Root be as it were surcharged by a Plethora. And diverse of the
succiferous Vessels being mixed herewith, and because lying next the Soil,
usually more or less mortified, and so their Principles somewhat resolved; the
Sap is hereby better specified, and further tinctured, such parts of the Sap
best entering as are most agreeable to those Principles, and carrying them off
in some part as it passes into the Bark.

The Sap thus strained, though it be pure, and consists of Essential parts;
yet being compounded of heterogeneous ones; and received into the Parenchyma of
the Bark a light and spongy body, they will now easily and mildly ferment.
Hereby they will be yet further prepared. And also more easily insinuate
themselves into all the Bubles of the said Parenchyma; swelling and dilating it
as far as the continuity of its parts will bear. Whereupon partly from the
continued entrance of fresh Sap, and partly by a motion or pressure of
restitution in the swollen and tensed Bubles of the Parenchyma, the Sap is
forced thence into the other parts of the Root.

And because the Parenchyma is in no place openly and visibly pervious, but is
every where composed of an infinite number of small Bubles; the Sap therefore
is not only fermented therein, and fitted for separation; but, as it passes
through it, is every part of it strained an hundred times over from buble to
buble.

The Sap thus fermented and strained, is distributed to the Organical parts,
according as the several Principles of this, are agreeable to those whereof the
said Organical parts consist. As the Sap therefore passes from buble to buble,
such Principles as are agreeable to those of the Fibers of the said Bubles,
will adhere to, and insinuate themselves into the body of the Fibers; sc.
earthy and watery chiefly, next acid, then spirituous and oleous, and least of
all airy.

And the Sap by its continual appulse and percolation, as it leaves some parts
upon the said Fibers; so as it is squeezed betwixt them from buble to buble, it
licks and carries off some others from them, in some union together with it;
and so is impregnate herewith, as Water by passing through a Mineral Vein
becomes tinctured with that Mineral.

The Sap thus impregnate with some united Principles of the parenchymous
Fibers, passes on to the succiferous Vessels, whereinto their correspondent
Principles also enter; scil. earthy, watery, saline, and oleous chiefly. And
because the parenchymous Principles mixed with them are in some degree united,
and so more ready t^ fix: some of these therefore will likewise enter into the
said Vessels. Whereupon, the Alkali oleosum of the one, and the Acidum
spirituosum of the other meeting together, these with the other Principles all
concentre, and of diverse fluids, become one fixed body, and are gradually
agglutinated to the Vessels, that is the Vessels are now nourished.

The supply of the Sap still continued, the Principles thereof will not only
enter into the Body of these parts, but their Concaves. And the parenchymous
Fibers being wrapped about the Vessels, as often as the said Fibers are more
turgid with their own contained fluid, they will thereby be somewhat shortened,
or contract in length; and so must needs bind upon the Vessels, and thereby as
it were squeez some part of the fluid contained both within themselves and the
Vessels back again into the Bubles.

The Sap herein being thus tinctured with some of the united Principles of the
Vessels, diverse of them will now also insinuate themselves into the
parenchymous Fibers, and be incorporated with them; whereby these which before
were only relaxed and dilated, are now also nourished, and not till now. Some
portion of the united Principles of both parts being necessary to the true
nutrition of each; as the confusion and joint assistance of both the arterious
and nervous Liquors is to the nourishment of the parts in Animals.

Some portion of the Sap thus doubly tinctured, is at the same time transmitted
to, and enters the body of the Air-vessels; consisting chiefly of Earth, Water,
Air, and Acid; and in like manner as in the other parts herein agglutinated.
And the appulse and pressure of the Sap still continued, some parts hereof are
also trajected into the Concaves of the said Vessels; existing therein as a
most compounded fluid, partaking more or less both of the Principles and
Tinctures of the other Organical parts and of their own containing Vessels, and
is, as it were, a mixed Resolution from them all.

And the parenchymous Fibers being wrapped about these as the other Vessels,
and in like manner binding upon them, thus frequently squeezes part of their
contained fluid out again, as necessary, though not to the immediate
nourishment of the parts, yet the due qualification of the Sap; being a
constant aerial Ferment successively stored up within the Air-vessels, and
thence transfused to the Sap and other parts.

And that there may be a better transition of the Sap thus tinctured to the
several Organical parts; therefore none of them are close set and compact
within themselves severally; for so they would be inaccessible to the Sap, and
their inward portions wanting a due supply of aliment would be starved: but the
Vessels both of Air and Sap being every where divided into braced portions, and
other parenchymous, filling up the spaces betwixt them, intermixed; there is
therefore a free and copious communication of the Sap, and of all the Tinctures
successively transfused into it, from part to part, and to every portion of
every one of them; the parenchymous portions running betwixt the Braces, as the
smaller Vessels do amongst the other parts in Animals; whereby none of them
want that due matter which is necessary either for their nutrition, or the good
estate of their Contents.

For the due distribution of the several parts of the Sap, Diametral portions
of the parenchymous Body run sometimes directly through the Bark, as in Lovage,
Parsley, etc. and so are all or most of them continuous betwixt both the
succiferous and Air-vessels from the circumference to the center; thereby
carrying off a more copious and aerial Ferment from the one, and communicating
it unto the other. For as the Sap enters the Bark, the more liquid parts still
pass into the succulent portions thereof; the more airy is separated into those
white and dryer diametral ones; and in its passage betwixt the portions of the
Air-vessels, is all along communicated to them. Yet is it not a pure and simple
Air, but such as carries a Tincture with it from the succiferous Vessels: and
therefore when the diametral portions are more distant, the Vessels run not in
a straight line betwixt them, but are reciprocally inclined so, as to touch
upon them, as in Lovage is visible; thereby communicating their Tincture to the
Air as it passes by them through the said diametral portions.

By the continual appulse of fresh Sap, some both of the airy and all the other
parts thereof, are transmitted into the Pith; where finding more room, it will
yet more kindly be digested. Especially having the advantage herein of some
degree of warmth, being remoter from the Soil, and as it were tunn'd up within
the Wood, or the Mass of surrounding Vessels. So that the Pith is as it were a
Repository of better Aliment gradually supplied to those succiferous Vessels
which are frequently scattered up and down therein, and which ascend into the
Trunk. But where no succiferous Vessels are mixed herewith, it usually becomes
dryer, and is replenished with a more aerial and warmer Sap; whereby the growth
of the Caulis is promoted as by an hot Bed set just under it. And thus all the
Parts have a fit Aliment provided for their nourishment.

In this Nourishment the Principles of the Sap are, as is said, concentred, and
locked up one within another: whence it is that the Organical parts, being
cleansed of their Contents, have none of them any taste or smell, as in the
Piths of Plants, Paper and Linen Cloth is evident; because till by digestion,
violent distillation or some other way they are resolved, they cannot act upon
the Organs of those senses. For the same reason they are never tinctured
excepting by their Contents; and although to the bare eye they frequently show
white, yet viewed through a Microscope they all appear transparent. In like
manner as the Serum of Blood, Whites of Eggs, Tendons, Hairs, and Horns
themselves are transparent, and without much smell or taste, their Principles
being in all of them more or less concentred; but being forcibly resolved, are
ever variously invested with all those Qualities.

And as from the Concentration of the Principles in every Organical part they
all agree thus far; so from the Predominion of those of each part the rest are
controuled, not only to a Concentration, but an Assimilation also, and their
respective properties are thus preserved. Hence the succiferous Vessels are
always tough and most pliable; for so are all Barks wherein these Vessels
abound: so are the Twires of Flax, which are nothing else but the succiferous
Vessels of that Plant. For Sal Alkali, Oil, Water, and Earth are, as is said,
the predominant Principles of these Vessels. Now it is the Oil chiefly by which
Bodies are tough: for being of it self viscous and tenacious, by taking hold of
other Principles, marries them together; and the Sal Alkali and Earth
concentred with it, adds to it more strength. Hence the Caput Mortuum of most
Bodies, especially those that abound with Oil and Sal Alkali, are brittle and
friable; those Principles, which were the Ligaments of the rest, being forced
away from them. Hence also the parenchymous parts of a Root are brittle and
friable; sc. because their earthy, and especially oleous and saline Principles
are, as is said, so very few. Therefore all Piths and more simple Parenchyma's
break short; so Corn, and the Roots of Potato's, and diverse other Plants being
dried, will easily be rubbed to Meal; and many Apples after Frosts eat mealy;
all which parts have the Analogy and Essence of one only Body.

And as the Consistence of the several Organical parts is dependent on their
Principles, so are their Figures. And first the Succiferous Vessels from their
Sal Alkali grow in length; for by that dimension chiefly this Salt always
shoots; and being a less moveable Principle than the rest, and so apt more
speedily to fix or shoot; thus overrules them to its own Figure. And even as
the shape of a Button depends on the Mould, the Silk and other Materials
wrought upon it, being always conformable thereunto: so here; the Salt is as it
were the Mould, about which the other more passive Principles gathering
themselves, they all consort and fashion to it. Hence also the Vessel^ are not
pyramidal as Veins, but equally thick from end to end; the shootings of the
said Salt being also figured by the like dimension. And as by the saline
Principles the Vessels are long, so by the oleous they are every where round or
properly Cylindrical; without some joint efficacy of which Principle the said
Vessels would be flat, or some way edged and angular, as all saline Shoots of
themselves are, as those of Alum, Vitriol, Sal Ammoniac, Sea Salt, Nitre, etc.
And because the spirituous and more fluid portion of the Principles is least of
all apt to fix; while therefore the other parts fix round about, this will
rema^n moveable in the Center; whence every Vessel is formed, not into a solid
but hollow Cylinder, that is, becomes a Tube.

The Lactiferous Vessels are tubulary, as the Lymphaeducts, but of a somewh^t
wider Concave. For being their Principles are less earthy and oleous, and also
more loosely concentred; as from their easy corruption or resolution by the
Air, it appears they are; they are therefore more tender; and so more easily
dilative and yielding to the said spirituous portion in the Center. Whence also
they are more adapted to the free motion of the milky Content; which being an
o^eous and thic^er Body, and having no advantage of pulsation as the Blood in
Animals, might sometimes be apt to st^gnate* if the Vessels, through which it
moves, were not somewhat wider.

As the saline Principles are the Mould of the succiferous, so are the aerial
of the Air-Tubes. Now the Particles of Air I suppose are all crooked, and many
of them spiral; which from the Elastick Nature of the Air is probable; being
capable both of dilatation and angustation by force; which it could not be, if
its Particles were (...) and not crooked, nor so well by (...) all of them
simply crooked, as if some of them were also spiral. Wherefore the said spir^l
and other crooked Particles of the (...) shooting and setting together as the
(...) the other Principles cling and fix conformably round about them: so that
as by force of the saline Principles the rest are made to shoot out in long
continued Fibers; so by force of the Aerial, those Fibers are still disposed
into spiral Lines, thus making up the Air-vessels. And according as fewer of
these Aerial Particles are in proportion to the Saline, the Concave of the
Air-vessels is variously wider, or the Fibers continue their shooting by wider
Rings, as those that come nearer to a right Line, and so are more complient to
the Figure and shooting of the said saline parts. And whereas the Succiferous
Vessels shooting out only in length are never sensibly amplified beyond their
original size; these on the contrary, always more or less increase their
Diameter, because their Fibers being disposed into spiral lines, must needs
therefore, as they continue their growth, be still dilated into greater and
greater Rings. And being at the bottom of the Root more remote from the Air,
and so having somewhat fewer Particles purely Aerial their ingredient to them,
then at the top, they fall more under the government of the saline, and so come
nearer to a right Line, that is into greater Circles, and so the Air-vessels,
made up of those Circles, are there generally wider.

By mediation of their Principles the Parenchymous parts likewise of a Root
have their proper Contexture. For from their acid Salt they are fibrous; from
their Oil the Fibers are round and in all parts even within themselves; and
from their Spirit it is most probable that they are also hollow. But because
the Spirit is here more copious than the Air; and the saline Principle a
Saldacidum, and more under the government of the Spirit than an Alkali;
therefore are not the said Fibers continued in straight lines, as the
Succiferous Vessels; or by one uniform motion into spiral lines, as the Fibers
in the Aerial; but winding in a circular manner to and fro a thousand ways,
agreeable to the like motions of the Spirit, that most active, and here most
predominant, Principle. And the spirituous parts being, as is said, here more
copious and redundant, they will not only suffice to fill up the Concaves of
the Fibers, but will gather together into innumerable little spaces up and down
without them: whence the Fibers cannot wind and wreath close together, but are
forced to keep at some distance one parcel from another, and so are disposed,
as Bread is in baking, into Bubles.

And the under Fibers being set first as the Warp, the spirituous parts next
adjacent will incline also to fix, and so govern an over-work of Fibers
wrapping as the Woof in still smaller Circles round the other, whereby they are
all knit together. For the same reason the Succiferous Vessels being first
formed, the Parenchymous Fibers set and wrap about these also. And the
Air-vessels being formed in the Center, the succiferous run along those
likewise; as volatile Salts shoot along the sides of a Glass, or frost upon a
Window; and so are as it were incrustate about them in a Ring.

All the more aetherial and subtle parts of the Air, as they stream through
the Root, it should seem do gradually dispose the Air-vessels where there are
more of them, into Rays. Therefore in the inferior parts of the Root they are
less regular, because more remote from the Air. And in the upper parts of many
Roots, as Cumfry, Borage, Parsnep, where those that are next the Center are
confused, or differently disposed; those next the Bark and so nearer the Air,
are postured more regularly and always into Rays. For the same reason it may
be; that the Succiferous Vessels in the Bark where the Air vessels are more
numerous, are usually disposed into Rays; and that the Parenchyma of the Bark
is disposed into Diametral Portions; and that where the Air-vessels are fewer
or smaller, these Portions are likewise smaller or none, as in Chervil,
Asparagus, Taraxium, Orpine, Bistort, Horseradish, Potato's, etc.

The said aetherial parts of the Air have a power over the Air-vessels, not
only thus to dispose them; but also to solicit and spread them abroad from
the Center toward the Circumference of the Root; which power, in speaking
according to vulgar sense, I take leave to call Attraction. This Attraction or
Magnetic power betwixt the Air and these Vessels may be argued, from the
Nature of the Principles common to them both. From the Electral Nature of
diverse other Bodies, the Load stone being not the only one which is attractive.
And from the spreading of these Vessels always more or less at the upper part
of the Root where nearer to the Air: which is not merely the spreading of the
whole Root, but a particular motion of these Vessels visibly encroaching
farther upon the Bark. And from other Effects hereafter mentioned.

The spreading of these Vessels is varied, not only according to the force the
Air ^ath upon them, but their own aptitude to yield thereto. As often therefore
as they are slenderer, they will also be more pliable and recessive from the
Center toward the Circumference: hence in such Roots where they are small they
stand more distant, as in Turnep, Jerusalem Artichoke, Potato's, and others;
and so their Braces are fewer; and in the same Root, where they are smaller,
their distance is greater. Besides, in these smaller Air-vessels, the Rings
being less, and the spiral Fibers whereof they are made continuing to shoot;
the said Rings therefore must needs be so many more, as they are smaller, and
so take up more space by the length of the Root; and so not being capable of
being crowded in a right line, every Vessel will be forced to recede to a
crooked or bowed one.

The Succiferous Vessels, being by the parenchymous Fibers knit to These, will
likewise comply with their motion and spread abroad with them. Yet being still
smaller and more pliable than the Air-vessels, and so more yielding to the
intercurrent Fibers of the Parenchyma, their braced Threads will sometimes be
much more divaricated, than these Air-vessels, as in Jerusalem Artichoke. And
because the Succiferous Vessels, although they are joined to the Aerial by the
parenchymous Fibers, yet are not continuous with them; neither fall under the
like attractive power of the Air as the Aerial do; the Aerial therefore upon
their spreading, do not always carry all the Succiferous along with them, but
often, if not always, leave many of them behind them sprinkled up and down the
Pith; as in Parsley, Carrot, Jerusalem Artichoke, Turnep, etc. may be seen.

The spreading of the Air-vessels still continued, several of them at length
break forth beyond the circumference of the Root, and so are distributed,
either in the lower parts into Branches and Strings, or at the top into Leaves.
And least they should all spread themselves into Leaves, and none be left for
the Caulis; as where they are very small, or the Succiferous Vessels to bound
them are but few, they might; therefore diverse of them are oftentimes more
frequently braced in the Center; for which reason they cannot so easily
separate and spread themselves from thence, but run more inwardly up into the
Caulis, as in Borage.

From the various Sizes, Proportions, and Dispositions of the Parts, Roots are
variously sized, shaped, moved, and aged. Those that by annual growth are
large, have fewer both Aerial and Succiferous Vessels, and a more copious
Parenchyma. So that the Aerial Vessels, or rather the Airy Ferment contained in
them, volatilizing a smaller portion of the Sap; this therefore being less
capable of advancement into the Trunk, must needs remain and fix more copiously
in the Root, which is thereby more augmented. So where the Succiferous Vessels
are few, the Root is yet proportionably large; and where they are numerous, it
is never so, as to its annual growth, in any proportion to their number;
because their Tincture will go farther in setting the Parenchymous parts, than
the Tincture of these will in setting them.

When the Aerial Vessels are more pliable and sequent to the attraction of the
Air, and so spread themselves, and the Succiferous together with them more
abroad; in the manner as has been said; the Root also will grow more in
breadth; the nutrition of the Parenchymous parts, to which the Vessels are
adjacent, being thus by the same dimension more augmented; as in Turnep,
Jerusalem Artichoke, etc. But where these are not spread abroad, the Root is
but slender; as in Asparagus, Dandelyon, etc.

The Vessels as they thus spread and move toward the circumference, because
the Fibers of the Parenchyma are no where inosculated or continuous with them,
but only wrapped about them, and their motion so exquisitely slow; therefore
they make not their passage through the said Parenchymae by tearing of it, or
causing any rupture; but only by slipping themselves along its Fibers, as it
were from Buble to Buble, (as we are wont the Rings of a Tarring Iron) and so
as they move forward themselves, leave the said Fibers behind them all knit
together in the Center, thus either making or augmenting the Pith.

If the Aerial Vessels be contracted, and somewhat large or numerous, and the
Succiferous also more copious round about them; the Root grows very long, as
those of Fenil, Vine, Liquorish, etc. For the Air-Vessels containing a more
copious Ferment, it will well digest and mature the Sap; yet the Succiferous
being over proportioned to them, it will not therefore be so far volatilized as
to ascend chiefly into the Trunk, but only to subserve a fuller growth of these
Vessels: and these being more numerous, and so more sturdy, and less sequent to
the expansive motion of the Aerial; this their own growth, and consequently
that of all the other parts, cannot be so much in breadth as length.

Where the same Aerial Vessels are fewer, or more contracted, or sheathed in a
thicker and closer Bark; the Root is smooth, and less Ramified; as in
Asparagus, Peony, Taraxicum. But where more numerous, sheathed in a thinner
Bark, smaller, more dilated; the Root is more Ramified, or more Stringy, as in
Columbine, Clary, Beet, Nicotian. For being, as is said, by these means, more
sequent to the Attraction of the Air, approaching still nearer the
circumference of the Bark, they at last strike through it into the Moulds. And
the parenchymous Fibers being wrapped about them, and the Succiferous Vessels
knit to them by those Fibers; therefore they never break forth naked, but
always invested with some quantity of these parts as their Bark: where by
whatever essential part is in the main Body of the Root, is also in every
Branch or String.

From the same expansion and pliability of the Air-vessels, the Root oftentimes
puts forth Root-buds; in the formation of which Buds they are pliable and
recessive all kinds of ways; being not only invited outward toward the
circumference of the Root, as in Root-strings; but spread more abroad every way
in the Bud; whereas in the said Root-strings they are always more contracted;
which, in respect of the disposition of the Parts, is the principal difference
betwixt the Root and the Trunk. Hence those Roots chiefly have Root Buds, which
have the smallest Air-vessels; these, as is said, being most pliable and
expansive.

But because the expansiveness of the Vessels depends also in part upon the
fewness of their Braces; therefore the Buds shoot forth differently in diverse
Roots. Where fewer, they shoot forth beyond the circumference of the Root, as
in Jerusalem Artichoke; where more close, as in Potato's, the Buds lie a little
absconded beneath it, the Air-vessels being by their Braces somewhat checked
and curbed in, while the Bark continues to swell in a fuller growth.

If the Aerial Vessels are all along more equally sized, the Root is so also,
or Cylindrical; as those of Eryngo, Horseradish, Marsh-mallow, Liquorish, etc.
But if unequal, growing still wider toward the bottom of the Root; the Root is
unequal also, but grows, quite contrary to the Air-vessels, still smaller or
pyramidally; and the more numerous and larger the Vessels are, the Bark is
proportionably the less, and so the Root more sharp and spiring, as in Borage,
Nettle, Patience, Thorn Apple, etc. For here where the said Air-vessels are
wider, they contain a more copious Ferment, whereby the Sap is thereabout more
volatilized, and copiously advanced to the upper parts. Withal, thus receiving
within themselves, and transmitting to the upper parts a more plentiful Vapor,
they hereby rob the parenchymous parts of their aliment, and so stint them in
their growth.

From the different proportion and situation of the parts, the Motions of the
Root are also various. For where the Air vessels are spread abroad and invested
with a thinner Bark, the Root runs or lies level, as in the level Roots of
Primrose, Ammi, Anemone, etc. may be seen. So that these Roots as by the
perpendicular ones shooting from them into the Moulds they are plucked down; so
by the Air-vessels, standing nearer the Air and more under its attractive
power, they are invited upwards; whereby they have neither ascent nor descent,
but keep level betwixt both.

But if these Vessels are contracted standing either in or near the Center, and
are invested with a Bark proportionably thick; the Root strikes down
perpendicularly, as Dandelyon, Bugloss, Parsnep, etc. Therefore the said
Vessels, although they are spread abroad in the level, yet in the perpendicular
Roots of the same Plant they are always contracted; as by comparing the level
and down right Roots of Ammi, Primrose, Jerusalem Artichoke, Cowslip, and
others, is manifest.

If the Aerial Vessels are contracted and environed with a greater number of
Succiferous, the Root grows deep, that is, perpendicular and long;
perpendicular from the contraction of the Aerial, and long from the predominion
of the Succiferous, which in their growth are extended only by that dimension,
as in Liquorish, Eryngo, etc.

If the Succiferous are over proportioned to the parenchymous parts, but under
to the Aerial; the Root is perpendicular still, but grows shallow; the
Succiferous being sturdy enough to keep it perpendicular, and the Aerial having
a predominion to keep it from growing deep; as in Stramonium, Nicotian, Beet,
etc.

If on the contrary the parenchymous are predominant to the Aerial, and that
both in the Root and Trunk; then the whole body of the Root changes place or
descends: for the said Aerial Vessels having neither in the Trunk, nor in the
Root a sufficient power to draw it upwards; it therefore gradually yields to
the motion of its String-Roots; which as they strike into the Soil pluck it
down after them. And because the old Strings annually rot off, and new ones
successively shoot down into the Soil; it therefore annually still descends
lower, as in Tulip, Lily, etc. may be observed.

Where the Air-vessels are much spread abroad and also numerous, the Root
oftentimes, as to its several parts, descends and ascends both at once: so
Radishes and Turnips, at the same time their nether parts descend, their upper
ascend, where therefore the said Vessels are more loosely braced and spread
much more abroad than in the lower parts. Hence also the upper part of the
Roots of most Seedlings ascends; because the first Leaves being proportionably
large, and standing in a free Air, the Air-vessels in them have a dominion over
the young Root, and so yielding themselves to the solicitation of the Air
upwards, draw the Root in part after them.

By the situation and proportions of the Parts, the Age of the Root is also
varied. For if the Succiferous Vessels have the greatest proportion, the Root
is perennial, and that to the farthest extent, as in Trees and Shrubs: because
these Vessels containing a more copious both Alkali and Oil, and their several
Principles being more closely concentred, they are less subject to a
resolution, that is, a corruption or mortification by the Air.

If the parenchymous parts have much the greatest, the Root seldom lives
beyond two years, but afterward perishes either in whole or in part, as do
diverse bulbous, tuberous, and other Roots; whether they are more porous and
succulent, or more close and dry. If porous, all the fluid Principles standing
herein more abundantly, either by a stronger fermentation, or otherwise,
^^solve the fixed ones of the Organical Parts, whence the whole Root rots, as
in Potato's. Hence also Parsneps, and some other Roots, which in a hard and
barren Soil will ^ive several years, in another more rank, will quickly rot.
But if the Parenchyma be close, then the Air chiefly entering in and filling it
up, thus mortifies the Root, not by rotting the parts, but over drying them, as
in Satyrion, Rape Crowfoot, Monks-hood, etc.

But if the Air-vessels have the greatest, and especially if more large, and
withal are spread more abroad; the Root is annual, as in Thorn Apple, Nicotian,
etc. For hereby transfusing into all the other parts a more copious Air, they
are thus by degrees hardened and become sticky, and so impervious to the Sap,
which should have a free and universal transition from part to part: as Bones
by precipitations from the Blood at length cease to grow. Or the same more
abundant Air so far volatilizeth the fluid parts, that they are wholly advanced
into the Trunk, and so the Root is starved. Whence the Air-v^ssels also of the
Trunk, where numerous and over proportioned to the bulk of the Root, as in
Corn, they so far promote the advance of the Sap, as to exhaust the Root,
sucking it into a consumption and death.

From the Principles of the Parts, their Contents and the several Qualities
hereof are also various; the fluid of each Organical Part being made chiefly by
Filtration through the sides thereof; such of the Principles in the Sap being
admitted into and transmitted through them, as are aptest thereto: in the same
manner as when Oil and Water being poured upon a Paper, the Water passes
through, the Oil sticks: or as the Chyle is strained through the Coats of the
Guts into the Lacteal Vessels: or as Water in Purgations, is strained through
the same Coats from the Mesenterical.

The Principles therefore of the parenchymous Fibers being spirituous, acid,
and aerial, they will also admit the like into them; excluding those chiefly
which are Alkalizale and Oleous. And as by the Conjugation of such Principles
in the Fibers, the like are capable of admittance into them; so the proportion
and union of the same Principles regulates their transmission into their
Concave: wherefore the Principles of the Fibers being chiefly acid, next
spirituous, and least aerie; the more aerie ones will be transmitted: for if more
of them should fix, they must do so by similitude and adhesion; but where there
are fewer similary parts to adhere to, fewer must adhere. The Fibers then
contain so many parts of Air as to admit many more into their body; but not to
fix them; which therefore must needs upon admission pass through into their
Concave; where, together with some other more spirituous parts, they make an
aetherial fluid. And because some aqueous or vaporous parts will also strain
through with them; hence it is, that as more and more of these enter, they by
degrees still thrust out the aerie ones, which quitting the more succulent
Fibers of the Parenchyma, are forced to betake themselves to the dryer ones,
scil. all those whereof the diametral portions do consist. For the same reason
the Aerie parts being gradually excluded the succulent Fibers of the Bark; they
are forced to recede and transmigrate into those of the Pith: And the Fibers
themselves being filled, and the Aerie parts still forced into them; they at
length also strain through the Fibers into the Bubles; whence while the Bark is
succulent, the Pith is often filled with Air.

The Lymphaeducts being more earthy, s^linous, oleous, and aqueous, will both
admit and copiously fix the like Principles; yet the Water being more perfluent
than the rest, will therefore strain, with a lighter Tincture of them, into
their Concave. Especially the oleous Principles hereof being rampant, and less
apt to fix and seize the aqueous parts, upon their entrance, than the saline.

But the Lactiferous being somewhat less earthy and oleous than the
Lymphaeducts, and the oleous parts being herein less rampant; therefore the
earthy and oleous parts will be both copiously transmitted hereinto. So that
the Lymphaeducts being more oily, both admit, and fix the like Principles; the
Lacteals being moderately oily, admit them, but fix them not, letting them pass
through; but the parenchymous Fibers being scarce at all oily, do not so much
as admit them.

The fluid Ferment contained in the Air-vessels, is also in part dependent on
the Principles of those Vessels, being in their percolation tinctured
therewith. But because the percolation is not made through the body of the
Fibers whereof the Vessels are composed, but only betwixt them; therefore the
transient Principles are not here distinguished so precisely as in all the
aforesaid Organical parts, but more promiscuously pass into the Concaves of the
said Vessels, and are therein all immersed in a body of Air; the Fibers
themselves in the mean time, as those of the Parenchyma, admitting and
containing a more aerie and aetherial Fluid.

The Contents are varied, not only by the Nature, but also the proportion and
situation of the Parts, whereby they are in different facility and quantity
communicated to one another. Hence it is partly that a Vine, and that Corn has
so little Oil; sc. because their Air-vessels in proportion with the other
parts, are so great and numerous: in Corn the Stalk being also very hollow, and
becoming as it were one great Air-vessel. For the oily parts of the Sap are so
exceedingly attenuated by the Aerie ferment contained in these Vessels, that
they are for the most part so far immersed in the Spirit, or mixed therewith,
as not, by being collected in any considerable Body, to be distinguishable from
it. And the affinity that is betwixt Spirits and Oils, especially Essential, is
manifest; both are inflammable per se; and burn all away; the Odors, which we
call the Spirits of Plants, are lodged in their essential Oil; both being duly
Rectified, will mix as easily together as Water and Wine. So that although Oil,
by the separation of its earthy and saline parts, which give it its sensibly
oleous Body, may not be so far attenuated as to produce a Spirit; yet that it
may so far, and so be mixed with it, as not to be discerned from it, will be
granted.

Hence also the Lactiferous Vessels, because they stand more remote from the
Aerial, and the Succiferous interpose; the Liquor therefore contained in them,
is not so much under the government of the Aerial ferment, and is thence partly
more oily. For the same reason, all Roots which are milkie, so far as I have
observed, have an under proportion of Air-vessels, these being either fewer or
smaller.

From the Precedents we may receive some information likewise of the Odours,
Colors, and Tastes of Plants. And for Odours, I suppose that the chief matter
of them is the Aerial ferment contained in the Air-vessels. Not but that the
other parts do also yield their smell, but that these yield the strongest and
the best, and immediately perceptible in fresh, undryed, and unbruised Plants.
For the Air entering into, and passing through the Root, and carrying a Tincture
from the several Organical and Contained Parts along with it, and at last
entering also the Concaves of the Air-vessels; it there exists the most
compounded and volatile fluid, of all others in the Plant, and so the fittest
matter of Odor; and such an Odor as answers to the smell of all the odorous
parts of the Plant. Wherefore the Organical parts smell not at all, because the
Principles are, as has been said, so far fixed and concentred together. Hence
also the Contained themselves, or any other Bodies, as their Principles are any
way more fixed, they are less odorous: So is Rosin less than Turpentine, and
Pitch than Tar, and many the self same Bodies when they are coagulated, than
when they are melted: So also Musk, which is not so liquid as Civet, is not so
strong; nor Ambergreece as Musk; for although it has a more excellent smell
than Musk, yet yields it not so easily, since it is a more fixed Body, and
requires some Art to be opened. Hence also the Leaves of many Plants lose
their Odor upon rubbing; because the Air-vessels being thereby all broken, all
their contained odorous fluid vanishes at once, which before only strained
gradually through the Skin. Yet the fixed Parts themselves, upon drying, are so
far altered by the Sun and Air, as to become resoluble and odorous.

So also of their Colors. As whence the Colors of the Skins are varied; for
diverse of the Succiferous Vessels together with the parenchymous Parts
successively falling off from the Bark therein; by their proximity to the Earth
and Air their Principles are more or less resolved, and so produce diverse
Colors. So those Roots which turn purple any where within, have usually a
blacker Skin; the one of those two Colors being by a resolution and corruption
of parts easily convertible into the other, as in Cumfry, Thistle, etc. So the
Milk of Scorzonera, contained in the Vessels of the Bark, upon drying turns
into a brown Color; wherefore the Skin, in which there are dive^s of those
Vessels, is of the same. So both the Milk and Skin of Lovage is of a brownish
yellow. But Parsnep has a clearer Sap in all its Succiferous Vessels and a
whiter Skin. So Potato's being cut traverse after some time out of ground, have
diverse red specks up and down where the Vessels stand, and their Skin is
accordingly red.

The reason, I say of these Colors, is the resolution or reseration of the
Principles of the several Parts chiefly by the Air, and a lighter mixture of
them consequent thereupon; whereby the sulphurious or oily parts which were
before concentred, are now more or less rampant, discovering themselves in
diverse Colors, according as they are diversely mixed with the other Principles.
Hence these Colors are observable according to the nature of the Parts wherein
they are, or whereunto they are adjacent; so where the Succiferous Vessels run,
there red, or some other more saturate Color; the oleous Principles being, as
is said, more copious in these Vessels; as in the Bark of Peony, the inward
parts of Potato's, etc. may be seen. But the parenchymous Parts, where more
remote from the said Vessels, they are usually white or but yellow, the
sulphurious Principle hereof being, as was said, but sparing. The same is seen
in those Roots which show both red and yellow; those parts principally where
the Succiferous Vessels run being red, and where the Aerial only mixed with the
parenchymous being yellow, as in Patience. So the pithy part of a Carrot, where
the Aerial have very few Succiferous mixed with them, is yellow, but the Bark
where the Succiferous are very numerous, is red. For the same reason many Roots
which are whiter in their upper parts, are purple or reddish in their
inferior, as Avens, Strawberry, etc. because those lower parts having layn
longer underground (these being descending Roots) their Principles are thereby
somewhat nearer to corruption or somewhat more resolved, and so the oleous ramp
and spread all over the rest in that Color.

And that the resolution of the sulphurious and other Principles is partly
effected by the Air, appears, in that where the Air has a better access to the
Succiferous Vessels, the Colors are chiefly produced, or are more conspicuous.
So in Potato's, where the Succiferous Vessels are either next to the external
Air, as in the Skin; or contiguous with the Air-vessels, as in the Ring within
the Bark; there they produce a red: but where more remote from both, as in the
middle of the Bark and Center of the Root, there they produce none. Hence also
it is, that the Leaves and Flowers of some Plants, as Bloodwort, Wood Sorrel,
Radish, Jacea, etc. although green or white in the greatest portion of their
parenchymous Part, yet where the Succiferous and Aerial Vessels run, they are
of red, blue, and other Colors; the oleous parts of the one being unlocked and
opened by the aerie of the other.

And lastly of their Tastes. Where either the Succiferous Vessels are
Lymphaeducts, or the diametral Portions in the Bark are wanting, or the
Air-vessels numerous and large, the Root is of a weaker Taste; as that of
Burnet, Melilot, Borage, Bugloss, Cumfry, Potato, etc. For in that they are
less oleous, and the Air more copiously mixed with the saline Principles,
whereby these are either mollified or refracted; they are neither hot nor
pungent, but become more mild. Whence also of the same kind of Roots, those
which have the smallest and sewest diametral portions, as Skirrets, are the
mildest; and those with the largest, the strongest, as Lovage.

Most Roots which are acres or biting, have a very copious Parenchyma in
proportion with the Succiferous Vessels, as of Arum, Dragon, and others;
because the saline and other Principles are not so much hot by any sufficient
quantity of sulphurious from those Vessels, but rendered rather pungent from
some Spirit and Air. But diverse Vmbelliferous Roots, especially which abound
with Lactiferous Vessels, are hot; as Fenil, Lovage, Angelica, etc. Yet is it
not their Oil alone that makes them hot, but the combination thereof with the
saline Parts; as is manifest from the nature of the Seed of these Plants,
wherein the Oil is most copious; and which being held to a Candle till they
burn, constantly spit; which comes to pass by the eruption of the saline
Parts; being the very same effect with that which follows upon burning of
Serum or Blood. And therefore as the Seeds are more hot, they also spit the
more, as in Cumine, etc. which though fulsom, yet not so hot, less; in Fenil
and Dill more; scil. there being a greater quantity of volatile Salt contained
therein. Hence all essential Oils are hot, the Spirit and volatile Salt being
incorporated herewith. And some of them will shoot, and crystallize as Salts
do, as that of Anise, which argues a mixture of a considerable quantity of
volatile Salt. As also from the nature of these Oils, in being amicable to the
Stomach, Carminative, and sometimes Anodyne; scil. as they kill some fetid,
corrosive, or fermenting A^id: and volatile Salts themselves will have the like
operation in some cases as these Oils.

Many Lactiferous Roots, as Taraxicum and others of that kind, are not so much
hot as bitter. For although by the Lactiferous Vessels they are very oily; yet
those Vessels being posited in Rings and not in Rays, and having no Diametral
portions running through their Bark to the Air-vessels; the Acido-Aerial parts
do hereby, although not mortify, yet so far refract the saline, lightly
binding up the oleous therewith, as to produce a bitter taste. Which bordereth
upon astringent; wherein, I suppose, the saline and earthy are mean, the oleous
least, and the acid most, and so more closely binding up the oleous and earthy
with the saline. Hence many sweet Bodies upon burning become bitter; the acid
Parts, which before were more concentred, now becoming rampant and more
copiously mixed with the oleous.

The Roots or other parts of many Vmbelliferous Plants have a sweetish Taste,
as both sweet and common Chervil, both Garden and wild Carrot, Parsnep, Fenil,
etc. the saline Principles being concentred in the oily, and both of a moderate
quantity with respect to the rest: for by the oily the saline is rendered more
smooth and amicable, and both being moderate, they are not therefore hot, as in
some other Vmbelliferous Roots, but by the predominion of the other Principles
made mild. Hence it is, that Sugar it self is sweet, scil. because it is an
oleous Salt; as is manifest from its being highly inflammable; its easy
dissolution by a moderate Fire without the addition of Water; and in that being
melted with Turpentine and other oily Bodies, it will mix together with them.
And the Crystals in the Oil of Aniseeds, may be called Saccharum Anisi. So also
the acid parts of Vinegar being concentred in the Salino-sulphurious of Lead
produce a Sugar. Hence Barley, which upon Distillation or Decoction yields
only an acid, being turned into Malt becomes sweet: scil. because being
steeped, couched, and so fermented, the oleous parts are thereby unlocked, and
becoming rampant over the other Principles gives them that Taste. And the Bile
it self, which, next to Water and Earth, consists of most oily parts, and of
many both saline and acid, is a bitter-sweet; the saline and acid being
smoothed by the oleous, and the oleous gently bound up together with both those.

THE EXPLICATION OF THE FIGURES.
TABLE I.
FIG. I. A slice of the Root of Marsh-mallow cut traversly about the top.

aaa. The Skin.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

acacac. Diametral Portions of the parenchymous Body which run through the Bark
toward the Center.

The black Rings in the Bark represent the position of the Succiferous Vessels.

The black Specks represent the position of the Air-vessels.

The greater whereof are those in the Center* and the utmost standing in a Ring
adjacent to ccc or the inner Verge of the Bark.

N. B. That in this, and all the other Figures generally, by every single Speck
is not represented a single Air-vessel, but a Conjugation of Air-vessels,
sometimes fewer, and sometimes more together.

Fig. 2. A slice of the same Root ^ut traversly about the bottom; wherein both
the Succiferous and Air-vessels still keep their general position; but the
former are not here represented.

Fig. 3. A slice of the same Root ^ut traversly about the middle.

aaa ccc. The Bark; wherein the Diametral Portions and the Succiferous Vessels
are both omitted.

cccccc. Diametral Portions frequently running betwixt the Center and the inner
Verge of the Bark in just six Rays.

Fig 4. A slice of the Root of Cumfry.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

eee. The position of the Succif^rous Vessels; being from the utmost Verge of
the Bark to the black Chords peripherial; and from these the inner Verge
standing in Columns.

ecec. The simply Parenchymous parts of the Bark.

cctt. The position of the utmost Air-vessels in double speck Rays.

tte. The position of the inner Air-vessels in Rings.

All the white spaces are simply Parenchymous parts of the same substantial
nature with the Pith.

Fig. 5. A slice of the Root of Fenil.

aaaccc. The Bark, or all that p^rt of the Root which is analogous to it.

cebceb. The position of the succiferous Vessels especially called the
Lymphaeducts in a triple Order of Rays.

eee bbb. The position of the Milk Vessels in speck Rings.

The white Lines are Parenchymous portions running through the Bark.

ccce. The Air-vessels, somewhat radiated.

e. The Pith.

Fig. 6. A slice of the Root of Parsnep.

aaa eee. The Bark.

eee. The position of the Succiferous Vessels in Rays.

eee c. The Air-vessels, more plainly radiated about the circumference, and
more confused about the Center.

Fig. 7. A slice of the Root of Beet.

aaa. The Skin.

To the first Order of Specks may be accounted the Bark, and no further.

cee ccc. The Succiferous Vessels postured in Ring^, and those Rings made up of
short Rays.

The Specks are the Air-vessels, being all postured from the Center to the
Circumference in speck Rings, and those Rings made up of short Rays; especially
those betwixt aaa ttt.

The white spaces are all Parenchymous parts.

Fig. 8. A slice of the Root of Horseradish.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

The Specks therein represent the position of the Succiferous Vessels.

ccc vvv. The Air-vessels, standing neither in Rays, nor Rings.

e. The Pith.

The Specks therein are a few of the succiferous Vessels.

Fig. 9. A slice of the Root of Borage.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

The Succiferous Vessels are here omitted, but are postured in Rays like those
in Fig. 30.

ccce. The Air-vessels.

cece. Their position more in Rays next the inner Verge of the Bark.

eee. Their position in Spiral lines next the Center.

The white Spaces are s^mply parenchymous parts.

Fig. 10. A slice of the Root of Peony.

aaa eee. The Bark.

The Specks therein represent the position of the Succiferous Vessels.

ee cc. The greater part of the Air-vessels postured in a Ring next to the
inner Verge of the Bark; and that Ring made up of short Rays; and most of the
Vessels herein of a larger size.

At the Center also there are one or two Conjugations more of a larger size.

The rest standing in Rays betwixt are smaller and more distant.

All the white Spaces are simply Parenchymou^ parts.

Fig. 11. A slice of the same Root cut traversly about the thinner part.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

The Specks therein represent the Succiferous Vessels.

ccc. The smaller Air-vessels postured in Rays.

The greater standing here only next the Center, and postured triangularly.

Fig. 12. A slice of the thick level Root of Iris tuberosa.

aaa eee. The Bark.

Upon the inner Verge hereof stand the Succiferous Vessels; but are here
omitted.

eee. The Air-vessels; somewhat closer here than they are in the Root it self.

ccc. Other Air-vessels dispersed up and down in several Conjugations
irregularly.

The Air-vessels of every Conjugation are postured in a little Ring, each Ring
or Conjugation containing a part of the parenchymous Body as a small Pith
within it self, represented by the black Specks.

Each one of these Conjugations shooting forth entire with its Pith within, and
part of the Parenchyma without, becomes a perpendicular String-Root, like that
represented by Fig. 27.

Fig. 13. A slice of the Root of Bistort.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

Upon the inner Verge of the Bark stand the Succiferous Vessels in a Ring; but
are here omitted.

ccc eee. The Air-vessels all postured in a speck Ring next the inner Verge of
the Bark.

eee. The Pith.

Fig. 14. A slice of the Root of great Celandine.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

The peripherial Lines or Chords, represent the position of the Succiferous
Vessels.

cece. The Air vessels postured all in Rays from the inner Verge of the Bark
toward the Center.

About the Center more confusedly.

ee. The parenchymous or pithy parts.

Fig. 15. A slice of the Root of Dandelyon.

aaa ccc. The Bark; or all that part of the Root which is analogous to it.

The peripherial Lines, or Rings and Chords represent the position of the
Succiferous or Milk vessels.

ccce. The Air-vessels postured confusedly.

e. The Pith.

Fig. 16. A slice of the Root of Columbine.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

The Succiferous Vessels herein postured rather in Rays; though the Graver has
represented them by Rings.

eee. The Air vessels postured in Rays; some whereof are continued to the
Center, others half way, or less.

The white Spaces represent the parenchym^us parts.

Fig. 17. A slice of the Root of Orpine ^u^ traversly at the tuberous part.

aaa c^c. The Bark.

The small Specks represent the position and quantity of the Succiferous
Vessels therein.

ccc eee. The Air-vessels.

ccc. The utmost of them postured in a Ring.

eee. Diverse of them running from the Ring in Rays toward the Center.

The white Spaces analogous to the Pith.

Fig. 18. A slice of the same Root cut traversly at the slender part.

Wherein the Air-vessels are postured in a double Ring, the one next the Bark,
the other next the Center.

Fig. 19. A slice of the Root of Goats beard.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

ccc. One part of the Succiferous or Milk Vessels postured in a Ring upon the
inner Verge of the Bark.

And some of them which should have been represented by pricks sprinkled up and
down the Bark are omitted.

ccce. The Air-vessels all postured in Rays, and running from the inner Verge
of the Bark toward the Center.

And a Conjugation of them postured just in the Center.

Betwixt these Rays of Air-vessels run some exceeding small Diametral and more
aerie portions of the parenchymous Body.

Fig. 20. A slice of the Root of Valerian.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

ccc. The Succiferous Vessels postured in a Ring upon the inner Verge of the
Bark.

The Specks represent the Air-vessels postured likewise in a Ring next the
inner Verge of the Bark; and some of them radiated toward the Center.

ae. The Pith.

Fig. 21. A slice of the thicker part of the level Root of Ammi.

The smaller Specks represent the position and quantity of the Succiferous or
Milk-vessels in the Bark.

The larger Specks represent the Air-vessels postured in a Ring adjacent to it;
and usually made up of nine Conjugations.

Within is contained the Pith.

Fig. 22. A slice of the thinner part of the same level Root.

The Succiferous Vessels in the Bark are omitted.

The Air-vessels postured in a Ring adjacent to it; and consisting of five
Conjugations.

Fig. 23. A slice of the perpendicular Root of Ammi.

The smaller Specks are the Succiferous Vessels in the Bark, or that part of
the Root analogous to it.

The great black Spot represents the Air-vessels all conjugated or clustered
in the Center.

Fig. 24. A slice of the upper part of the Root of Venus Looking-glass.

aa cc. The Bark.

ee. Some of the Succiferous Vessels postured therein in a Speck Ring.

ee cc. And some of them postured in Rays.

cc. The Air-vessels; some of them postured in single Conjugations next the
Bark, but most in Rays meeting in the Center.

The white Spaces are parenchymous parts.

Fig. 25. A slice of the thinner part of the same Root.

Wherein the Succiferous Vessels are in part postured into three Chords
answerable to the former in a Circle.

The rest should have been in short Rays.

The Air-vessels are postured in three portions triangularly, and each portion
also of a wedged or triangular Figure, the points of all three meeting in the
Center.

Fig. 26. A slice of the Root of Sun Spurge.

Wherein the Air-vessels are postured in four Conjugations quadrangularly.

Fig. 27. A slice of the perpendicular or String-Root of Asp^ragus.

aaa. The Skin, which is very thick.

^^^ ^ae. The Bark; or all that part of the Root which is analogous to it.

The small black Rings represent the position of the Succiferous Vessels upon
the inner Verge of the Bark; yet not in two Rings as here represented, but in
one.

The inner white Space represents the position of the Air-vessels in a thick
Ring.

The black Spot represents the small Pith within it.

Fig. 28. A slice of the tuberous or thicker part of the Root of Lilium non
bulbosum.

aaa eee. The Bark; or all that part of the Root which is analogous to it.

The Succiferous Vessels are postured in a Ring upon the inner Verge of the
Bark, as in Asparagus, but here omitted.

eee. The Air-vessels postured in a thin Speck Ring.

c. The Pith.

Fig. 29. A slice of the Root of Jerusalem Artichoke.

aaa. The Skin.

ccc. The Bark.

The Succiferous Vessels therein dispersed up and down chiefly in specks, and
some in shorter Chords, but both are here omitted; and the rest in a Ring upon
the inner Verge of the Bark.

eeee. Diverse other Succiferous Vessels dispersed abroad about the Center; but
the Conjugations are smaller and less discernable than is represented by these
Specks.

ddd. The Air-vessels postured in Rays of unequal length, and winding to and
fro toward the Center.

With each of these Rays other Succiferous Vessels seem to be mixed.

All the white Spaces are simply parenchymous and of the same nature with the
Pith.

Fig. 30. A slice of the Root of Bugloss.

aaa eee. The Bark.

eee ccc. The Succiferous Vessels therein postured in Rays, and running from
the inner Verge thereof toward the Circumference about half way.

eee t. The Air-vessels postured in Rays, and running directly from the inner
Verge of the Bark toward the Center.

c e t. Parenchymous Portions inserted betwixt all the Rays, and meeting in the
Center.

Fig. 31. A slice of a younger Root of Eryngo.

aaa eee. The Bark; or all that part of the Root analogous to it.

eee ccc. The Succiferous Vessels.

eee. Those upon the inner Verge of the Bark posited in a Ring.

ec ec ec. Others streaming in Rays toward the Circumference.

ccc. The uniting and oval or arched termination of the Rays.

eee v. The Air-vessels posited in a Ring adjacent to the inner Verge of the
Bark.

v. The Pith.

Fig. 32. A slice of the Root of Brownwort.

aaa eee. The Bark.

eee. The Succiferous Vessels posited in a Ring upon the inner Verge thereof.

ec ec. The Air-vessels postured in Rays from the inner Verge toward the
Center.

ccc. The same Air-vessels standing thicker and altogether confusedly at the
Center.

Fig. 33. A slice of the Root of Nettle.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

ccc. Those Succiferous Vessels that are therein posited in a Ring upon the
inner Verge thereof.

All the rest of the Succiferous Vessels are posited in diverse other Rings
standing all one within another.

The Air-vessels are postured in Rays running directly cross the Succiferous
Rings.

Fig. 34. A slice of the tuberous or thicker part of the Root of Dropwort.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

ccc. The Succiferous Vessels postured in a Ring.

cece. The Air-vessels postured some in single Conjugations adjacent to the
inner Verge of the Bark; and some in Rays meeting in the Center.

Fig. 35. A slice of one of the thinner and rounder parts of the Root of Bryony.

aaa eee. The Bark.

ececec. The Succiferous Vessels posited therein in the form of a Glory, and
extended about half way toward the Circumference of the Bark.

eeee. The Air-vessels postured partly in Rays, but especially in Rings one
within another from the inner Verge of the Bark to the Center.

Round about every Speck or Conjugation Succiferous Vessels also seem to stand.

All the white Spaces are simply parenchymous parts.

Fig. 23. A slice of the Root of Melilot.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

The Specks represent the position of the Succiferous Vessels therein,

The Diametral Portions extended half way toward the Circumference of the Bark
are here omitted.

ccc. Three very thick Parenchymous or Diametral Portions, postured
triangularly, and meeting in the Center.

The Air-vessels are all postured in Rays represented by the Prick-lines.

Both these and the smaller Diametral Portions running betwixt them should have
been more numerous.

Fig. 37. A slice of the Root of Burnet.

aaa eee. The Bark.

eee. The position of the Succiferous Vessels in Columns extended half way
toward the Circumference.

Diverse other Succiferous Vessels postured in Chords represented by the black
Lines.

All the white Spaces are simply Parenchymous parts.

The Air-vessels are posited in Rays from the inner Verge of the Bark to the
Center.

Fig. 38. A slice of the upper part of the Root of Lovage.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

The black Lines are the Diametral Portions running through the same from the
Circumference toward the Center: within the Bark very conspicuous, but out of
it scarce discernable.

The little Circles and Specks represent the Succiferous Vessels posited
betwixt the Diametral Portions, some of the Circles on both sides adjoining to
the said Portions.

bbb. The more succulent Parenchymous parts of the Bark wherein all the
Succiferous Vessels stand.

cee. The Air-vessels standing most of them in short Rays from the inner Verge
of the Bark toward the Center, and some of them meeting therein.

d. The Pith.

Fig. 39. A slice of the smaller part of the same Root.

aaa eee. The Bark; or all that part of the Root which is analogous to it.

From eee to the Center stand the Air-vessels all contracted together.

Fig. 40. A slice of the Root of Patience.

aaa eee. The Bark.

ccc. The simply Parenchymous part of the Bark.

eee. The Succiferous Vessels postured in Rays, and extended from the inner
Verge of the Bark both toward the Circumference and toward the Center; most
of them in the Bark uniting or arching together.

III. Other Succiferous Vessels, many of them winding to and fro in extravagant
lines, but most of them postured in little Circles of different sizes, all
represented by the Specks.

Within every Circle, and the larger white Spaces, are contained the
Air-vessels; but not here represented, because, being few, not discernable,
except by Glasses.

All the other parts of the white Spaces besides where the Air-vessels stand,
are simply Parenchymous.

Fig. 41. A slice of a small Potato.

aaa bbb. The Bark.

The Succiferous Vessels are postured therein some in Rays and Specks upon the
inner Verge, and others in Chords toward the circumference; whereof some of
them should have been longer.

bbb. And the other shorter Lines and Specks toward the Center, are the
Air-vessels.

cccc. The simply Parenchymous parts.

Fig. 42. A slice of a Carrot.

aaa ccc. The Bark.

The position of the Succiferous Vessels therein is represented both by the
Lines and Specks.

ccc. Their position in short Lines upon the inner Verge of the Bark.

cbcbcb. Their position in speck Rays extended toward the circumference.

bbb. Their position in winding lines partly radiated, and partly peripherial:
more of which should have been represented adjacent to the Skin, and running
sharper and more directly upon the speck Rays.

eee. The position of the Air-vessels in short Rays from the inner Verge of the
Bark toward the Center.

Diverse other Air-vessels sprinkled up and down the pithy part of the Root,
represented by the black Specks; and seeming to be environed with other
Succiferous Vessels.

NB. That besides the differences betwixt these Roots seen in their
Descriptions here set down; diverse others may be observed by comparing the
Figures together: and many more in viewing them through a Microscope;
especially as to the number and size of the V^ssels, and of the Bubles of the
Parenchymous parts.

Though most of the Figures come up to what is material, yet some of them fall
short of that elegancy and preciseness visible in the Roots themselves, if cut
and observed in a due manner.

TABLE II.
Fig. 1. A piece of the Root of Scorzoner^ split down the middle.

aaaa. The Skin or outside of the Bark; which is very rough.

cece. The Conjugations of the Succiferous or Milk-vessels, by which partly the
skin becomes rough.

ccc. The Braces of the said Vessels.

eee. The Parenchymous parts filling up the spaces betwixt the braced Vessels.

aaa ttt. The Bark showed in the transverse cut.

The Specks represent the position of the said Milk-vessels therein.

tdtdtd. The Air-vessels postured in Rays.

d. A larger Conjugation of them in the Center.

Fig. 2. A piece of the Bark of the Root of Garden Burnet; which stripeth off
much better than that of Scorzonera.

aaaa. The inside thereof represented and laid flat.

The black Lines represent the position of the Succiferous Vessels.

At the white Spaces they are divaricated by their Braces.

Fig. 3. A piece of the same Scorzonera Root before in part described.

^aaa. Represents the middle part or substance of the Bark, the outward part
being p^^red off.

ce ce ce. The above said Milk-vessels.

cccc. Their Braces here toward the inner Verge of the Bark more numerous.

eeee. The ^arenchymous parts filling up the spaces betwixt the braced Vessels.

Fig. 4. A piece of the Root of Dandelyon split down the middle.

ac ac. The thickness of the Bark, or all that part of the Root analogous to it.

ssss. The Conjugations of the Milk-vessels running through it: which should
not have been represented by Lines altogether continuous, but frequently broken
off (as those in the Bark of Burnet) where they are divaricated by their Braces.

aeaded. The said Milk vessels as they appear postured in Chords and Rings upon
the traverse cut.

ccc. The Air-vessels all clustered together in the Center.

Fig. 5. A piece of the same Scorzonera Root before in part described.

aaaa. Represents it with the Bark striped off by half its circumference.

eded. The Air-vessels adjacent to the inner Verge of the Bark.

ddd. The Braces of the Air-vessels conformable to the utmost Braces of the
Milk-vessels represented in Fig. 1. of this Table.

eee. The Parenchymous parts filling up the spaces betwixt the braced
Air-vessels.

ccce. The Air-vessels appearing in the traverse cut, as in Fig. 1. of this
Table.

The Lines should have run directly upon the Specks; the Specks being the
terminations of the said Lines or Air-vessels running through the length of the
Root from the inner Verge of the Bark to the Center.

Fig. 6. A piece of the same Scorzonera Root split down the middle, as the
first.

aaaa. Represents the inside or the flat of the said piece.

ded ded. The Air-vessels running through it betwixt the inner Verge of the
Bark and the Center.

vvv. The breaking off of the said Vess^ls where they are divaricated by their
Braces.

eeee. A larger Conjugation or Cluster of the said Vessels at the Center, and
there more closely braced.

ca ba. The Bark and the Milk-vessels therein appearing upon the transverse cut.

c c. The Air-vessels.

Fig. 7. A slice of the Root of Borage cut down the middle.

aa cc. The thickness of the Bark.

cccc. The Air-vessels represented by all the broken Lines.

cc. Most of the said Vessels more frequently braced toward the inner Verge of
the Bark, being broken or cut off at every Brace.

eeee. Some few of them braced more closely at the Center; and many of the
Braces appearing together unbroken.

edc. The gradual approach of the said Vessels toward the circumference at the
top of the Root.

d. The Pith thereby made.

Fig. 8. A slice of a Carrot cut down the middle.

ad ad. The thickness of the Bark.

dbb dbb. The Air-vessels running through the Root.

db. Their closer position, more frequent Braces, and greater number next the
inner Verge of the Bark.

The rest about the middle and Center represented by the smaller Lines: the
greater should have been so many light shades representing the more sappy parts
of the Parenchymous or pithy body where some sow of the Succiferous Vessels
seem to run.

One or two Conjugations should also have been drawn from d to e at the top,
bounding the Pith in an Hyperbolical Figure.

eeee. Some of the Succiferous Vessels gathered together more numerously at the
top of the Root, without any Air-vessels mixed with them.

cccc. The Side-leaves.

ae. The Centre-leaves springing up either before or upon the Caulis.

de. The Space wherein some both of the Succiferous and Air-vessels are, by
degrees, collaterally distributed into the said Leaves cc a e.

Fig. 9. A slice of the Root of Parsley cut down the middle.

ad ad. The thickness of the Bark.

vvv. The Air-vessels: but the Lines by which they are represented should not
have been altogether continuous, as they are, below the oval, nor all out so
numerous.

ve ve. The Conjugations of the said Vessels running along the circumference,
and meeting at the Basis of the Caulis, and so bounding the Pith in an oval
Figure.

ca ca. The Side-leaves.

ee. The Centre-leaves.

s t l e. Some of the Succiferous Vessels standing in the Pith without any
Air-vessels mixed with them.

s vv. Some of them more numerous and confused.

tt ll. Others of them arched.

ll e. The Arches closer and more obtuse.

In the traverse cut of the Root the same Succiferous Vessels appear postured
in Rings.

sss. The Parenchymous parts of the Pith.

Fig. 10. A piece of the Root of Jerusalem Artichoke cut by the length.

aaaa. As it appears with part of the Bark paired off.

cece. The Air-vessels.

cc. The Braces of the said Vessels, being very rare.

eeee. The Succiferous Vessels with their Braces, which are exceeding numerous,
and much divaricated.

The white Spaces are Parenchymous parts.

Fig. 11. The Root of Jerusalem Artichoke.

aaa. As it appears with all the Bark paired off.

bd. The Air-vessels.

d. Their Braces.

bcd. The Spaces betwixt them filled up with the Parenchymous body.

cc ee. The manner of the eruption of a Root-Bud, or of a Trunk from the Root.

The Rings are made up chiefly of the Succiferous, and the Rays and Specks of
the Air-vessels.

e. The Pith in the Center of the Bud.

TABLE III.
Fig. 1. A slice of one of the perpendicular or String-Roots of Asparagus cut
transversly.

aaa. As it appears to the bare eye.

The utmost black Ring is the Skin.

eee. The Bark, or all that part of the Root which is analogous to it.

The inner black Ring shows the position of the Succiferous Vessels upon the
inner Verge of the Bark.

Within which the Air-vessels stand, and should have been represented by
another white Ring.

And within this a very small Pith according to Fig. 27. (Tab. I.) above
described.

AA. One half of the same slice as it appears through the Microscope.

bb. The Skin; composed throughout into Bubles.

It should have been bounded by a Line from the rest of the Bark to the
thickness of about one third of an Inch.

AA. GG. The Bark, or all that part of the Root analogous to it; composed
throughout into Bubles.

ee. The Bubles of the Bark; here more round.

The Texture of the fibrous Threads whereof they are composed, is not here
represented, because that will be more perspicuous in the draught of the Pith
of the Root.

DD. GG. The position of the Succiferous Vessels in a Ring upon the inner Verge
of the Bark.

GG. TT. The Air-vessels also postured in a Ring; and of a larger size.

The white Rings show the sides of the said Air-vessels.

The black Spots within them show their Concaves.

The Spaces betwixt them filled up with a mixed body, partly consisting of
Succiferous Vessels, but chiefly Parenchymous.

TT. The Pith, composed throughout into Bubles.

Fig. 2. A slice of the slender part of the Root of Jerusalem Artichoke cut
transversly.

aaa. As it appears to the bare eye.

ccc. The Bark.

ce ce ce. Both the Succiferous and the Air-vessels represented by the black
Lines, the Succiferous being postured directly against the Air-vessels, upon
the inner Verge of the Bark. But the Lines are too few.

e. The Pith.

AA. One half of the same slice as it appears through the Microscope.

bb. The Skin.

AA. EE. The Bark.

The black Columns are the Succiferous Vessels.

SS. The younger and more succulent portion of the said Vessels postured in
Chords.

In the other parts of the Columns stand the elder and less succulent.

Amongst them stand the Air-vessels, of a smaller size, and about four or six
in every Column.

EL. EL. Other Columns betwixt them wholly Parenchymous.

LL. The Pith.

ee. The Bubles of the Pith, which are very large, and most of the largest by
the Weftage of their composing Fibers made angular.

TABLE IV.
Fig. 1. A slice of a smaller Root of Dandelyon cut traversly.

aa. As it appears to the bare eye, answerable to Fig. 15. Tab. I.

AA. One half of the same slice as it appears through a Microscope.

CC. The Skin.

AA. GG. The Bark; or all that part of the Root analogous to it.

DTG. The position of the Succiferous or Milk-vessels amongst the smaller
Bubles, in Chord-Rings; the Chords being of different lengths in the same Ring.

EE. The Parenchymous Rings betwixt them all from C. to G. wherein the Bubles
are of a larger size; yet all of them small in respect of those in many other
Roots.

GT. GT. The Bubles streaming in Rays cross three or four of the black Rings;
in which space other Succiferous Vessels, scil. Lymphaeducts seem to be mixed
with the Lacteal.

From GG. inward stand the Air-vessels, all contracted into a Cylinder in the
Center: The larger whereof about the Center, the smaller next the Bark. And all
of them small in comparison with those in many other Roots.

The Spaces betwixt them filled up with a mixed body, partly consisting of
Succiferous Vessels, but chiefly Parenchymous.

Fig. 2. A slice of the smaller part of the Root of Marsh-mallow cut traversly.

aa. As it appears to the bare eye according to the Description of Fig. 2.
Tab. I.

AA. One half of the same slice as it appears through a Microscope.

bb. The Skin; not altogether so thick; and the Bubles rather postured in Rays.

DA. DA. The Bark.

GG. The Succiferous Vessels postured in a Ring upon the inner Verge of the
Bark.

SS. LL. The rest of the Succiferous Vessels standing in more distinct
Conjugations throughout the Bark both in Rings and Rays represented by the
black Spots.

SL. SL. The Parenchymous parts of the Bark standing betwixt them.

From DD. to the Center stand the Air-vessels.

DT. DT. Some few of them postured in Rays: the parts betwixt which are wholly
Parenchymous or pithy.

From TT. inward the rest, and greater part of the Air-vessels standing
together in the Center.

TABLE V.
Fig. 1. A slice of the lower part of the Root of Bugloss cut traversly, as it
appears to the bare eye.

a. The Skin.

a e. The Bark.

ccc. The Succiferous Vessels in a Ring.

Within them the Air-vessels.

Fig. 2. The same slice, as it appears through a Microscope.

A. bbbb. The Skin; which should have been somewhat thicker.

AA. LL. The Bark.

bb. GG. The Bubles of the Bark postured rather circularly.

GG. FF. The rest of the Bubles all radiated; amongst which it is probable some
few of the Succiferous Vessels run.

SS. The arching of the Buble-Rays.

FF. LL. The Succiferous Vessels more visibly and numerously postured in a Ring
upon the inner Verge of the Bark.

Within stand the Air-vessels postured in Rays, most of them meeting in the
Center.

ttt. A single Air-vessel.

ll. A Conjugation of two in the peripherial posture.

ff. A Conjugation of three in the Diametral posture.

eee. Some of them more firmly contained together in the Center by the
Parenchymous Threads.

dddd. Parenchymous parts.

TABLE VI.
Fig. 1. A slice of the lower part of the Root of Horseradish cut traversly,
as it appears to the bare eye.

a. The Skin.

ac. The Bark, with the Succiferous Vessels therein represented by the smaller
Specks.

Within stand the Air-vessels represented by the larger and blacker Specks.

e. The Pith.

Fig. 2. The same slice, as it appears through a Microscope.

AA. The Skin.

A. B. The Bark.

B. L. The Succiferous Vessels therein postured in the form of a Glory.

B.G. The Air-vessels postured in a thick Ring; the several Conjugations
whereof are radiated.

G. E. Other Succiferous Vessels within the Air-vessels postured in a thin Ring.

E. The Pith.

ee. The Bubles of the Pith.

TABLE VII.
Fig. 1. Should have represented a slice of a small Root of a Vine cut
traversly; but the Sculpture is utterly false.

Fig. 2. The same slice, as it truly appears through a Microscope.

A. The Skin.

A. B. The Bark.

S. The Succiferous Vessels therein postured in more distinct Portions, the
Figure of ea^h Portion coming near an half-oval.

LLL. The woody part of the Root consisting of Vessels originally succiferous.

Amongst them stand the Air-vessels of different sizes.

eee. One of the largest.

e. A Conjugation of three small ones.

DD. Parenchymous or Diametral Portions inserted betwixt the aforesaid Vessels
about a third part toward the Center; the Bubles whereof are quadrilateral.

B. G. Other larger and longer Portions continuous with the Bark, and pointing
near the Center.

B. L. Six others all meeting in the Center, and crossing each other almost at
equal Angles.

FINIS.
Tab. 1


Tab. 2


Tab. 3


Tab. 4


Tab. 5


Tab. 6


Tab. 7



