ABRAHAM's PROSPECT.

BEING A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Mr JOHN WILLIAMS, Late VICAR of
DEVINNOCKE, In the PARISH CHURCH of Llanspithid in the COUNTY of BRECON, On the
12th day of June, 1680.

By OWEN GRIFFITH.

LONDON, Printed for H. Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, M DC LXXXI.

To his Honored Friend DANIEL WILLIAMS OF PENPONT, In the COUNTY of BRECON, Esquire
SIR,
AS SOON as my little Affairs would give me leave (and you know this has been
a season of more than Ordinary business with men of my employments) I have sent
you a Transcript of what was lately delivered at the enterment of your Dear
Father, together with some few Additions which then by reason of the straitness
of the time, were thought fit to be omitted; and the whole (such as it is) is
freely tendered to your disposal. All that I aim at in sending You so mean a
Present is, to give some further Testimony and Assurance both of my respect to
the Memory of my Deceased Friend, and of the Continuance thereof to Your self,
the only surviving Issue of his Body. And if the Review of what You then heard
can add any thing to Your Satisfaction or Advantage upon any account, I shall
be very glad of it, and of any occasion that shall be offered, whereby I may be
able, according to my Capacity and the real inclinations of my Soul, more amply
to express how much I am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Friend and very Humble Servant, OWEN GRIFFITH.
August 14. 1680.
A Funeral Sermon.
HEBR. XI.10. For he looked for a City which has Foundations, whose Builder
and maker is God.


THIS Chapter contains in it the History of Faith, and its famous
achievements. Though many Soldiers behave themselves very worthily in the
field, yet the General bears the Name and the Honor of the Battle. So though
other Graces are very subservient and of great use unto the Christian in his
encounters with Sin and Satan, yet being actuated and guided in their motions
by the influence of Faith, this wears the Crown of the Victory, and has all
the Glory ascribed unto it. Among all the Stars in this illustrious
Constellation, the renowned Champions in this Sacred Catalogue, honorable
mention is made of the Patriarch Abraham as one of the first and greatest
magnitude. Several instances are given of his Heroic disposition, whereby he
became so remarkably famous as to receive in testimony of his Faith that
honourary Title of the Father of the Faithful, Romans 4.11. That which is here
very signally recorded of him is his readiness at God's Call to leave his
kindred and country, ver. 8, 9. to go into a strange land which he knew not,
to leave a certainty for an uncertainty, without any scrupulous inquiry or
distrustful hesitancy of being disposed by God, and of paying unto him a ready
and (in some sense) a blind Obedience. Magnus est animus qui se Deo tradidit,
degener qui obluctatur, Senec. He was a man bravely disposed who could thus
resign himself at God's feet, and follow him without reluctance though he led
him into a strange country, and could be content to dwell there, not as an
Inhabitant but a Sojourner, in a moving Tabernacle, no settled Mansion. Some
Philosophers heretofore had such large Souls, that they thought it injurious to
be confined to any particular place, and therefore professed themselves to be
(...) equally concerned in all places, to be Citizens of the world. But Abraham
disowned any such interest on earth, was always in the Nature and Condition of
a Pilgrim, and where ever he came, still ready for a removal. And the reason
why he sought no certain Inheritance, not so much as of a foot of land in
present possession (excepting the small purchase of a Cave for burial) was the
hope he had of a rich Revenue in a far better Country, which he expected to
receive in Reversion, For he looked for a City, etc.

In the Words there are Four things to be considered,

I. The Act ascribed unto Abraham, He looked for. II. The Object to which this
Act is referred, A City. III. The Excellency of this Object described by 2
particulars. 1. Its stability and firmness, a City which has foundations. 2.
Its Architect and Author, whose Builder and maker is God.
IV. The Influence such an expectation had upon him to move him to all the
duties of Mortification and Obedience; and this the causal Particle For
prefixed to the words, points out unto us, For he looked for a City which has
foundations.
Abraham, (...), he looked for -- And if we compare the Text with other
Scriptures where the word is used, we shall find it to signify 4 things
especially, which being considered by us may give us the full meaning and
importance of it in this place.

1. It signifies an Act of desire, not a mere natural inclination, such as is
in all men, and carries them out after Happiness, every man by reason of the
capacity of his immortal Soul, aiming at something though incognito, that may
be proportionable thereunto, being ignorant of that to which his own propension
and weight of Nature does bias and incline him; but it is such a desire as is
serious and earnest, fixed on a direct and proper object. It is expressed v.
16. by the word (...), which signifies a vehement appetite, like that of the
stomach, that is restless and provokes to any pains that may give it
satisfaction. Such as by a Metaphor is attributed to inanimate creatures, Romans
8.19. The earnest expectation of the creature looks for the manifestation of
the sons of God, (...), a very earnest looking is thereby intended, like theirs
who long for a special friends coming, as Sisera's mother looked out at the
window and cried through the Lattice, why is his Chariot so long in coming? why
tarry the wheels of his chariots? Judge. 5.28. Thus did Abraham look for this
City -- having a longing desire to see and to enjoy it. -- Expleri mentem
nequit, ardescitque tuendo -- Nothing on this side the line of Heaven could
satisfy him. He trampled upon the world and all the vanities of it as
contemptible and unsatisfying. Canaan though a Land flowing with Milk and
honey, was not for his enjoyment. He could not see any thing in it so alluring
as to be able to charm his soul, or make him unwilling to be translated into
that region, whereof Canaan was but a mean Type or Shadow. His heart was fixed
upon a nobler Orb, so that life was to him a banishment, and the earth a
prison. He passed through the world as one unconcerned in the affairs of it,
and mounted continually in his thoughts to those windows of glory, with the
wings of Contemplation and desire, which did not allay but rather augment his
Appetite and thirst after the plenary Fruition of those felicities that were
still in the view of his Soul? But because men may eagerly desire some good, of
which they have no ground to expect the enjoyment, therefore

2. It implies an Act of Hope. To look or hope for in Scriptures are words of
the same signification, Phil. 3.19. From whence we look, i.e. hope or expect
for a Savior. Jude ver. 21. Looking for the mercy of God. Sometimes they are
conjoined, Tit. 2.12. Looking for the blessed, hope. His hope then is hereby
intended, not a moralists hope, such as has for its object bonum incertum
futurum, a good future and uncertain, which is but a probable Conjecture at
best, and leaves a man's spirit in a doubtful, anxious posture; but such as was
sure and well-grounded, to which Faith held the Candle, whereby he had an
evident and clear Prospect of those substantial glories in the other world. It
was not a bare opinion of such an estate as very suitable to his inclinations
(it being usual with men easily to believe, what they passionately desire) but
a firm and infallible persuasion, bottomed upon the sure word and promise of
God, being fully persuaded that what he had promised he was able also to
perform, Romans 4.21. To expect confidently such things without a divine
Revelation, had been but a mere dream or fancy, no Theological virtue, but a
very fond presumption. A promise therefore he had, Genesis 15.1. and upon that
security he went at God's call and sojourned in a strange land not as one
uncertain (as the Apostle says of himself in a like case, 1 Cor. 9.26.) but
acted by his Faith, ver. 8, 9. And of all the Patriarchs it is said they died
in Faith, ver. 13. Having seen the promises afar off, they were persuaded of
them, and embraced, or saluted them (so the word may be rendered) though at a
distance, seeing them only with the Eagle-Eye of Faith through the clear Medium
and Perspective of the Promise. Like Mariners now in sight of their Native soil
after a troublesome and tedious voyage, salute it at a distance with loud and
joyful Acclamations. If they had not had such an assurance of the reward
reserved by God for them, it would not have been consonant unto reason, but an
Argument rather of their Folly, to renounce their present complacencies and
assume the condition of Pilgrims, on whom the world seldom casts a favorable
Aspect, unless in the end of their journey they were secure of such an estate
as might be sufficient to recompense their sufferings, and to counter-ballance
all the bitternesses and hardships they endured in the way thither. As Abraham
saw Christ's day afar off and rejoiced, Joh. 8.58. So had he by the help of the
same Spiritual Optics a sight of Heaven so evidently represented to him, as to
engage his hope to a diligent and steady expectation of it. But because a man
may both passionately desire and fondly hope for some good in itself
attainable, and yet miss thereof for want of industry and diligence in the
prosecution, therefore

3. It imports an Act of Obedience and an endeavor to the utmost in order to
its attainment. In our ordinary expressions we use to say, a man looks for that
which is agreeable unto, and the natural consequent of his actions. He looks
for beating who is guilty of those miscarriages whereby he justly deserves such
usage. He that throws himself into apparent danger looks for ruin. It is said
of that wicked servant, that did beat his fellow servants, and did eat and drink
with the drunken, Matthew. 24.50. his Lord will come in a day that he looked not
for him. Had he looked for his coming, that would have appeared by his actions,
he would have been better employed in a diligent discharge of his Task and
Duty. Many presume strongly of heaven and make professions of their desires
after it, but if we view their actions we cannot believe their own mouths, nor
imagine that they are seriously persuaded of any such thing, because their
indulged lusts bid defiance unto their hopes, and their lewd practices confute
their loudest professions. Some slight Glances upon heaven and sudden raptures
or emotions of Spirit after bliss (such as are weak and leave no warmth or
impression on the soul, and therefore may be found in sensual persons and
Belialists who can with Balaam wish to dye the death of the righteous, and that
their latter end may be like his, Numb. 23.10.) will not serve the turn, unless
our desires be vigorous and operative, and engaging unto Holiness and
Obedience. For in a Scripture sense and by a right I^terpretation, such as deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live righteously, soberly and godly in
this present world, do only look for this blessed hope, Tit. 2.12. and so did
Abraham look for it. He did indeed in hope believe against hope, Romans 4 18.
both Faith and Hope in him were stronger than a contradiction, but his
Obedience and Endeavors to do God's commands were as strong as either, as was
evident in that most difficult and signal piece of service to which he was
summoned of Sacrificing his Son, Genesis 22 2. Isaac was the Son of his old Age,
the Son of his love, the Son of the Promise. In Isaac shall thy Seed be
blessed, Genesis 21.12. So that to offer him in Sacrifice seemed to oppose not
only his Reason but his Faith too: and he himself must be the Executioner; with
his own hands must he tear out his bowels and burn him to ashes on the Altar,
and to Mount Moriah he must go to do this, which was three days journey, Genesis
22.4. time enough for Nature to reason with the harshness of the Precept, and
for Affection to struggle with the unnaturalness of the Duty, and yet on he
goes unmoved in his resolution to perform this strange work, and with his Son
to Sacrifice his own hopes and promises unto Gods command and his own purposes
of an indisputable and entire Obedience. And we must after so great an example
be willing to Sacrifice our lusts at God's command as he did his Son. We must
labor to tread in his steps both by doing and suffering the Will of God, and
then (not otherwise) may we assuredly hope to rest in his bosom. But because
that good which a man thus desires and hopes for, and with unwearied endeavors
pursues after, is not soon obtained, but after a long expectation, therefore

4. The word implies an Act of Patience, and to that purpose it is often
translated, waiting, 1 Pet. 3.20. The long-suffering of God (...) waited for
the disobedient, and Jam. 5.7. (...), The husbandman waits for the precious
fruit of the earth and has long patience for it. He that waits must be content
to stay, and therefore it is said, Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of patience, that
after you have done the will of God you might receive the promise. Patience is
needful, not of laborers only to do the will of God, but of waiters also to
tarry for the reward. The delay of good hoped for is afflicting and pungent, it
makes the heart sick without patience to support it. So that the Christian
must have the patience as well as the faith of the Saints, Rev. 13.10. For if
we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it, Romans 8.25.
therefore it is said of Abraham, After he had patiently endured he received the
promise, Heb. 6.15. God is graciously pleased to put us to our choice whether
we will have our Heaven here, or wait for it hereafter; whether we will draw
our comforts from the broken and impure Cisterns of the creatures, or reserve
our selves for those Crystal streams that flow from that pure and living
Fountain of everlasting Consolations, where our enjoyment shall be full and
free without any danger of Epicurism or intemperance. And were it not for our
too hasty and impetuous desires after present wages though but brass and
counters, and a sinful impatience mingled with an infidelity and a distrust of
God and his Promise for our future more comfortable allowance and satisfactory
reward, the use of a very little reason seasoned and improved by Grace, might
be armor of proof unto us against the destructive charms of sin, and might put
the controversy beyond dispute, that Heaven is worth the waiting for, and the
satisfactions there are very sufficient to smooth all the wrinkles in the face
of Religion here, to take off the seeming severities of a holy life, a renewed
Repentance, and necessary self-denial, in themselves the most amiable and
lovely duties, and the best Credentials, the surest Evidences we can provide,
both for our Conduct and our Title to the Celestial Canaan or heavenly
Jerusalem, which is that City which Abraham did look for, 1. in his desires,
and 2. in his hopes, and was well worth 3. all his pains, and 4. his Patience
too, because it is a City that has Foundations, etc.

a City. To condescend to the meanness of our capacity the Scripture does
express Heaven unto us by such things as our understandings can apprehend, and
gives it such Titles as may suit with and satisfy every man's Appetite and
Inclination; very often it is called a City, The City of the living God, Heb.
12.22. a City to come, Heb. 13.14. the Holy City, Rev. 21.2. and much of the
happiness thereof may be conceived by us as it is represented under this Notion
of a City, wherein there are to be found such rare and peculiar advantages as
are necessary and sufficient to complete the bliss thereof. I shall briefly
recommend these five particulars to your present consideration. This is a City
where there is to be found.

1. The best Society: A City is a multitude of people that have the benefit of
a mutual and near converse, and quietly cohabit under the same laws and
Government. Company is the most pleasant thing of life, without which there is
no full content in any enjoyment, no comfortable use of the greatest
possessions. If to live with virtuous persons here, in whom there is sin to
imbitter, as well as grace to sweeten their converses unto us, by reason of
their manifold defects and imperfections, be one of the chief ingredients to
our present in happiness, what will it be to live with them when they shall be
perfected in goodness and in glory? If he could cry out (O praeclarum illum
diem, etc. Cic. de Senect.) O the happy day when I shall depart out of this
crowd and sink, into that council and society of blessed Souls! and if Socrates
rejoiced to die, because he thought he should then see Homer and Hesiod, and
other excellent men famous in their generations; how much more should the
Christian long to see Christ the eternal Son of God in his assumed nature, and
with him the glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the
Prophets, the Noble Army of Martyrs, and the whole Church of the Firstborn, of
which blessed Corona he himself shall make a part, sitting down with Abraham
and Isaac and Jacob, and all his pious friends departed, whom he shall know and
love in a greater degree than ever he did in this life? This then is recorded
as one of the singular Eminencies of that place, that we shall be
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19. and be admitted into the fellowship
of Myriads of Angels, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just
men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12.23,
24. A Royal Society of perfect Virtuoso's, free from all infirmities of pride,
Ignorance and self-seeking to exercise our Charity and Patience, and without
any sufferings to move our pity and compassion. And the content that shall flow
from this Communion and Acquaintance, shall be durable and entire, not subject
to any prejudices, or the bitter and disquieting thoughts of a sad parting any
more.

2. The most excellent Order. As the Firmament without the Sun, or the body
without the soul, so is a multitude without Order; a rude indigested heap of
people, no formal Society. Order is the essential Ornament of all Societies,
and the Beauty of Heaven. The Inhabitants there are peaceable without any
disaffection, and orderly without the least confusion. There is indeed an
imparity or difference of degrees in Glory as well as in Grace. There are
Angels and Archangels, Cherubims and Seraphims, and all shine not with an equal
Luster. There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, another of the
Stars, for one Star differs from another Star in glory, 1 Cor. 15.41. So it
shall be among the Saints and at the Resurrection. All shall be satiated, but
All not capacitated for the like reception. He that employed his five Talents
well, shall be made Ruler over five Cities: and he that has but two Talents
and improves them as he ought, shall be proportionably rewarded, he shall rule
over two Cities. But though there be a difference, yet there shall be no
disorder; for he that has least shall not be disdained, nor he that has most
be envyed. Every one shall have so much, that he shall desire no more, but will
love and enjoy that good in another which he might seem to want in himself.
Therefore there will be no envy occasioned there by any unequal clarity,
because there shall reign in all an Oneness of Charity. There will be in all
one and the same blessedness of joy, though there be not in all one and the
same sublimity or height of glory. There is no deceitful friendship, or
strangeness of affection, no unkind thought, carriage or affection; there is a
Corporation of Saints uniformly and harmoniously conspiring to obey and
magnify their Maker; where the King is Verity, the Law Charity, and the term
Eternity.

3. The most Sovereign immunities; Paul as a Citizen of Rome escaped Scourging,
Acts 22.25. for such were not to be bound or beaten. Many Cities have large
Charters, but greater Privileges have the Burgesses and free denizons of the
New Jerusalem, who have their names written or enrolled in heaven, Heb. 12.23.
Magistrates of Cities and Buroughs usually have their Books or Rolls wherein
the names of all free men are written or registered, whereby they may claim
their right to the privileges of that Corporation, whereof they are admitted
members. In relation thereunto God is said to have his book, and this enrolling
of names assures the Christian of his right to the Privileges of Heaven. And
oh! what excellent things, what royal Prerogatives belong to that City of God!
where is Mirth without sadness, health without sickness, life without labor,
light without darkness, an Olio of delights, an Ecstasie of fruitions. Pyrrhus
said of Rome, not then mistress of the world, that it was, urbs Regum, a City
of Kings; but one thing was wanting in that kingly City, as it was told a great
Emperor ravished with its beauty, men died there as well as in other places,
it was not privileged from death. It may truly be said of this City, that it
is urbs regum, where the meanest doorkeeper wears a Crown more precious than
the Onyx and the Jasper, and their Crown shall never fade, their joy never
fail, their Sun never set, their life never end. There will be neither hunger
nor thirst, nor weariness nor age, they shall be privileged from sin and
sorrow and death itself for evermore.

4. The largest Capacity. Some Cities are famous for their bigness. Nineveh was
an exceeeding great City of three days journey, Jon. 3.3. and Scanderoon the
Imperial Seat of the great Cham of Tartary, 28 miles in compass, and Quinsay
the greatest in the world reported to be a hundred, but nothing to this great
City, Rev. 21.10. which is 12000 furlongs, the length and the breadth and the
height of it are equal, v. 16. A great and definite measure being put for an
indefinite and a greater. As it is said of Tophet, it is large and deep, for
the King it is prepared, Isa. 30. ult. so of Heaven we may say, it is large and
high, for the blessed it is prepared. It is the Court of God, and of Christ,
wherein are habitations for an innumerable company of Angels, and all the
Spiritual seed of Abraham, which are as the Sand on the Sea shore. For though
the Scripture says that few shall be saved, yet is that to be understood
comparatively to the vaster numbers that walk in the broad way that leads to
destruction; for absolutely considered they are a great multitude that no man
can number, Rev. 7.9. yet shall one heaven contain them all. Though the way to
heaven be strait and narrow, yet is heaven it self spacious and ample:
Therefore our Savior tells his Disciples, Joh. 14.2. in my Fathers house are
many mansions; there is room provided, and accommodation sufficient to
entertain all comers. None shall have cause to complain, the place is too
strait for me, give place to me that I may dwell, Isa. 49.20. None though they
come late and last thither, shall be forced to any inconvenience, as the
blessed Virgin was to lodge in a stable, because there was no room for her in
the Inn, Luc. 2.7.

5. The greatest Security. Men live in Cities for the security of their persons
and the safety of their goods. Tuto vivere was one end they had at first in
building them, that they might be places of strength and protection against
hostilities and dangers, whereas solitary dwellings are often exposed to
violence and assaults. But this is a City most secure. The greatest in the
world, Nineveh, Babylon, Jerusalem, have had their rise and ruin; so that now
they live only by the mouth of fame. Fuit Ilium and ingens gloria Teucrorum --
That they have been, is all we can say of such as once flourished in greatest
strength and splendour, but now lie buried under their own ruins, and all their
beauty and honor is laid in the dust. But Heaven is a City that cannot be
shaken, Heb. 12.27. All things there are out of Gunshot, beyond the reach and
attempts of men and devils. They that are there shall not feel nor need they
fear the destroyer any more. It is subject neither to rust, nor to robbery, not
to vanity in it self, nor violence from others; for neither can moth corrupt
there, nor thieves break through and steal, Matt. 6.20. This is the only City,
upon the Gates whereof may truly be engraven that Venetian Motto, Nec fluctu
nec flatu movetur, neither winds nor waves, neither secret underminings, nor
open Assaults can create any molestation or disturbance to it, and the reasons
of its being so strong and impregnable are given in the following words, which
leads to the Third part.



1. Its stability and firmness, it is a City which has Foundations. 2. Its
Architect and Author, whose Builder and maker is God.
1. Its stability and firmness, it is a City which has Foundations. The
strength of any building lies chiefly in the foundation, though the walls be
weak, yet if well founded, it may stand long. The strength of the Church is
described by this, that it is sounded upon a Rock, so that the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it, Matthew. 16.18. and the New Jerusalem has
Foundations, and these all of stones, and those stones most precious and
therefore most durable, Rev. 21.18. which denotes the firmness and security of
the place, and of their condition who are translated thither. The Apostle
therefore 2 Cor. 5.1. opposes this earthly and that heavenly house, this being
made with hands, that without; this transitory, that eternal. Here we have but
Tabernacles, that have a roof but no Foundation; and if we call them houses,
their foundation is but dust, which deserves not that name, Job 4.19. The world
is but (...), a fashion that passes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. All the goodliness and
splendour of it lies in the outside, and is but skin deep, without any
consistency or solid stay. Here there is no continuing City. The Church, and
every member of it is (...), Ambulatory, in an unsettled and suffering
condition. All are but sojourners, Psalm. 39.14. Our dwellings are uncertain, by
fire or poverty or persecution, and a thousand intervening accidents, to be
sure by death we shall be forced to leave them. But in Heaven there are
Mansions, which is therefore called (...), an abiding City, there we shall not
only be, but continue for ever, 1 These. 4.17. We cannot tell how many the
foundations be. St. John makes mention of Twelve, Rev. 21.14. by which some
understand the twelve Apostles, and their doctrine summarily comprised in the
twelve Articles of our Creed: but we may reduce them to two principal ones, and
this we may conceive the lowest number. There is a Foundation upon a
Foundation, sufficient to underprop and secure it for ever, so that we shall
not need to be troubled with Anaxagoras his conceit, that Heaven was made of
stones and would one day fall upon men's heads. 1. Christ's Merit and Purchase,
this is one, and a sure foundation; for other foundation can no man lay, than
that that is laid, Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. He is the chief corner stone,
Ephesians. 2.20. only by Christ is there such a place as Heaven, and such a state as
Salvation attainable for believers. No created righteousness is able to support
it self from ruin. Angels are mutable Creatures, created with a natural
blessedness from which some did and all might have fallen; now that the good
Angels are immutable, they owe it to Christ, by whom they received a
blessedness supernatural, which by Creation they had not. For though he be not
properly a Redeemer, or a Mediator of Atonement, yet (as some Divines say) is
he a Confirmer and supporter of Angels; of him therefore the whole family in
Heaven and earth is named, Ephesians. 3.15. and by him has God reconciled to himself
all things, whether they be things in heaven, or things in earth, Col. 1.21. As
the Angels fell, so man in innocence standing upon the foundation of his own
righteousness, that proved rotten and deceitful, and the building of his
happiness reared upon it, was beaten down with the violent storm of the very
first Temptation. But the happiness of Heaven will be firm and certain, because
founded upon Christ's perfect righteousness, not the creatures changeable will
and variable obedience. He that bought us at so dear a rate, will not trust us
with our selves any more, and our happiness shall be not in our own hands, but
in the safe keeping of a faithful Creator, and most merciful Redeemer. And oh!
with what kisses of love shall we embrace and hug those wounds, by which he
purchased the possession of that Inheritance for us? with what ravishment of
affections shall we sound forth that Song of Triumph and Thanksgiving to our
Deliverer? Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive honor, and riches,
and wisdom, and strengh and glory, Rev. 5.12. for he was slain and has
redeemed us to God by his blood, out of every kindred and tongue, and people
and nation, ver. 9. The other I shall mention is, 2. Gods free love and
goodness whereby he has designed for believers an eternal Well-being in glory,
before they had a temporary being in Nature* from the Abyss of everlastingness
had he thoughts of kindness toward us, and even then did lay contrivances of
Bliss for us, who since we were deserved nothing but damnation. These are the
everlasting arms that are underneath the Saints in glory, Deuteronomy. 33.27. It is in
this hand even of Gods love, that the Souls of the righteous are, Wisd. 3.1.
out of which none shall be able to pluck them, Joh. 10.29. If once these arms
impale us, neither sin nor hell shall get us thence for ever. The Sanctuary is
inviolable, the rock impregnable, and we safely locked up to eternity. So safe
that they who would pass from hence cannot, says the Gospel, Luke 16.26. None
certainly can be ever willing to lose that happiness, or to have it suspended
for a moment; yet upon supposal, that they could be willing and have a mind to
exchange places, they shall not be able; the gulf of God's irreversible decree
and kindness toward them is fixed and they shall never be able to alter it. So
that as the Be sucks and satiates her self with the sweetness of the flower;
or as the child lies at the breast sucking, and enclosed within the careful and
tender arms of the loving mother; so shall the happy Soul securely feed on the
deliciousness of God's love, with whom there will never be any variableness or
shadow of changing. And this assurance of the perpetuity of this happiness is
that which heightens it. Every moment will be sweeter to us, in that we shall
never be disquieted with the thought, that our condition (as happy as it is)
will have an end; which thought like Gall and Wormwood poured into those rivers
of pleasures would imbitter and allay the lusciousness of them to our taste.
And this assurance is built on this principal foundation of Gods love and
immutable purpose which stands fast, 2 Timothy 2.19. and has this Seal, the
Lord knows who are his; he knows them so as to approve of them, and
preserve them in that happiness of Soul and body to all eternity, which he
himself has ordained for them and does conferr upon them; and this leads to
the second particular by which the excellency of this City is described, and
that is --

2. Its Architect and Author, whose builder and maker is God. Every work
receives its estimate and value from the skilfulness and reputation of the
Author. Any picture drawn by the hand of an ingenious Apelles, or any piece of
Sculpture carved by an inspired Bezaliel or Aholiab will affect the heart, and
command the eye into the greatest diligence and curiosity of observation.
Solomon's Temple was a magnificent building. The expense was great, David having
prepared 100000 Talents of Gold, and 1000000 Talents of Silver, besides Brass
and iron without weight, 1 Chr. 22.14. The laborers were many, 17000, besides
Overseers with Hiram and cunning Artificers, 2 Chr. 2.14. The time spent in
building was long, 7 years notwithstanding all that help and preparation. All
which contributed to render it certainly a most admirable and glorious
structure. But here behold a more glorious than Solomon's, whose builder is God.
He does not only say (...), whole maker, that word being more general and
appliable to the whole Creation; but also (...) whose Artist (ad excellentiam
operis refertur, Zanchius) which sets forth in a peculiar manner the excellency
and beauty of this work. Indeed any immediate work of God is stupendous and
requires our wonder. What a rare Fabric is that great house we now dwell in,
which is of his making? How is the floor dressed with herbs, and flowers and
trees, and watered with Rivers and Springs and Seas? what a rich Canopy is hung
over the heads of Worms? The visible heavens are the Sieling of this house, and
the Stars like golden Studs or sparkling Diamonds adorn that Sieling. How vast
and pleasant a building, admirably beautified with astonishing workmanship in
every part, and fitted not only for our necessities but delight! If we view
man's body the mansion of his Soul, what mysteries of the divine skill are to be
found in the narrow compass thereof? it is not a rude lump or mass of clay
thrust together, but a piece of so rare an Architecture and composed with so
much curiosity and exactness, that no hand but Gods could make any thing to
equal it, and the most curious piles in the world are but heaps compared unto
it. If Nature has so much beauty in it, how beautiful a thing is glory? If God
has created such heavens as our eyes do see, for those that hate him, then
certainly eye has not seen, ear has not heard, nor has it entered into the
heart of man to understand, what those heavens are he has provided for those
that love him. The Moonlight of that Region will be brighter and more
illustrious than the Sun-light of this. All the luster and amazing gaudiness in
the visible world united into one object, compared unto it, will be more
unequal, than a Gloeworm to the Sun. An excellent prospect is given of it, Rev.
21. where the Holy Ghost makes a collection (as it were) of all the
excellencies scattered among the creatures, to give us the picture and legible
representation of this Celestial and Divine City, whose walls are of Jasper, v.
18. whose Gates are of pearls, v. 21. whose foundations are of precious stones,
ver. 19. whose streets are of pure gold, ver. 21. and if the outward structure
be so rich and stately, certainly the inner rooms are more magnificent and
glorious, the chiefest Hangings and Embroideries whereof are peace, ver. 25.
and glory, v. 26. and holiness, v. 27. God and the Lamb who are both its light
and temple, v. 22, 23. Its water a pure river of life, cap. 22.1. Its fruit,
the fruits of the tree of life, v. 2. The beauties of it are so many, they
cannot be defined, and so precious they cannot be valued: by two things we may
further judge of its excellencies. 1. That it is said to be a place of God's
preparation, ver. 16. of this Chap. not only made but prepared by him, which is
nothing but a Metaphorical expression of the greatness of the glory he has
ordained for it. Such entertainments as are prepared, are more sumptuous and
costly, than what men make upon a sudden. 2. That it is intended by him as the
place of his special residence and the habitation of the blessed, where he has
purposed to show the exceeding riches of his grace, and to give the world a
full proof of his bounty and glory; and certainly the preparations made upon
such designs are answerable to the Magnificence of such a Majesty. We read of
some that built a City and a Tower to get them a name, Genesis 11.4. And
Nebuchadnezzar says of Babylon, that he built it for the honor of his
Majesty, Dan. 4.30. Such structures built by Princes as it were for ostentation
to discover their wealth and greatness, want no expense nor exactness in the
contrivance. It is below the greatness and the goodness of God to boast of his
gifts above their real worth, or to flatter men into his service, with promises
of great matters, which when enjoyed will not answer their expectations. Here
his people mourn and bear the Cross, whilst professed enemies rejoice and wear
the Crown. God might therefore (with Reverence be it spoken) be ashamed to be
called their God (as the Apostle intimates, v. 16.) unless he had Rewards in
store for them, better than any the world can afford unto them. If then we
would give our minds the liberty to travel through the wide and distant corners
of the earth, and gather up all the glory and splendor they meet with to make
up a complete Idea of happiness, an Vtopia of delight, such as could have no
being or existency but in our fancy and imagination; yet would all this be
superlatively exceeded by those preparations that God has made for those that
love and fear him. The Italians have a Proverb, He that has not seen Venice
believes not the bravery of it, and he that has not lived there somewhile
understands it not; it is more true of Heaven, a man in speaking of it cannot
hyperbolize, but must entreat his hearers as the Orator does his Readers
concerning the worth of Lucius Crassus, Vt majus quid de eo quam quae scripta
sunt suspicarentur. That they would conceive of it much more than he is able to
express. No Rhetoric of men or Angels being able fully to represent it to us.
We shall say when we come to see and to enjoy it, what the Queen of the South
said of Solomon's Wisdom and Royalty, The one half, nay the hundredth part of
what is to be found there was never reported to us or conceived by us here. The
best draught will be so imperfect, that it comes infinitely short of the
transcendent excellency of the Original.

Abraham unto the duties of Mortification and Obedience, it being given as the
Reason of his self-denial mentioned in the former verses, which is pointed out
by the causal particle For prefixed to the words, For he looked, etc. his
expectation to enjoy it was the prime motive to his Obedience. In our race we
are to eye our Crown to encourage us in our Course, and we must still aim at
God's glory in our own Salvation; God was pleased to join these together, to
twist them in the same frame, and no man ought to put them asunder. Heaven is
the end of Faith and of good works, 1 Pet. 1.9. and it is essential to the end
to engender and cause desire, and for desire to quicken endeavor and provoke
the efficient unto action: those therefore would seem wiser than God, who deny
us the liberty of using such Motives. St. Paul was of a most ingenuous and free
spirit, and yet had he an eye to the prize of the high calling, Phil. 3.13, 14.
and Christ himself as man, did not disdain such rational encouragements, it was
a relief to his Soul to think of a Reward. It is mercenary to grumble for pay
in hand, to prefer present wages before the Inheritance; it is sinful to expect
the reward and neglect the work; to be Mercenarii not Operarii, to sever the
wages from the Duty; but they who carefully perform the one, may comfortably
expect the other. For why should our bountiful Lord back his Precepts with
Promises, and propound unto his servants such alluring Incentives, but to
encourage their Faith to close with them, and their endeavors to labor after
them? Christians then should dwell often upon the Meditation of these supernal
enjoyments. They should take a daily walk through the streets of the New
Jerusalem, mark well her Bulworks, and tell the Towers thereof, listen to the
melodious Harmony of the Heavenly Quire, view the order and employment of the
glorified Saints, and certainly it will have a great influence upon their
hearts, and be useful to them on several Accounts.

1. First and more generally, It may work in them a Conversation suitable to
such a place and condition; to labor that whether absent or present they may
be accepted of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.9. I know nothing that should have a stronger
Operation upon us than the consideration of those rich Advantages and ample
vouchsafements reserved in heaven for us. There is no Sword like this to behead
all our beloved lusts, and to cut off the very sinews of our darling
corruptions. Were there indeed no other world to enjoy God in, yet ought we not
while we have a being to employ it in his service? Heaven and earth obey his
will, though capable neither of reward for their obedience, nor of punishment
for their disobedience. Quench Hell and burn heaven, it will be our Duty
notwithstanding to love and fear our Maker. But what sweet Allurements, tender
Cords, irresistible persuasions are there to invite us to it, seeing the
everlasting doors of Mercy and of Glory stand open to embrace and to reward us?
How should this provoke us to endeavor after that righteousness to which so
excellent an estate is annexed? were it a sensual Paradise we expected, then we
might indulge our selves in our lusts, without bidding any defiance to our
hopes; but heaven is a pure and holy, as well as a glorious and blessed place;
and therefore ought we to purify our selves, 1 John 3.3. to deny all
ungodliness and wordly lusts, Tit. 2.12. to have our conversation in heaven,
Phil. 3.20. i. e. To converse and deport our selves (though we are on earth) as
Citizens of the Corporation that is above, whereby we may be meet to be
partakers of that Inheritance with the Saints in light, Col. 1.12.

2. Secondly and more particularly, this may arm Christians against the
pleasures of the world, and all the Temptations of prosperity. There is usually
more danger in the charms and smiles, than the frowns and threatenings of the
world; and more are destroyed by the Silken halter of pleasures, than the iron
chain of Affliction: but a glimpse of heaven apprehended and seriously laid to
heart, will darken and obscure all the glories of the world, and render its
temptations harmless and without a sting. Hence it was that Moses was enabled
to quit Pharaohs Court, and his hopes of inheriting the Crown of Egypt, the
recompense of reward to which he had a respect, Heb. 11.26. did eclipse the
luster, and outweigh in his impartial balance, the honor, and the profit, and
the pleasures of sin, which men of the world are apt to envy and admire. He
chose rather to embrace the poor and despised condition of Gods people, and to
walk in the stricter paths of piety and Religion, than to deprive himself of
endless felicities for the short and transitory enjoyment of a few carnal dying
pleasures and worldly trifles.

3. This may raise us above the Afflictions of the world and support our
Spirits under them. Our blessed Savior for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross that was laid upon him, Heb. 12.2. The foresight of these
comforts has so transported Christians, as to make them willing to embrace the
stake, kiss the Faggot, welcome the Cross and refuse deliverance. Holy Ignatius
in a burning zeal could say, fire, gallows, beasts, breaking of bones,
quartering of members, crushing of body, all the Discipline of hell and
torments of Devils, let them come upon me, so I may enjoy that Treasure in
Heaven. It is worth the having, though we must travel through a wilderness to
possess it, though we buy it at the hardest rate even with Martyrdom and
Persecution, it will not repent us of our suffering, nor shall we have cause to
complain of a hard bargain, when once we come to obtain it. For I reckon not
the sufferings of this world, worthy to be compared with the glory that shall
be revealed, Romans 8.18.

4. This may be a Cordial to fill the Soul with holy courage against the fear
of death. Though death in it self be unwelcome unto nature, yet if Faith makes
this glory to appear, that King of terrors will prove a messenger of the
greatest joy. The Heathens though they had but a dark view and a vain hope
concerning the happy state of Souls in their Elysian fields after death, were
to remarkably and passionately affected with it, that Socrates comforted
himself over his draught of poison with the meditation of that subject. How
vigorous then should the effects be that flow from the solid and strong
consolations of believers? should not this dispose them to a longing
expectation after their change? and cause them to groan earnestly to be clothed
upon with this house which is from heaven? 2 Cor. 5.2. and desirous (with St.
Paul) to be dissolved and to be with Christ? Phil. 1.23. To be removed out of
this land of Cabul or of dirt (as Hiram called the Cities that Solomon had
given him, 1 King. 9.13.) into that City of pearls there to be entertained in
the King of Heavens banqueting house, or Wine Celler, where the banner over
them will be love? even that love that cannot be fathomed, which was from
everlasting, and will extend to everlasting, and never shut up into hatred and
displeasure. That love which brought the Son of Gods love from Heaven to earth,
from the earth to a Cross, from the Cross to a grave, from the grave to Glory,
that he might provide Mansions, and prepare the way for Believers into the
possession of eternal Bliss and Glory in this City which has foundations whose
builder and maker is God.

I Have now finished my Meditations on the Text, and lest I should disappoint
your expectations according to the decent custom at such Solemnities; give me
leave, and lend me (I beseech you) a little more of your Patience, to add
something of this Venerable person and Reverend Brother, that is departed from
us, or rather gone before us out of this Valley of Tears, land of Mortality and
trouble, into that City of excellencies, immortal region of Rest and
Blessedness. It was one of his last desires, I should discharge this friendly
Office to him, and to perform the Will of the dead with an affectionate
kindness and a hearty zeal, I conceive to be an Act not only of Charity, but of
Justice too, and the last debt of Piety and Friendship we are able to pay unto
them.

As it was not his Practice, so I am confident it was not his desire, nor is it
my intention to use any flattering Eulogies on this occasion, or to raise a
Monument to his Fame upon a false and a rotten foundation; but to pay that
civil and true respect, which his worth, and usefulness, and comparative
eminency above the ordinary rank of us his Brethren of the Clergy while he
lived, requires from us toward his memory now he is dead; and were his Picture
to be drawn by his own Pencil and with his own hand, it would be more exact and
to the life, which I can but endeavor weakly to represent unto you according
to my meanness in duller colors and ruder delineations.

As for his descent and birth, it is so well known in this place, where (if I
be not much mistaken) he received his Being and Christianity, sucked in the
first, and breathed out the last air, that for me to mention it would be very
superfluous and insignificant. He had his education in his younger years in the
Schools of the Prophets, and at the feet of knowing Gamaliels, until he had
imbibed in a very competent measure those Arts and Sciences, and was admitted
unto those degrees as might adapt and qualify him for the Priesthood, and
render him capable of being fixed in the Orb of the Churh, wherein he did shine
very conspicuously, as a Star not of the least Magnitude.

He was both apt and able to reach, and when called thereunto especially in
public, discovered himself a workman that needed not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of Truth, and being richly furnished with those Ministerial
Abilities, of an useful memory, a good invention, a subact and solid judgment,
an ingenious style, and a ready elocution. He was not one of those clouds
without water carried about of winds, Jude 12. but filled with the rain of
divine and sound knowledge which dropped from him in warm and pleasant showers,
for the Edification of his Hearers in godliness and good works.

He was constant to his Principles, and held fast the faithful word, Tit. 1.9.
He held it fast, 1. in his judgment, for he was very Orthodox. 2. In his
Affections, for he was very zealous. 3. In his Practice, for he was very
conformable and obedient to the Discipline of the Church, and the Dictates of
his lawful Superiors according to the Primitive pattern, and rule of the
Gospel. He desired no other Coat of Arms (as you see) should be affixed to his
Hearse, but the Bible and the Common Prayer, which he thought sufficient to
guide the Christian in the way of Holiness and of Happiness, without any
additional Directories, new pretended lights, or Enthusiastical Raptures and
Illuminations.

God was pleased to expose him, together with other eminent persons (of whom
the world was not worthy) to that fiery Trial in the late and never to be
forgotten times, and to enable him to endure that Storm of Persecution and
severe usage from merciless and usurping Taskmasters with an even mind, and an
unshaken Soul. Athanasius the Great parted with his Bishopric, rather than he
would part with one syllable or Iota of the truth; and so did he part with his
Benefices and worldly preferments (and his loss upon that account we may all
know to be greatly considerable) to preserve his Conscience, and Religion, and
his Loyalty inviolable, and without Scar or Scandal.

But God who never utterly forsakes his suffering Servants, nor forgets their
labor of love and kindness to leave all, and cleave to him in times of
greatest difficulty, restored him among others to his Rights and Liberties, and
a double increase of blessings, and the freedom to profess and preach that
Religion wherein he was baptized, for which he suffered, and in which he died,
which as it ought to be, so I am persuaded was unto him the greatest joy, and
dearer than all his possessions.

And when the door through Gods mercy and signal Providence was once open, his
mouth was not shut, nor did he the work of the Lord negligently, but labored
to fulfill his duty in all the instances of it according to his opportunities,
though the success (as it too commonly happens) was not answerable to his pious
and sincere endeavors, through the restlesness and malice of Satan and his
instruments, that are busy and officious to sow their Tares in every corner of
Gods field, and to compass Sea and Land to gain Proselytes and to make them (if
possible) ten times more the children of Hell than themselves. It is said of
Melancthon being a young man, that he thought he was able to convince all
gainsayers, that it was not possible for them to resist the strength of reason
and evidence of truth, with which he should assault them; but he was quickly
forced to confess, the old Devil was too hard for young Melancthon. Men in
these days if in any, are so obstinate and perverse, so wedded to their proud
fancies, bewitched with the Sorceries of Schismatical Teachers, charmed with
the gaudiness of an hypocritical profession and a varnished piety, that our
Brother here might, and most of us in the Ministry may sit down and sadly
complain with the Prophet, Isa. 49.4. I have labored in vain, I have spent my
strength for naught, yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work (or
my reward) with my God; and this is the only comfort to support us against all
the indignities and affronts of an ungrateful world, of absurd and unreasonable
men, and to encourage us to proceed in the discharge of our duty, and to
endeavor above all things (as our Brother here did) to adorn our Doctrine and
Profession with a good Life and a sober Conversation.

In that respect he was in a very great measure free (I suppose) from the
Censures of the most Critical, even of such as can espy the mote that is in
their brothers eye, but quietly brook the beam that is in their own. He was
endued with an exemplary Temperance in Meat and Drink which he used to satisfy
the needs only, and not the lusts of the flesh. He was not of an unsociable and
morose temper, but always circumspect in his greatest freedoms, and careful not
to transgress the bounds of a virtuous gravity, and a Christian moderation.

His Temperance was attended with, and the parent of another signal virtue in
him, and that was Prudence, which did eminently appear in all his Transactions.
As in the Government of the Tongue, and a constant wariness of Speech, not
speaking to or of any person what might be offensive and disobliging, or an
occasion of distaste, in wading successfully through many affairs of great
difficulty and of great moment, which might easily have oppressed an indiscreet
and unwary undertaker. In improving his Portion which he being his Fathers
second Son, I suppose was not very great, into a rich and ample estate: In
Matching his Son into two Families of good Quality and of good Fortunes, but of
greater Integrity and Reputation in the Country -- And having mentioned his
Son, I think it not unseasonable to take notice of his Paternal Inclinations
toward him. He was his only Son, and the Son of his love, upon him his Care
and Affection were wholly centred, insomuch that having continued in a
Matrimonial estate but a very short time, and being when bereaved of his
Consort in the heat and vigor of his Age, yet such was his mastery over his
passions, and so great his Indulgence to his Son, that he deposited all
conjugal intendments and led a single life, notwithstanding the household cares
and intervenient troubles that Condition without an assistant must of necessity
bring upon him. And from this one surviving Branch he had the great
satisfaction (before his eyes were closed) to receive and see the fair and
multiplied pledges of a numerous and a hopeful posterity.

That Portion which by Gods blessing upon his Diligence and wise management he
did plentifully enjoy, he did expend and dispose in a commendable and fitting
way, being not like Isreal's empty Vine, bringing forth fruit unto himself. In
his expenses and entertainments he was gentile and free, and yet frugal, not
addicted to the extremes either of a sordid parsimony or of a vain profuseness
and foolish prodigality. To my knowledge he was upon occasions offered, very
ready to contribute to the relief of the necessitous, and to promote Charitable
designs. To his Parishioners he was loving, and beloved of them. To his Tenants
and those with whom he dealt, he was indulgent and tender, not rigorously
pressing them to the inconveniences of bad Markets, but forbearing long and
often with those that were unable, and if they complained or he conceived their
bargain to be too hard, he would return some part of what was due for their
encouragement and ease. This I have received from some of his Parishioners and
others, persons of understanding and credit, and free from any designs, who
have expressed with sorrow upon this account their resentment of so great a
loss, and whose testimony weighs more with me, than any uncertain Reports and
uncharitable Censures, which are apt to misinterpret the best actions, to blast
and sully the fairest Reputations. There were several of his indigent
neighbors that owed him at the time of his death several small portions of
money, which put together amounted to a very considerable sum, for the
discharge of all which he has given a very punctual and strict command, and to
63. aged people he has ordered a good provision to be made of Cloth, of meat
and of money, upon this day of his Enterment, which I doubt not but is fully
performed according to his pious intention, to Gods glory, and the seasonable
supply of their needs.

He was always of a very healthy constitution, it was with him as with Moses,
Deuteronomy. 34.7. His eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated: his memory was
fresh, his judgment serene and perfect, his complexion vigorous and lively,
without any infirmity that might render his life a burden unto him, or any
symptom that might threaten to him so unexpected and sudden a change.

But when it pleased God to visit him with this last distemper, which was
neither violent nor of long continuance, he soon apprehended it to be the
messenger of his dissolution; and therefore he presently set his house, and
estate, and his Soul in Order to a quiet and undisturbed departure. When his
judicious Physician came unto him, whom he admitted to be sent for, and whose
prescriptions he observed, for the satisfaction of his Relations more than his
own, he desired him to deal heartily and freely with him, and truly to discover
his Apprehensions of him, professing that he had in his thoughts already parted
with the world, and was not afraid to die; that if God should not think fit to
restore unto him here the voice of joy and health, he submitted entirely to his
pleasure, in confidence that through the Merits of his Savior, when this
earthly Tabernacle should be dissolved, there was prepared for him a house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

He behaved himself during the time of his Sickness very piously and
penitently, and desired every day the attendance of an affectionate Brother the
Minister of this Parish to assist him in his Devotions; and upon Friday last he
received his Viaticum, the Holy Eucharist with great Humility, and ardent
expressions of his Faith, and Repentance, and Charity to all men, and a renewed
self-resignation into God's hands, and a perfect detestation of the horrible
corruptions of the Church of Rome, both in her Doctrine and Practice, touching
the Nature and the Use of that Blessed Sacrament. And having an inward
Sentiment, a Prophetic instinct (as it were) of the approach of his last
enemy, death, he prepared himself to entertain that encounter (which he did
accordingly) with an undaunted Spirit, and a Christian Resolution. Not many
hours, I suppose 2 or 3 before the Fatal Minute, he ordered his Grand children
to be brought unto him, his sorrowful Son then attending in the room, and in a
grave and pathetical manner (as old Jacob did before he died) he imparted to
them the best and last Legacy which he could bequeath and had in reserve for
them, his Fatherly and Priestly Benediction. He retained the benefit of his
Intellectuals and outward Senses entire unto the last, and when this earthly
house of his Tabernacle was dissolving, his Soul quitted it without any groan,
or commotion or amazing circumstance, and stole away in an easy and a quiet
expiration. His Lamp is now extinguished, and he is gone unto his rest, where
we may comfortably hope he has been entertained by that chief Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls, with an Euge bone serve, well done thou good and faithful
servant, enter thou into thy masters joy. Unto which state of Joy and
Blessedness God Almighty bring us all, through his Mercy and the Merits of
Jesus Christ our Savior: To whom with the Father and Holy Spirit, be ascribed
of Men and Angels, all Honor and Glory, Thanksgiving and Praise, both now and
for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

