A GLASS For the People of New England, IN WHICH They may see themselves and
Spirits, and if not too late, Repent and Turn from their Abominable Ways and
Cursed Contrivances:

That so the Lord God may turn away his Wrath, which he will bring upon them
(if they Repent not) for their Blasphemies against himself, and for all the
Murders and Cruelties done to his tender People, ever since they usurped
Authority to Banish, Hang, Whip, and Cut Off Ears, and Spoil the Goods of
Dissenters from them in Religious Matters, while themselves disown
Infallibility in those things.

By S. G.

Man in the Pride of his Heart, will not seek after God; but when his Pride is
sta^ned, and his Lofty Look and Mind brought low, then may be he will, though
many times it proves too late.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

A GLASS For the People of New England, In which they may see themselves and
Spirits, and if not too late Repent and Turn from their Abominable Ways and
Cursed Contrivances.
THey may remember, that themselves were here accounted Dissenters from the
Episcopal Worshippers; and may be, many of them, in that Day could not in
Conscience Comply with the Prelate then in power; so took their Flight in that
Day, in which they were called to bear a Testimony against that they saw to be
Evil in that Day and Time.

But when they came to New England, they (I mean the worst and basest-spirited
of them, which indeed were most in Number) fell to Bani^h their Fellows, which
could not bow to their gilded Calf of Will Worship, which in short time grew a
great Bull, with Horns to push and gore, even to the Gallows, those that could
not worship the Beast; notwithstanding the Lord raised up a Testimony in many
of their Neighbors and Inhabitants of the same Country, who witnessed for the
God of Heaven, against their Ways, Doctrines and Worships, some of which they
banished in a barbarous manner; others they evilly entreated and accused them
of Heresy, Conspiracy, Muteny, Faction, and what not, to hide their Deceit and
cover their Persecution withal. And to the end they may come to a Sight and
Sense of their Abominations, I am willing to set a few things in order before
them, and not only before them, but also that all others may hear, and learn,
and fear, and do no more so wickedly, lest the Anger of the just God break
forth as a Flame, as it is now happened among that persecuting Generation in
New England. So that all may see against whom and what they have set
themselves, and vaunted themselves at all times, even against the Appearance of
the Lord Jesus Christ, that he should not appear to stain their Pride, in which
they prided themselves above all Humanity or Tenderness, either to Learned or
Unlearned, Male or Female, Old or Young (if any questioned what their Hireling
Priests and Smiting Prophets said) they must be banished, slandered and named
with reproachful Names at best; but how much worse used, many can witness, and
their own Cruelty manifest.

Many were the Abuses committed by them, on those that went over on the same
Account as themselves did, and had as good a Right to live there as any amongst
them, although they banished them, by what Power, they best know that have seen
their Patent; but I Will leave that a while, and come to their proceeding against
John Wheelwright, one of the Ministers of the Country, whom they charged with
False Doctrine, and a Mover of Sedition, and what not, as you may see at large
in a Book in Manuscript, in which is all their Proceeding, too much here to
insert, I Will only give the Reader some Passages, by which it may be easily
understood, against what they set themselves, and opposed.

But I may first give a hint at the manner of their Work; J^hn Wheelwright
preached of a Light in man, and of a Spirit in man, at which New England was in
an Uproar, and much troubled (as Herod and all Judea was when they heard of
Christ Jesus (who is the ^ight) coming into the World. So a Jezebel's Fast, as
you shall see anon was proclaimed, under pretense to seek God in this Day of
Trouble; the Fast was kept ^n the 16th Day of the 11th Month, 1636. and this
Pestilent Man (as they deemed him) John Wheelwright, must preach at B^ston,
before the Wolves in Sheeps Clothing; and indeed, however it has been or may
be with him since, the man then spoke and preached many sound Truths; I Will here
insert some of his Sermon, and let the Reader judge.

He exhorted the Brethren and Sisters, To get Christ into their Hearts, that
they may be happy; and exhorts his Brethren and Sisters in the Name of God, To
endeavor to bring Christ into the Hearts of People, and then (says he) you
shall make the Church and your selves happy.

And also said, That as soon as Christ comes into the Soul, he makes the
Creature nothing; and (said he) in the Gospel Works of Sanctification must be
pressed no other way, but as they grow from the Root, Christ Jesus; for it is
he that works in you both to will and to do, of his own good Pleasure: and
(said he) this is the Covenant of Grace, I will forgive their Sins, and write
my Law in their Hearts and Inward Parts, and that is the Gospel in which the
Spirit of God is conveyed, etc.

And says he, We must be Meck and Lowly, as Christ was lowly, and content to
receive all from the Father, even so must we be meek and lowly, and content to
receive all from Christ: If Duties be pressed any other way, they will be
Burdens, that neither we nor our Fathers were or will be able to bear;
therefore, says he, if we mean to keep Jesus Christ, we must keep open this
Fountain, and held forth this Light.

And told them in that S^rmon, That the Spirit of Christ was no Smiting Spirit
(and so far John Wheelwright in this place) with much more, honest and true
things, that were then given him to declare, and which indeed he then even in
the midst of Woolflsh Professors did boldly and valiantly declare, and as
honestly and nobly stood unto in your Court, when and where you Arraigned him,
Judged him and Condemned him, but could not disprove his Doctrine, though he
and others often challenged both Priests and Professors, from highest to
lowest; and all or most you had to say, was, That it was contrary to the rest
of the Ministers, and therefore was Seditious and Mutinous.

But because I would be fair, and not wrest their words nor meanings, I Will
rehearse some of their own Sayings in open Court against Wheelwright's
Doctrine, exactly as I read in a Book, as aforesaid, and having also some
Knowledge of things done in that Place of N^w-England. At a Court at Boston,
1636. consisting of Henry Vane Governor, Twelve Magistrates, Twelve Priests
and Thirty Three Deputies; John Wheelwright was brought into the Court, and
accused for preaching on the Fast Day a Heretical and Seditious Sermon, tending
to Mutiny and Disturbance. Wheelwright bids them prove it by Scripture, and so
did the Governor and many others, who saw their Wickedness, and abhorred and
declared against their Proceedings; and many Members in the Court gave in their
Testimony, That his Doctrine was true, and according to God and Scriptures; and
so said John Cotton, one of the Twelve Judges of the Matter, and a chief man
for Learning, as they accounted him. But so mad was the greatest part of them,
that they would proceed against Wheelwright and his Doctrine, right or wrong;
but he would not answer to their ensnaring Questions, but still offered them to
prove his Doctrine by Scriptures.

And now, to make good my word, I Will give the Reader their own words in Court.

And first let us hear Collicott, one of the Witnesses against him in Court
(says Collicott) His Use in his Sermon was, to put a Difference between a
Covenant of Works, and a Covenant of Grace, and I do conceive, that he did
drive against the things now in question. And for the Light that is revealed by
the Spirit, he did plainly and punctually say, That in that Case there was
nothing to be seen but the Glorious Light of the Spirit breaking in upon the
Soul in an absolute Promise. So far Collicott.

But let us hear Spencer, that great Orator, and New England Church Member; may
be he will be more to the Purpose then his Brother Collicott: Well, come on,
Spencer; let us hear what thou can say against John Wheelwright.

Spencer: Wheelwright teaches, that the Knowledge of our Sanctification, as
well as our Justification, is only by Faith in Christ; and that in the ^ovenant
of Grace nothing is revealed but Jesus Christ, and his Righteousness freely
given to the Soul, and the Knowledge of it comes by Faith: And this, says
Spencer, is contrary to the Doctrine preached in New England; for, says
Spencer, it is commonly taught in New England, That a man may prove his
Justificaiion by his Sanctification. And so far Spencer in this place.

Well, hear John Endicott: This is concluded a False Doctrine, because it is a
Doctrine against all the Ministers of the Country. But here John Endicott told
a Notorious Lie in open Court; for sure he owned that John Cotton was a
Minister, and if so, hear what he declared in open Court.

Cotton: Brother Wheelwright 's Doctrine was according to God, in the Poin^s
Controverted, and wholely, and altogether; and nothing did I hear alleged
against the Doctrine proved by the Word of God. And so far John Cotton, with
much more, which he then spoke to allay the Heat of their Raging Spirits, but
all would not do; for when they were so much Challenged to prove by Scripture
the Doctrine False, which Wheelwright had del^vered, or else to acquit him,
they found out another way to bring their Wicked Ends to pass.

And said Spencer: The Matter in hand is not the Doctrine, whether it be true
or false; but the Question is, Whether or not Mr. Wheelwright has stirred up
Mutiny in the Country, and cast Aspersion upon the Ministers? And the
Ministers, I mean eleven or twelve, were as mad as who was made, and as
violent as any in this Matter; for which, and such like Causes and Outrages,
committed by them, both in New England, and also here in England, the Lord, by
sundry Ways and in diverse Manners, has pleaded with some of them, and some
are hardened against a Day of Judgment, which certainly will overtake them in
this Life, or in the Life and Judgment that is to come.

But that which is most to be lamented, that those which once had a Good
Testimony in their Hearts and Mouths for God and his Light and spiritual
Appearance; and they not being faithful and constant to that which was made
manifest and committed to them, its even happened to them according to the
Saying of the Lord God, by the Mouth of his Prophet, That in the Day in which a
Righteous Man turns from his Righteousness, and does wickedly, all the
Righteousness that he has done shall be forgotten, and in the Sin which he
does he shall surely dye the Death.

And so I Will leave John Cotton and John Wheel wright and others to that of God
in their Consciences, if any of them be in the Body, as for them that are out
of the Body, they are gone to their long Home.

And so you Professors of New England, who are not yet wholely blind, may see
what your Priests, Rulers and Church Members have banded themselves against for
this Thirty or Forty Years.

Even against God, who is a Spirit, and who is Light in all his Appearances, in
either Son or Daughter, before ever a Quaker came amongst you: So the God of
Heaven and Earth is clear of all your Blood, having raised up Testimony after
Testimony, even ever since you set up your Inventions, and denied the Light.

The next Piece of Wickedness I am to mind you of, is your barbarous Action
committed against Ann Hutchinson, whom you first imprisoned, then banished and
so exposed her to that desolate Condition, that she fell into the Hands of the
Indians who murdered her with her Family except one Child, and after that made
a notorious Lie on the destroyed Woman, the which one of their Priests put in
Print, and another of that Tribe, Samu^l Clark Priest of London, taking the Lie
out of his Brother Wells his short Story, and must needs put it into his Book
called, God's Judgments against Heresy, in which he also scandalized Mary Dyer
and Midwife Hawkins, all which were known to be Women of honest Lives and
Conversations, only protested against their false Church and Worships, for
which they suffered in their Names and Estates, and some lost their Lives for
their Testimony sake: For Mary Dyer they banished and hanged at Boston, for her
Testimony against them, which she was moved of the Lord to bear amongst them.

But because you Professors have banished, and so been a means of destroying a
Woman and her Family, as before, and have covered your selves by saying, she
held about Thirty Monstrous Heretical Opinions, but have not that I can find
laid down so much as One of them, for Indifferent Persons to judge.

So I may do a little of that Work for you and others, by which it may be seen
what the Ground of your Quarrel was; and I will do it in short, and honestly,
as I found it in her Letter, to one Mr. Leveret as she writ him in her Answer
to his 1st. Month 1646.

It seems by that Letter which Leveret sent to Ann Hutchinson he termed her
Haughty Jezebel, and said she was a Railer and Reviler, and such like Terms and
Names, and yet in the same Letter asked her what was become of the Light, she
once shined in, in their Parts?

And now Ann Hutchinson, to that Letter of Leveret's, If it were the True
Light, in which you say I did once shine in, I am sure the Author thereof, and
the Maintainer of it is God, and it shall break forth more and more unto the
perfect Day, and when I was with you it discovered the best Light in your self
to be Darkness, as your self confessed to me in your own Parlour.

And whereas you say I speak great swelling Words of Vanity, that Scripture is
fulfilled in your false Teachers, who follow the Way of Balaam and Bozer, And
that Water holds out the Spirit, John 7. 38, 39. And Christ Jesus came by this
Water or Spirit, Mat. 1. 18. And hereby we shall know the Spirit of Antichrist,
because he confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh. And as to
that in Rev. 12. which you say must be meant of Constantine, and not of Christ,
being brought forth in the Gentile Church, then the Woman that brought forth
Constantine must be crowned with Twelve Stars.

But your Church standing in the City Order, by your own Confession must needs
be one of those Cities of the Nations, which the Lord has said should fall,
Rev. 16. 19. And if what you called Railing or Reviling, were a Truth of God,
acted by him through me, then you have called the Spirit of God a Railer and
Reviler. And so far Ann Hutchinson, with much more in her Answer to Leveret's
Letter of the 1st. Month 1646. after they had imprisoned her, and banished her.

So Reader if thou have an Understanding of what the Woman held forth, thou may
soon conclude what the Thirty Heretical Opinions were, that so much enraged
New England Professors to imprison, banish, and so (in a Sense) murder her and
her Family by the wicked Hands of the Indians.

But how shall these People hide their Wickedness from the simple-hearted, that
they should not see their Wickedness, and cry out against their Cruelty? well,
I Will show thee honest Inquirer, how they hide themselves and the Innocent Blood.

The Woman before mentioned having been imprisoned and there by the Priests and
Professors pumpt and sifted to get something against her* laying their Snares
to entrap her, and having so done take their Opportunity when her Husband and
Friends were absent, as it is said, and examined her in the forepart of the
Day, and banished her in the after-part.

Notable quick Work! so she goes by Water with many others that perceived they
must go to Pot next, and providentially fell with Road-Island, and there they
made a Cave or Caves, and in them lived until the cold Winter was past, in
which time it was known to the Professors, where they were, and that they had
bought the Island of the Indians; and the Professors began to stir and
endeavor to bring the Island within the Compass of their Patent, so the poor
molested Woman, it is like let in Fear, and thought she would go far enough from
their Reach, so going Southward to seek a Place to settle upon, where she and
her Family might live in Quietness, fell upon a Piece of Land that was in
Controversy between the Dutch and the Natives, and the Natives being in a Heat
came upon them, and were the Executioners of what the New England Priests,
Magistrates and Church Members were an Occasion of, through their wicked and
cruel proceeding, in forcing them to flee from their Rage and Fury.

And because I promised thee to tell thee honest Inquirer, how they hide and
cover their Wickedness, I Will do it by rehearsing what Priest Wells a chief
Actor in this matter, printed in his Book entitled W^lls's short Story (page
44.) as Samuel Clark in his lying Book quotes his Brother W^lls for his Author,
of this and such like most Notorious Lies, of which he prints thus, Ann
Hutchinson, Mary Dyer and Midwife Hawkins, see Clark's Examples page 249. and
they have been known to be honest Women, and such as were of good Report, and
nev^r accounted either Witches or such Persons, as these two Priests and
Brethren in Wickedness would have People believe, that so their Wickedness
might be undiscovered.

Now here Priest Clark after he had writ and printed a most cursed Lie of Mary
Dyer, whom they banished and afterward hanged at Boston, as also of Midwife
Hawkins: Says he, About the same time, and in the same place, One Mrs.
Hutchinson, who held about Thirty Monstrous and Heretical Opinions, whereof you
have a Catalogue set down by the same Author, page 59. And growing big with
Child, and toward the Time of her Labor, at last broughtforth Thirty
Monstrous Births, or thereabouts, some bigger and some lesser, some of one
Shape and some of another, few of any perfect Shape, none of all of humane
Shape: This Mrs. Hutchinson was first vanish^d by the Magistrates of
New England, into Rhoad Island for her Heresies, out not staying long there,
she removed with all her Family, her Daughter and her Children into the Dutch
Plantation to a Place called Hell Gate, where the Indians set upon them, and
slew her and her Family, her Daughter and her Daughter's Husband, with all
their Children save only one that escaped.

So here is the Priests and Professors Cover, and they wipe their Mouths, and I
warrant they would by saying the Indians committed this Murder be thought clear
of this Innocent Blood.

So Reader thou may see the Rage and Envy of this professing Generation, for
they banished, imprisoned this tenderly bred Woman in or toward Winter, and
what with Fears and Tessings to and fro the Woman miscarried, upon which they
grounded their abominable Untruth; many Witnesses might be produced to prove
this, and to disprove their abominable frequently told Slanders, and also
printed by Priests and New England Professors, and their Consederates here in
England.

I might i^sert that other Story which the same Lie makers made of Mary Dyer,
and Midwife Hawkins, but it is not worth while, as to his Description of a
horrid Monster, wherein their Lies were apparent to many sober People.

And now let me mind you of your abominable Wickedness committed by whipping
Obadi^h Holems the Baptist with forty Stripes save one, it seems the old Father
of all Whippers about Religion, loads his whipping Children in one Way, and
sets them their deceitful Bounds, and may be he and they his Children may bring
Scripture and Example for Forty Stripes save one.

But why would you not dispute the Point with Obadiah, when he so fairly
offered it at your torturing Place, and the man you may remember brought his
Bible to your Whipping Post to prove his Principle and Practice by Scripture,
and disprove your Principles and Practices by the same; but your Godly
Magistrate, as you called him, told him that was no Place to dispute in, or
Words to that purpose, and so you whipped him in cruel manner forty Stripes save
one: And his Fellow that was with him an aged honest man, you whipped also in
cruel manner, and would have whipped Clark as you said, had you not had Money
given you: But where did you learn in Law or Gospel to take Money for not
whipping them that deserved Whipping? Behold your base Dunghill Spirits in which
you act!

And you may remember, that when one of your own Members or Brethren, though
not in Cruelty, namely John Spur, beheld your Barbarous proceedings, and the
man's then Christian like Deportment under the Tyranny of your Tormenter, who
in violent manner in the Face of the People, after your Jezabel. Lecture at
Boston, gave him Forty Stripes save one upon his naked Body, the which John
Spur beholding, was moved with Pity, and in the Brokenness and Tenderness of
his Heart could do no less then take the man by the Hand, and gave thanks in
the Man's behalf to God, who had carried him through so great an Exercise, with
so much Joy and Patience, for which John Spur was sent for to your Seat of the
Whore and Beast at Boston, and there was sined for giving Thanks to God, as
aforesaid, the Sum of Forty Shillings; and this was for taking the Man by the
Hand, and giving Thanks to God, after he had been whipped Forty Stripes save one.

So all People may see what blind Zeal will hurry Professors on to do, drink
Blood, and desire to drink more and more, and thirst more and more after Blood,
as will in time be manifest to all sober People. Oh drunken Professors and
Talkers of God Christ and Ordinances! but possess nothing but Cruelty and
Deceit. How are you made drunk with the Cup of Abomination? What more
abominable, then for men to rent and tear the Flesh off the Backs of Men and
Women like Dogs, and all about Religion, and yet say no infallible spirit to be
known now adays, so then they themselves may be wrong as well as any.

Oh how have these Professors like Dragons smote with Head and Tail (the false
Hireling Priests, the Head, and the Earthly Power the Tail) at all Appearances
of God ever since they usurped Authority, never given nor granted them by God
nor man, witness their Pattent given them by the King; repugnant to such Cruel
Proceedings against tender Consciences And how have you vented your Folly, and
made your Madness manifest, by your base reproachful Language, commonly vented
like Floods after them that could not submit to your Bundle of Will Worship,
calling that good Island which took up, as I may say, your Banished, and
yielded to them through the Blessing of God its Increase, which you commonly
would call it, Rogues Island, and in my Hearing some of your Members commonly
would say that none but Whores and Rogues went thither; A base envious Term and
Name, by which the Rancor of your Spirits does appear to all sober People.

Oh the exceeding Cruelty that appears in your Hearts, and because I would have
you sensible of your own Iniquity and mourn under it, I may set one thing more
before you in order, and that is this.

When, or soon after you had made your Decree, that none should be received to
inhabit within your Jurisdict^on, but such as should be allowed by some of the
Magistrates, thinking thereby to keep up your invented B^ilding, and Babylonish
Tower of Will worship: And how bountifully has the Lord handed forth to you,
by raising up Testimony after Testimony against all your unequal Proceedings,
and I may here rehearse one before named, (viz.) John Wheelwright.

First, Says he, This Law does leave these weighty matters of the Commonw^alth
of receiving or rejecting such as come over to the Approbation of Magistrates,
and suspend those things to the Judgment of Man, whereas the Judgment is
God's, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. This is made a Groundwork of gross Popery, Priests and
Magistrates are to judge, but it must be according to God's Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 9,
10, 11. That Law which gives that (without Limitation) which is proper to God
cannot be just.

Secondly, Because here is Liberty given by this Law to expel and reject those
which are most Eminent Christians, if they suite not with the Disposition of
the Magistrates, whereby it will come to pass, that Christ and his Members will
find worse Entertainment amongst us, then Abraham and Isaac did amongst the
Philistines, then Jacob amongst the Sechemites, then Let amongst the Sodomites,
then the Israelites amongst the Egyptians; These all gave leave to God's People
to sit down amongst them, though (they) could not claim Right as the King's
Subjects may now -- That Law, the Execution whereof may make us more cruel and
tyrannical over God's Children then Pagans and Sodomites, therefore it must
needs be most wicked and sinful.

Thirdly, This Law does cross many Laws of Christ, Christ would have us to
render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar 's, Mat. 12. 11. but this Law
will not give unto the King's Majesty his Right of planting some of his
Subjects amongst us except they please them.

Christ bids us not to forget to entertain Strangers, Heb. 13. 2. But by this
Law we must not entertain for any continuance of time such Strangers as the
Magistrates like not, though they be never so gracious, allowed of by God and
Good Men, except we will forfeit them our whole Estates, it may be and much
more then our Estates come unto.

Fourthly, Christ commands us to do good unto all, but especially unto them of
the Household of Faith. Gal. 6. 10. this Law gives Liberty to do hurt unto all,
especially unto them of the Household of Faith. Many other Laws there are of
Christ, says Wheelwright, which this Law dasheth against, and therefore is
most wicked and sinful. And so far John Wheelwright in his Testimony against
your Law or ungodly Decree, which Sayings of his are come to pass, and you have
exceeded Philistines, Egyptians and Sodomites, so it may be truly said who is
like unto you, Priests, Magistrates and Professors of New England, in Cruelty,
Boldness and Presumption?

Oh that you would be stirred up to search what the matter is that the Lord is
so displeased with you! it seems to me and many more, he is making you an
Example to many Nations, and I hope, and do believe it will be for good to many
in these Kingdoms of England, Scotland, Ireland and Holland, with all their
Territories, when they shall hear, behold and consider what the Lord is doing*
and suffering to come to pass upon a People that made a great show, and a great
talk of God, Christ and Ordinances, but in the very time of this great talk and
profession, brought forth more Oppression then Egypt and Sodom, and have indeed
done worse then all the Nations round about, and therefore thou must drink of
the Cup of terrible Amazement and Astonishment, poured out by a Just Hand, as
from God upon thy Inhabitauts, Oh New England!

And the Lord God grant for his Mercy sake, that the Inhabitants of our poor
Lands of England, Scotland and Ireland, may be warned, that so they may no
longer follow your pernicious Ways, and bring like punishment upon themselves
as you, oh people of New England have done, by provoking a Longsuffering God,
who has indeed born long your unrighteous Ways and Doings.

Oh how has the Father and Author of all Persecution about Religion, and your
deceitful Hearts fitted you for a Day of Slaughter! How are your young, as well
as your old men become a Scorn and Derision in Cities and Countries! and are
not the Fruits of the corrupt Tree found among you? Is not Drunkenness, Gaming,
Cheating and Cozening found among you, that it is even become a By Word, There
is a New England Cheat, take heed of a New England Cheat.

And how ashamed are your profane and Professors, to hear one tell them of
their and your pranks! they cannot endure to be told of your Laws; to whip,
banish, cut off Ears, spoil Goods and hang at last, Dissenters from them in
Religion, while themselves say it is a great and damnable Heresy to hold
Infallibility in the things of God, and that a man must prove his Just^fication
by his Sanct^fication, and that there are Delusions in the Witness of the
Spirit, and Sanctification must be the Judge of the Witness of the Spirit; and
that the Seal of the spirit is not the holy Ghost in us, and the Witness of the
spirit is only mediate, and not immediate; and to say that Christ is our
sanctification, is a damnable Doctrine.

And do you not say, that God b^und himself in an everlasting Covenant of Grace
to the legi^timate Seed of them that be in Church Covenant, and that Children
are left under an everlasting Covenant, by leaving them under Church covenant;
and that there is a running over of Grace from the Father to the Children in
the Way of Church covenant; and that Children by Church covenant, are born in
an Eternal Covenant. See the Elders Tenent in the Bay, with much more confused
Stuff too long to write o^ read unless it were better.

But admit all this were as true, as it is false and blasphemous, would any
sober Man or Woman think this to belong or appertain to that whipping Church,
and Church Members of New England?

Let them lay aside their long Prayers, and then tell me what is left among
them, that will either enchant the Eye or Ear of any sober Man? for are they
not as Earthly minded, as Proud spirited as any, as Envious as any, and yet
would be accounted the Members of the Church of Christ.

Oh how are you yet pulling down as with a Cart*Rope the Judgment begun in
your Land and Country! witness your newfound ways to torture and tear like
Dogs the Flesh of the Conscientious, who are clear of your Calamities, in the
Sight of God, though it may be some of their Earthly Houses may fall, by the
Hands of the barbarous Indians, as many have fallen by the Hands of barbarous
Professors; but I say, they are clear of those Calamities, and not at all
engaged in your Quarrels which you have brought upon your selves, through your
Pride and unequal Dealing with Dissenters in matters of Religion, and by your
treacherous Practices toward the Indians, all which cries very loud for
Vengeance, however you may think to hide your selves with Flattering Printed
Papers, yet your Filthiness does appear and cannot be hid.

And you have now found out a new way to torture the Conscientious People
(viz.) your Gantelop and Whip, with which you whip an Hundred Stripes. Oh how
are you grown in Cruelty! from forty Stripes save one, and two Pounds Fine, to
an hundred Stripes, and five Pounds Fine, and this with your old Laws new
revived, you have got up at Boston to torture those that are no ways engaged in
your Quarrel (as I said before) and punishmen^s which God has certainly
brought upon you, for all your Abominations.

But through and over all the Cruelty of your Gantelop the Lord has born a
little one, and though you had Power to hale this mortal Body through your many
whipping professors and profane, yet the Testimony lives ^ver all, and is a
sweet Savor unto God, to whom be praises forever, and evermore,

And I hope all that fear the Lord, both small and great will be found in the
same Testimony, and to it stand to the praise and glory of God, who is now
requiring at your Hands the Blood of his innocent Servants and Martyrs, slain
by that murdering spirit, which in Persecutors has lived, reigned and acted,
from the Day of righteous Abel, unto this Day.

And now you would pick a new Quarrel with the Quaker^, and say, They set their
Posts by God's Posts, and their Thres: holds to God's Thresholds, and you are
troubled that man should join his Posts to God's Posts, and his Thresholds to
God's Thresholds, and that in the open Meetings of the Quakers, whose damnable
Dectrines and Blasphemies provoke divine Jealousy.

But you have not t^ld us what those pernicious Tenants are that are preached
in the Quakers Meetings, no more then you did of Ann Hutchinson whom you
banished for her Testimony, as has been hinted.

But to whom should man join his Posts and Thresholds, if he have any to join,
as you say ye have? I hope none will be so blind and ignorant as to set their
Posts or Threshold to the Devil's Post, and the Professors of New-England's
Posts, viz. their whipping Post or Gallows Posts, no nor yet join their
Threshold to t^eir Goal Thresholds, nor their Bridwel. Threshold, devilish
slaughter house Thresholds, over which, and in which, Professors and Talkers of
God and Christ do and have haled over Lambs and Followers of Christ, and in
which they crop their Ears, and out of which they bring them in their Wills and
Madness, and banish, whip and hang them in their blind Zeal.

And you can take God's Posts which he through the Operation of his Everlasting
and Eternal Spirit has fitted and prepared for his holy Building, and hang
them upon the Devil's Posts (viz.) your Gallows posts, and set them to your
whipping-posts, and sport your selves with tearing and rending their naked
Backs, and Arms, and tender Breasts of Men and Women with forty Stripes save
one, and sometimes an hundred. Oh bloody Butchers of Professors! how do you
stinck of Blood, of Innocent Blood. And now after, and for all these
Abominations which you have committed against the Lord God, and his Appearance
in his Sons and Daughters, Servants and Handmaids, upon whom he has in these
later Days poured out of his Spirit, according to the Scriptures and the
Promise of God, and that upon some amongst your selves, which called to you to
mind the Light and spirit, and its Teaching, and also cried out against your
Idolatrous Practices, and confused Principles; and against your smiting
Spirits, and that before that reproachful Name of Quaker got up, all which you
have evilly entreated, banishing some, and whipping others, before the Quakers
were sent from God to call you to Repentance, and Amendment of Life, that you
might not dye in your Sins, but these you most Evilly Entreated.

And now the Lord for his own Elect's Sake is risen to take Vengeance, and make
Inquiry after Innocent Blood, which your proud and earthly Hearts have drunk
in, and was hid through Deceit.

And the Lord God is making you, as I may say, as a Sign to many Nations, that
shall coolly, and seriously hear and consider what you have professed, and what
brought forth; and now you would fain hide your selves a little longer, and
say, The Quaker is the chief Cause of our Misery, and he joins his Thresholds
to G^d's Thresholds, and his Posts to God's Posts, and that in the open
Meetings of the Quakers, whose blasphemous Principles, etc.

But ye have not printed their Principles that ye call so provoking Divine
Jealousy, no more then you printed Williams his Principles whom you banished,
nor yet John Wheelwright's Principles, which set the Priests and Professors in
New England in an Uproar in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred Thirty Six.

But John Wheelwright spoke many things which are now come to pass; and also
bore Testimony to the Light. Read part of his Sermon preached at Boston, which
provoked Jealousy, but not Divine, but Devilish Jealousy.

And in his third Use in that ^ermon, did he not say, The second Sort of People
that were to be condemned, are all such, as do set themselves against the Lord
Jesus Christ, such are the greatest Enemies to the State as can be, if they can
have their Wills, you see what a lamentable State, both Church and Commonwealth
will be in, then we shall have need of mourning, the Lord cannot endure these
that are Enemies to himself, and Kingdom, and People, and unto the Good of his
Church; such shall never be able to prevail against the Lord. What will be the
End and Issue think you, if People do set themselves against the Way of Grace
and the Lord Jesus Christ? This will be the Issue of it, those that oppose the
Ways of Grace, and resist the Truth, they shall wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.
8. they may happily proceed a great Way, but the time shall come that they
shall go no further, and by Reason of the Agitation of things it will come to
pass, that the Church will be cleared, and your Folly manifested unto all men,
so says the Apostle, It is a hard thing to kick against the Pricks, Acts 9. 5.
Who ever strove against God and prospered? If men or women fall upon the Lord
Jesus Christ they break, but if the Lord Jesus Christ fall on them he will
grind them to Powder: If any fall upon Christ, and will not let Christ alone,
but fall upon them which hold him, and will abuse them, and be buffeting the
Lord Jesus Christ, there is never a Stroke they give, but makes Wounds in their
Consciences, but if they will be heaving out Christ, they shall find it the
heaviest Stone that ever was; it will fall and grind them to Powder, if People
set themselves against the Lord, and the Ways of Grace, and his Truth this will
be the Issue of it on their Part; either those that set themselves against the
Ways of God, they will be put to silence by the Light that comes from Christ;
for such Truths come with such Light and Power that they shall be so convinced,
as that they shall not be able to speak any more in the Case, as Christ put
down those that came against him, so that they durst ask him no more Questions;
and so there comes such a Power from the Word held forth by the Saints of God,
that it will strick a Fear into their Hearts that oppose it: What ailest thou O
Jordan that the Floods go back! Tremble thou Earth at the Presence of the Lord.
They that came to Christ fell back, there comes a divine Power from the Lord
that turns them all back; the Lord will strick with Trembling those that come
against Jerusalem; or if they be not put to silence, it will come to pass in
time, they will fall i^to a wonderful Strong Passion, and will quarrel with the
Saints of God. It was the Case of Zedekiah with Michaiah, the Question was,
which of them had the Spirit of God, and he comes and smites the Prophet
Michaiah on the Cheek, but the Spirit of God is not a smiting Spirit. Stephen
convinced the Jews, and did by the Power of the holy Ghost Evidence his Cause
to be the Cause of God, and they were not able to resist the Spirit by which he
spoke and they came and run upon him, why do ye resist the holy Ghost (says
he) what makes the Sin against the holy Ghost, but Enlightening, and setting
themselves against the way of Truth, and persecuting it in Malice and Wrath. It
is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God. Heb. 10. 31. For
our God is a consuming Fire, Let every one (in the Fear of God) have a Care how
they set themselves against the Truth, and Ways of God, and the Ways of Jesus
Christ; for we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.
10.

Thus much of the Sermon preached by John Wheelwright, in the Year 1636.

By which you Professors of New England may see how prophetical he spoke of
what is come to pass and fulfilled on you, as he said, If People did set
themselves to Oppose and Resist the Grace of God, and his Way and Truth (as you
have done) such shall wax worse and worse. And are you not more and more
enraged, and crying out Blasphemy and Heresy? but have not given Account what
those Blasphemous and Heretical Principles are, against which you have set your
selves this Thirty or Forty Years. And why did you not print Obadiah Horne's
Principles, to whom you gave Forty Stripes save one, and his Fellow-Sufferer's
Principles, whom you also whipped in a Cruel Manner? So it seems all must fare
alike that suit not with your Will Worship. But now of late you have printed
against the Quakers, but give no Account either what they say, do or hold,
which seems to me to be very brutish, and below common Civility or Manhood: You
see, I do not so by you; but plainly tell, what you say, do and hold, and may
enlarge upon all, if I have been too scant in my Account, neither indeed would
I be willing to be otherwise dealt with in such a Case.

What! are you so Mad-drunk with Blood, that ye care not either what you do,
say, or print? You have no need to make your selves more naked.

Could not your Secretary Rawsen, which has partaken with you in your
Wickedness and Folly, and has had a large scope of Blood with you, advised you
better then to put in print such a piece of Folly? Why did you not set him to
work, and print the Quakers Abominable bl^sphemies and Idolatries, as you call
them, that so all People might have judged of the Matters, or else kept his
printed Piece in New England? for People here in England, even many Profane
Ones, and much more sober Men and Women, know the Quakers Principles and
Conversation also, and are not willing to close their Eyes, as Professors in
New England have, and here in England l^kewise many Professors do.

Its well known Rawson has Envy enough in his Heart to lay open Quakers
Faults, if he could find such great ones; but may be he intends to wrap the
Lambs in Wolves Skins, like one of their Priests, who was talking of the
Quakers, and was asked, Why they should suffer so deeply, or the like, seeing
no Evil Thing was proved against them? Why (said the Priest, or words to that
purpose) in case you have a Wolf in your Trap, but may be cannon prove he
killed a Lamb, or the like, but he is a Wolf, and of such a Nature as will do
Mischief; so he must not go, and the Quaker must suffer though nothing can be
proved against him o^ them, but in the Trap he is. And may be that is the
Matter that you go aboard S^ips, and Rifle the Quakers, and then ca^ry them
into Prison, and l^ck them up, may be when they have been long tossed upon the
Sea, and would gladly enjoy a little fresh A^r and Victuals.

Well, the Lord God, against whom you have done Evil, above what can be said or
written with Tongue or Pen of man, open your Blind Eyes; yea, if you could come
to him who is the Light and Life of all Good Men and Women; he, I say, would
anoint your Eyes, that the God of this Wicked World, to wit, the Devil, has
blinded, and then would you see as you are seen, and be h^mbled before the Lord
God of Everlasting Pity, which has no Pleasure in him that dies, who indeed
would have all return and live. A Remnant there is that know, he is a very
Pitiful God, and a Gracious God, a Sin-pardoning God, a God that blots out
Iniquity as its turned from; therefore turn ye all People to the Light; for God
is Light, and his Son is Light; so love the Light, and ^e love God and his Son,
who is come a Light into the World, that whosoever believes in him and follows
him, should not abide in Darkness, nor Envy, nor Anger, nor Wrath, nor Malice,
but come to Love, which (thinks, muchless) does no Evil to any man; and so,
live in God, who is Love: but first they must come out of the Devil, who was,
is, and ever will be a Murderer of Mankind, both Soul and Body, without they
turn from him, and deny his wicked Spirit; and indeed, the Fruits of his spirit
are manifest, which are Anger, Wrath, Whisperings, Evil-surmisings, etc. which
being lived in, grow to Banishings, Whippings, Cutting off Ears, Hanging and
Murdering about Religion, and what not that is Aboninable; and against such
Wickedness there is a Law of God and Man: But the Fruits of God's Holy Spirit
are Quietness, Meekness, Lowliness, Temperance, Brotherly-kindness, Merciful as
God is Merciful, against such there is no Law; for all Law is for such, I mean,
not all men's Laws or Decrees which are made against the Innocent; but all Good,
Just and Equal Laws, are not against, but for, all such as truly Fear the Lord,
and work Righteousness, and abide in him, who is the Author of all Good, to
whom be Praise forever, Amen.

Reader, be not troubled that I use the word Professor so often, for it very
often rises in me so; and I mean, such as profess God, Christ and Scriptures,
and Ordinances of the Gospel, but live in another Spirit, and them are the
Professors meant: but such as possess, and then profess, what, and no more then
they do possess, such Professors my Soul loves, and the Lord my God loves, and
will love for evermore.

ANd now I may set down some Tenants, which I found written in a Book called,
The Elders Tenants in the Bay. So if they be your Tenants, ye Elders of
New England, consider of them (for some of them appear very uns^und) if they be
not, then disown them, and let us have it under your Hands; or if you will own
part, then let us know which part, and how many; they are numbered from One to
Forty Six: Those of them which I am most dissatisfied in are thus noted on the
Margin.

Tenent 1. The Promises of Grace are Condition^d, and no Promise is absolute,
but h^th Conditions, either expressed or employed, in the Right of which
Condition the Promise is performed, and so by us to be pleaded.

II. There are saving Preparations before Union with Christ.

III. The Law subdues the Will, and we may too much cleave to the Gospel.

IV. Faith is first given to the Soul before Christ.

V. We are Co-Workers with Christ in our first Union.

VI. Sanctification is the first Evidence of our Justification.


VII. Faith is always confirmed by Signs and Promises, and not by Spiritual
Manifestations.

VIII. Sanct fication is more plain and perspicuous then the Witness of the
Spirit.


IX. There are Delusions in the Witness of the Spirit.

X. Sanctification must be the Judge of the Witness of the Spirit.


XI. The Witness of the Spirit is only Mediate, and not Immediate.


XII. The Nature of Man is not capable of Immediate Vision or Spiritual
Manifestation.


XIII. The Seal of the Spirit is not the Holy Ghost in us, but the gracious
Operations of the Spirit.


XIV. To say that Christ is our Sanctification, is a Damnable Doctrine.


XV. God has tied himself in an Everlasting Covenant of Grace to the
Legitimate Seed of them that be in Church Covenant, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Acts 2. 39.


XVI. Children are left under an Everlasting Covenant by leaving them under
Church Covenant.


XVII. Children are left under a Covenant of Faith, by leaving them under a
Church Covenant.


XVIII. Church Covenant reaches to a Thousand Generations.


XIX. Children by Church Covenant are born in an Internal Covenant, 1 Kings 14.
13.

XX John Baptist's Faith was evident by Leaping in the Womb, Luke 1. 44.

XXI. Children born of Believing Parents have no Right to the Seals by that
Covenant your Parents entered into after their Birth.

XXII. The Legitimate Seed of Israel were circumcised, and none else.


XXIII. There is a running-over of Grace from the Father to the Children in the
way of Church Covenant.

XXIV. The Jailer had right by Church Covenant to the Seals, Acts 16. 33.

XXV. Faith the Cond^tion of the Covenant is before Just^fication.

XXVI. We are justified with respect to Works.


XXVII. The Spirit of God of it self is not a sufficient Witness, although it
reveal to the Soul a sure Promise except it reveal the sight of some Graces.


XXVIII. One that has the Evidence of Faith, if he falls into some Sin, its
not a season to look upon his Assurance but his Sin for Recovery.

XXIX. That Faith that justifies my Person, and will serve to believe with, is
not sufficient to come to a Sacrament.

XXX. That Church Covenant is the staple commodity of New England, says Mr.
Ward of Salem or Ipswich.

XXXI. To dismiss a Member of such a Church as holds forth a Covenant of Grace
to be absolute without condition, and the Evidence thereof without respect to
condition, is sinful, and the nursing them up in Sin.

XXXII. Errors that are ripe to be prayed and fasted against, which tend to the
Subversion of the Gospel, are not fit to be named, nor the Persons that hold
them.

XXXIII. To question a Ground of Faith to pray and fast against such Errors,
that come under a pretense of Justification, to tread down Sanctification; I
demand how one should say Amen to a thing doubtful? and to bring those
Scriptures, Mat. 2. 7, 1 Cor. 14. 8. 16. Romans 14. 23. is hideous Blasphemy.

XXXIV. A Member dealt withal for an Offense, which is not convinced of the
Offense, nor sufficient Means of Convict on, who was willing to confess so far
as Light was manifested, and attend for more Light to conviction, Jesus Christ
censured not ^u^h an one for an absolute Sinner.

XXXV. A Member under the Admonition of a Church, if they come to the
Sacrament, are to be excommunicated.

XXXVI. Sanctification in the Nature is permanent, immortal, immutable.

XXXVII. The Image of God in Adam was not created, but infused, and the same
way that the Image of God was infused in^o Adam, Faith ^^ infused.


XXXVIII. If a Woman, being a Member of a Church, and dismissed t^ another
Church be delivered of a Child by the way, that Child is a Member of no Church
because born between two Churches.


XXXIX. If upon leave from an Offi^er of a Church, a Member may have Liberty to
be absent to hear in another Church, yet if he ask leave by a Deputy, and
depart, he must give Satisfaction for ending a Mess^nger, and not coming
himself.

XL. To hold Justification is not laid up in my self, but in God's everlasting
Love witnessed in an ab^olute Promise, is a doctrine of Liberty and
Licentiousness, and a way to commit all Sins, and not to be troubl^d.


XLI. If a Man see no Christ nor no Faith, if he see himself full of
Mortification, he may safely come to the Sacrament upon that Ground.


XLII. What the Minister binds in Church-censure, is bound and loosed in Heaven.

XLIII. That the Covenant God made with Abraham in Genesis 17. 7. was a
conditional Covenant.

XLIV. That Faith must go before Justification, as a Means to obtain
Justification, Gal. 2. 16.

XLV. That though a man be ungodly before he be called and justified, yet not
immediately before he is justified; for he is called before he is justified,
Romans 8. 3.

XLVI. That Christ styles his disciples a Faithless Generation, and he must
needs mean of them, because he says, How long shall I be with you, etc? Mark
9. 19.

QUERIES by another Hand for the New England Priests and Elders to Answer.
1st, Whether did Christ come to save men's Lives, or to destroy them?

2ly, Whether did not Christ dye for all men, to the Intent that all men
through him might have Life, and believe in him, and be saved?

3ly, whether the Gospel is not a Gospel of Salvation?

4ly, Where did ever Christ or the Apostles make any Law, to put any to Death
that did blaspheme against them, and would not hear them, but rather left them
to the Eternal Judgment and Death, and the Tares and Wheat to grow together
till the Harvest?

5ly, Whether have not New England Priests and Elders brought forth a Monstrous
Birth of the Flesh, worse then Balaam, worse then Core, worse then Cain, Herod,
Pharaoh and Nebuchadaczar; for these never pretended themselves to be
Christians, and therefore my Query is, whether ye New England Priests and
Professors, since ye fled out of Old England into the Wilderness of
New*England, whether you have not brought forth many Monstrous Births, like
Bruit Beasts, like Dragons, like Cockatrices, like Roaring Lions and Devouring
Wolves? Let the Fruits of the Birth that they have brought forth in the
Wilderness speak.

For, has not this Monstrons Birth, or Births, so suddenly brought forth
without the Midwise, which has been begotten by the old Serpent, devoured
Widows Houses, spoiled the Goods of the Innocent People of God, Whipped, Hanged,
Banished, Cut off Ears, Branded with Hot irons?

Now if this be the Birth of the Spirit, let God, and Christ, and the
Scriptures, and all Good Christians judge.

6ly, Whether or no, if these be your Principles, that are here laid down, you
can make them good by Scriptures? and if you can, in your next give us Chapter
and Verse for it.

7ly, Whether is this the God that you have made in the Wilderness of
New England, and worshipped it? Surely Christ will break it to Powder, and put
it into your River to drink, as Moses did Israel's Calf.

And over your Red Sea God's Heavenly Israel shall go dry-shod, and on the
Banks above it, they shall stand and praise God, and see you wallowing in your
own Red Sea of Blood, who pursue after the Blood of the Righteous, to bring
them into your Spiritual House of Bondage: but God will bring your Counsel to
naught, as he did your Fore father, Pharaoh and his Host:

For wherein do ye differ from all the Monstrous Births of the World, with your
Fleshly Carnal Weapons, against the Birth that is born of the Spirit, and the
Womb of the Morning, Jerusalem, which is above, who is free, and her Children,
which is the Mother of us all True Christians. For, the most Monstrous Births,
which have been brought forth in many Ages, in all Nations, are now brought
forth in New England; who outstrip the Turks, and far have outdone the
Bishops, from whose Face you fled? And how can you ever any more exclaim
against the Cruelty of the Papists? And have not the Christians more Liberty
amongst the Turks, then amongst you?

8ly, And whether have not you dishonored Christianity, more then the Turks,
in your Lives and Actions, and the Jews, who crucified Christ without the Gates
of Jerusalem? but you, who go under the Name of Christians, persecute and
crucify him in his Members within your Jurisdiction, and every Appearance of
God, as they and all may see, that have taken a Prospect of your Proceedings in
New England.

YOu Professors and Priests of New England, did the King give you Liberty for
your Seditious Conventicle beyond the Seas, and give you a Patent for your
Liberty* and that none others should have their Liberty in New England but your
selves? And does your Patent say, That you must Imprison, Banish, Whip, Spoil
the Goods of all them that will ^ot conform to your Will Worship, and Blind
Zeal, and Self Righteousness and Formal^ties; and if any do return after that
you have banished them, then you are to Hang them, as you have done; and such
as come to visit them that you do imp^ison, to cut off their Ears, and brand
them with a Burning Iron, as you have done, that speak against your Wicked
Proceedings? Let us see, if that your Patent and the Scriptures will bear you
out for your Practice, for your Hanging, and Cutting off Ears, and Burning with
Hot Irons, and Banishing the King's Subjects, and Imprisoning, and Spoiling of
their Goods, as you have done, to them that would not conform to your Devilish
Persecuting Spirit.

And did ever the Bishops Cut off any of your Ears, or Brand you with Hot
Irons, and Hang any of you, or Banish any of you, under pain of Death, if that
you did Return, and make you pay Five Shillings a Day for not hearing of them,
and beat you with pitched Ropes, and Cut off the Ears of any that came to visit
you, when any of you were in Prison in Old England.

And have not you with your cruel, Murderous, Persecuting and Oppressing
Spirit, hindered the King's Subjects for Peopling that Place; and you to make
wor^^ Laws against the People of God, then ever the Bishops had against you?
and thus you have acted contrary to the Scriptures, and contrary to your
Patent, and contrary to the Laws of England, and are judged of all, and of God,
and the Angels and of all Good Men.

And are not you Priests and Profess^rs of New England, like unto those Workers
of Iniquity, that David prayed against, as in Psalm. 64 when he said, Hide me
from the secret C^^^sel of the Wicked, from the Insurr^ctions of the Workers of
Iniquity, who whet their Tongues like Swords, and bend their Bows to shoot
their Arrows, even with bitter Words, that they may shoot in secret at the
Perfect, etc?

But to talk of Perfect and Perfection amongst you, your imperfect Spirit
cannot endure to hear: And further, David says, They encourage themselves in
an Evil Matter, they commune of laying Snares privily, etc. but God shall shoot
at them with an Arrow suddenly, and they shall be wounded; so they shall make
their own Tongues to fall upon themselves, and all that see them shall (...)
away.

And does not ^olomon say, The Expect^tion of the Wicked shall parish, and
their Y^^^s shall (...), and the Cou^s^ls of the Wicked are Deceit, and their
T^^d^r Mercies are cruel, the Belly of the Wicked shall want, the Lamp of the
Wicked shall be put out; the Sacrifices of the Wicked are Abomination to the
Lord; the Way of the Wicked is Abomin^tion to the Lord, and the Thoughts of the
Wicked are Abomination to the Lord; the Ploughing of the Wicked is Sin, and the
House of the Wicked shall be overthrown; the Horns of the Wicked shall be cut
off, says David; and the Rod of the Wick^d shall not rest upon the Back of the
Righteous; and the Light of the Wicked shall be put out, says Job; the Wick^d
shall fall by his own Wickedness, says Solomon, Prove. 11 5.

And therefore consider your selves, who have persecuted and do persecute the
Righteous, whether you m^st not eat the Fruits of your own Doings; and whether
the Lord is not doing so to you, as you did to his People: And are you not as
blind as the Jews, that crucified Christ, and called him a Blasphemer, and
said, Let his Blood be upon us and our Children?

Did not Christ Weep over Jerusalem, when he would have gathered them? and did
they not cast away all Pity and Tenderness of the Lord toward themselves? and
when he told them what Misery they would come to, which did come to pass in the
days of Titus, when Jerusalem was Destroyed; and had not they then Blood to
drink, who had drunk Blood?

And have not God's people wept, mourned, travailed over you and for you,
New*England Priests and Professors? and still you remain in your Hardness: For,
what pleasure is it to the Flesh, or their own Wills, for the Servants of the
Lord, both Men and Women, for them to travail some Hundreds, some Thousands of
Miles, to warn you, and exhort you to fear God, and leave off your Wickedness
and Persecution of people that would be called Christians, which have
dishonored both Name and Nature, Life and Religion, from whom Repentance is
hid from many of your Fyes, and several of you have dyed in your Sins and
Wickedness, in the Jews ev^l Thoughts, who thought they did God Good Service in
Killing ^is M^ss^ngers.

Oh! you Professors and Priests of New England, that the Sun should go down
upon you, and beset, that you should be so dark, and not see your selves: for
the Jews discerned not the Time of the Son's Coming in the Flesh, nor you the
Time of his Coming in the Spirit.

And therefore, once more take heed of the Lord God leaving you to your ^elv^s,
and giving you up to your Hearts Lusts, who have been the De^pi^e^s of the
Goodne^s and Riches, and Forbearance of the Long-sufferings of the Lord God,
which would have led you to Repentance; but after the Hardness and Impenetency
of your Hearts, have treasured up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and
Revelation of the Righteous Judgments of God: And therefore, how can you ex^ect
but Indignation, Tribulati^n and Anguish upon all you that ^ave done so many
Wicked Deeds against the Servants of the Lord and d^unk their Blood?

And therefore, you that b^ sober mind and consider these things, and consider
what Jacob said of the Cruelty and ^ra^h of Simeon and Levi, O my Soul, come no
thou into their Secret, unto their Assembly, mine Honor be not thou united;
for in their Anger they slew a Man, and in their Self w^ll they dug down a
Wall; and he said, Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierc^; and their Wr^^h,
for it was cruel. Now Jacob was the second Birth; but we do know, that you that
are born of the Flesh will persecute him that is born of the Spirit; but the
Birth of the Flesh is not a True Christian, neither can enter into the Kingdom
of God, except ye be born again?

G. F.

The Copy of a Letter which was delivered into the Hands of R. Bellingham, late
Governor of Boston in New England, for him to read and consider, with his
Assistants, and the Inhabitants of the Town of Boston, with the rest of their
Brethren where this may come.
THe Powers that are ordained of God, are for the Punishment of Evil doers, and
for the Praise of them that do well: But thee, Richard Bellingham, who art
accounted Chief Magistrate in this place, have not acted by this Rule, in what
thou have done against me; but have laid thy Sword upon the Innocent, for which
the Lord God will plea^ with thee and your Priest whose Name is Increase
Madder, who was one with thee in thy Cruelty, and the rest of your Brethren,
who were present; but the people who came to hear, thou turnedst out of thy
Doors, that they might not see your Works of Darkness, although I desi^ed thee,
that they might see what was done; for Truth is not asham^d, neither does it
hide it self in Corners; but Cruelty and Oppression seeks to cover it self, as
James Oliver would do, who said, I was a Woolf, and you would k^ll Wolves; who
had no hing against me, to prove me in that beastly Nature, but I was a
Stranger unto you, who are Professors of the Scriptures, which say, You should
not forget to Entertain Strangers; but this was the Entertainment I found
amongst you, a Constable seized on me and my Goods, and took them from me
before I was on your Shore, and brought me before thee Richard Bellingham, who
had nothing against me, but that I was a Quaker, also asking me, what I came
here for, and how long I would stay, and whither I would go? my An^wer was, I
stood in the Will of the Lord, and did not know how long I should stay, nor
whither I should go, but as the Lord orders me. Thou said I spoke very
meekly, and was a sober man, yet thou by Tempting Words soughtst to ensnare me,
and scoffingly said, you are free from Sin, are you not? My An^wer was, my
Faith stands in that Power which cleanses my Heart from dead Works, to serve
the Living God in the Newness of Life; and the Grace of God which brings
Salvation, which has appeared to all men, was my Teacher, which taught the
Saints of old to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly-Lusts, and to live godly and
soberly in this World, but your Teacher Increase Ma^der, said, There was
nothing in him that he hoped to be saved by, and that there was none cleansed
from all Sin on this side the Grave, and there was none good; no not One. Unto
whom I said, Thou art a dark man, and speak ignorantly of the Things of God,
at which thou rose up in much Anger, and had much to do to keep thy Hands off
me, which was not seemly f^r a man that sits on the Seat to do Justice: And
so thou spoke to thy Officer to take me away, and would not suffer me to
speak in my own Desence, which was not denied Paul by Foelix, who was counted
an Heathen; and so thou gave Order to ^eep me close, and let none come at me,
where I am kept in a stinking smoaky Hole; and also thou and thy Assistants, I
hear have laid a Fine upon the poor man (in whose Ship I came as a Passenger)
of an Hundred Pounds, if he send me not away the first Opportunity. Oh ye cruel
ridged Professors! the Lord has opened an Eye that sees you, and he will
redeem his People from under your Bondage, who are exercising your Cruelty upon
them; but the Lord will plead with you; and also the Man not willing I should
lie in such a nasty Place, desired of you to let me be at his House till he had
an Opportunity to send me away, but ye would not, who have nothing worthy of
Bonds to lay to my Charge. Oh how has the God of the World blinded your Eves,
and filled your Hearts with Envy against the Appearance of God! who are
Professors of the Scriptures, and say, They (...); b^t you know them not, nor
the Power of God which give them forth, as it was said to them of Old, who were
crying, The Templ^ of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; and if we (...) to our
Fath^^s Days, we would not (...) the Prophets, who were garnishing their
Sepulchers, and painting their Tombs, who slew the Lord of Life, and hung im on
a Tree. And may I not say unto you, as Stephen said unto them, Ye (...) necked,
and uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, ye always resist the holy Ghost, as your
Fathers did, so do ye, but they gnash^d upon him with their Teeth, and cast
(...) out of their City, and shed his Blood: and do not your Fruits make you
manifest, as theirs did? and do not the Scriptures of Truth bear Testimony
against you, that you are of the Wolf's Nature i^ the Sheep's Clothing, which
devours the Lambs (indeed) for you do savor of the devouring Spirit, and not
of the Meek Spirit of Christ Jesus, who said, I came to save men's Lives, and
not to destroy them, who is come and his Reward is with him; who said, It has
been said by them of old time, thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate thy
Enemy, but I say unto you, Love your Enemies, pray for them that despightfully
use you, and persecute you, Mat. 5. 43, 44. But thee Richard Bellingham a^t of
another Spirit, the Lord rebuke thee, who said thou thoughtst thou did God
good Service in what thou did against us: So the Words of Christ Jesus are
fulfilled upon thy Head, which he spoke saying, They shall speak all manner of
Evil of you, and they will think they do God good Service, when they kill you.
So out of thy own Mouth art thou judged; but as for thy causing thy Jailer to
read the thirteenth chapter of Zachary to me, that will not cover thee in the
Day of the Lord, for he is come who is the End of the first Covenant, and has
brought in the better Hope, which destroys the Devli and his Works, and saves
men alive, who rebuked his Disciples, when they would have had Fire come down
from Heaven, as Elias had, to destroy them with whom they were offended, but he
said unto them, Ye know not what Spirit ye are of; before whom all things are
naked and bare, who beholds thy Cruelty, who would have me give thee under my
hand, never to come to this Town more, or else in Prison it seems I must lie,
till by your Law I am forced to another Land; but unto thy cruel Will herein I
dare not bow; for I may come again into this Town, and honest men who fear the
Lord may live here, when your Laws are vanished as the Smoke before the Wind,
and your false Doctrine come to cease, which your Priest Increase Madder, and
some of you held forth, when I was before you; for he is made manifest whom we
bear Testimony unto, who is given of God, for a Covenant of Light unto the
Gentiles, and for Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth; this is he of whom it
was said, Of his Fullness we have received, and by Grace were they saved, and
not of themselves, it was the Gift of God, and they had these heavenly
Treasures in their Earthen Vessels, as the Scripture says, Acts 6. 8. Stephen
was a man full of Faith, and of Power, and the Saints were filled with the holy
Ghost, and spoke as the Spirit gave them Utterance, Acts 2. 4. And Christ Jesus
said, He that beliveth on me, out of his Belly shall slow Riv^rs of Living
Water, John 7. 38. Ye know the Spirit of Truth, for he dwells with you, and
shall be in you; and I am in my Father and you in me, and I in you John 14. 17,
20. And the Apostle said, Christ was in them the Hope of Glory. And he to the
Corinthians, Christ was in them except they were Reprobates. And these were
Ministers of the Spirit, who had these Heavenly Treasures in them; but what a
Minister Increase Madder is, let them whose Eyes are open judge, who says, He
has nothing in him by which he hopes to be saved* A dry Tree! and miserable
Sheep are they, who have such a Shephe^d, and well may it be said, that they
that feed and follow such Teachers, give their Money for that which is not
Bread and their Labor for that which satisfi^s not their Souls. And Increase
Madder says, There is none cleansed from all Sin on this side the Grave; but
the Scripture says, As the Tree falls, so it lies; and as Death leaves,
Judgment fin^s, and there is no Repentance in the Grave. Where must they be
cleansed then? I know not, except he believes as the Pope does, that there is a
Purgatory, because he says, not all their Sins; for in leed the Papists do
believe, that their venial Sins (as they call them) shall be purged away there;
but the Scripture says, If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we
have Fellowsh pone with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John 1. 7. And ye shall know the Truth, and the
Truth shall make you free, John 8 32. And there is therefore no Condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit; for the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free
from the Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8 1, 2. And John says, Herei^ is our Love
made perfe^t, that we may have Boldness in the Day of Judgment, because as he
is so are we in this World, 1 John 4. 17. and these were Men l^ving on this
Side the Gra^e. But Increase Madder says, there is none good, no not one: It
is very true, that t^ose that are out of God's Covenant, and have none of these
Heavenly Treasures in them but are as Clouds without Water, Heady, High minded
men, greedy after filthy Lucre, whose God is their Belly, who mind Earthly
things, such we have to contend with, for the Truth's sake, as the Apostles had
in their Day, who were Enemies to the Cross of Christ then, as you are at this
Day: I say in that State there is none good, no, not one; and the most upright
of them, is as a Briar, and the justest amongst them as a Thorn-Hedge, I find
it so; but blessed be the Lord, who is my Keeper, who has redeemed me out of
their Dewlling Place, and opened mine Eves with many more, and we see where you
are, and we know God's Controversy is with your blind Guides (who cause you to
err) and you who are led by them, who are covering your selves with a
Pro^ession, as the Phar^see^ did, but your Hands are full of Cruelty, and your
Hearts hardened in Persecution unto Blood, and are making a Mo^k of Sin, who in
Derision are calling the Innocent Servants of the Living God, Wolves, and say
you must kill them. Oh ye wretched men! God will plead with you: was ever the
Flock of Christ Jesus found in your Practice? did ever the Lambs kill Wolves?
but they that fear God, and work Righteousness are accepted of him, but always
suffered as Evildoers, by them who had a Form of Godliness, but resisted the
Power, in whose Steps ye are; but such as you sow, such shall you reap, God
will not be mocked by you; for the Day of the Lord is come, which burns as an
Oven, wherein God will plead with all Flesh for his Seed's Sake, which he has
and is raising up, who has said unto it live, and it shall live; though our
Bodies may be laid in the Dust, yet it shall spring forth in Thousands more: So
in vain do ye strive, ye mortal men, the Fruit of your doings will fall on your
own Heads, a Weight too heavy for you to bear.

From One that suffers, by you for the Truth's Sake,

Boston-Prison-House, the 15th of the 4th Month, 1667. John Tyso.
And Richard Bellingham, it is Equity and Justice for thee to return to me the
Books thou tookest from me, which are mine, and is Injustice in thee to take
them from me; therefore do as thou would be done by, and let thy Moderation
be seen, for the Lord is at hand, who is no Respecter of Persons, but gives
unto every man according to his Doings; for he has given of his Good Spirit to
instruct man, but many rebel against it; but it has taught us, who have
believed in it, as it did his People of old, To do unto all men as we would
they should do unto us; and gives us Strength and Patience to undergo what
Cruel Men may be suffered to inflict upon us; who can say from our Hearts. If
it be thy will, Lord, Forgive them, blessed be his Name forever: and this is
from one that has learned of Christ, and am a Christian, though in Scorn by
thee called a Quaker; yet Quaking and T^embling I have experience of, as the
holy men of old had, and as the Apostle exhorted the Saints, to work out their
Salvation with Fear and Trembling; and so they that are true Christians will
not wonder and mock at Quaking and Trembling; but God will plead with the
Uncircumcised; for crying Lord, Lord, will not save them; for it is the Doers
of his Will that are just^fi^d in his Sight; and Christ Jesus said, Except ye
cat my Flesh and drink my Blood, ye have no Life in you, John 6. 53 And so
consider thy Cruelty in keeping me here, and thy Jailer William Salli^r, who
will not suffer a man to bring me work; but as Christ Jesus said, Go learn what
that means, I will h^ve Mercy, and not Sacrifice.

J. T.



A Copy of this fore going Paper was delivered into the Hands of (...)
^^llingham, Governor of Boston in New England, the (...) of the 4th Month,
1667. but no Answer I received from (...) or any of them; but through the
Enmity of his persecuting spirit* he said, I deserved to be Hanged; and thus
Cruelty and Wickedness they act, and would bury it in Darkness with themselves;
but it is in my Heart to put it to public View, that Wickedness and Hypocrisy
might be seen and judged, and Righteousness might take place in the Hearts of
the Sons and Daughters of men; for the Day is come which discovers your
Nakedness, and will consume your Covering, your Outside Profession, and has
and will shatter your old Buildings, and Raze your Foundation to the Ground. Ye
Bloody Men, how do ye stink in the Nostrils of the Holy God? and are you not
become a Hissing to the Nations? Your Judgment slumbers not, who have been
stout against the Lord in his breaking forth in the Hearts of his People: And
you whose Hands have been dipped in Blood (yea, in the Blood of the Innocent
Servants of the Living God, and no Place of Repentance can by you be found) Woe
is unto you, your days are and shall be cut off in Darkness forever; but the
Holy Seed (which you have fought against) which God has raised and is raising
up, and also from amongst you, shall replenish the Earth: For I do believe,
there are Sheep which are not yet gathered (which the Lord will gather) from
off your Barren Mountains and dry Hills of your Empty, Dark, Rusty, Cankered,
eaten Prosessions, to rest with the Lord in the Mountain of his Holiness
forever; and for this End is our Travail in Soul and Body, that people might be
gathered to God: And the Cry of my Spirit is unto the Lord, Oh! that his Day
might more and more dawn, that People might see their Way out of Darkness, and
the Chains thereof through the Power of God might be broken, and the Liberty of
the Sons of God, which is in Righteousness, might be known unto the Sons and
Daughters of Men, after this Deluge of Darkness and Night of Apostasy, which
has been over the World. For God Almighty is a fulfilling his Promises, and
his Day is come unto many, and the Night is far spent unto Thousands, Glory to
God forever, though Multitudes yet sit in Darkness, and see it not; for the God
of the World has blinded their Eyes, through the Enmity of the Seed of the
Serpent, which bears rule in their Hearts, whereby they despise the Appearance
of God, and persecute his Servants, who are sent unto them, as it was said unto
the Jews, I will send them Prophets and Apostles, and some of them they shall
slay and persecute, that all the Blood from Righteous Abel unto this day be
required at their Hands.

J. T.

Something further, as a Testimony against the Cruelty of the New England
Professors
ANd now you New England Priests and Professors, you are found in the Steps of
that old persecuting spirit, beyond the rest of the Nations in t^is Age of the
World, in Cruelty and Bloodshed; for you have slain the Prophets of the Lord,
and drunk the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; whereby the Iniquity of your Fore
fathers you have fulfilled in a large Measure, which will not depart from you
Reins, nor be blotted out in Generations to come, no more then the Blood
thirsty Chief Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, and Hard-hearted Jews are; but
with them you will be recorded, and bound under the Chain and Seal of Darkness,
and numbered with the seed of Cain, who Murdered his Brother, because his
Brother's Works were Righteous, and his Evil. But notwithstanding the great
Sufferings and cruel hard-hearted Dealings we have received from you Rulers,
Priests and People of New England, whose Prisons, S^ocks, Whips and Gallows
have been our Portion from you, and for no other Cause, but our Testimony for
God, who have been moved of the Lord to come amongst you, and in true Love to
your Souls: But Christ Jesus, who is our Lord and Master, received such
Entertainment amongst the great Professors in the days of his Flesh; and we
know, the Servant is not greater then his Lord; and these Sufferings seem small
in Comparison of the Eternal Weight of Glory which is already revealed, and
daily God is manifesting to his People, wherein we have great Cause to Rejoice;
and we seeing the Prosperity of that blessed Work, he has made us instrumental
in (to his Glory, and to the Comfort of many weary and hungry Souls) are daily
encouraged in this blessed Work, and to sound an Alarm against your Babylonish
Building and Habitation of Cruelty, which God eternal has determined to
Overthrow, notwithstanding you are stout against him; but the Lord will be too
hard for you, and your Building must fall, who would limit the Holy One of
Israel, as that Generation of Evildoers did of old, who called Evil Good, and
Good Evil, as you do, who say, You think God's Judgments are upon you because
you suffer that Erroneous People called Quakers to live amongst you; so
desperately are your foolish Hearts darkened, that Judgment is turned backward,
and Equity cannot enter: But behold! Cruelty and Oppression covers your
Dewlling Place. and you grope like Blind Men (in the dark) although God's Day
is come, and the Children of it see your Nakedness, and whereby your Notion of
Profession is vanishing, and shall molter away (like a Fogg when the Sun
arises in her Strength) and the Mountain of the House of the Lord shall be
established on the tops of the Mountains; for Sion shall be built, and
Jerusaiem (spiritual) shall be inhabited in Defiance of her Foes: for, God
Almighty has thundered from his Dwelling place, and your Old Heavens must
depart as a Scrole; for notwithstanding your Profession of Gospel Ordinances,
Death reigns over you, and to Moses you are not yet come: But the Desire of my
Soul is, That the Lord may open the Eyes and Hearts of them amongst you, who
have any Tenderness of Spirit in them, and who have not sinned out the Day of
their Visitation, that they would truly turn to the Lord who smites, and then
he would truly heal them, who has done Great Things for us, who have believed
in his Name, and waited through the Way of his Judgments, his Mercies we have
found; and our desire is, that others might enjoy the same; blessed be his Name
who lives forever.

London, the 28th of the 5th Month, 1676. From one that desires the Well being
of all men, John Tyso.

Page 9. line 9. for 1646. read 1643. page 10. line 1. for 1646. read 1643.


