THE GROUNDS Of the present WAR Between his Electoral Highness PALATINE OF THE
RHINE And the Duke of LORRAIN.

Expressed in a Letter written from Frankendale to a Person of quality here in
ENGLAND

London Printed for J. S. 1669.

THE GROUNDS Of the present WAR Between his Electoral Highness PALATINE of the
RHINE, and the DVKE of LORRAIN.
My Lord,
IF what I hear be true, in England you are in the dark about present Affairs
in these Parts, which I wonder at very much, seeing the Interest you ought to
take in it, is sufficient to stir your curiosity, and, I believe, to make you
concerned in it. If what Solomon says be true, As cold waters to a thirsty
Soul, so is good news from a far Country; it ought to be very acceptable to
you if they be good, but most uncomfortable when it happens to the contrary;
for in this respect you must deal with others, as you would be dealt by, if
you were in the same condition, especially being, as you are obliged to it by
the two most Sacred ties that are, namely of Religion and of Consanguinity,
whereupon in this case does depend interest, which is the present God of the
World.

It Is a very obvious, yet a true observation, that Ergland was never in a more
flourishing condition, then when it has owned and protected abroad the
Protestant Interest. I will not dispute whether it be really her Interest so to
do, to unite all the members of so potent a Body, and declare her self the Head
of it, or a particular reward from God for so good an act; but it is most
certainly so, as the happy Reign of Queen Elizabeth can testify, she protected
Holland, and assisted Henry the fourth of France, and She was loved at home,
and feared and respected abroad, which Queen Mary (who took a contrary course)
could never obtain. When I mention the Protestant Interest. I mean not only,
when merely upon the account of Religion, Wars are raised against Princes, to
force them to abjure that which they profess, and embrace another (for now by
the grace of God that Party is so numerous, that the enemies of it dare not
openly to own that to be the cause of their falling out) but I also extend it
to the assistance of those Princes who profess the same Religion, in the
desence of their just Rights and pretentions.

The most Noble and Illustrious Family of the Counts Palatines of the Rhine is
one of these, who has produced some Princes eminent for their Piety and
Charity, as upon several occasions they expressed it, assisting abroad those
that were unjustly persecuted in their Spiritual, and wronged in their temporal
liberties; and within their Dominions giving Sanctuary to those who for
Religions sake were driven out of their own countries; so that upon this and
other accounts it was by the enemies of the Truth, taken notice of to be (as
indeed it was) the most eminent of the Reformed in Germany, and therefore all
are acquainted how cruelly she was afflicted in the late German Wars; and that
the loss of the battle of Prague by that family, was a satal blow given to the
Protestant interest in those parts, I hope no rational man will deny: the
consequences of it were the loss which the Protestants made of the casting
Vote in the Electoral College, the dividing into two, one of the three they
had in it as well as the Electoral Dignity, and that instead of seven Votes the
Protestants had four, now of eight they have but three. Hence also followed the
miseries which those Persons of the Royal English blood have undergone, and and
the desolation of that good Land, which in her properity was the Sanctuary of
the persecuted Protestants, and a Land of Prayers in her affliction.

His Highness, the present Elector is a person who has been much exposed to
the rage and malice of the enemies of Religion, and his family, having been
heretofore, not only driven from his own House and Lands, but also without
right and Reason yea against the Laws and constitutions of the Germ in Empire,
wrongfully and forcibly kept out till by the mediation of Princes and States,
grown jealous of his enemies, they were forced to grant him some Conditions,
which out of a politic necessity he has been willing to accept, choosing
rather to get one part (though with the loss of the other) then to be still
deprived of all.

But since the time he has been restored to part of his States as of his
dignity, they have threatened, picked out Quarrels, and began groundless, and
uunecessary Wars against him, as was done of late by the Arch Bishops, of Mews,
Colen, the Bishop of Spire, and others their consederates, out of the ancient
hatred against his Religion and family, and out of a desire to usurp his
State, undo his Subjects, and at last to strip him of all; so out of an envy
to his person, because they see him so eminently transcendent above them:
indeed I might wonder to see that to be hated which deserves praises and
admiration, were it not that Scripture tells me how the righteous is an
abomination unto the wicked.

And, My Lord, That you may the better know the Ground of what I say, I shall
undertake to give you an impersect character of that Prince who through many
crosses and difficulties has attained to such a height of persection, in every
Princely quality: and herel need not, to follow the advice of agreat Politician
who says, When thou speak of a Prince, commend him highly, and say he is a
Person of many great Parts, though he has them not; for, though thou say
what he i^ not, yet thoushewest what he ^^ght to be. But when I affirm here
that his Electoral Highness is an extraoridnary person, I say nothing but what
his Neighbors, so as well as friend, do acknowledge him to be, to wit, the
bravest Prince of all these parts; and therefore that which some of them cannot
love, they do esteem and admire, for he knows and practices that sentence of
Socrates, One must be indeed, what be wauld be occounted to be. God and Nature
who appointed him to suffer and to do much, have fitted his body for any
hardship, which being of a middle Stature needs no great diet, nor long sleep,
in both which he is very temperate and far from the excesses wherein Germany
does abound; he eats not much and though he keeps a very noble and plentiful
table, he does not delight, as to his own diet, in the variety wherein it does
abound, neither is he choice in the several kinds of meats but all are almost
alike to him, Wine mixed with Water is his usual drink, and yet he drinks but
seldom: he uses no Feather-beds, and four or five hours at the most is the
time he allows himself to be in Bed; neither does he sleep all this while, for
very often he has one or other to read Books to him by his bed side, and
sometimes he calls for Paper and Ink to write himself. All his affairs from the
Highest to the lowest he takes notice and is the director of; so that for
certain he ever carries, all his Council along with him, yet he is very willing
and patient to hear what others can say upon any matter, but all resolutions
come immediately from him: every Writing which comes from his Secretaries
Office he peruses, and Before he Signs it takes notice of the Orthography and
of the very comma's that are wanting; and in all this he is undesatigable, for
he enjoys himself amidst the crowd of his business as much as if he had nothing
to do, so that when he receives Company, one would think he has nothing else
to do but study how to be civil and oblidging: Yet his affairs are so casie to
him, that presently he dives into and finds the bottom of them, for he has a
quick and pregnant wit, and he is so judicious as to unsold that which is
really true from that which is but seemingly so, whereby he suffers not his
judgment to be seduced by specious and plausible words or pretenses. As for his
soul, I do not believe there is one more noble in all the world, high, constant
and fixed in his resolutions, which are good and just, he is generous without
ostentation, liberal with choice and without profusness and upon this account
merit and virtue do avail with him more then savor: so that it is pity the
extent of his Dominions is not suitable to the greatness of his abilities to
Govern, but he is above the malice of his enemies, who though they have usurped
part of his S;ates, yet could never derogate any thing from his worth, and
since it is Gods pleasure he is well contented with his condition, knowing it
to be more honor for a Prince to deserve larger Dominions, and not have them,
then to enjoy them and not be qualified for them. In a word, he is temperate at
Table, sweet and civil in Company, rational and solid in his discourse, wise in
Council, valiant in the Field, Noble and great every where.

And such as he is himself, such he desires others should be; therefore his
Court is very well modeled, consisting of select Persons, who afford variety,
but breed no consesion, for in it things are carried on in a hand some and
orderly manner.

I must not omit to mention that extraordinary application his Highness has
upon Occasion to Warlike affairs, those rare and regular sortifications of
Manheim are most, or rather all aster his direction; and since this present War
broke forth, one would admire to see how careful and active he has been
himself, to see Provision, Ammunition, and Artillery, conveyed to his Camp, to
view it, and the fortifications of his places and ex tempore to give his
directions, so fit, so judicious, and so necessary. The very devices of his
Guidons, and Colors, with their Motto's, which are so witty, and so ingenious,
are all of his own contrivance, so are the sentences of his medalls. But to be
short, he is in his States that which the Soul is to the body, whole in the
whole, and whole in every part of it, he does move all and animate it. Words
wouldfail me if I went about to exaggerate those virtues. I know to be in him,
but I believe it is better to hold his peace then not to speak enough of it.
Your Lordship will believe this the more that, you know I have not any
dependency upon that Prince, but I think my self obliged to bear record to
those qualities I have truly observed in him, and I matter not who knows of it.

But one thing more I must say of this Prince, that he remembers himself to be
of the Royal English Blood, and therefore every thing which concerns that
Nation, is so near to him, that I doubt whether the best English man be more
tender of the good and honor of England, then this prince is, he loves the
Language, which he speaks very well, and the Nation too, so that it is enough for
one to be an English man, thereby to get a free access to his Person, and find
a civil reception a^ his Court, as many have had, and have a present experience
of.

Of all this Princes neighbors, te Duke of Lorrain has, been and is still,
one of the most trouble some: he has made himself so well known to the World,
that he saves me the trouble of giving you any character of his Person. He is
of a family which has heretofore afforded so many bloody and cruel persecutors
of the Protestants; so that upon this account (if he had any Religion at all)
he might be thought to be the Electors enemy; but he walks upon other
principles, and considering himself to be an undone man, despair makes him not
to care what mischief he does to others; and as the Palatinate is a
neighboring Country to his, so he has taken every occasion to over run it
with his Soldiers, who are the Tartars of these parts: thus not long using he
joined with the Elector of Mentz to Sack and Plunder that poor Country, he
using Fire and Sword to leave lamentable marks of his cruelty: and as he is a
man who neither stands to engagements, nor does perform any promises, there is
no trust to be put to any Treaties of peace with him, but one is forced to
sland upon his Guard, and to be at great charges to prevent his attempts and
Hostilities.

Now as the Palatinate, is the Country the most exposed to his invasions, his
Highness is very much concerned to watch his designs, as to defend his own, so
to protect those subjects who live under him. A Prince, like a compassionate
father, being to pity the miseries of his people, so as to make them cease when
they rise from with in, and to prevent them by possible and lawful means if
feared from abroad. As Princes may justly exact and require the hands and
purses of their subjects upon account of the public good, so Subjects may
justly expect Protection from their Sovereign, when they are oppressed by
strangers; and as a wise Prince is not satisfied to remove the will and
inclination which his neighbors have to do him wrong, but also, if possible,
and by lawful means, he will hinder them from having the power to hurt him,
or take it away from them if they have it; as it is natural to fortify his
Ground against the feared overflowings of Sea, an d Rivers, so his Electoral
Highness of late is wisely gone about to prevent for the future those
desolations which the Lorrainers have heretofore too often caused in his
Country, leaving the success in the hand of God.

When I speak of those means which to right themselves Princes use, the
question is not whether they ought to be lawful; all (though they had but
common sense and reason) do affirm it, and every one thinks or at least
pretends it, that the means he uses are just, but to judge of it aright, one
must come to particulars, and examine circumstances; that is good at one time
which is bad at another, and fit for one person to do, which is amiss for
another, that is lawful for a Magistrate to do, which may not be allowed to a
particular man; every one must act within the Sphere of his station, so a Judge
may condemn a man to die, which another not invested of that authority may not
do: and sometimes merely upon necessity of State some man's life is to be
sacrificed to the public good and sasety, for so a member is sometimes cut off
to save the whole body. Of two Princes who are wronged, often, one will use
justifiable ways to get satisfaction, and the other shall take those which are
unwarrantable; nay, the very same Prince will sometimes upon diverse occasions
observe a contrariety of means, and even in the same business apply both
lawful and unlawful remedies. And of two Warring Princes, one, as the other,
will pretend to be in the right way, yet it is not so. I confess there are some
general rules by which to examine the lawfullness or unlaw^ullness of those
means, as are the Laws of God and nature, and the particular constitutions of
Nations and Countries: In a word on^ ought to consult justice and reason: I
know an aggressor will never want pretenses to palliate his ambition,
injustice, hatred, desire of revenge, and the like, which judicious and
rational persons, will find out and condemn. But I believe that on the other
side, none may deny, that a Prince, to right himself of wrongs already ready
suffered, and to prevent that for the future the same be not done to himself or
his people after he has tried all peaceable ways to obtain it, and they have
been ineffectuall, in such a case, by the laws of God and Men he is empowered
and by his place and duty obliged to draw his Sword and (if he sees that to be
a probable way to get satisfaction) use it in the desence of himself and of his
people: and this is now the case of the Prince Palatine.

And that the means which he has used are lawful and warrantable it will
appear from the grounds of his late proceeding. The Duke of Lorrain, who
engaged himself so far in the German Wars, seized upon some places of the
Empire, namely Homburg, and Landstull, which are doors to let him into the
Palatinate; these places the Duke, by an order of the Empire, was to restore,
and receive a sum of moneys, in consideration of his charges; the moneys were
offered him, which he refused to take, whereupon, seeing he made is clearly
appear thereby that he was resolved to keep a footing in Germany, hereafter,
and upon occasion to trouble the peace thereof, the Imperial Chamber at Spire
empowered his Electoral Highness Palatine of the Rhine, in the most concerned
Prince, to use all fit and possible means of taking those places from the
Lorrainers hands; after the atchievment of which the Marquess of Baden
President of the Diet, and he of Durlack, came a purpose to Frankenstall to
congratulate with the Prince for his successes. And one of the Earls of Nassaw,
the owner of those places, made over his rights and pretentions to his
Highness; so that there are two strong grounds for him to act as he has acted.

But that which put him the more earnestly upon it is the further design of the
Lorraigner against his States, which clearly appear by the purchase he made
since, of a strong Castle named Holneck from a Vassal of his Electorall
Highness, which he might not sell without the consent and approbation of his
Sovereign. This the Prince complained of, and desired satisfaction for, as for
things before mentioned; and for performance of things formerly promised by
virtue of Treaties; but he could never receive any favorable answer to his
just desires: contrariwise new designs were daily and underhand carried on to
disturb the Peace of his Dominions, as I could instance in some particulars,
were it not I am already gone beyond the extent of a Letter.

And those just grounds of a falling out, were so well and so perfectly known
abroad, that his most Christian Majesty sent Mr. D'Aubevil to take assurance
from his Highness as he had taken it from the Duke of Lorrain, not to act any
Hosstilities one against another, which was easily obtained from the Duke,
either by the means of that dependency he has upon France, or by a principle
he had to secure that which he was in possession of; His Highness also gave his
word for it in relation to the Dukedom of Lorrain in its ancient bounds, but
those places which were controverted, must needs be supposed to have been
extepted eitherexpressedly or implicitly.

Wherefore his Highness prudently taking his time, besieged the two Castles of
Landstull and Holneck. and within a fortnight time took them both by
composition with the loss only of two men, and of seven or eight wounded;
wherein the providence of God has visibly savored his Armies, every one of
these Castles being in a posture to have held out much longer time then they
did, and till relief had come unto them: nay, in the Town of Landstull 300
Lorrainers were surprised the very morning they intended to have put a Convoy
into the Castle, and one D'Aspermont a kinsman of the Dutchesses, their
commander taken in his bed and carried away prisoner.

After this, His Highness having left Garrisons in both places, but with orders
to demolish the fortifications of Landstull, drew his Army toward Frankenstall,
and hearing of the march of the Lorrain forces he went toward Bingen a Town
upon the Rhine belonging to the Elector of Mentz, to oppose them, and since
that time they have sought with the success, which certainly you heard of, and
if you were acquainted with the order of the fight, you would grant that his
Highness has carried himself in it with an admirable conduct, as with an
extraordinary valor.

Now, my Lord, I leave the rest to your serious consideration: I do not
undertake to say what is your interest in it, you know it in England: and I
were overbold if I did press it upon you. However I may tell you how dangerous
'twould prove to let the Lorrainer grow too Potent against the Palatine,
especially because the French is like to succeed him in that Dukedom, and for
ought we know does encourage him to it Upon this occasion therefore it were a
Christian and Princely resolution to lay by animositys if any there be, and
assist the weak if it be possible, to prevent further desolations, and methinks
'twere also wisdom in any one who has grounds to pretend to that succession,
to hinder the destruction of that which one day may happen to be theirs; and I
am fully persuaded that there is no service the English would go upon so
heartily as this.

But perhaps you will tell me, it is policy not to engage, for fear this should
be a presidont for others to do the like on the contrary side, but it is a thing
very disputable whether this be a sufficient ground to dissuade you from it,
and suppose I grant it, yet there are several indirect and by ways to do it,
even as we think the Lorrainer has encouragement from others; at least I know
it were neither honourrable, nor advantageous, to suffer that branch of the
English Royal blood to be cut off, whilst it is in your power to prevent it,
though I hope it will never come to that.

This is my Lord all that I have as present to communicate to you, leaving your
Statsmen before it be too late to make upon it such serious reflections as the
matter deserves: however I hope if you do not assist so excellent a Prince, you
will countenance him in the Treaty, which they say is shortly to begin; or at
least pray for a blessing upon hs Person and continual prosperity of his Arms.

I am Yours etc.

FINIS.

