THE Grounds and Occasions OF THE CONTROVERSY Concerning the Unity of God, etc.

THE METHODS by which it has been managed, AND The MEANS to compose it.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

LONDON; Printed, and sold by E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall. MDCXCVIII.

THE Grounds and Occasions OF THE CONTROVERSY CONCERNING The Unity of God, etc.
THE eminently Learned, Wise, and Good Bishop of Down and Connor, Jeremy
Tailor, having affirmed and proved from express, clear, and full Attestations
of Scripture, from the Reasonableness of the thing, from the Testimonies of
Fathers, and later Schoolmen, that all the Articles of the Christian Faith are
plainly set down in Scripture, did not yet scruple to acknowledge, That there
were still in Scripture innumerable Places containing in them great Mysteries;
but then those Mysteries, he thought, were so involved with Clouds and
Darkness, so covered with Allegories and Garments of Rhetoric, that God may
seem to have left them as Trials of our Industry, as Arguments of our
Imperfections, Incentives to our Longings after the clearest Revelations of
Eternity, and as Occasions and Opportunities of Mutual Charity and Toleration.

That the Mysterious Passages of Scripture, are Trials ever like to find Work
for our Industry, and convincing Arguments of our Imperfections, is evident
from the little satisfaction which the many various attempted Interpretations
have given; and I question not but this Reflection may incline devouter Minds
ardently to long for the brighter Revelations of Eternity: but how few are they
who make the obscure Mysteries of Scripture, Occasions and Opportunities of
Mutual Charity and Toleration? In truth it is but reasonable to judge that the
All-wise God designed them for this good end; but the general Event which has
accidentally followed, through the Indisposition of unwise and ill-natured Men,
is, that they are made Occasions of venting bitter hatred, and wreaking zealous
Malice one upon another.

Could Religious Controversies be managed without intemperate Heat, breach of
Friendship and good Neighborhood, the advantages issuing thence might perhaps
be more and greater than could be easily esteemed and numbered; we should
certainly reap Fruits worthy our Industry and Study, either by improvements of
our Knowledge, or sense of our Ignorance; we should happily teach, or at least
civilly use one another: but if we are forsaken of common Prudence, as well as
Christian Charity, we shall turn all our Disputes about Religion, and [when we
are forbid them] every thing else into the Instruments of barbarous Cruelty,
and thereby create a greater mischief to the Body Politic, whereof we are all
Members, than a wise Conqueror would compel us to suffer, or a fair Enemy wish.

It is out of an honest desire of being serviceable, not to demonstrate what is
the certain true sense of a Mysterious Article, [I would sooner promise to
solve all the puzling Phenomenon in Nature, or fix the time for the Downfall of
the Turk, and Conversion of the Jews] but to prevent the mischievous
Consequences of various Interpretations, that I am going to consider, I. What
has raised the Disputes at present agitated among us. II. What has inflamed
them to that dangerous Excess, which in time it is feared may disturb the
public Quiet. III. What Is the proper way to remedy the Mischiefs which have
happened, and to prevent farther.


It is to me evident that the original of our present Disputes can be referred
to no one Cause; many Persons, Ecclesiastics and others, diversely moved, have
engaged in them. There is one sort of Men, who have been sometimes
distinguished by the Name of Unitarians, and by angry Adversaries reproachfully
called Socinians; but [to deal justly on all sides] who ought to be numbered
with the Orthodox, because they not only embrace the Doctrines of the Church of
England, but also are contented to use her School-terms, which they once
thought, and do still think not so fit to express her sound Doctrines. These
Persons, as to me seems probable, have engaged in our Religious Controversies,

1. Out of an aversion from taking things upon trust. This Motive must be
allowed to be reasonable and just, because he that gives up his Faith to human
Authority, is beholden to his good Fortune, whenever the Opinions which fall to
his lot, have any thing of truth or usefulness in them; and as often as they
happen to be illgrounded and noxious, he deserves all the evil Consequences
which he suffers by them; for if he had made use of his Reason before he gave
his Assent, there was at least a probability that he might have known better,
and guided himself more safely. The Bereans are commended in Scripture who
would not take things upon trust, no not from the Mouth of an Apostle; which is
enough to justify, without farther arguing, all them who are concerned in
Religious Controversies, moved thereunto by an aversion from taking things upon
trust. If I were writing to do service to these Orthodox Unitarians, [for that
must be granted to be their Character, now they have explained themselves, and
taken off the jealousy which the Church had conceived of them] if I were
writing purposely to do them service, I might here expatiate in liberal Praises
due to that noble Disposition of Mind, which takes nothing upon trust: We are
beholden to it for all the great Improvements of Knowledge, which serve the
Necessities and Comforts of Life; and not only so, but methinks we owe to it
our very Christian Orthodoxy it self: for an easy implicit Believer will never
stand with his Supreme, be it Alcoran, or what it will, which he is required to
subscribe; but the wary Examiner, who searches the Scripture that he may see
whether things are as the Church teaches, no sooner perceives the truth of her
Articles, but he holds unmoveably steadfast to them, and unfeignedly venerates
his holy Mother. But this is not my business now: Therefore,

2. Another Motive, which I am persuaded has influenced these Orthodox
Unitarians to enter into Religious Controversy, is an honest desire to be
serviceable to the Church, and useful to well-dispos'd less-knowing Christians,
by instructing and informing them. Whether these Persons are Ecclesiastics or
Laymen it matters not much; for I suppose it will be granted, that it is lawful
for one Man to inform and instruct his Friend, Neighbor, or Countryman, either
in private Discourse, or public Print, tho he be not a Minister of the Gospel,
or perhaps not Episcopally ordained.

3. I will not say but that these Unitarians may have been thrust upon
Controversy by a forward zeal to defend the Mysterious Doctrines of the Church,
against the Heathenish Interpretations of some eminent unwary Tritheists. Zeal
in defense of Doctrines which are certainly true, or at least unfeignedly
believed to be so, and against Errors really pernicious, or generally suspected
as such by good Men; if it spend its force only to establish the former, and to
refute the latter, abstaining from all Illegal, Injurious and Unchristian
Treatment of erroneous Persons, may pass for a virtuous and laudable temper of
Mind. Men give an assent, an unfeigned assent to Doctrines, because they
believe them to be true; and they endeavor to persuade others of the truth of
those Doctrines whereof they are persuaded themselves, because they suppose
that the same may be beneficial to others, as well as to themselves: On the
contrary, they seriously dispute against those Doctrines, which they imagine to
have an evil influence, prejudicing the nobler Interests of Mankind. To me then
it appears, that the arguing and disputing Temper is cherished and prompted by
good Nature; but if Wisdom does not direct, and Charity accompany it, if it
grows wild and imperious, and uses them ill, whom it cannot convince, it ceases
to be a laudable virtuous Temper, and becomes quite another thing. Now whether
these Unitarians have vindicated the Mysterious Doctrines of the Church of
England, by proper cogent Arguments, and in an obliging Christian manner,
without illegal injurious treatment of Dissenters; that is a Question which
ought not rashly to be determined for or against them. That I may more
impartially deal in my Censures, I defer the Consideration of it till my method
shall lead me to consider also how proper and how cogent have been the
Arguments; how winning and civil their manner of handling them, who have made
it their business to oppose these unfortunate, but perhaps not justly suspected
Unitarians: for to speak freely, I am afraid that all which either of them must
pretend to, is to have committed the fewest Mistakes, and to have trespassed
least against the righteous equitable Laws of Christ, and the generally
accepted Rules of good Manners.

I have now noted all that I can probably imagine to have prompted the Orthodox
Unitarians to enter into the Religious Controversies which are at present under
debate. Methinks it is too hard to judge as some do, that they have been spurred
on by a vain Ostentation of Learning; tho thus much is evident, without a stock
not contemptible they could not have done what they have: but to say that their
Writers are mercenary, and hired to the Work, looks as like an impertinent
Slander as can be; but to suppose them hired, which I don't believe, though I
cannot prove the contrary, I would fain ask, where is the unpardonable crime, to
be hired to write in defense of this or that Explication which the Church gives
of an Article that is obscure, and understood but in part? If any Man will hire
me to that Work, which agrees with honest Principles, and exceeds not my poor
Abilities, I am not ashamed to declare that I am at his Service, ready to be
commanded at a reasonable Rate.

There is another Division of Disputants engaged in Religious Controversy, but
which fall into many a Subdivision; all which Subdivisions are in open
profession, and most of them in truth and reality of the Church of England, as
well as the Unitarians, tho they are sometime unwisely content to prove their
Title to that Honor by so weak an Argument, as their differing from the
Unitarians; and when they have done, very few of them differ from the
Unitarians, except in terms Scholastic, peculiar Phrase and manner of
Expression, which small matter is also now very well accommodated.

This Division of Disputants, with all their Subdivisions, may be comprised
under the general distinction of Nominalists and Realists; the former are of
the Church, and know themselves to be so; the latter are mere Heathens, as far
as Polytheism goes, tho they know it not: we are bound in Charity to believe
they know it not, because they profess to be of the Church. Both the
Nominalists and Realists engaged against the suspected Unitarians, moved
thereunto, as may be guessed from their Writings,

1. By a profound Reverence for Authority. To do these Gentlemen justice as
well as the former, this Motive is not to be rashly condemned, nor yet can it
be well allowed, without nearly examining what is here meant by Reverence, and
what degrees of Reverence are here spoken of: Meaning by Reverence, a good
opinion, and high esteem of the Wisdom of the Ancients, of Fathers and
Councils, of modern Convocations of pious and dignified, learned and wealthy
Men, methinks it is a justifiable Motive, a Motive also to which we are
naturally inclined: for we are born only with a nobler Form, and a Docility
above other Creatures; and under the first advances of our Knowledge, it is
hardly possible for us to think of ever becoming, like the Royal Psalmist,
wiser than our Teachers: When our Reason is grown manly, and can go alone, i.
e. of it self compare Ideas, examine their Agreement and Disagreement, thence
drawing farther useful Conclusions, still we are justly inclined to have a
great Respect for our Teachers, and Men of Fame that went before us; and
cannot, nay ought not to endure to have their Doctrines condemned as erroneous,
without fair and full evidence against them. When Experience chances to
acquaint us with any notices, about which our Ancestors, or now living
Teachers, have been mistaken, there is still a Reverence due to them, a
Reverence that should restrain us from exposing them, a Reverence that should
guide us modestly to represent what our own study and observance has
discovered; and it is but an honest and grateful Reverence to their Wisdom, to
vindicate all their Conclusions, which our own Reason apprehends to have been
fairly drawn from just Premises. Wherefore all those Writers that have engaged
in Religious Controversy, moved by such Sentiments as these, their Reverence
for Authority becomes them, and justifies their Undertaking; but what is beyond
this, is Excess and Extravagance, and it were strange if the products of such
Motives should be regular and even, reasonable and useful. It is notorious
Excess, and wild Extravagance, to make Gods of Men, and equal Human Authority
to Divine. The Doctrines of Fathers, the Canons of Councils, the Decrees of
Popes, the Confessions of National Churches, may, it is true, be reasonably
defended by any Man who is sincerely persuaded, that the same are truly stated,
righteously ordained, wisely decreed, and well drawn up: But when any Doctrines
or Canons, Decrees or Confessions, are defended, not for sake of their own
Truth and Excellence, but in reverence to the Authority of the Authors, a
Reverence is paid them above what they can deserve, because a greater cannot be
paid to God Almighty. We can but submit our Judgments to the Revelations of
God; and it is lawful for us to examine, nay it is our commendation to examine
how far those Histories are to be trusted which give us an account of his
Revelations: having once satisfied our selves in this point, [and as to the
Histories of the Old and New Testament, we have fair and full Evidence, that is
my Opinion, and I am sure the Unitarians grant it] we have then nothing to do
but to examine [with the best skill we have in Languages, and Customs of the
old Jews, and first Christians, by regarding the Genius, Style, and Design of
Sacred Writers, etc.] what is the true and proper signification of the Words
which we read, what sense arises from them. Contradictions to natural Reason
cannot be the true sense of the words, Difficulties may; such is the Doctrine
of the Resurrection: if we submit our Judgments in any case but this, where we
are sure of a Divine Revelation, and where we are sure of the sense of the
sacred Penman's words, we pay an excessive Reverence to the Authority of Men;
but I believe that those Gentlemen who profess to submit their Judgments to the
Church, have no other aim, but to court the Church her favor, or cheat her
inspection with a Complement. There Is no avoiding such a thought as this, when
the solemn and public Judgment and Declaration of a Vice Chancellor and Heads
of one of our Universities, condemning the Doctrine of three infinite distinct
Minds and Substances in the Trinity, as False, Impious, and Heretical, contrary
to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and of the Church of England, is made
a Jest of, and rejected with bold, contemptuous and angry Railery. All that the
Church of England requires of us is, I humbly conceive, such a Reverence and
Esteem as I first described, a wise Submission, a Reverence joined with
Honesty, and a good Understanding, a Submission, according as may be gathered
from the 20th of her 39 Articles; because she does not, as she ought not,
ordain any thing contrary to God's Word written; because she expounds
Scripture, one place consonant to another; because she is a faithful Keeper of
Holy Writ, decrees nothing against the same; and besides the same enforces
nothing as necessary to Salvation. The Church does not pretend to
Infallibility; the most eminent, Sons shall I say, or Fathers of the Church,
look upon her Articles as Forms in a comprehensive Latitude, drawn up for Peace
sake; and very conscious are they that the Church of the last Age was
Calvinist, the Church of the present Age Arminian, and all the while it was
Church of England: but when bold Opiniators shall not be content to keep
themselves within the accountable bounds of prudential Latitude, but start odd
Notions, not at all distinguishable from Heathenish Polytheism, then they who
dispute against them enter into Religious Controversy, moved thereunto by a
very just Motive. But perhaps it may be urged, that the Polytheists did not
begin the Quarrel: Well, suppose it, what will they gain by that Plea, if still
their Doctrine is no other than Polytheism? And what if it should appear that
the Unitarians gave the first occasion of Dispute; this will create no
Prejudice against them, in the Minds of considering Men: for as far as I can
perceive, they took Exceptions not against the Articles, but the Scholastical
Terms of the Church; and drove at nothing farther, than that those difficult
Propositions, which are called Mysteries, might be expressed as far as the
Subject would admit, in words plain and intelligible; and when that could not
be, in the very Phrase of Scripture. The Unitarians, if I take them right,
cannot yet submit their Judgment, so as not to prefer Scripture Phrase before
Scholastic Terms; tho they are such lovers of Peace, that it has been again
and again declared, that when nothing is meant by all those Terms of Art which
is contrary to Reason, or not consonant to Scripture, they will not
contentiously decline the use of them. They have said as much in some of their
Prints, and I should not do them justice, if I did not take notice of it. They
are also ready to pay due reverence to the Church, because of her great Candor
and Moderation in not exacting from good Christians a submission of Judgment as
to the use of Religious Rites and Ceremonies; something more hardly once she
treated them, but now (God be thanked) she is come to a true Christian Temper;
so that I reckon, the Toleration which Parliamentary Authority has indulged, is
enjoyed by conscientious Separatists with the consent of the Church; for it
were uncharitable to suspect that she is not the same now, as a while ago in
the time of her danger: And therefore I think that those warmer Zealots, who
entertain their Auditories with Invectives against the Toleration, do not only
slight the Authority of King and Parliament, but also bring a Scandal upon the
Church. It is but just to believe that the Church is pleased with the
Toleration for this other reason, because she gets more by that, than ever she
did by violence; for it is visible that our Parochial Churches are fuller now
than when we compelled Men to come in. But enough of this, tho it is not
altogether out of the way; for this also tends to declare on what accounts a
reverential esteem is due to the Church; and on what respects the vindication
of her Honor is a just Motive of entering into Religious Controversy: but a
blind submission of Judgment to all that the Church already has decreed, or may
decree hereafter, is a senseless slavish Stupidity. An implicit Faith in all her
Articles, is more than she does require; a taking up always with the first
obvious, literal Grammatical Sense, is more than the most, and the most learned
Deacons, Priests and Bishops themselves do.

2. The Persons, of whom I have been speaking, were prompted, as may be
gathered from their Prints, to enter into Religious Controversy by an
indignation against all Innovations in Religion. As specious a look as this
Motive has, it must be very well circumstanc'd, before it can be allowed for a
just and reasonable one; for it happens many times, that the Innovation is but
surmis'd and suspected; and perhaps there would not be half the Differences
which there are in the Church, if words which have not all of them determinate
and distinct Ideas, if terms of Art and equivocal Phrases were expounded, and
sixth by exact and plain Definitions. Foreign Protestants are apt to suspect
that the Church of England favors the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, because
she expresses her self by that ambiguous Phrase, Real Presence; they are afraid
lest Real Presence should signify Corporeal Presence: But when the Church
avows, that she does not use the word Real in that sense, but means only a
Spiritual Presence, apprehended and enjoyed by Faith, the occasion of dispute
is removed, and all that can be said against the Church, is, that her Language
is not so proper, as her Faith is pure. Therefore that celebrated Hugonot
Jurieu, was more angry than the Cause deserved, when he joined
Transubstantiation and Real Presence together, and called 'em both Monsters;
which harsh Censure cannot be returned upon his Accomplishment of Prophecies,
for that is an ingenious, learned, pretty thing: the Events of History have an
agreeable resemblance to the Apocalyptick Emblems to which he applies them; but
for all that, I believe there is not one word of truth in his interpretative
Accomplishment. By the Form of Absolution in the Visitation of the Sick, one
might be apt to suspect, that it was the Doctrine of our Church, that God has
given power to our Priests that now are, to forgive sins; but yet the
generality of our Priests abhorring delusive Priestcraft, make no more of it
than a mere Declaration, that God forgives the Sinner, supposing he be truly
penitent: When they have thus explained themselves, no Body can quarrel their
Doctrine; and who would fall out with them for an awkward way of expressing it?
Ever give me Catholic, Orthodox Doctrine, tho veiled under obscure and less
proper Phrase, rather than gross affected Tritheism, openly avowed, and in
distinct plain words expressed, in words and phrase so clear and proper, that
every understanding unbiased Reader may at first sight apprehend it. Now by
explaining and defining, the occasion of Dispute is removed; indeed some
Disputants define ignotum per ignotius, one obscure ambiguous word, term,
phrase, by another more obscure and ambiguous: they mend the matter well; but
full, plain and clear Definitions make short work of Controversy: The
Disputants quickly see by this means where it is they differ, if so be they do
differ; for not rarely it happens, they discover that they were of one and the
same mind, tho they did not express their thoughts after one and the same
manner. I am very much mistaken, or this is the very Case between the suspected
Unitarians, and the Nominal Orthodox Trinitarians who suspected them: Indeed as
to the Realists, there is a wide difference between them, and both the former;
their Tritheism is Innovation with a Witness, and a just Motive for their
Opposers to engage in Religious Controversy. Again it may happen, that the
Innovation comes to no more than the reviving a long-buried Truth, or the
rubbing the rust off from a corrupted Usage: for Truths certain and useful have
run like Rivers under ground for several Ages, and then their first appearance
afterward may be called Innovation; but that will not justify any Man's
contending for his old Errors; no, tho his old Errors have lived for several
Ages. The eating and drinking the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ by
Faith, the other Day was a mere Innovation; yet I do not believe that our Real
Trinitarians will say, that the Anthropophagous Romanists, the human Flesh and
Blood-eating Papists, had reason with Fire and Sword to oppose it. The cry of
Innovation is sometimes made use of, to secure a beloved false Doctrine from
being contradicted; a superstitious cheating Practice from being undermined.
Where a present Establishment is without fault, no Innovation can be so; but a
departing from the Language of the Schools, is not the same thing as departing
from the Faith. Yet that our Differences may be accommodated in some tolerable
manner, let sound Religion, say I, be taught in barbarous Language; better so,
than Tritheism clothed with words pure and proper, and phrase elegantly plain;
for that is but like Martial's fine Amber-Box, with nothing but a Viper and a
dead Fly in it.

3. Both Realists and Nominalists, as themselves profess, and I believe,
honestly have entered into Religious Controversy to vindicate the Christian
Religion, the main Foundation of which, they once (by mistake) verily thought
that the Unitarians were undermining, and laboring to overthrow. It is good to
be jealous for the honor of the Christian Religion; but nevertheless it is a
fault, and a very unchristian one, to charge any Man unjustly: for an unjust
Charge of this high nature, robs innocent Persons of the Comforts and
Advantages which they might chance to have in the good opinion of others; and
not only so, but exposes them to the dire Effects of that Zeal, which is too
hot ever to have mercy, and too passionate ever to consider matters calmly,
deliberately, and as they ought to be considered. When the Realists and
Nominalists first suspected the Unitarians of entertaining such wicked and
detestable thoughts, as to undermine and subvert the main Foundation of the
Christian Religion, it would have extremely become them to have carefully
weighed what are the sure and certain Truths, which may be reasonably called
the Foundation of the Christian Religion; and what are the less certain
Doctrines and Speculations, concerning which, Men that lead virtuous and
Christian Lives, are differently persuaded: But now in their anger and their
haste, they have condemned the Unitarians as Heretics, for not giving the true
sense of some Articles, whose true sense they themselves have not yet found
out, or are not agreed upon. One would think that a mistaken Exposition of an
obscure Article did not tend to the Subversion of the Christian Religion, but
they have judged it otherwise; yet to do them right, for furious merciless
Judges, they use as much equity as could be wished, carrying on their severe
Censures with a remarkable Impartiality. The Tritheistick Trinity (says one of
them) is worse even than Socinianism: The Nominal Trinity (says another) is as
bad; in which last Censures, I shall not contradict them: but one thing I must
remark, viz. That when the Purposes in which Men agree are none of the best,
the gaining their Point is but removing an Obstacle which hinders them from
vexing one another. There are some great Men, who (out of what Christian
Principle, neither I, nor they can tell) would have the Unitarians be Heretics
by themselves, and by consequence burnt by themselves, without the company of
any of them who commit the very same, or a more heinous fault: For which
purpose they solicit the Magistrates, after the manner of Inquisitors, Omni
affectu quo possint, but without the Hypocrisy of the Inquisitors; for these
great Men of ours call for Fire in plain words, which the other mean when they
require Mercy, and to justify the Exemption of whom they please from Heresy and
the Stake. The Other day this Dream was told; -- A Man may be very right in the
belief of an Article, and yet be mistaken in his Explication of it.

I call this a Dream, meaning no disrespect in the World to the Author, for
quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus, but because it appears at the very first
sight an inconsistent Notion; now pleasing Dreams Men are unwilling to part
with, therefore a Friend is called in to give credit to this; but as ill luck
would have it, all which that Friend says, is That a Man may quit his
Explication, without parting with the Article it self: That is, Dr. Sh -- may
quit his Explication, and so may every other Realist, without parting with the
Article of the Trinity. But under favor, he that quits the true Explication,
quits the Article it self, or it is impossible to quit it. To speak seriously,
one would wonder how it could enter into the thoughts of a wise Man being
awake, to imagine that an Article might be rightly believed, that was not
rightly understood. If it be objected, that I alter the Case, and should have
worded it -- that was not rightly explained: I reply, The thing is the same;
for I presume that the Author from whom I beg leave to dissent, will obligingly
grant me, That the Explainer, whom he would save from Heresy, understands as he
explains: I am sure he is a Knave if he does not; and speculative Heresy is an
innocent thing, in comparison with practical Knavery. To declare publicly that
an Article may be rightly believed, which is not rightly understood! if an
Unitarian, or any Friend of theirs had done it, without question he had been
plentifully reproached. Mr. J. E. B. D. would not have missed the occasion, but
have enriched his last Rhapsody of railing, with Exclamations argumentative, as
well as ill-natured. How! an Article rightly believed, tho not rightly
understood! -- To see what senseless shifts these pretenders to Reason take up
with, to save their Heterodoxes from the imputation of Heresy, and themselves
from the peril of the Stake! What Idea can there be had of so
self-contradicting a Proposition? Indeed to such a sharp Reproof as this, I
don't see what could have been replied by any Unitarian of them all, or by Mr.
Lock, or Mr. Toland either [as much Friends as they are (tho neither side knows
it) to the Unitarians.] But then those Gentlemen are not capable of such an
elevated Thought; it is not possible for any one to rise so high, but a
vast-read, profound Scholar, who does not judge concerning the Truth of a
Proposition, by the Agreement or Disagreement of the Ideas contained in it, but
by a sort of Reason, which what it is, and how it operates, no Conception can
be had, nor Account given. But whatever Mr. J. E. would have done had this
contradictory Notion been started by an Unitarian, I shall deal gently with it,
observing only, that, for whose sake soever it was made public, it will save
all that Assent and Consent to an Article, as it lies in the Words of the
Church, of what Denomination soever they are, and how plainly contradictory
soever their Explanations; it will save all alike, all, or none. But the
Unitarians want not this Plea to defend their Cause, for they profess to
believe the Article of the Trinity; nay, and what is more, they explain that
Article to the very same Sense as do the Nominalists, for Peace sake submitting
even to the Scholastic Terms, which they cannot like so well as the very
Phrase of Scripture. Now I cannot imagine how these Unitarians, so very
orthodox, and so exactly conformable to the Church, can be left alone in the
lurch for Heretics, unless it be proved, that, as one Man may be right in the
Belief of an Article, tho he be wrong in the Explication; so another may be
right in the Explication of an Article, tho he be mistaken in the Belief of it.
But after all these things which may be righteously pleaded in behalf of the
Unitarians, it must not be denied but that their Adversaries had a just Motive
to enter into religious Controversy, while they suspected them of laboring to
undermine the Christian Religion; only their Adversaries were to blame, that
they did not more calmly and leisurely examine the Meaning of those Passages,
whatsoever they were, at which they took Offense. I purpose to offer something
now, to clear all Suspicions that the Nominalists may chance to entertain of
the Unitarians: as for the Realists, no Accommodation can ever be between them
and true Christians; great Men, out of the abundance of their Charity, may
forgive the Tritheism of those Heathenish Writers, but by all their Wit and
Learning they can never make Three infinite Minds to be but One God:
nevertheless, I am content that they be forgiven, only I would not have so much
Charity wasted to forgive them, that there be no Equity left for sincerer
Christians. In order to clear the Suspicions which the Nominalists may chance
to entertain of the Unitarians, that so there may be no Simultates between
them, no evil Grudgings, no base Language, no unchristian Reviling, I shall
consider, 1. What manner of Persons those are, who of late have been
distinguished by the Name of Unitarian. 2. What is the Tendency of their
Doctrines. And this I propound to do, not by way of Answer to all the false and
foul Imputations which are vomited up by Mr. Burgess, Mr. Edwards, or that
over-bold Poetaster who makes so bold with the Almighty, as to subscribe
himself God's most humble, most faithful, and devoted Servant, (but I suppose
that that Gentleman will excuse himself, and say, all the World may know he did
but complement) but in hopes to satisfy those fairer Disputants, such as Dr.
Pain and Mr. Norris, whom, by their Christian Candor and Equity, one may with
more Reason conclude heartily to believe the holy Religion which they profess.
Yet it will not be proper to speak to the first Head, until I have premised a
word to inform the Reader of what standing these Unitarians are. When the
Papists ask the Protestants, Where was your Church before Luther? the
Protestants, by way of Reply, pretend to find Christians through all Ages, tho
of diverse Denominations, who are recorded to have held the same Opinions with
them: in like manner, the Opinions which are at this day charged upon the
Unitarians, may be traced up from Age to Age, to the very next times to the
Apostles, and by their early Asserters were vouched as truly Christian and
Apostolical; and in several Ages a great majority of Christian Professors
holding the same, they then went for Orthodox. But our Church of England,
bearing a great Reverence for Antiquity, is very zealous for the Retention of
some old Philosophical Terms, yet as nice and careful in explaining the same
according to Scripture and Reason; tho at the same time, she, in the Persons of
her most Orthodox Sons, is reproached by a few backsliding Tritheistick
Realists, as if she agreed with those ancient Heretics said to be the Founders
and Predecessors of the Unitarians. The Unitarians themselves, I mean the
English of late so called, think it an Injury to be termed Ebionites, Alogians,
Arians, Photinians, etc. or indeed any thing but Christians; but when they are
reproached by those Names of distinction, they cannot forbear noting that the
very Apostles Creed has lain under the Suspicion of Arianism, Photinianism,
etc. God knows how justly; for we have some Orthodox Doctrines, which if they
are contained in that Creed, are yet so covertly contained there, that it is
not every ordinary Reasoner that can espy them, and by a long Train of just
Consequences deduce them, and bring them into light. By the Apostles Creed
however, and by the Holy Scriptures, the Unitarians are always willing to be
tried, and mean not to make a Peace-disturbing Schism from the Church of
England, at least not as long as the chief Doctors of the Church profess, That
by none of her Homilies, Creeds, or Canons, they mean any such thing as a
Tritheistick Trinity, a Trinity with three distinct infinite Minds. The present
Term of Reproach (with which some Men, for want of better Argument, hope to
confound the Unitarians) is Socinian. Now it must be confessed, That the
Unitarians think honorably of Socinus; but yet they do not espouse his whole
Scheme, nor any thing of his Scheme, because it is his; nor any thing more of
his Scheme than is espoused by their Arminian Nominalist Brethren, who are a
great majority of the Church, tho the Animadverter may not love to bear of it.
Socinus's Life is in Print among us, both Latin and English: the Memory of the
Man is frequently reviled; but I do not hear that his Adversaries undertake to
refute the historical Account which the Polonian Knight has given of him. Mr.
Bidle, in his Preface, has these Words of Socinus, He took the same course to
propagate the Gospel, that Christ and the Apostles had done before him,
forsaking his Estate, and his nearest Relations, and undergoing all manner of
Labors and Hazards to draw Men to the Knowledge of the Truth: He had no other
End of all his Undertakings, than the Glory of God and Christ, it being
impossible for Calumny it self to asperse him with the least Suspicion of
worldly Interest. He, of all Interpreters, explaineth the Precepts of Christ in
the strictest manner, and windeth up the Lives of Men to the highest Strain of
Holiness.

The Author of the Growth of Error makes it an Article against Socinus, that he
accused the Reformed of immoral Practices, and boasted of the Holiness of his
own Followers. But what says that Author? Was Socinus's Accusation unjust, or
his Boasting rash and ill grounded? Why, he says, Meisner answered Socinus; but
it seems he confesses too, that Schlichtingius defended him. Upon the whole
matter, to speak impartially, Excepting that the foreign Unitarians are
recorded to have sometimes dealt hardly with one another upon account of their
different Persuasions concerning worshipping Jesus Christ, it does not appear
that their Lives were wicked and unchristian. Here in England, Men that know
little of them, or have Ends in traducing them, load them with heavy
Imputations; but impartial Men abroad, who have known and observed them,
notwithstanding they differ from them, do yet bear honorable Testimony to
their Piety and Virtue. Monsieur Stoop a Protestant Officer in the French Army,
in his Religion of the Dutch, Anno 1673. gives this Account of the Socinians in
Holland: They have their secret Assemblies, in which they are very fervent in
Prayer to God, with groaning and weeping. -- They affirm that they have no
Interest in the maintaining their Doctrine, save only the Persuasion they have
of its Truth, and the Zeal of appropriating to the only individual and
sovereign God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Glory of his Divinity.
-- They are confirmed in their Faith by reading the Word of God, and by the
Books which have been written against them. -- Their Conversation is holy and
without Reproach, as far as Men can judge by what they see. Much more this
impartial Gentleman, none of their Party, says to their Praise. Even of the
English Unitarians, one of our Reverend Bishops disputing against them, when he
looked upon them as altogether Socinianiz'd, fairly professes, that he judges
they would not think so meanly of our Lord Christ, but for fear of taking away
from the Honor of God Almighty. But I have a Word or two to offer to the
Reverend Bishop of Sarum, before I speak of the English Unitarians of this last
Age. As ill as he thinks now of these Unitarians, I hope he will not retract
the noble Character which he once gave of one George Van Par, a Dutchman,
burnt in England 1549 for Unitarianism, which he could not in Conscience
abjure: He led a very exemplary Life for Fasting, Devotion, and a good
Conversation, and suffered with extraordinary Composedness of Mind. It is out
of the way to speak of Barth. Legate, [a Man of whose virtuous Behavior the
Booksellers of Paul's, among whom he conversed for 7 Years before his Execution,
gave a good account] for he was an Arian, burnt An. 1611, re-burnt this last
Year by Mr. Gailhard: but it is a better Argument for that poor Man's
Seriousness in his Religious Persuasion, that he could endure to be burnt for
it, than it is for the Sincerity of Mr. Gailhard, and the Honor of Calvinism,
that he thirsts after the Blood of thousands, and damns all Orders and Degrees
of Men that do not forward his Executions. But that no ill-minded Person may
hence take occasion to say, that I insinuate that the Unitarians are a numerous
Body; I openly declare, that whether they are many or few, is more than I know,
or care, who am an impartial, tho not always a melancholy By-stander: But that
they are better Men, truer Christians, and more faithful Subjects, than the
revengeful Calvinists, will appear to any Man that examines the Writings of
both sides. I now come to speak of those Persons of this last Age who have been
distinguished by the Name of Unitarians.

Anthony Wood, in his Athenae Oxonienses, 2d Vol. p. 197-199. gives a large
Account of John Bidle, and says among other very commendable things, that being
Master of Crifts School in Gloucester, He was much esteemed for Diligence in his
Profession, Severity of Manners, and Sanctity of Life. And when he came to
converse in London, after many Years Imprisonment, He was very taking for his
Religious Discourse and Saint-like Conversation. Now Mr. Wood, I presume,
cannot be suspected of Partiality in favor of an Unitarian. John Bidle sealed
the Sincerity of his religious Persuasion, by his Death; for he took that
Sickness in Newgate, whereof he died 2 days after Removal.

Mr. Cooper succeeded Mr. Bidle Master of Crifts School in Gloucester, afterward
Minister of Chelthenam in Glocestershire; and after the Act of Uniformity,
Minister of an Unitarian Congregation in that Place. We appeal to all that knew
him, whether he was not a Man always composed and grave, but of a most sweet
and obliging Temper and Conversation. He suffered those Abuses from intemperate
and riotous Men, when the Nation was running mad they knew not for what, that
it broke his Health, and hastened his End. His Daughter Mary died about a Year
and a half since, a known Unitarian; so that the Minister who preached her
Funeral Sermon commended her to his Auditors for a Pattern of Christian
Virtues, however erroneous in her Judgment. Mr. Cooper was succeeded in the
Guidance of an Unitarian Congregation by Ralph Tailor, Henry Sturmy, Thomas
Macock, and Allen Kear, all of them very serious and diligent in their way,
devout and pious, strictly honest, and charitable to their power; however not
so accomplished in Humane Learning.

John Knowles of Gloucester, by long and diligent Study, became very knowing in
the Critical Learning of the Scriptures; his much Reading, and Thoughtfulness,
won him to Unitarianism, having in his younger Years been an Independent. His
singular Piety and Virtue were exemplarily conspicuous in diverse Stations and
Stages of his Life. His Labors were directed to the Benefit of others; the
greatest Fruit of them to himself, was Dangers and hard Usages. His Patience
was tried by undeserved Injuries, and Imprisonment even in the time of the
raging Plague. Dying, he bequeathed some Books of value to the Library at
Gloucester; and a Third of all he had, for the Relief of Men persecuted for
Religion, and other Charities. He also was an Unitarian Teacher while he lived
in London: After the Year of the Plague, he conversed frequently among the
Clergy; his Learning, and Seriousness in Religion, was well known among them,
of whom several are now living.

Mr. Gilbert Clerk was Fellow of Sidney College in Cambridg; which Place he was
obliged to leave for Conscience sake: after that, he lived long at Stamford,
well known and esteemed by Dr. Cumberland the Reverend Bishop of Peterborough,
who used to speak of him by the Name of Honest Gilbert. He was Author of two of
those Tracts called Tractatus tres, etc.

Mr. Noual, late Rector of Tydds St. Giles near Wisbich in the Isle of Ely, was
a Man of singular Piety, and winning Conversation. His Writings testify his
excellent Learning. He was complained of to his Reverend Diocesan, for omitting
those parts of the Liturgy, which after some Years of Study and Consideration
he came to be persuaded against. We appeal to the Reverend Bishop, and even to
all the Clergy of Ely, especially to him that preached his Funeral Sermon last
Trinity Sunday, whether he deserved not the Character given him.

I ought not to conclude the Account which I give concerning the Persons of the
Unitarians, without taking notice of Mr. Thomas Firmin. I have known him
intimately these 6 or 7 Years, and do now mourn the Loss of the best Man I ever
knew: but upon the strength of so short an Acquaintance, had I never so great
Abilities, I ought not to pretend to draw his just and full Character: let the
Reader expect that, as I do, from one of his dearest eldest Friends. Yet
something I am prompted to offer, not only by my Gratitude to his Memory, but
in proper Justice to the Argument before me.

Mr. Thomas Firmin is now gone to his Rest, but has left behind him a good
Name, a Name entertained with the highest Esteem among the greatest and best
Men, not of our Nation only, but of far distant Countries; for it pleased God
to inspire him with a wonderful measure of true Christian Charity, so that he
looked upon himself as obliged to study and labor no less a Work, than the
Good of Mankind in general. One while he was busy in providing for the Poor,
both at home and abroad, as far as his wide and honorable Friendships, his own
honest Acquisitions, his apprehensive Understanding, constant Industry, and
Application could carry him. In providing for the Poor, his Charity was regular
and prudent; he considered what was fitting to be allowed to the Unhappy,
reduced by some common Casualty of Providence, and what was necessary for the
Support of the Sick and the Aged, of lame Persons, and Children. As for poor
People, able to work, he rightly judged, the best Charity was to find them
Work; he did it for thousands: And till the Great Council of the Nation shall
make effectual Provisions in this weighty matter, thousands will be sadly
sensible of the Loss of Mr. Thomas Firmin. At another time he joined his
Counsels and Interest to advance the Trade of England; and to whatever good
Work he joined his hand (which he did to many) the same proceeded much more
successfully through his hearty and active Concurrence. On all Occasions he was
ready, and sincere in discountenancing Deism: for tho he was persuaded there
might be Deists, that were virtuous and good Men, upon the sole Belief of the
Existence of God, and the Expectance of future Recompenses; yet he thought
Deism nothing so sure a Foundation of true Virtue and Goodness, as the
Gospel-Revelation. He made himself one in the Society for Reformation of
Manners; and no good Man of that number was more zealously affected, by wise
and legal Methods to suppress Profaneness and Irreligion, which, he well knew,
loosened the Bands of all Society, and made Man to Man a more dangerous Enemy
than biting Serpents, or devouring Brutes. In short, as to matters Civil, his
chief Aim was, the Prosperity of Old England: With respect to Religion, his
ardent Desire was, first to convince the World that Natural and Revealed
Religion both, obliged them to be morally honest; and then to promote universal
Love and Good Will among Men morally honest, however about speculative
Doctrines differently persuaded. But God never indulged it, no not to his
dearly beloved Son, to go about doing Good, and incur no Envy; to shine
conspicuously in his Generation with the Splendor of good Works, and meet no
Hatred nor Opposition. That which Mr. Firmin met with, proceeded sometimes from
the Jealousies and Fears of Ecclesiastics, eminent for their Honors,
Learning, and Piety; but I leave it to the World to judge whether their
Jealousies and Fears, or his Conduct was most to blame. But what was Jealousy
and Fear only in the Minds of some eminent Ecclesiastics, was Passion and rash
Zeal, and the over-boiling of an unchristian Breast in others of a lower form,
which I will not say but their weaker Judgments might look upon as a piece of
good Service to God, and it is not impossible for them to have supposed it the
readiest way to serve themselves. But had Mr. Firmin been the Heretic which
they represented him, it would not have misbecome them to have bated him some
ill Language for the sake of his truly Christian Conversation. For wise Men
will always set a greater Value upon a good Life than a clear-sighted
Understanding, and never confute a supposed Heresy (which does not engage its
Professors in immoral Practices) with penal Inflictions instead of convincing
Reason.

I will not here dissemble what I have once heard from Mr. Firmin's own Mouth;
viz. That a venerable Prelate, or two, had lately charged him as a Promoter of
Deism, which, they said, was the Road to Atheism. At this Charge the good Man
was extremely concerned; not that he admitted the Charge, or the Aggravation of
it, to be true, (for he was thoroughly satisfied at whose doers that Guilt lay)
but concerned he was, that he should be so unhappy, as to be in such manner
misjudged by Persons of their Worth and Character: whereupon he was more
frequent in his Advices to his Friends, that they would be diligently careful
of their Conversation, that they would shun the Company [as much as their
lawful worldly Business permitted] of immoral Men, but especially of them who
questioned the Truth of the Christian Revelation. He thought indeed better of a
moral Deist than of a wicked Man professing Christianity; yet no one ever
talked doubtingly of the Christian Revelation in his Company, but was sure of a
just and public Reproof. I could add more to his Praise on this Topic, but I
hope to see it done by one much longer and better acquainted with him than my
self. I think Mr. Firmin ought not to have been looked upon with an evil eye by
any of the Church of England; I am sure the moral Discourses of the most
learned and pious of the Clergy in his time, differ not at all from his
Sentiments, but rest on the same Foundations which he built upon; viz. the
Foundations of natural Reason, and consonant Christian Revelation. It Is true,
he did differ from them as they differ from one another, in some speculative
Opinions; and I will say that for both their Honors, wherein the Clergy
differed among themselves, each Party thought Mr. Firmin in the more pardonable
Error: so that if Heresy had been doomed to the Fire, the Church would have
been almost half destroyed before it had come to his turn.

'Twere too invidious a thing to name either those that esteemed, or those that
malign'd him; but might I have the liberty which some Philosophic Fathers,
after their Conversion from Paganism, made bold with, I would adventure at a
Pathetick Argument, and by a proper Prosopopoeia introduce Mr. Grigg, Dr.
Whichcot, or Archbishop Tillotson, vindicating the Honor of their dear Friend.
Had they been now living, they would have done it effectually. I am conscious I
cannot put into their mouths Words worthy them or him; but the least they would
have said, must have imported thus much -- He exposes his own Judgment, who
accuses Mr. Firmin of Heresy; he proclaims himself an ill Man, who questions
his Morals.

Against his worst Enemies, those that could take Offense at nothing but the
Virtue and Reputation of the Man, I shall not inveigh severely: it is enough to
say, the Coffee-man can have no Comfort in his Scandal, which no body will
credit: and as for Mr. Burgess, he took it up, not from any manner of
Probability, [even his own Printer, and several others, told him it was a
horrid Calumny] but out of pure Zeal against what he calls Socinianism, because
he knows no better. It was this which made him talk, in his fanciful way, about
stinking Goats, and sweet-scented Panthers, painted Snakes, and immoral Poison.
But, whether it pleases him or not, the injured Man's fair Fame has taken Wing,
and is not to be bounded within our narrow Seas, or blasted by his envious
Metaphors. The Masters of Oratory say, those Metaphors ought to be shunned
which are borrowed a re turpi, aut sordida; and those which are too far
fetched, had better have been let alone: but if a Man is above these Rules,
then with his Goats, Snakes, and Panthers, he may make what work he pleases;
and if he be minded, at one bold Stroke to defy all Rules, and ridicule his own
Discourse, let him represent the serious Business of reproving Sin, by snuffing
a Candle.

By accident, our Enemies often happen to do us greater Kindness than our
Friends. So happened it to Mr. Firmin; All that conversed with him were
extremely taken with the soft, agreeable, and endearing Conversation of the
Man; but what a Friend says in such a case, is often suspected to have more of
Affection than Truth in it: but Providence, to secure the Fame of Mr. Firmin,
moved an Enemy to bear Testimony to his Honor; for one that with a malevolent
eye observed him, represents him as a Man of Socinus's Make, complaisant and
sweet even to such as oppose and detest his Heresy. Now I know of no Heresy
which he had; I am sure he did not take the Opinions of Socinus upon content,
but agreed with, or differed from, that Writer, as he saw cause: if he had any
thing in him bordering upon Heresy, it was his Obstinateness in believing with
his own Understanding those things only which appeared to him credible,
agreeable to Holy Scripture, and not contradictory to Natural Reason: but his
Conversation indeed, that (as his Enemy says) was always complaisant and sweet;
for, alas! he was bred a Christian, and never used to return Railing for
Railing. But by the way, if a sweet good Nature be an Heretical Temper, then a
furious ill Nature must be an orthodox Temper, and then this Term of Art,
Orthodox, will at last become but another Word for Unchristian.

Who would have imagined that the Wit of an Enemy should have advanced against
Mr. Firmin such an Objection, as that He was open-handed to the Poor with his
own or other Folks Money? Both parts of the Disjunction are true; but to
suppose only the latter so, that proves that Mr. Firmin was well known for a
faithful and prudent Dispenser of Charity: and to suppose he had nothing of his
own to give, which is spitefully insinuated; yet even this redounds to his
Honor, for is it not a very commendable thing, if there were no more in it, for
a Man to spend so much of his time upon the Poor? I am apt to think it was
offense taken at the ill Lives of the Christians, rather than the Doctrines of
Christianity, which made the renowned Averroes wish, that his Soul might rest
with the Philosophers: now have I that awful regard for the Virtue and Piety of
Mr. Firmin; that let his Adversaries revile him, and call him Heretic as long
as they please, I cannot forbear praying, may my Soul rest with this thrice
excellent and truly Christian Unitarian.

It is to spare the Reader's farther trouble, that I deduce no longer a
Catalogue of English Unitarians, not long since deceased, who were neither
Atheists, nor Deists, nor Profane, nor immoral Persons, (as is the Cry of some
now when they have spent all their fair Arguments, and distrust their Efficacy)
but seriously religious, fully satisfied of the truth of the Christian
Revelation, devout, honest, and charitable.

If it objected that the Unitarians lately deceased, whom I have now
charactered, separated themselves from the Church of England, and formed
religious Assemblies to themselves apart; and therefore the Unitarians now
living cannot pretend to the Title of Orthodox Churchmen. I reply, 1. That as
for the Unitarians deceased, it is probable to me, that they separated [after
such manner as they did separate, which how far it was, I have not been made
acquainted] that they might not seem to profess a Tritheistick Trinity,
composed of three distinct Infinite Minds and Substances; for in their time our
eminent Ecclesiastics had not so particularly explained themselves against
that heathenish Notion. 2. There may be a conscientious Separation from the
Church by Men that agree with her in Doctrinals: such I take the Separation of
the Presbyterians, Independents, and Anabaptists to be. 3. The Unitarians now
living being lately satisfied that the Majority of the Doctors of the Church,
do not mean by their scolastick Terms still retained, any such Trinity as is
plain Tritheism, but such a Nominal Trinity as the Bishop of Sarum and Dr. S --
th have explained, and as the Learned Bishop of Worcester has spoke of, tho a
little obscurely, which learned Men cannot help; and having therefore publicly
professed their Agreement with the Church of England on this and other disputed
Articles, I ought not in reason but to look upon them as sound and orthodox
Members of the Church of England as to their Faith.

If it be still objected, That there is in some of the first Prints of these
Unitarians something very like a formal Opposition of the Articles of the
Church: let it be considered they have of late answered for themselves,
confessing that careless or less accurate Expressions may have been used by
both Parties, of which neither ought to take advantage, because (which is
originally a Tritheist's Argument, but the Nominalists acquiesce in it) there is
no Heterodox Intention on either side: Nay, the Unitarians have desired, that
those Passages in their Writings, (which might be wrested by an ill-natured
Adversary to their Disadvantage) be interpreted according to their later more
accurate and careful explaining their Minds.

If it be farther urged (by those that love no Satisfaction, but the Ruin of
poor Men who have had the Misfortune to displease them) that it is an
intolerable Shame for the Unitarians to shift about thus, after they have made
a hurly-burly in the Chutch; they may perhaps desire to know whether they are
more to blame than the Realists, and whether they may not have as free leave to
explain their first Writings, as the Realists to explain their first? For Dr. S
-- th was not angry at the Dean for explaining his obnoxious Tritheistick
Phrases, but because his Explanation was as arrant Tritheism, as his first
obnoxious Tritheistick Phrases: which cannot be said of the Unitarians in that
Book where they have declared their Agreement with the Catholic Church.
Whereupon even Mr. Edwards cries out, Why should I contend with these Catholic
and Orthodox Men? Who will fall out with those that profess agreement with the
Catholic Church? Indeed he does not use these friendly Words, till the very
latter end of the very worst Book he ever wrote. It Is true, he acknowledged
himself in debt to the Civility of the nameless Socinian, [so he calls him, for
he calls no Man he dislikes by a right Name] and promised a return of Civility
about six Leaves before, but it seems he had not quite discharged his Stomach
of the foul Matter which lay upon it, and could not speak him fair, till he had
called him all the names he could think on: just his way of dealing with Mr.
Bold, for seven or eight Leaves together he represents him as a Subverter of
the Foundations of Christianity, a Worshipper of the Idol that Mr. Hobbs and
Mr. Lock have set up; a dull, phlegmatic, horrid lying Fellow, etc. and in the
close he is ready, [if what he says is true] to express the deference which he
ows to Mr. Bold's Person and Office. From whence, tho it does not follow but
that Mr. Bold may be a learned and honest Man, (for all that Mr. Edwards says
is not Gospel) yet it does plainly follow, that Mr. Edwards thinks he ows a
deference to an Antichristian, Idolatrous, dull, horrid lying Fellow, and that
he is ready to express the same; and by joining Mr. Bold's Person, [whom he
represents as an Antichristian, etc.] he fairly implies that it is his
Persuasion, that the Office sanctifies the Person, tho the Person be an
Antichristian, Idolatrous, dull, horrid lying Fellow. I hope without offense to
any sober Man, it may be set down as an instance of Priestcraft, this subtle
Contrivance, That the holy Office of the spiritual Man should expiate whatever
is done amiss by the Sinner: I word it gently, and don't pursue it so far as
the matter leads. I have said what I had to say concerning the Persons of the
late Deceased, and now living Unitarians; and as far as I perceive, the Men are
honest, their Conversation blameless, the Holy Scripture is their Rule, and
they interpret it according to the best of their understanding; nay, as good
luck will have it, they interpret it just as the founder and major part of the
Church does, and have always so interpreted it, tho they did not always
perceive the Agreement between the Church and themselves: they are not as they
have been odiously reviled, Men of no seriousness in Religion, mere Deists,
much less Atheists, or (as a Reverend Father out of the abundance of his
Charity compliments them) irreligious profligate Villains; but it is to be
hoped that he will recall those bitter words, at least for his own sake; for I
am told they are resolved to make it plainly appear to the World, that his
Lordship's Doctrine in some of his Books [and in some perhaps not] accords as
much with the Racovian Catechism, as theirs: so that if there be not two Rules
to judge of Heresy, one Fire will serve them and his Lordship both.

I come now to consider what is the Tendency of the Unitarian Doctrines: only
one Question I have to premise. Supposing that the Conversation of these Men is
such as becomes the Gospel [which from my Soul I believe] but their Doctrines
false, and of mischievous Tendency; would it not have become their jealous
Adversaries [who by the Rules of the Gospel are obliged to believe the best
which a Cause will bear] to have looked upon them as Men erring through
Ignorance, and not perceiving the mischievous Tendency of their Doctrines? A
good Man cannot promote a Doctrine which he knows to be false, or of
mischievous Consequence; but a zealous or a proud Man is capable of suspecting
a Doctrine to be false, and of mischievous Consequence, which is nothing so.

Two ways the Unitarians defend their Doctrines from the Imputation of
mischievous Consequence or Tendency; 1. By ingenuously, carefully, and largely
explaining their Minds on those Articles which they were charged to deny, or
expound amiss. 2. By making it appear, that they have no particular private
Opinions about Matters commonly held necessary to Salvation, different from the
Church of England; i. e. if the Bishops and chief Doctors of the Church know
what the Church means.

1. By ingenuously, etc. The Writer who drew up the Trinitarian Scheme, quotes
not the Authors whence he drew it, I suppose, because his Design was to reprove
the Errors of Men, and spare their Persons. Mr. Edwards, who knows not when his
Friends are well used, tells him, he had no credible Authors to vouch that
Scheme: Sure he meant creditable. But it is no new thing for Men of bustling
Learning to forget their Mother Tongue. The Unitarian will not pretend to find
credible Authors, i. e. Authors fit to be trusted, for the Scheme which he
looks upon as erroneous; they may be credible in Matters of fact, in Matters of
Faith not so. Matters of Faith are not to be taken on the bare Credit of any
Man's word: but if creditable, i. e. Authors of esteem, to vouch that Scheme,
will content Mr. Edwards, he may have them in due time; and to be very civil to
him, he shall be one.

Mr. Edwards framed a Socinian Creed, and quoted his Authors for every Article:
a Unitarian Writer replied, but says Mr. Edwards, That Gentleman in effect
acknowledges that the Articles I fixed on the Socinians are the very Doctrines
and Sentiments of those Persons, worded as I set them down; and that the
Authors whom I quoted delivered them in those very Terms, and that I have not
misrepresented any of them. He that will may trust Mr. Edwards, but I for my
part desire to be excused; for the Unitarian Writer in his Agreement of the
Unitarians with the Catholic Church, does expressly affirm, That he has
examined some of Mr. Edwards's principal References, and can say of them, that
they are either Perversions, or downright Falsifications, of what the Authors
(referred to) did intend. It is true, he has alleged no Instances; but he
seldom is long, on such an occasion, in a Friend's Debt. But on every Article
of Mr. Edwards's Socinian Creed, he has ingenuously, accurately, and amply
declared, what it is which the English Unitarians do believe; to all which Mr.
Edwards returns only this Censure -- It is Higgling, or Dodging, or
Recantation. Now if an ingenuous, accurate, and ample declaring what the
English Unitarians do believe, be higgling, and dodging, who can help it? If it
be Recantation, methinks Mr. Edwards should have rejoiced, that his Labors had
contributed to win Souls to the true Faith. But, alas! he is afraid that it is
a real Recantation, and therefore he beslaves the Party; for he was in hopes
they would have persisted in their Error, that he might have had the Pleasure
of seeing them burned, and the Comfort of believing them damned. But
notwithstanding this his (...), the Unitarians stand upon it, that neither are
their Doctrines erroneous, not have they forsaken them. No! why, says Mr.
Edwards, This Anonymous Scribe, merely to avoid the Imputation of some Articles
I fastened on the Socinians, ventures to renounce what the Staunch-men of that
Party have asserted. Well! but if he never did assert what the Staunch-men have
asserted, nor ever profess himself a Disciple of Socinus, may he not have leave
to renounce that which is falsely laid to the Charge of himself and his Friends?
I doubt not but Mr. Edwards knows what is Heresy enough to burn a Man; but does
he think to persuade the Unitarians, as they do Witches in Scotland, to confess
the Crime whereof they are not guilty, that so he may have the Satisfaction to
glut his vengeful Eyes with the Flames in which they fry? But Mr. Edwards would
fain prove that the Anonymous Scribe [as he calls him, for he is full of his
Nicknames] has also renounced what the modern domestic Socinians have
asserted. He offers this Instance for Proof. The Anonymous Scribe had said, He
may for our parts be Anathema, that teaches or believes that Doctrine, viz.
That there is no Merit in what Christ did or suffered, and that he made not
Satisfaction for our Sins. And yet in one of their Prints they let us know,
That the Oblation which Christ made of himself, was not made to the Justice of
God, or by way of Reparatio^^ but, as all other Sacrifices, by way of humble
Suit. How these two Passages do directly contradict one another, Mr. Edwards,
when he is at leisure, will inform us: In the mean time, I make bold to
acquaint him, that before I have done, I will produce him an honorable Cloud
of Witnesses of the last and of this present Age, eminent Doctors and Bishops
of the Church of England, offering the same Sense for Orthodox, which Mr.
Edwards decries as gross Socinianism. Mr. Edwards having offered nothing else
excepting bad Language, against tho Book called -- Agreement of the Unitarians
with the Catholic Church, thither I refer the Reader; for, not Mr. Edwards
himself (I presume) tho he is a bold Man, will dare to pronounce the Doctrines
which the Unitarians there own, to be false and of mischievous Tendency.

But Mr. Edwards and some others have one invidious Objection which I do not
remember particularly answered: They say Socinianism is the Road to Deism, and
Deism the Road to Atheism. Now if this were true, it does not affect the
Unitarians, who are neither Atheists, nor mere Deists, nor yet Socinians. But
Mr. Edwards takes every of these Positions for indubitate -- A Unitarian is a
Socinian; Socinianism tends to Deism; Deism, to Atheism. These things, with
him, necessarily hang together, like a Hobbian Chain of Thoughts. Yet I will
show him how loose the Links of this Chain are; if he knows how, let him fasten
them. That a Unitarian is no Socinian, appears plain from the Agreement, to
which I hope to add some farther Proof: that Socinianism does not tend to
Deism, I will now offer some Reason; but Mr. Edwards must take it for an
Auctarium, which I need not throw him in, but shall do it out of pure Charity,
to convince him of his adventurous Boldness at Calumny, and extreme Shortness
at Argument. By Deism (I take it) is commonly meant, Natural Religion, founded
on the Belief of the Existence of a God, and of a future Life, with a Rejection
and Disbelief of all Revelation. Socinianism is not the Road to this Deism. I
know not of any English Catechism which accounts for the Truth of the Christian
Revelation, except the Racovian. Methinks it is a Deficiency; and if Deism does
abound so much, as Mr. Edwards says, surely 'twere not amiss, that our Youth,
and other docile, apprehensive (tho not Book-learn'd) People should be
informed, in a plain Catechetical way, how the Authority of the Old and New
Testament is to be proved: This may be learned in that Catechism of the
Socinians which is called the Racovian; the first Chapter consists of near
eight Leaves, proving that we have no just Grounds to doubt, but sufficient
Reasons to persuade us to give Credence to the Holy Scriptures. Now the
Arguments there used are not trivial ^or weak; are not such as might give an
Adversary occasion to object that they mean to betray the Cause. Let Mr.
Edwards tell me what can be said more to the purpose, or better, in such a
compass; touching the Sufficiency, Chap. 2. touching the Clearness of Holy
Scriptures, Chap. 3. The Socinians have declared themselves so plainly, so
judiciously, so Orthodoxly, that their embittered Adversaries have nothing to
find fault with. Now supposing that these Men were widely mistaken about the
Sense of several difficult Texts, yet who, that had any Modesty left, would
accuse them of inclining to Deism, of rejecting the Authority of Holy
Scriptures, and denying the Truth of the Christian Religion? Let Mr. Edwards
defend the Christian Religion, if he can, better than the Socinians have
defended it; but if he has no stronger Arguments than they have used for that
purpose, why would he have them suspected of Deism? To labor to persuade
People that the Socinians, who have said so much to establish the divine
Authority of the Bible, do not themselves believe it, is, methinks, no other,
than to tempt Scepticks to conclude, that enough cannot be said to establish
their Authority; which Mr. Edwards of all Men ought not to do, unless he
himself be a mere Deist; which Imputation, as yet, I forbear to lay to his
Charge, tho in truth, by his last Book [which he calls A Vindication of
Fundamental Articles, etc. but might better have entitled it, A Vindication of
Railing, (see p. 26, 27.) which Title, the Book fully answers, for it is one
interrupted (...)] it does not appear that he is a Christian. Queen Elizabeth
had a Secretary, who when he retired to Tihalds, his Country Seat, was wont to
lay aside his Cognizances of Honor, with these words, Lie there Lord Burleigh;
and then the grave Statesman would be very merry and gamesome. It take Mr.
Edwards to have much of that honorable Gentleman's Humor, for I cannot
imagine that he has utterly renounced Christianity; only perhaps when he writes
or preaches Controversy, he cries, Lie by for a while, lie by so long good
Christian; but the angry Story once finished, or the Sermon over, he is the same
Mr. Edwards, as learned, as honest, and as pious as he was before. I beg my
Reader always to consider, that I defend Socinianism only quo ad hoc, it is not
the Road to mere Deism: in the next place, I will prove that mere Deism is not
the Road to Atheism, Deism, I defined to be Natural Religion founded on the
Belief of the Existence of a God, and of a future Life. There may, for ought I
know, be Men who would be counted Deists, that believe not a jot of the Life to
come, but these, I judge, if they were put to it, would hardly be able to
distinguish themselves from downright Atheists. To me it is all one, to
question the Existence of a God, and to question his future Retributions; but
Natural Religion, which depends on the Belief that God is, and that he is a
Rewarder, cannot be the Road to Atheism. I will not deny but that Mr. Edwards
knows the Road to Atheism as well as any Man breathing, but he must not put it
upon us, that Deism is that Road; he may as well bear us in hand, that sailing
Eastward is the Road to the West Indies. There cannot be a plainer
Contradiction, than to say, That the Belief of a God leads to the Belief of
none. Were Atheism the prevailing Opinion I grant to Mr. Edwards, we should
quickly see it move apace to the Ruin and Subversion of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, Societies and Bodies Politic; but upon the Principles of Deism,
i. e. on the Foundation of Natural Religion, public Peace and Order stood firm
before the days of the Christian Revelation: and did it not do so among the
neighbor Nations that hated the Jews? Among the Deists, during the flourishing
days of the growing Greatness of the Romans, there were, I believe, as few
Atheists as there are among Christians now.

Let no malicious Adversary here pretend, that I plead the Cause of Deism; no,
I do not: this I do, I maintain that Deism is not the Road to Atheism, as some
Men very weakly and imprudently have affirmed; for it rather is the Road to
Christianity. I know Mr. Edwards will be angry with me for what I am going to
tell him; but let him summon all the Powers and Skill he has in Logic,
seasoning it with a dose of ill Nature quantum sufficit, and then refute me if
he can. I here affirm, That if the Man who is not yet a Christian, be an
honest, moral Deist, a Believer in God, and an Expecter of a future Judgment,
he is, at least in precinctu ad salutem, and stands fair to be a Christian; no
revealed Religion offers so reasonable Grounds to win him as the Christian. Now
I much wonder that so ingenuous and moderate a Man as Mr. Norris should join
with Mr. Edwards in so ignorant, invidious, and designing an Assertion as this,
viz. Deism is the Road to Atheism. Mr. Norris's elegant way of wording it is,
He that is once a Deist, is in a hopeful way of being an Atheist whenever he
pleases. No, Mr. Norris, no; an honest moral Deist's Principles are directly
pointed against Atheism: but a spiteful, proud, and cruel Christian, is in very
great danger of being an Atheist, if he be not one already. But perhaps Mr.
Edwards may reply, he spoke not of a Deist, who never had been a Christian, but
that his meaning was, The Man who falls from Christianity to Deism is in the
Road to be an Atheist. To this I reply, That tho the Unitarians are firmly
persuaded of the Truth of the Christian Religion, yet they need not grant the
Assertion thus explained to be true; for, what Christianity teaches, beyond
that which natural Reason dictates, has not the Efficacy to prevent Atheism,
which natural Reason has: however, I am content, and I think the Unitarians
ought to be so likewise, That the Man who is afraid of a Bullet should wear a
Coat of Mail, as well as keep out of Gunshot.

I hope the Reader now plainly sees, that there is never a Link of Mr.
Edwards's Chain that will hold. The Unitarians are Orthodox [of which more
anon.] The Socinians are so far Orthodox, that they are firmly persuaded of the
Verity of the Christian Religion, and are not mere Deists: Conscientious moral
Deists are in no danger of being Atheists. But is there no dangerous Road
leading to Atheism, of which Men ought to be warned, that they come not near
it? Yes, there is; and it is a wide Road too, paved all along with rash
Censures, ill Language, false Stories, barbarous unchristian Dealing, forged
Decrees of inconditional Reprobation, and Stoical Fate, this is the Road, and
the Persecutor, the Slanderer, and the Calvinist drive hard, like so many
Jehu's in it, leaving Deism a long way off on the right hand. The Christian
Religion does not allow its Professors to be so much as proper Judges of Heresy
as commonly understood, much less to be Executioners of Heretics; for the
reason given why the Tales should not be pulled up before the Harvest, is, lest
some good Corn should be pulled up with it. The Christian Religion directs Men
by fair Carriage, by the Words of Truth and Soberness; to convince them whom we
think in the wrong. He that is cruel, abusive and unjust, can be a Christian
only in name; in reality he is Infidel all over. Then for Calvinism, that four
System which is good for nothing but to fight with, [but I hope Mr. Edwards is
innocent from that, for he has sourness enough without it] how should it
otherwise than tend to Atheism, when it represents Man without Free Will, and
God without Goodness?

2. The Unitarians defend their Doctrines from the Imputation of mischievous
Consequence or Tendency, by making it appear that they have no particular
private Opinions about matters commonly held necessary to Salvation, different
from the Church of England, that is, if the Bishops and chief Doctors of the
Church know what the Church means.

I do confess that I much fear the Unitarians may have private Opinions about
Articles commonly held necessary to Salvation, different from the Opinions of
the Compilers of the 39 Articles, and from the Grammatical literal Sense of
those Articles; for through them, as also through our Homilies, there runs a
Vein of that Scheme which at this day is called Calvinism. But the Grammatical
literal Sense of our Articles and Homilies are fallen into the hands of
Governing Bishops, Deans, and Doctors, and Governed inferior Priests and
Deacons; of whom a vast Majority [as appears by their Prints and daily Sermons]
expound them very widely different from the Grammatical literal Sense, intended
by the first Compilers. Words and Phrases have nothing in their own nature
which can fix them to this or that particular Sense: it is common Consent and
way of speaking which appropriates them, and therefore our Articles and
Homilies which once held forth some of the Predestinarian Rigors for the
Doctrine of the Church, are not to be supposed to teach the same still, now
that the Consent of our Church runs so strongly another way. Possibly the
Unitarians have not Cranmer, Latimer and Ridly on their side, in the Points now
controverted; but in them and all other necessary Articles, they have the
Reverend Bishops of Worcester and Sarum, Dr. South, and Mr. Edwards with them:
indeed if those Bishops and Doctors should neither be the Church, nor conjoined
with enough to make a Majority, which must be the Church, the Lord have mercy
upon the Unitarians; for who is it that indulges his Brother a due liberty of
Conscience, but when he needs it himself? but the Bishops and Doctors aforesaid
being conjoined with an uncontestable Majority, the Unitarians have nothing
more to do, to prove that they have no particular private Opinions about
Matters commonly held necessary to Salvation, but to show their Agreement with
those Bishops and Doctors; or, which is much the same thing, the Agreement of
those Bishops and Doctors with them: now this has been amply and fairly done by
an Unitarian, I know not whom, he being a perfect Stranger to me; but it
matters not much who he is, whether a Transmarine, or Cismarine Divine, or no
Divine at all, it is nothing to the Cause that. Mr. Edwards by drawing up a
Creed from Socinian Writers, mostly Foreigners, and publishing it as the Creed
of the Unitarians, gave this Unitarian an occasion to declare the Sense of
himself and his Friends upon all those Points, which he has done in a Paper
called, The Agreement of the Unitarians with the Catholic Church. Mr. Edwards
takes no notice of this ingenuous Declaration; but because the Author has not
also defended every unstudied doubtful or extravagant Saying, which this or
that Socinian may have published, therefore he triumphs, rubs his Forehead, and
proclaims, That the Unitarian has not one Syllable to say for himself, or
against him. Now in my Judgment, the Unitarian might as well expect that Mr.
Edwards should defend all the Pagan Tritheism which might be quoted from Dr.
Cudworth, Dr. Bull, and Dr. Sherlock; for what has the Unitarian more to do
with the foreign Socinians, than Mr. Edwards has with these learned and real
Trinitarians and Tritheists? For, the Unitarian does not blindly follow the
Socinians, but while he takes up with some of their critical Interpretations of
difficult Texts, he forsakes them in others; even Mr. Edwards himself agreeing
perhaps in most points with the aforesaid Realists, accepts them for Orthodox
Brethren, while he lets them keep their Tritheism to themselves: it were a very
unfair thing in me, if I should publish the religious Frenzies of Mr. Gailhard
[which have been so well chastis'd by two honest Gentlemen] as part of Mr.
Edwards's Faith; nay, I much doubt whether he would be content to own all that
I could quote him out of the Origines Eccles. and the Irenicum of that Patron
of his, whose Name [he says] is not so much the Name of a Person, or a Family,
as it is the Name of profound Learning, and solid Religion. I mention not those
Books as if I thought them full of Errors, for I have a greater esteem for them
than perhaps the Author himself may have now, or Mr. Edwards either: but my
meaning is, that neither should Mr. Edwards be put to answer for the Tritheism
of the Realists, nor the Unitarians censured for Socinian Mistakes. By the way,
were I a great Man, and my Fame wanted some specious Decoration, I would bestow
my encouraging Bounty on an Ecclesiastic rather than a mere Heathenish Poet;
not but that the mere Heathenish Poet might have the most Wit, the noblest
Fancy, and as little Conscience as any grave Panegyrist whatsoever: but because
an Ecclesiastic for a small matter will say all that he can to make a God of
his Patron, while the other measures his Encomiums by the Number of the Guineas
that are paid him. To return, the Socinian Persuasion is to be seen in the
Racovian Catechism: The English Unitarian Sentiments in the Agreement, etc.
those their Sentiments there set down, no one that I know of has undertaken to
refute or charge with Heresy. But farther, from several Tracts of the
Unitarians it appears that those their Adversaries who have been distinguished
by the Name of Nominals, and who are a considerable Majority of the Church, do
yet explain the controverted Articles to the very same Sense as do the
Unitarians, I refer the Reader chiefly to the Discourse concerning the Nominal
and Real Trinitarians, to which I can add but little; yet some Instances I
shall produce, which make it plain that the Leaders of the Nominalists in the
controverted Points differ as little from the Socinians, as the Unitarians do.
The Racovian Catechism affirms that the Essence of God is but one in number,
and that in the Essence of God there is but one Person: The first of the 39
Articles of the Church of England teaches, That in the Unity of the Godhead
there are three Persons; this Doctrine the Learned Bishop of Worcester
undertakes to defend, supposing it gainsay'd by the Socinians and by the
Unitarians: But if it be gainsay'd by neither, his Lordship has thrown away a
great deal of Learning to little purpose. It Is true, a Man has not the less
Learning for this sort of Expense; but then if he spends much Labor in it,
it is an undervaluing of his Judgment. The different Explications which the
Racovian Catechism and his Lordship give of this ambiguous homonymous word,
Person, being considered, it is plain that they differ about the meaning of a
word, and that is all, while their Doctrine is one and the same. The Racovian
Catechism defines a Person to be an Individual Intelligent Essence; but,
according to the Bp of Worcester, a Person is one and the same Nature under
different Modes of Subsistence. Vindic. of the Trin. p. 14, 15, 16.
The Bishop will not say that there are three Individual Intelligent Essences
in the Godhead: The Racovians never did say, that the Godhead might not be
considered as subsisting under diverse Modes. Now as for the Unitarians in this
Particular, their Case is this -- While they followed the Definiture of the
Racovians, which was accommodated to the common Acception of the word, Person;
their Doctrine was -- But One Person in the One God: But when the Nominals
unanimously declared that they meant by Person, not a complete Intelligent
Being, but only Relations, Properties, or Modes of Subsistence; then the
Unitarians made no scruple to own three Persons in one Godhead. As to the
Particular before us then, all that I would beg of my Lord of Worcester in
behalf of the Unitarians, is, that they may have leave to be as much Socinian
as his Lordship, more they will not desire: and if his Lordship has any
Arguments to refute the Trinity of the Realists consisting of three distinct
Minds, Intelligent Beings, Essences, which the Socinians have not used before
him; let him be pleased to communicate them, and the Unitarians will promise
for the future to oppose the Tritheism of the Realists only by his Lordship's
Arguments, and not by any borrowed from the Socinians; farther, the Unitarians
will be content that his Lordship shall only declare himself against the
Doctrine of the Realists, who are by reason of their equal Learning, Eminence
and not contemptible Numbers, too considerable to be otherwise grieved: but far
from every Orthodox Father be that Injustice, common among Boys, who when the
Person that gives the Offense is out of their reach, strike him that stands
next.

It is not much out of place here to commend the good temper of the Unitarians,
who for conserving brotherly Love and Peace among Christians will not litigate
about Terms and Words, on which the Authority that imposes them puts an honest
Sense and Meaning: there are [it must not be denied] no small Inconveniences in
altering the common signification of words; but that is so well remedied by a
new Definition of the words that are altered, that I would sooner envy our
Church the Power of declaring Articles of Faith, than this Liberty of making
words signify, in spite of common Sense, what they please. The greatest
Mischief is, when words that must be used in Theological Controversies, must
not signify as they have commonly done, nor yet be determined anew to any other
express Particular; but this is the Fault of some Realists. One of the
Unitarians in his Book called, The Agreement, etc. p. 36. has examined the
Sense of the Bishop of Sarum concerning the Incarnation and Divinity of our
Lord Christ, and grants that the Sense of his Lordship may pass for Orthodox,
but undeniably evinces that the Sentiments of the Unitarians are a degree or
two more Orthodox. I shall not repeat, but refer the Reader to the place,
choosing rather in pursuit of my chief purpose to insist wholly on this, that
there is not so wide a Difference between his Lordship's Explanations and the
Racovian Catechism as might be imagined, and that his Lordship is at least as
much Racovian as the Unitarians. I do not aim to vindicate all that is in the
Racovian Catechism, but only so much of it as the Unitarians are concerned
with. The Racovian Catechism teaches that Jesus Christ was a true Man by
Nature, but had not truly a Divine Nature; that Jesus Christ was not so
constituted of a Divine and Human Nature, as a Man is of a Body and Soul. The
Bishop of Sarum teaches in the 2d of his four Treatises, p. 96. That the
Godhead by the Eternal Word, the 2d in the blessed Three, dwelt in, and was so
inwardly united to the human Nature of Jesus Christ, that by virtue of it God
and Man were truly one Person, as our Soul and Body make one Man. It must be
confessed that here is Contradiction in Terms direct and plain as can be: but
let the Exposition of the Terms which is given on either side be duly weighed,
and it will evidently appear, that the Racovians and the Bishop agree very well
as to the Substance of the Article, except in one small respect wherein his
Lordship is at some small variance with himself. When the Racovians teach that
our Lord Christ who was a true Man, had not a true Divine Nature, they do not
mean that he was not constantly illuminated, conducted, and actuated by the
Godhead; but only that the Godhead did not become commensurate to a finite Man,
so as to produce a real Communication of Idioms, and thereby make the great
things which are spoken of Christ in respect of the Illuminating, Conducting,
Indwelling Godhead, to be equally applicable to his Humanity: this is plain
from the Reasons they give why they deny Christ to have a Divine Nature. The
first is this, two Substances endued with opposite Properties cannot combine
into one Person, i. e. [according to their Sense of the word Person] into one
individual Intelligent Essence. Nothing occurs throughout the Bishop's whole
Discourse contrary to this Negative; but to establish it more sure, several
Expressions of the Bishop's [as Mr. Hill of Kilmington has observed upon him]
intimate that the Manhood of Christ is a Person distinct from the Eternal Word
that dwelt in him. 2. The Racovians deny the Divine Nature of Christ, because
[say they] two Natures, each whereof is apt to constitute a several Person, i.
e. a several individual Intelligent Essence, cannot be huddled into one Person,
or one individual Intelligent Essence. One would think that this Reason should
not down with the Bishop, and indeed the Language does not; for p. 102. he says
that from the Divine and Human Nature united, there did result the Person of
the Messiah: but then what does he mean by the Divine and Human Nature united?
Why, no more than The Human Nature always actuated, illuminated, and conducted
by the Divine. This is very agreeable to Scripture, yes, and the Racovian
Catechism also. But to make this look more like an unintelligible Union, that
the Realists might not charge him with betraying the Cause to the Unitarians,
he calls it in lofty Phrase, an assuming the Man into an inward and immediate
Economy, p. 108. In short, the Bishop makes no more of the Divine Nature than
this -- Christ was God by virtue of the indwelling of the Eternal Word in him,
p. 127. The Racovians scruple the Phrase, Divine Nature, but admit all that the
Bishop makes of it. The Bishop places the Divine Nature in that thing, which
the Racovians do not deny; and the Racovians deny the Divine Nature, for
Reasons which the Bishop allows to be Truths: so then the difference between
them is purely Nominal, a mere Logomachy. But to do his Lordship justice, he is
in the right for using the Terms, Divine Nature, and God-man, because they are
Terms authorized by the Church, on which both his Lordship and the Church puts
an honest Sense: and the Racovians were too stiff in refusing them, especially
considering that in their very Catechism they speak, in other Phrase, as
honorably of Christ as his Lordship; for they say, that Christ is by no means
to be reputed a mere Man, they give their Reasons for it, and therefore call
him a Man truly Divine: and for my part, I think a Man truly Divine, must have
a Nature truly Divine; and therefore the Racovians, whose Doctrine is taught by
the Bishop, would have done better had they taught it in the Terms of Art which
the Bishop uses, tho perhaps he is not fond of the Terms, which one may partly
guess by his declining to consider all or any Speculations concerning the
Eternal Generation: Whereas the Unitarians fully to demonstrate their
Orthodoxy, allow the Eternal Generation of the Logos, Son, or Wisdom. Let me
not forget that I observed the Bishop did not so well agree in one small
respect with the Unitarians, which respect was such, that therein he was at
some small variance with himself: the thing is this, He has affirmed that God
and Man make one Person, as the Soul and Body make one Man; it was proper for
him to take up with this Expression, in conformity to the Athanasian Creed: but
his Philosophical Reasonings look quite another way; for, p. 102. he has these
Words, It has been thought that the Human Nature in Christ had no special
Subsistence, tho it was not easy to explain this Notion, since if Subsistence
belonged to the Human Nature, it might seem that it [the Human Nature] was not
perfect if it had not a proper Subsistence. An Hypostatical Union was proposed
as a Term fit to explain this by, i. e. the Human Nature in Christ was believed
to subsist by the Subsistence of the Word; but it was not easy to make this the
more intelligible, by offering a Notion full as unintelligible as it self to
explain it by. Now tho the Bishop is a cautious Man, and will have a care of
offending a Brother, as appears by those soft ways of expressing his dislike of
an Opinion -- It has been thought -- It is not easy -- It might seem; -- Yet
here he sufficiently discovers to any considering Reader, that he believes the
Human Nature of Christ had a proper Subsistence; and if it had a proper
Subsistence, then [say I] by it self it constituted Christ a Person, and then
God and Man did not make one Person, as the Soul and Body make a Man: For the
Bishop explains Subsistence thus, We may conceive the Subsistence of an
intelligent Being, P. 107.
to be its acting entirely in it self, or upon Matter united to it, without any
other Spirit's being constantly present to it, actuating it, or having it under
any immediate vital and inseparable Influence. It may seem strange tho that the
Bishop should intimate, that the Human Nature of Christ had a proper
Subsistence, a Subsistence of its own, and afterward define the Subsistence of
an Intelligent Being, to be its acting entirely in it self, without any other
Spirit's being constantly present to it, etc. It is a Mercy that
Self-contradiction is not Heresy. I hope the Bishop is not of Rhetorius's Mind,
who thought that the Teachers of contrary Doctrines were all in the right. St.
Austin could not persuade himself that any one could be so whimsical, but upon
the Supposition he puts down the Name of Rhetorius in his black Catalogue of
Heretics.

I designed to have spoke at large with the Bp of Sarum concerning the
Satisfaction of Christ, on which Article he can have no difference with the
Unitarians, and has as little as may be with the Racovians; but the Author of
The Agreement, etc. having been before me, I shall be the shorter. There is not
a more artful controversial piece of Writing, than some few Pages of the second
of the four Treatises. His Lordship's Learning and piercing Judgment are such,
that he clearly sees through the whole Article, and no Man were better able to
state it plainly, to disintangle it from the Philosophy of the Schools, to
decide it accurately, and firmly establish the certain Truth: but then his
Wisdom is such, that while he gives forth his Lectures, which may be very
profitable to them that know how to use them, he retreats from the envy of the
Calvinists in a set of Ecclesiastical Phrases, whose strict Grammatical Sense
has been long laid aside; he distinguishes himself from the Racovians by
labored Metaphorical Flourishes, frowns upon the Unitarians to hide his
Agreement with them, and amuses the Writers of positive Divinity, [which
Character he can tell any Party was not meant of them] to dissemble his
aversion from their unreasonable and odious Scheme. I will convince the Reader
of the Justness of my Observation. The Racovians dispute against their
Doctrine, who determine that there is such a Mercy in God as must forgive, and
such a Justice as must punish, and cannot be satisfied without it; that because
God would have both his Mercy and his Justice take place, therefore he found
out that way to forgive Sins, by sending his Son to suffer Death in that Nature
which had offended. These Racovians acknowledge God to be wonderfully merciful
and just, but they contend that he freely forgiveth, that he punishes Sins
when he pleases, when his Wisdom thinks fit. Now let us hear the Bishop; he
sets his Face against the Writers of Positive Divinity, and censures these
their Doctrines, That God cannot freely forgive Sins; that punishing, as well
as remunerative Justice, P. 135.
are essential to him; that God being infinite, every Offense against him has
an infinite Guilt, and must be expiated either by Acts of infinite Value, or of
infinite Duration; and that a Person of an infinite Nature was only capable of
Acts of an infinite Value; that such a one was necessary for the expiating Sin.
And are not these the very Errors opposed by the Racovians? more fully and
elegantly stated by his Lordship, that is true, for nothing loses under his
hand; nor do the Racovians overthrow these Errors with that irresistible force
of Argument as his Lordship. For, says he, In all this Gradation there is one
main Defect, the Scripture sets none of these Speculations before us; nor is it
easy to apprehend, that a Right of punishing which is in the Legislator, and a
Right to reward, which passes from him to the Person that acquires it, should
be equally essential to God: in the one his Fidelity and Justice are bound,
because of the Right that accrues to another; but the other of punishing, seems
to be a Right that is vested in himself, which he may either use or not, as he
pleases.

Agreeing thus in the main, one would wonder what Nicety should divide the
Racovians and his Lordship: there must be but a Nicety between them; but it is
not the first time a Nicety has made a great Breach between Friends. The
Bishop, speaking of his Racovian Friends, pretends to take Distaste, because
they believe That Christ only died for our Good, P. 141, 142.
and not in our Stead, that by his Death he might fully confirm his Gospel, and
give it a great Authority -- They believe, That by his dying, he intended to
set us a most perfect Pattern of bearing the sharpest Sufferings with the
perfectest Patience -- and the most entire Charity -- that by doing this he was
to merit at God's hand that supreme Authority with which he is now vested for
our Good, that so he might obtain a Power to offer the World Pardon of Sin upon
their true Repentance. Finally, That he died in order to his Resurrection, and
for giving a sensible Proof of that main Article of his Religion. Now what does
his Lordship believe more than this? Why he says the same things over again in
a new Set of Phrases, and adds this Expression, Christ suffered both upon our
Account, P. 143.
and in our Stead. If the Bishop would abide by the strictest and most proper
Sense of these Words In our Stead, he would indeed differ in a considerable
matter from the Racovians, but then he would also differ as much from himself;
for he means no more by suffering in our stead, than the Racovians mean by
suffering for our good; as appears from what he says p. 135. If every Sin, as
being of infinite guilt, must be expiated by an infinite Act, it will not be
easy to make this out, how the Acts of Christ, tho infinite in value, should
stand in a strict equality with all the Sins of so many men, every one of which
is of infinite guilt. If his Lordship is sincere in this, then he cannot
pretend to believe that Christ suffered the infinite Punishment due to the
infinite Guilt of all Men, and by doing so, made a full, proper, and adequate
Satisfaction for the Sins of the World; which is the strict and proper Sense of
suffering in our Stead. All that his Lordship does, or can consistently to
himself, make of this Phrase -- In our Stead, is, That Christ did so suffer for
our Good, that if he had not suffered as he did, we must have been the
miserable Sufferers our selves. But there is another Phrase wherein his
Lordship labors to distinguish himself from his Friends, and that is,
Expiatory Sacrifice. But he may please to consider, That the Racovians are not
utterly averse from this Phrase; for in their Catechism, to that Question, What
think you of those Sacrifices? [ i. e. of the Old Covenant] they answer, p.
139. By them the Sins of the People were expiated or atoned; that is, by the
intervening of those Sacrifices, Remission of Sins, graciously decreed by God,
was brought to effect. Otherwhere also they thankfully acknowledge, That the
Death of Christ expiates our Sins, through the gracious Condescension of his
Father, who is pleased to accept that Sacrifice, not as a Payment to his
Justice, but as an Application to his Mercy. And just thus, but more elegantly
[as always] his Lordship explains what he means by an Expiatory Sacrifice, p.
151. We are to consider, that in Sacrifices it is the Appointment, and the
Acceptance, which makes the Satisfaction; for God's accepting a Sacrifice, is
an Abatement of the Rigor of Justice, and a declaring that he will pardon Sins
in such a Method and upon such a Consideration. He had spoke to the same
purpose, p. 136. But I am weary of transcribing. By what I have said it is
plain, That on the Article of Christ's Death, and Satisfaction for the Sins of
Mankind, there is no real Difference between the Bishop and the Racovian
Catechism: and when his Lordship explains his less proper Phrases, there is an
end of all verbal Difference between them.

As before of the Bishop of Worcester, so now of the Bishop of Sarum, I have
one thing to beg in behalf of the Unitarians: But because I would not offer my
Petition rudely, I have a very pertinent Story to introduce it. In the
beginning of the last Reign, William Pen, in behalf of himself and Friends,
preferred an Address, which to the best of my remembrance was thus worded.

James,
We are sorry for the Death of thy Brother Charles, but we rejoice that we are
fallen under thy Government. Thou art a Dissenter from the Church of England,
so are we; we hope thou will allow us that Liberty which thou take thy self.
So farewell.


By this excellent Pattern I draw up my Petition.

My Lord of Sarum,
The Unitarians are sorry that they have been misunderstood by the Church of
England, but they rejoice to find that your Lordship teaches the same Doctrine
which they have done: If your Lordship thinks it no Heresy in your self, they
hope it will be none in them. So farewell.


Having thus shown by what Methods the Unitarians defend their Doctrines of
evil Tendency and mischievous Consequence, I think it fit to acquit my self of
a Promise to Mr. Edwards. He takes notice of these Words in the Agreement, etc.
p. 7. He may, for our parts, be Anathema that teaches or believes that
Doctrine, viz. That there is no Merit in what Christ did or suffered, and that
he made not Satisfaction for our Sins. And he pretends that the contrary was
taught by an Unitarian the other day in these Words, Antitrinitarian Scheme, p.
18.
The Oblation which Christ made of himself, was not made to the Justice of God,
or by way of Reparation, but, as all other Sacrifices, by way of humble Suit.
Now I take this Passage to be so far from a Contradiction, that it may be
looked upon as a just and reasonable Explication of the former. The Bishop of
Sarum, either more honest or more discerning than Mr. Edwards, represents the
Socinians owning that Christ by his Death merited at God's hands, merited a
supreme Authority, and obtained a Power to offer the World Pardon of Sin upon
their true Repentance, p. 142. He believes also, with the Unitarians, that the
Oblation was made, not to the Justice, but to the Mercy of God; for he says,
page 135. The Right of punishing, God may use, or not use, as he pleases; and
that the Acts of Christ, tho infinite in value, cannot stand in a strict
Equality with the Sins of Mankind. And whereas Mr. Edwards accuses the
Unitarians for scoffing and ridiculing the Merits and Satisfaction of Christ,
they are ready to tell him, 1. That they are the least given to scoffing of any
Writers of Controversy. 2. It cannot be pretended that they have scoffed the
Merits and Satisfaction of Christ, as the Church and the Bishop of Sarum
understand those Words, whatever they may have done to the Calvinistical
Hypothesis, which Mr. Edwards must embrace, if on this Subject he disputes
against them. 3. Whether the Calvinistical Hypothesis be fit to be scoffed at,
I will not argue; but I am sure it deserves to be abhorred. That there was no
such Justice in God, as necessarily obliged him to exact a Satisfaction, is a
Persuasion not only built upon sound Reason, but also credited with the
Authority of the most eminent Theologues, ancient and modern: Vossius, in his
Answer to Ravensperger, has quoted above a dozen of them, and Calvin and Zanchy
are two of the number. But Mr. Edwards I will not say refines, but corrupts the
very Dregs, the four Hypostasis, the heavy Subsidence, the thick Sediment of
Calvinism.

I thought I had concluded the Topic on which I have dwelt (I fear) too long
already; but I beg the Reader's Patience yet farther, that I may call to mind a
Gentleman who has engaged in this Controversy, and might take it ill if he
should be neglected, as one not worthy of our Notice.

He is a zealous Accuser, and a strong Justifier of the Doctrine of the
Unitarians; but since his Courtesy is more beneficial than his Anger injurious,
tho perhaps he never intended it so, I will do what I can to reconcile him to
himself. He is an irreconcilable Enemy to the Unitarians, or Socinians (as he
calls them) of New Atlantis and Vtopia, but accords perfectly well with the
European Unitarians, both Foreigners and English. He says p. 58 There is a
Distinction made in the Godhead, under these three Names, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, which the Church has expressed all together by the Word Trinity, and
singly by the Word Person. -- I conclude that there is something more than a
mere Nominal Distinction. -- I conclude that they are not three distinct
different Spirits. From these two Conclusions let us hear what he infers, p. 59.
I infer there is in the Godhead something more than a mere nominal Distinction,
and something less than that of three different Spirits. Some Men have such
roving wild Heads, that they will infer any thing from any thing; because the
Moon shines with Light borrowed from the Sun, therefore Kings hold their Crowns
of the Pope: But our Author keeps close to the Matter, and infers from his two
Conclusions, nothing but what he had concluded before. Well! if he is right in
his Conclusions, he is safe in his Inference. But how came he by his
Conclusions? Why, from some Passages of Scripture he found that there was a
Distinction in the Godhead. Well! be it so. One might ask now, what is the
Distinction? Is it a Distinction of Properties, Relations, Modes, or what? But
for that we must hold him excused; for (says he) I have not the least knowledge
how strict the Union is, or how great the Distinction. He was well set on work
then, to write against the English Unitarians, who oppose no Trin-Unity, but a
Trinity of Three distinct Essences, in Numerical Unity.

But the Ignorance of this pert Academian is a small Fault in respect of that
censorious and singular Boldness wherewith he takes upon him to censure his
Superiors in the Church; his Superiors for Learning and Dignity both, who
several of them have attempted to explain, and have made it intelligible [at
least they themselves think so] how the Three are distinguished, and how
united. Mr. Peter Brown fears not to throw this Censure on their Undertakings;
p. 59. Any Man who strives to conceive it himself, or takes pains to explain it
to others, is guilty of such a Folly, that I cannot think of any Action in
nature extravagant enough to match it. This is very agreeable to his Sense, p.
173. where he intimates that neither Dominion nor Religion are founded in
Reason. So then his Loyalty and Orthodoxy are both of a piece. Our Church of
England, in the late Reigns, had much ado to be loyal enough for the Men of
Dublin; I am afraid they will have much ado to be Orthodox enough for them now.

Having now spoke what I had to say concerning the Causes which have raised the
Disputes at present agitated among us, I am next to consider what has inflamed
them to that dangerous Excess which in time may disturb the public Peace.

Certainly it cannot be pure Love of God, or a sincere Desire to advance the
Happiness of Mankind, which makes Religious Disputants manage their
Controversies with that angry impatient Heat: I know it is not uncommon for Men
to pretend the Honor of God, and the Interest of Holy Religion, when they whet
their Tongues like Rasors, and dip their Pens in Gall; when they lay Plots to
oppress and kill, and are bent on Ruin and Destruction: nay, it is possible for
them, while they are thus mischievously employed, to think they are doing God
Service, but they must have prodigiously debauched their Reason, before they
can entertain such Thoughts; for it is not easy to believe that God delights in
Uncharitableness, Envy, Hatred and Persecution.

It is not easy to believe that Persecution is not contrary to the obliging
good-natured Precepts of the Gospel.

It is not easy to believe that Force is the way to convince Men of their
Errors.

It is not easy to believe that Force is a proper way to move Men to consider.

It is not easy to believe that speculative Opinions which Men cannot help,
should be destructive of their Eternal Happiness.

It is not easy to believe that the Magistrate's Sentiments are rational and
true, merely because they are the Sentiments of those who are in Authority.

It is not easy to believe that the Magistrate has a right to enforce his own
Opinions, when himself is confessedly liable to Mistakes.

It is not easy to believe that God would be worshipped in every Nation only by
that way which the Magistrate shall choose.

It is not easy to believe that it is the Duty of Men to worship God contrary to
their Consciences.

Is it not easy to believe that Persecution, which naturally tends to set all
Mankind together by the ears, to destroy Trade and Commerce, and to hinder the
Improvements of Knowledge, can be doing God good Service.

It is not easy to believe that Magistrates were appointed to ruin those for
whose good, we are told in Scripture, they were ordained.

It is not easy to imagine, that Authors who have publicly professed that in
Matters of Faith every Man must judge for himself, and that every Man using his
own Judgment, without Pride or affectation of Singularity, is doing the best
thing that he can do; that simple Error is not Heresy, etc. it is not easy, I
say, to imagine that such Authors can esteem Persecution a part of that
reasonable Service which they owe to the Great God.

If Men of reviling persecuting Tempers could be persuaded deliberately and
seriously to examine their own Minds, and put themselves the Question, What is
it which prompts them to give bad Language, to calumniate, to form Designs
against the Fame, Estate, Liberty, and Life of their Brother, to pursue him
beyond this Life, [not as Brutus did Aruns, which was the Wit of the Historian]
but with real Enmity to pursue him beyond this Life, to hang him and burn him
in order to damn him; no doubt they might perceive that they were not moved by
a true Love of God, or a desire to advance the Happiness of Mankind, but by an
undue Love of themselves, and a desire to advance some not very honorable
Interest, which might be much impeded by an indulged Liberty of Prophesying:
it is something of this kind which has mingled so many bitter Reproaches, false
Stories, and malicious Insinuations with our controversial religious Pleadings.
That I may avoid the envy of descending to Particulars, I leave my Observation,
as it is propounded only in general, being satisfied that free impartial
Considerers will soon perceive its Truth; and as to those Persons who are less
used to look into the Reason of things, I will for their sakes cover it with a
great Authority: Bp of Sarum's 4 Tracts, p. 185. If it be said that Error does
disturb the Peace and Order of the Church beyond what is to be apprehended from
Sin; Error runs Men into Parties, and out of those Factions do arise, which
break not only the Peace of the Church, but the whole Order of the World, and
the quiet of Civil Society; whereas Sin does only harm to those who are guilty
of it, or to a few who may be corrupted by their ill example: To this it is to
be answered, That Sin does naturally much more Mischief to Mankind than Error.
He that errs, if he is not immoral with it, is quiet and peaceable in his
Error; therefore still the greatest Mischief is from Sin, which corrupts Men's
Natures through its own Influence. And the Mischief that Error does procure,
arises chiefly from the Pretensions to Infallibility, or something that is near
akin to it: for if Men were suffered to go on in their Errors, with the same
undisturbed quiet that they have for most of their Sins, they would probably be
much quieter in them; since Sin of its Nature is a much fiercer thing than a
point of Speculation can be supposed to be: but if Men apprehend Inquisitions
or other Miseries, upon the account of their Opinions, then they stand together
and combine for their own defense; so that it is not from the Errors
themselves, but from the Methods of treating them, that all those Convulsions
have arisen, which have so violently shaken Churches and Kingdoms.

I quote no other Author, nor no more from this to the Purpose before me,
purely to avoid being tedious; but there is that plenty of concurring
Testimonies obvious to be collected from the printed Discourses of the most
eminent of our Ecclesiastics, that hardly a considerable Man of any order can
call for the Sword of the Magistrate to punish Differences of Opinion in
Matters of Faith, but he must do it in defiance of his own Conscience, as well
as the Laws of the Land. I lay it down then, not only for a very certain,
evident, but also for a generally confessed Truth, that it is always a Vice,
more or less artificially concealed, which prompts religious Disputants to
fight the Lord's Battles with angry Noise, and fiery Words, and flaming
Censures, that Thunder and Lightning of theirs, which does more Mischief than
all the Artillery of Nature from the stormy Sky, or the sulphurous Caverns of
the Earth.

And now there is no avoiding the Inquiry, Whether the Unitarians or their
Adversaries, or both, have managed their Disputes with any of these unjust and
unbeseeming Methods. It is urged hard upon the Unitarians that they have
ridiculed the venerable Articles of the Christian Religion, and spoke
disrespectfully and contemtuously of the most eminent learned and pious Fathers
of the Church: for proof of the first Charge, the Story of Dulcinea, and one or
two Passages more; of the second, the two Tracts, called, Considerations of the
Explications, etc. are much insisted on. But methinks what the Unitarians say
for themselves in their own Defense, is weighty: as much of it as has been
communicated to me, I will set down, and add what more is obvious, and may be
justly added; but for the evener Thread of Discourse, I offer both the one and
the other as from my self.

I have scarce met with that Person who has read the Considerations, but
confesses, those two Tracts may pass for Models of elegant, proper, and decent
Writing, in the controversial way; and I was amazed that two Reverend Bishops
should think themselves affronted or disrespected there; for my part I know not
how a greater Deference could have been paid them, unless they had been
honored as inspired and infallible Interpreters, and worshipped with Mr.
Edwards's gross Flattery, which hallows their Names, and makes them signify
profound Learning, and solid Religion. The severe Virtue of one of the old
Romans, would have resented this as a Libel: But however Mr. Edwards vouches
his elevated Compliment with a solemn Asseveration, Without the least show of
Adulation it may be most truly said, that your Name is now not so much the Name
of a Person or Family, as it is the Name of profound Learning and solid
Religion. He that makes no conscience of such Strains and such Vouching, tho to
a Bishop very Learned and Orthodox, would have bated nothing had his Patron's
Merit been no greater than his own. But I digress -- The briskness and saltness
in those two Tracts, the Considerations, has nothing that is personal, nothing
that reflected on the Persons of their Lordships, or of any other Antagonists:
it is no more than is allowed to all Writers, that their Books may not nauseate
an ingenuous Reader, or weary and tire the more Delicate by a continued Chain
and Course of severe and close Reasoning, like a high Tragedy, without any
Interludes of Music and Dancing. And perhaps if their Lordships had leisure to
look into their former controversial Writings, when they were engaged with
other Adversaries, they might find that themselves had used as much Liberty as
here they condemn. A long deduced Narration of Argument upon Argument, naked
Argument, without pleasing turns of Wit, or well-suted Ornaments of proper and
manly Rhetoric, is a very dry Business, of which their Lordships have been so
sensible, that when I was a young Fellow, I used to read their Writings for my
Pleasure as well as my Profit; and I will undertake to prove that in the
controversial Discourses which they have published in Print, whether against
Papists or other Dissenters from the Church of England, they have used the
Persons of their Adversaries more disrespectfully and contemtuously than it can
be pretended the Considerer has used them; so that were their Charge against
the Considerer just, they ought to forgive him for their own sakes. It is a
good Spanish Proverb, If a Man's own House be made of Glass, he should have a
care of breaking his Neighbor's Windows.

But that which is aggravated most invidiously against the Considerer, is, the
manner of his Reply to the late Archbishop; to expose which the Bp of Worcester
repeats what he pleases, without its Dependence and Connection, and then
pronounces, Pref. p. 54. The plain meaning of all this is, that the late
Archbishop was a mere self-interested Man. But if this be not the plain
meaning, no, nor the meaning plain or obscure; then the Considerer is falsely
accused. I will lay the matter before the Reader. The Considerer begins his
Answer to his Grace the late ArchBp, with an Apology for his undertaking to
answer so many Men of the first Order in the Church, eminent for real Worth and
excellent Learning: He expresses a particular Deference to his Grace, as he
ought, above all the rest. He then declares the Motives which persuaded him to
answer; this being done, that his Cause might not lose by the Meanness and
Obscurity of his Person, he ingeniously notes, that in the Commonwealth of
Learning, there is no regard had to Titles of Honor; wherefore if he has proved
his Point, it avails his Opposers nothing that they are great Pensioners of the
World, biased by Rewards, and Aws. It will indeed hence follow, that the
Considerer did mean that in his Judgment, the Honors and Profits enjoyed by
the ArchBp, might have some influence on his mind to hinder him from discerning
plainly the state of the Question, or freely speaking his Mind: but this can
never be made to signify that the ArchBp was a mere self-interested Man, but by
such a Figure as makes the Name of a Learned and Religious Person truly signify
profound Learning and solid Religion. It Is not the most uncommon thing in the
World, for good Men, in great Places, to be influenced sometimes and in some
things by self-interest; but a mere self-interested Man is one who is wholly
governed by self-interest, whose Opinions alter as his Interest does, whose
Style accommodates it self to the Changes of Times, and the Steps of his own
Advancement. But tho I am satisfied that the Considerer's Words do not reflect
on the ABp. so injuriously as the Bishop of W. would persuade, yet I think it
had been better that they had been unsaid, for they are off from the Argument,
unbecoming, and best excused by observing, that none of all his Antagonists but
has more to answer for upon this account than he.

As for that Charge of ridiculing the Articles of the Christian Religion, the
Unitarians stand upon it, that they are perfectly innocent; only they
acknowledge that they have wrote satyrically against the Heathenish Error of the
Realists: but they hope they may be forgiven their Endeavors to put Tritheism
to open Shame, especially because they never wished to see it hanged or burned.

I have now noted what may be justly pleaded on behalf of the Unitarians, to
acquit them from the Guilt of an undue management of the Controversy: but there
are two things wherein I cannot excuse them; the first is a piece of Rashness
and Indiscretion; the second, a Trespass against a distinguishing Precept of
the Christian Religion. The Story of Dulcinea is pointed not against the
Orthodox Doctrine, but the Scholastic Unscriptural Terms of the Nominalists.
Now it was a piece of Rashness and Indiscretion to ridicule those Terms (how
obnoxious soever) unto which, for Peace sake, they now confess their
Consciences could submit. Sure they could not hope that the old Scholastic
Terms should be laid aside at their Instance. George Duke of Saxony thought not
amiss of the Reformation which Luther drove at; but that it should be made at
the Instance of a pitiful Monk, seemed to him intolerable. The Trespass against
a distinguishing Precept of the Christian Religion, of which I think the
Unitarians are in some measure guilty, is, That when they have been odiously
misrepresented, foully calumniated, maliciously exposed, haughtily insulted,
rated, reviled, and censured by this and the other Adversary, better skilled at
Libelling than Logic, they have not taken it with all the composed Firmness of
Mind, with all the steady Patience which the Commands of the Holy Gospel
required, and the Example of their blessed Master made practicable; but when
they have been barbarously used, have answered angrily again. It Is true, the
worst Returns that they have made, compared with what they have suffered, may
seem perfect Courtship; but if they had never been moved from an even Christian
Temper when all manner of evil was spoke against them without just Cause, their
Labors would have gained a still higher Esteem, and perhaps have been handed
down to late Posterity, as the most absolute Patterns of a dexterous and able,
pertinent, close, and just Management of Controversy.

I should now examine how the Controversy has been managed by those Authors who
have opposed the Unitarians, whether upon the Principles of Tritheism, or upon
a misunderstanding of one another about certain Terms of Art which admit diverse
Constructions: But I am really afraid of examining this, well knowing that I
should meet abundance of Unchristian Matter, not capable of any favorable
Representation. Should I but show how they have treated one another, the
impartial Reader would certainly say, that the Unitarians ought to sit down
content under the Injuries which have fallen to their share: and therefore I
hope these Authors will give me leave to pass them over [all but one, who has
distinguished himself by peculiar Antichristian Excesses] with this general,
not harsh Censure. In some of their Writings there appears much Learning; so
much Learning, that it runs into Confusion; such Confusion, that tho you may
perceive whom they love, and whom they hate, yet you cannot easily divine what
Opinions they are for or against: in others there are to be met better digested
Learning, and a strong Vivacity of Wit. This Man despairs of solving the
Difficulties he meddles with, but honestly hopes, that one time or other a
lucky Interpreter will rise, that presumes he has started a Notion which seems
to give some light to help to form some general Idea of Matters in question;
but among them all, there is little or no Christian Moderation and Temper. Yet
if these great Persons had confined themselves to close Reasoning, and left the
zealous angry part to Mr. Edwards, their Cause would not have suffered for want
of calling Names. That worthy Author's Book, entit'led A brief Vindication of
the fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, is such an entire piece of
Railing, that no Rabsheka before Christ, nor Lucian since, ever equaled it.
It Is wrote too all in the Strain of Bombomachides-Cluninstaridy-Sarchides,
Great Neptune's Grandchild: I vanquished the stupendous Giant COL, sprung from
the prolifick putrefying Gore of the odious Leviathan; we fought on
Altercando's Plains, where Lana Caprina has so often committed Fools and
Philosophers together. I pushed hard at first; in vain the mighty Monster
roared, in vain disgorg'd his poisonous Replies; for now collecting all my
Powers into one impetuous Volume, I poured in upon him 500 bald Reproaches,
Conundrums, and Blunders innumerable; and to perfect the glorious Work, I
murdered his Fame, but that, with some few trifling Stories, two malicious
Witticisms, and one lewd obscene Allusion. I ruined the whole Posse of the
Unitarians, struck their chosen Champion dead, that Champion that was culled
out of the whole Host, and was himself an Host, or else he had not been a Match
for me; yet him I confounded only with some Scores of Perversions, and a few
bolder Falsifications of Authors. I chained the Rector of Steeple to the
Carcass of old Malmsbury; like another Mezentius, I clapped them together,
Componens manibusque manus, atque oribus ora: And thus I made an One-Article
Christian stink alive.

The wonderful Book, full of these Strains, borrows all the Credit which it can
from an University-Licence. This calls to my Memory an Observation formerly
sent me by a Friend. The Spanish Clergy have the Reputation of learned and
judicious Divines all over Europe; not that they really excel those of other
Countries, but because the Pride and Gravity of the Nation takes a particular
Method which procures them this Fame: they will not suffer every splenetick
Trifler to scandalize his whole Order, by publishing his passionate Ignorance
or Weakness to the World from the Press; they absolutely refuse to license any
but very good Books. By this Policy of theirs, a Spanish Divine is become but
another Phrase for a very learned and judicious Divine. This is a dext'rous way
of raising a vast Reputation to a Community from a small stock of Merit: our
Universities might make their Advantage of it, but if they are for setting all
hands to work, then Mr. Edwards ought not to be denied his humble Request. But
this notwithstanding, I will say somewhat for his Brief Vindication; that is,
If it had not been for one thing, it might have repaid the Kindnesses of the
Licencers: for if all that part of it, which was meant for reasoning, had been
downright railing, and the railing part reasoning, perhaps the reasoning would
have been weak, because his Head is disordered, but the Book would have been a
very civil Book. But indeed as it is, I defy all the Heretics in Christendom,
and all the Atheists in the World to write any thing so wicked and unchristian.
I reserve the Consideration of Particulars, till he publishes such another
Book; for I reckon, that tho he has in all manner of evil-speaking far outdone
Heretics and Atheists, yet it is not impossible, but that having succeeded so
strangely in this unchristian Sally, he may adventure again, and outdo
himself. But as for the Unitarians, if I were fit to advise them, they should
never concern themselves any more with this Author. Mr. Lock, and Mr. Bold are
in equal Prudence obliged to let him rail on. There Is a Story in Plutarch, the
Substance of which I remember, but the Book I have not by me; some Strangers
from Chios, debauched lewd Fellows, full of Wine and Madness, vomited in the
Court of the Ephori, the chief Magistrates of the City, nay, and did something
worse in the very Chairs of State. Inquiry being made after the shameless
Offenders, and Information given in, every one expected to have seen them
severely handled; but the Ephori contented themselves with ordering their
public Crier to proclaim, That the Gentlemen of Chios should have leave to be
as filthy, impudent, and wicked, as their wretched base Natures would prompt
them.

I shall have absolved my Design, when I have added what occurs to my Mind
concerning the proper way to remedy the Mischiefs which have happened from the
Controversy, and to prevent farther. One would think it were easy to remedy
such Mischiefs, and to prevent the like for the future, because in the
controverted Points themselves, there is so fair and full an Agreement between
the Orthodox Nominalists, who are the Church, and the no less Orthodox
Unitarians. Eager Disputants seldom convert one another; but many times, after
long Dispute, discover that they rashly fell out, and that there was no
material Difference between them. Thus it is in the case before us; but then a
very odd thing happens upon it; for the Parties are like to fall out again,
because they fell out before for nothing. I am informed, that some angry
Nominalists threaten to call the Considerer to account, for giving the Occasion
of the Quarrel, and protest that they do not mean to be tricked out of the
Punishment of Heresy by a Turn of Wit. So the New Justice (if I remember right)
in one of Old Ben's Plays, upon every Rap at his Gate he bid his Clerk run, and
bring the Malefactors in, that he might draw their Mittimus. What! no
Malefactors yet? O Tempora! O Mores l But I thought it had been the Office of a
Minister of the Gospel, to preach the Mercies of God in Christ, to teach, to
exhort, to declare God's Judgments against Sin, not to execute them; to win Men
to God, not to send them to the Devil; for God reserves the Execution of
Vengeance to himself, and therefore allows the Civil Magistrate no coercive
Powers farther than to preserve the public Peace, which is uncontestably
proved in that admirable, strong, clear, and convincing Tract, entitled, An
Essay concerning the Power of the Magistrate, and the Rights of Mankind in
Matters of Religion; for which the learned Author deserves a Statue in every
Kingdom and Commonwealth upon the Face of God's Earth.

No Men can be in love with ill Usage, and therefore the Unitarians
remonstrate, That they were always persuaded that they had these two ways to
prove their Doctrine Orthodox, 1. The Suffrage of Reason; 2. The Testimony of
Scripture; but now they have a third, the Authority of the Nominalist
Unitarians, and they are resolved to make the most of it. They like the
Doctrines they have always taught never the worse for their being reasonable;
they are tenacious of them, because they are Scriptural; and not a little
pleased to see, that the Nominalist Trinitarians have expounded the Articles of
the Chapter of England to the very same purpose. Would the latter recant their
Expositions, which are Unitarian all over, I would not ensure the former neque
a reatu neque poena, nor from the Guilt, nor from the Punishment of Heresy: but
as the case stands, they have but one thing to answer for, and that is,
affronting some received Terms of Art; for which Offense, to say the truth,
they have given but little Satisfaction; for still they prefer Scripture
Phrases before all other, still they look upon the received Terms of Art as ill
chosen and improper, and consent, not to oppose them, only for Peace sake, and
not out of any Reverence which they are willing to pay to the Inventions of
Philosophic Fathers, or the critical Fancies of subtle Schoolmen. Indeed this
Fault, let it be never so much aggravated, will not make out a very honorable
Pretense for Ecclesiastical Execution, and yet it is the best that can be had,
unless the Persecutors should chance to light upon the arbitrary Device, of
taking upon them not only the Interpretation of the Articles of the Church, but
also of the Writings of the Unitarians. By this means indeed the Unitarian
Writings might chance to appear Heretical, that is, unless the Persecuted
should fall into the Humor of appealing to all impartial and unprejudiced
Persons, whether the Writings of the Nominalist Unitarians be not as obnoxious
as theirs, and altogether as much at the mercy of an Interpreter. And perhaps
there be, that think the World has been troubled too much by them both, and
that neither ought to be forgiven, unless they first forgive one another; and I
am strangely deceived, if I cannot name the Instances, which duly considered,
recommend to them both so much Humanity.

The Nominalists are safe from the Unitarians, not only by the Unitarian
Principle which disavows Persecution, but also because of their Paucity; nor
can their Abilities make them formidable; for, as a great Man notes, their
Adversaries are their Superiors both in Wit and Learning: and the Unitarians
ought to be safe from the Nominalists, not only because the Doctrine of them
both is one and the same, tho their Language sometimes varies, but also for
those many cogent Reasons which are to be met with, in the Essay above cited,
and in the Letters for Toleration; which I presume will have their influence on
both Nominalists and Realists, as many of them as are men of Virtue, true
Piety, and Christian Moderation; but as for such furious Inquisitors as Mr.
Edwards, and Mr. Peter Brown, I reckon they are so very passionate, that they
are utterly incapable of attending to sober Reasoning from plain Christian
Principles: therefore I will tell them a Story, which perhaps they may have
read in their younger days; and that it may not be thrown away upon them, I
will be at the pains of application. Pyrrhus, Prince of Epirus, an ambitious
Politic Captain, made use of one Cyneas, a sensible witty Man, in the conduct
of his weightiest Affairs. This Person one day accosted his warlike Master
after this manner: The Romans, Sir, against whom we are arming, are a hardy
valiant People; but if the Gods should prosper us, how shall we use our
Victory? Why, said Pyrrhus, when we have beaten the Romans, we shall presently
be Masters of all Italy. And how shall we govern our selves then Sir? Then Sir!
why then Sicily holds out her Arms to receive us, a fruitful Island, a noble
and an easy purchase. Very probable: and what! shall the possession of Sicily
put an end to the War? O Friend! says Pyrrhus, we must not throw away the
Opportunities which the Gods put into our hands. We are next bound for Lybia:
and then Carthage, proud, populous, and wealthy, is ours: and by that glorious
Conquest we shall become powerful enough to subdue all Greece. The subtle
Cyneas still plied him with the Question, What are we for next? At last Pyrrhus
replied, Then we'll live at Ease, spend our days in Wine and Mirth, and nothing
shall employ our Thoughts but the ways to vary and heighten our Pleasures. When
Cyneas had brought his unwary Master to this point, he turned short upon him,
and asked, What hinders us now from living at Ease, without dispossessing
others of their Rights, and hazarding our own Fortunes? Instead of running all
these Risques, we may even now sit down and sing, O be Joyful.

Now to my Application. Mr. Edwards and Mr. Brown, furious Dealers in Polemic
Squabble, ambitious both to spread their Empire wide over Conscience, were one
day in Consult, how to remove the Obstacles that stood in their way. The
methods they agreed on, were, to restrain the Press for fear they should lose
by disputing, to censure what they do not understand for fear there should be
Heresy in it, to set up an Inquisition, to jail the suspected of Faith
erroneous, and burn the avowed Dissenter. Their first Process they determined
to direct against a handful of Men, of late known by the Name of Unitarians, in
contradistinction to some Ecclesiastics professing to believe and worship
three distinct Infinite Minds. Dr. Christian Eubulus was their Chancellor, whom
they required to prosecute the aforesaid poor Men with the utmost Rigor. This
Christian Eubulus represented to them that the Unitarians held no private
Doctrines, different from what were taught by our most Orthodox Prelates; that
they were Men of some Learning, untainted Probity and good Sense; but if it was
irrevocably decreed, that they were to be utterly rooted out, he humbly desired
to know whom he was to fall upon next: Why! said Mr. Edw. and Mr. Br. when we
have once dispatched these malepert Unitarians, we shall become formidable to
all the Bawlers against Priestcraft, who now despise us, and need not be afraid
to attacque the Quakers; of whom the largest Division, the Foxonians, who are
the ruling Party, are mere Deists; they are a numerous and politic People, the
Scripture is to them a dead Letter, the Rule of their Faith is the Light within
them, that is, mere natural Reason; and they have an odd way with them, instead
of guarding their own Doctrines, they attacque ours; so it is absolutely
necessary to ruin this Sect: It may be done by Fines, Imprisonment, Death if
need be, or merciful Banishment; What matter if the State lose by it? better be
without them and their Effects, than plagued with their Heresy. Christian
Eubulus seemed to acquiesce, but desired to know of his Masters, whether they
should have any more need of him: O Dear Friend, replied they, when God has
blessed our Zeal so far for his Service, we must not give over so; there are
two Sticks, so they call themselves, Presbyterians and Independents, crooked
Sticks both, who cudgel one another when we let them alone, but not enough to
the purpose; these Sticks must be burnt, both burnt, for they will not bend to
decent Discipline; and by that time we have consumed them to Ashes, all the
little crawling Sectaries will fall down and worship as many infinite distinct
Minds or Essences as we please, or one such infinite Mind in Language that
signifies Three. Christian Eubulus was again at his Question, and when all the
World conforms, What then? Then Man! replied the bold Duumviri; why then we'll
live like true Christians, none of our Communion shall be suffered to indulge
himself in Profaneness and Immorality; we'll show Mercy, and do Works of
Charity; we'll diligently preach the holy Doctrines of the Gospel, and honestly
practice them our selves; so that the Church shall become a Heaven upon Earth.
When Christian Eubulus had brought his zealous Masters to this point, he put
them the hard Question of all; Why cannot we live like true Christians now? Why
cannot we now discourage the Profaneness and Immorality of the Members of our
Communion? What hinders us now from being fervent in Prayer, diligent in
preaching the Gospel, and exemplary in our Lives and Conversations?

When one is got into Stories, especially by the Parlour Fire in a Winter
Evening, there is no end of them; but if the Reader will forgive me, I will
punish him but with one more, and it shall be as short as he could wish.
Barclay in his Icon Animorum, tells us of a Father and his two Sons who
excommunicated the whole World, and confined the Church within the narrow Pale
of their own three Elect Persons; within a few days the hopeful Boys
excommunicated the old Man, and not long after they excommunicated one another.
Suppose now the Church of England should convert or confound the Unitarians,
the Quakers, the Presbyterians, the Independents, and every little
Philadelphian Society; nay, and Popish Recusants also, tho that is a swinging
Supposition: is all like to be Peace at home within her own Body? no such
matter, the Quinquarticular Controversy will set 'em together by the ears among
themselves; Mr. Gailhard, and the Growth of Error have already declared open
War against all Churchmen of the Arminian Persuasion; for want of a Bone, the
Theory of the Earth will make a bustle among them; and for ought I know the
Royal Society may make some Discovery in Nature, that may be Heresy in
Religion: but to mention no more, the Unitarian Controversy it self shall live
among them as vigorous as ever; Dr. Sherlock will never forgive Dr. South; nor
Dr. South, Dr. Sherlock; the Nominalists will never leave till they have run
down the Tritheists; the Tritheists with their last Breath will revile the
Nominalists for Sabellians and Socinians: so that in short, if the Church will
have no War without her Pale, she must have one within; wherefore I would
advise every one to make living like a good Christian his Business now, and
never be troubled at the Disputes which are stirring, of which there is like to
be no end, let the present Disputants that have the worst on it, by reason of
their inferior Numbers, be run down, hanged, or burnt, or not.

I conclude with one word of Advice to the Unitarians, i. e. that they would
give over the Dispute; I know they are Men of Conscience, and have, within the
Bounds of Moderation, been zealous for the Truth, but that will not suffer, tho
they are silent; the Learned and Excellent Bishops of Worcester and Sarum, Dr.
South and others are able and forward enough to defend it against all the
heathenish Opposition of the Tritheistick Tribe.

FINIS.

