THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Present Parliament, etc.

THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Present Parliament JUSTIFIED By the OPINION of the most
Judicious and Learned HVGO GROTIVS; With Considerations thereupon.

WRITTEN For the Satisfaction of some of the Reverend Clergy who yet seem to
labor under some Scruples concerning the Original Right of Kings, their
Abdication of Empire, and the Peoples inseparable Right of Resistance,
Deposing, and of Disposing and Settling of the Succession to the Crown.

By a Lover of the Peace of his Country.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, 1689.

The Opinion of the most Learned and Judicious HUGO GROTIUS, etc.
THere are some, I do observe, amongst the Clergy of the Church of England, who
seem very much concerned for the late King's Interest, and dissatisfied with
the Management and Disposure of Affairs relating thereto, by this Great and
Honorable Convention of the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament. All
who cherish Resentments of this kind I dare not indistinguishably condemn,
because they may possibly be directed in some by a Principle of Honor and
Honesty: But those whose Intentions are honest, and do not principally design
thereby to betray their Country into Popery and Vassalage (for such will be the
natural Consequences, tho not the Inducements to their Wishes) I desire they
would seriously weigh this Right they so much contend for, in the Balance of
Law and Reason, before they pass a Censure, or ground an Opinion.

There can be no Right pretended either to Property or Dominion, but by the
Laws of Nature, Nations, or the Municipal Laws of the Country where such Right
is claimed, and although the latter of these are grounded upon and derived from
the two former, yet do they notwithstanding take place in the deciding of all
Difficulties, so far as their Statutes or Presidents do extend: But where the
municipal Laws are silent or defective, there Recourse is to be had to the Laws
of Nature and Nations. Upon this account it was, that the Grave and Learned
Sergeant Maynard, being applied unto, as the fittest person, in respect of his
great Age and Learning, to signify what the Laws of the Land did direct in
such an Exigence as this, replied, That it was true, he was the most ancient of
all those who attended that Prosession, that he had outlived several Kings, and
several Sets of Judges, but now he had also outlived the Law it self.
Intimating thereby, that the Case was so unusual and extraordinary, that it
went beyond the Direction of the municipal Laws, and therefore must appeal to a
more remote Tribunal.

The Reason why I do more particularly single out the Opinions of this famous
Civilian upon this Occasion, is because of the great Credit and Authority he
has obtained in the World, especially amongst the Clergy, and is above all
other of his Faculty, most tender of the Rights and Prerogatives of Crowned
Heads. Upon this account there can nothing reasonably be objected to his Sense
of those Scruples and Difficulties which some at present labor under. Therefore
I desire they would hear him in his own Words, with the most fair and genuine
Translation they will admit.

Grot. de Jure Belli and Pacis, Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Sect. 16.
Si Bello injusto and cui Juris Gentium requisita non adsint, Imperium
arripuerit aliquis, neque pactio ulla secuta sit aut fides illi data, sed sola
vi retineatur possessio: videtur manner belli jus, ac proinde in eum licere
quae in hostem licet, qui, a quolibet etiam privato, jure potest interfici. In
reos Majestatis, inquit Tertullianus, and publicos hosts omnis homo miles est.

If any one by an unjust War, such as wants those Requisits which by the Laws
of Nations it ought to have, does usurp a Government, nor afterward enters
into any Compact with the People, nor is there any Trust reposed in him, but
his Possession is maintained by Force; the right of War does in this Case still
continue, wherefore it is lawful to deal with him in all things as with an
Enemy, for he may be justly slain by any private person. Tertullian tells us,
That against those who are guilty of usurping Majesty, and against common
Enemies, every one is a Soldier.

I know but of three ways whereby Empire can be originally acquired. The first
is by Nature, and the Governor a Patriarch, who immediately presides over a
Family or City of his own natural Generation, or claims the Government by a
Lineal Descent from him who was the common natural Ancestor of all his
Subjects. To this Title I think there is no Prince now in the World lays claim:
if there be, let him produce his Pedigree, and prove himself the Primogenitus
by an Hereditary Line from the natural Father of his People, and I will not
farther contend it with him.

The second sort of Empire is by Conquest, of which you see what Grotius says.
But put the case the Conqueror had a Right prior to his Conquest, so that the
War cannot be called unjust, yet after he has acquired the Government, he
cannot at once be in, by two Titles, so as to exercise the respective powers
given by both; because if he holds by Conquest his power is Absolute; if by
Contract, then limited and directed by the People; and he cannot be both
absolute and limited at the same time. From hence it must necessarily follow,
that by every Act wherein he transgresses his limited power, in usurping what
he had no manner of Right to, he renounces his lawful Title, and rules by force
and violence only, and thereby the Conquerors unjust War, and the Peoples just
Right to vindicate themselves from this unjust usurpation, is still continued.

As the Case stands now with us in England, if the late King could have claimed
by Conquest, as many have pretended he might, from William the Conqueror, only
to palliate some illegal Proceedings; what has been done against him, and much
more, in the Opinion of this learned Man, had been both lawful and justifiable.
But if he claims neither as a Patriarch, nor by Conquest, then there is only
left for him to claim by Compact, under which Qualification I desire you would
farther consider him by the Rules which our learned Author lays down.

Grot. de Jure Belli, Lib. 2. Chapter 14. Sect. 4.
Promissa quoque plena and absoluta atque acceptata, naturaliter jus
transfer, demonstratum supra est; quod itidem ad Reges, non minus quam ad
alios pertinet, ita ut improbanda sit, hoc quidem sensu, eorum sententia, qui
negant Regem teneri unquam his quae sine causa promisit.

That Promises fully made and accepted do naturally transfer a Right, is
already shown. Now this holds as well in Kings as in private Men: their
Opinions therefore are not to be allowed of, who hold, that what a King
promises without a good cause, is not obligatory.

Contrary to this fundamental Law of Nature and Reason is the Opinion of those
Divines who hold all Kings to be Jure divino, and consequently their Power
absolute; so also of those common Lawyers who would justify that all
Concessions made by the Prince to his People, in diminution of his Prerogative
Royal, (tho dangerous and destructive) are void and revokeable.

Ib. Lib. 1. Chapter 4. Sect. 7. N. 3.
Notandum est, primo homines non Dei praecepto sed sponte adductos, experimento
infirmitatis familiarum segregum adversus violentiam, in societatem civilem
coiisse, unde Ortum habet Potestas Civilis, quam ideo Humanam Ordinationem
Petrus vocat, quanquam alibi and Divina Ordinatio vocatur, quia hominum salubre
institutum Deus probavit. Deus autem humanam legem probans, censetur probare ut
humanam and humano more.

It Is to be observed, That Men did not originally unite into civil Communities
by any Command from God, but voluntarily, and from the experience they had that
separate Families were alone unable to resist any foreign Force. From hence
grew Civil Power, which Peter therefore calls an Humane Ordinance, tho
elsewhere it is called a Divine Ordinance, because God did approve thereof as
suitable and convenient for the good of Mankind; but when God approves of an
Humane Law, he must be supposed to do it as humane, and after an humane manner.

In this Paragraph our Author traces a lawful Empire to its Originals: he finds
it then to reside in the People, and derives it, together with the reasons
thereof, from Them, to such Person or Persons in whom it is by their Act and
Sanction placed and confirmed.

Ib. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Sect. 7. N. 2.
Ferri enim leges ab hominibus solent and debent cum sensu humanae
imbecillitatis. Haec autem Lex de qua agimus, pendere videtur a voluntate eorum
qui se primum in societatem civilem consociant, a quibus jus porro ad
imperantes manat. Hi vero si interrogarentur, an velint omnibus hoc onus
imponere, ut mori proeoptent, quam ullo casu vim superiorum armis arcere,
nescio an velle se sint responsuri, nisi forte cum hoc additamento, si resisti
nequeat, nisi cum maxima, Reipublicoe perturbatione aut exitio plurimorum
innocentium, quod enim tali circumstantia caritas commendaret, id in legem
quoque humanam deduci posse non dubito.

All Laws and Governments always are and ought to be established by the first
Legislators with respect to humane Frailty. The Law we treat of (viz. of
Resistance in cases of inevitable necessity) seems to depend upon the Intention
of those who first entered into Civil Society, from whom the Right of Governing
is transferred to the Governor. If such were asked, Whether they intended to
impose a Yoke equal to Death it self upon all who should offer to resist the
Tyrannies of a superior Magistrate, by force, upon any account whatsoever; I
much doubt, whether they would declare themselves in the Affirmative, unless
perhaps to avoid the Inconveniences which might attend such a Storm in the
State, and the destruction of many Innocents: for what in this case Charity
would oblige, may be received as a Law.

Here our Author gives another touch at the Original of Empire, and in effect
tells us, that as it first was in the power of the People to make the Laws of
Government, so it is absurd to think, that they should not by those Laws secure
themselves against the Passions and Infirmities of the Governor, which they
then made, that thereby they might be justifiable in re-assuming their native
Liberty, so far as to repel by force the violence he should offer either to
themselves or their Laws. To this effect, and more closely, does Vasquius
write, Lib. 11. cont. Illust. cap. 82. n. 3. Semper licet subditis si possint,
in libertatem eam, scilicet quae populi est, se vindicare: Quia quod vi partum
est imperium vi possit dissolvi; quod autem ex voluntate sit profectum, in eo
poenitere liceat and mutare voluntatem.

Grot. de Jure Belli, Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Sect. 13.
Si Rex partem habet summi imperii, partem alteram populus aut Senatus, Regi in
partem non suam involanti, vis justa opponi potest, quia eatenus Imperium non
habet: Quod locum habere censeo etiamsi dictum sit, Belli potestatem penes
Regem fore, id enim de bello externo intelligendum est: cum alioqui, quisquis
Imperii summi partem habeat, non possit non jus habere eam partem tuendi. Quod
ubi sit, potest etiam Rex sui imperii partem, Belli jure amittere.

If the Supreme Power be divided between the King and the People, he may justly
be resisted by Force if he invade that part which is not his own, because his
Power extended not to it. This I conceive must be allowed, though the King have
the Power of Peace and War; for this is to be understood of Foreign War.
Whosoever has any part of the Supreme Power, must also necessarily have a
Right to defend it; and where the Government is so constituted, the King
himself may justly, by the Right of War, lose even his own part of the Empire.

This is plainly the Case of England, where the Supreme Power is divided
between the King, Lords, and Commons, and where the King in his greatest
Magnitude is always acknowledged to be Minor Vniversis. It is evident then,
That if either of these three do break in upon the Rights and Privileges of
either of the other two, Force is justifiable to repel this Invasion: as for
instance, If any new Precept, Ordinance or Command should be introduced as an
obligatory Law; or if any Law formerly made should be repealed or dispensed
with, which in effect are both the same, by any one of these three Estates,
without the Concurrence of the other two in Parliament; this is such an
Invasion as Grotius here speaks of, because this Power of making and repealing
a Law is jointly in the King and People, but in neither of them separately. Now
whether the erecting of an High Commission Court directly contrary to an Act of
Parliament, be not a virtual repealing of that Act; Whether the dispensing with
several other Statutes be not equivalent with the assuming of a Power to
abrogate them; Whether the establishing a standing Army in time of Peace be not
a virtual Introduction of a new Law in it self, and a Repeal of all the old
ones in its Consequences; and whether all these be not such an Invasion of that
part of the Government which belongs to the People as will justify Resistance,
let the World judge: If so, the Legality then of all that has been done or is
farther likely to be done against such an Invader, will easily appear.
Theodosius the Emperor often used this excellent Expression, Tantum mihi licet
quantum per leges licet; and St. Paul acquaints us with the Conditions of our
Submission not for Wrath but Conscience sake, knowing that he is the Minister
of God for our Good. Nor indeed does it seem Christian or reasonable, to impose
Obedience farther than it shall appear to be for the general Good of the
People, for whose Safeguard and Protection, not their Ruin and Destruction,
Government, nay Religion it self, was first instituted. Vnicus imperii finis
est populi utilitas, says Junius Brutus; and I cannot but concur with this
fundamental Maxim, Salus populi est suprema Lex.

Grot. de Jure Belli, Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Sect. 10.
Si tamen Rex reipsa etiam tradere Regnum aut subjicere moliatur, quin ei
resisti in hoc possit non dubito. Aliud est enim ut diximus imperium: aliud
habendi modus, qui ne mutetur obstare potest populus: id enim sub imperio
comprehensum non est: Quo non male ap^es illud Senecae in re non dissimili, Et
si parendum in omnibus patri, in eo non parendum, quo efficitur ne Pater sit.

If a King shall endeavor to give up or subject his Kingdom to another, I
doubt not but he may be resisted; for Empire is one thing, and the manner of
holding it another, the Alteration whereof the People may hinder, for that is
not comprehended under the Notion of Empire it self. To this may that Saying of
Seneca be well applied, being in effect the same case, Although an universal
Obedience is required to Parents, yet not in those things wherein they cease to
act like Parents.

What Designs have been carried on to alter the Government by subverting the
fundamental Laws thereof, and by private Leagues and Combinations with a
neighboring Prince, to subject the Kingdom to his Power by admitting of a
foreign Army into it, is in part evident by the French King's Testimony, and in
convenient time will farther appear, to add to those many other weighty
Inducements, which the People had, to proceed by such Measures as the Wisdom of
the Nation has thought fit.

Grot. de Jure Belli, Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Sect. 9.
Si Rex aut alius quis imperium abdicavit aut manifest habet pro derelicto, in
eum post id tempus omnia licent quae in privatum, sed minime pro derelicto
habere rem censendus est qui eam tractat negligentius.

If a King or any other Superior Magistrate shall abdicate or manifestly desert
the Government, any thing may be lawfully done against him that may be done
against a private Person: but he who governs only negligently, is not to be
esteemed as one who has deserted.

The Word ABDICATE in its proper Sense, is used to signify, when a superior
Magistrate does renounce and utterly withdraw himself from the Government, or
from that share of it which he holds. This may be done voluntarily and
designedly, by transferring the Government to another by some formal method of
Conveyance, as Charles the Fifth did to his Son, being himself inclined to
become a Recluse; or else there may be an involuntary and undesigned
Abdication, as when an Office, and the executing of the same, does determine by
Misfeasance, or Nonfeasance. The Word DESERT implies only a Nonfeasance, and
must naturally amount in all Ministerial Offices (that of a King, who has only
the Executive Power, being no other) to an end and determination of the same,
and thereby does vest again in Him or them who first created or instituted the
Office, an immediate power to erect and institute a new one, together with such
an Officer as they they shall approve of to execute it, with such Restrictions
and Limitations as they shall think expedient. How far this poor Government has
been abdicated, renounced, deserted and forsaken by Malefeasance, Misfeasance
Nonfeasance, and at last by an utter Dereliction, I need not repeat, it being
too evident to all, but those who will not see, than whom there is none so
blind and incorrigibly ignorant.

Grot. De Jure Belli, Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Sect. 8.
Primum ergo, qui Principes sub Populo sunt, sive ab initio talem acceperunt
potestatem, sive postea ita convenit ut Lacedaemone, si peccent in Leges and
Rempublicam non tantum vi repelli possunt, sed si opus sit puniri morte, quod
Pausaniae Regi Lacedaemoniorum contigit.

Those Princes who are inferior in power to the whole Body of the People,
whether by original or subsequent Compact, as in Lacedaemon, if they violate
the Laws, or wrong the Commonwealth, such may not only be resisted by force,
but if necessary, be punished by death, which befell Pausanias King of the
Lacedaemonians.

How sacred the person of a King is, I cannot determine; but to his Office, as
to all things that are for universal good, whilst executed in order to that
end, I will allow a Character of Sanctity. Some Kings, such as were by God's
immediate appointment, are styled, His anointed, and were handed to his People
with a particular command to be tender of their persons; but this must be
understood of such only, who are also Nursing Fathers to their People; for of
others of a different stamp, the Scripture speaks but with a slender respect,
when it says, I have given you a King in my wrath. In Deuteronomy. we find the People
left to choose a King from among their Brethren, and Moses elsewhere prescribing
Laws to him. David makes a League with the People at Hebron, which was
doubtless that original Contract, according to which he was to go in and out
before them. It was a noble expression of the Emperor Trajan, when he delivered
a Sword to a Captain of the Pretorian Band, and said, Hoc pro me utere si recte
impero, si male contra me: but it is not upon every small occasion, that Kings
may be bound in fetters, or that Trajan's Sword should be inverted to his own
Breast. A King's Office is sacred, and so is his Right also, which, while it
keeps within its due limits, ought not to be invaded. The Laws of God do in
positive Terms command Honor and Obedience as well as Tribute to be paid to
him, with which the municipal Laws of this Kingdom do equally conspire in favor
of his Dignity and Person. But Divine as well as Human Laws, tho they sound
absolutely, yet refuse not upon extraordinary Exigencies, to submit to employed
Exceptions. Upon this account, the Jewish Doctors in case of their Sabbath;
which of all things was esteemed most sacred amongst them, and the Laws for the
observance of it most strict and absolute, yet they held that Periculum animae
impellit Sabbathum, and for the same reason Christ himself justifies the breach
of Sabbath, and eating of the Show Bread, in cases of extreme necessity; so
likewise must the danger be imminent, and the necessity very urgent, that can
any ways excuse so much as an irreverend thought of Majesty: yet, as the great
Law of Necessity is superior to all others, so will it sometimes justify such
Acts as are against all Laws of an inferior Order. In such cases the People
are, must and will be absolute and arbitrary, and therefore they cannot by any
Contract or Promise either with Prince or Peasant, renounce and abdicate this
great Law of Self-preservation, in affirmance of which great truth, Johannes
Major in lib. 4. Sententiarum, thus expresses himself, Non posse populum a se
abdicare potestatem destituendi Principis in casu quo ad destructionem
vergeret. But how far the present Exigence may justify the act of the People
in altering of the Succession where the Monarchy is hereditary, and the Heir
may plead his Innocence, the following Authorities will resolve.

Grot. De Jure Belli, Lib. 2. cap. 4. Sect. 10. N. 2.
Sciendum est, ejus qui nondum natus est nullum esse jus, sicut nec ulla sunt
accidentia rei non existentis. Quare, si populus, a cujus voluntate jus
regnandi proficiscitur voluntatem mutet, iis qui nondum nati sunt, ut quibus
jus quaesitum nondum est, nullam facit injuriam. Sicut autem populus express
mutare voluntatem potest, ita and tacit credi mutasse. Mutata igitur populi
voluntate, neque dum existente eorum jure qui expectari possunt, parentibus
autem e quibus nasci possunt, qui jus suo tempore essent habituri, id ipsum jus
derelinquentibus, nihil est quod obstet quo minus illud ut derelictum, ab alio
occupari possit.

We must know, that no Right can belong to him who is yet unborn, as that which
has no existence can have no accidents. Wherefore, if the People, from whose
Will all Right of Sovereignty did originally proceed, should happen to change
their Will, yet cannot they be supposed thereby, to injure them who have yet
acquired no Right. And as the People may be believed to change their Will by
express words, so they may tacitly likewise: allowing then, that the People
have changed their Will, and that such future Rights have no real existence in
those who are only in expectancy; but that the Parents from whom they may be
born, having in them this Right, did relinquish the same, what should hinder
but that which is thus derelinquished may be possessed by another.

This Point of Succession, upon supposition that the pretended Prince of Wales
was really born of the Queen, requires a decision, for it happening before any
alteration actually made in the Government, leaves the point to turn upon the
Change of the Peoples Will. Our Author here takes notice of an express and a
tacit Change. That the People did in a public formal manner change their Will
as to the Succession, before the Birth of this Child, I cannot say; but it is
certain, that they did generally show their Aversions to such a Succession,
long before this Birth, and would undoubtedly have done it in a more public
legal Method, had they not been awed by an illegal standing Army. As to a tacit
Change of their Will none can doubt, but it had a full Existence before the
young Prince had his, bearing date from that day, wherein public Prayers and
Thanks were by Order, offered up for the Queens pretended Conception, and may
by this Parliament, be accordingly so declared.

Grot. de Jure Belli, Lib. 2. Cap. 7. Sect. 26.
Similis est quaestio, an abdicari possit Regnum, aut jus succedendi in Regnum:
and quin pro se quisque abdicare possit non est dubium: an and pro liberis,
magis controversum.

Ib. Illud interest inter Natos and Nascituros, quod Nascituris nondum
quaesitum sit jus, atque ideo, auferri iis possit populi voluntate, si etiam
parents, quorum interest jus ad filios transire, jus illud remiserint: quo
pertinent ea quae de relictione supra diximus

It is such another Question, Whether a King can so abdicate his Kingdom as to
destroy the Right of Succession to his Son. That he may abdicate for himself is
not doubted; but whether for his Children also, is the Question.

The diversity depends upon the Childrens being born before or after the
Renunciation, for those who are yet unborn, the People may deprive of this
Right, because it is not yet accru'd, if the Parents, whose Interest it is that
such Right should descend to the Children, do also remit it. To the same
purpose is what has been said concerning Abdication.

Our Author does here again affirm a change of Succession to be lawful, upon
the change of the Peoples Inclination. But he is also farther of opinion, that
a King may abdicate for a Child unborn as well as for himself. It is already
sufficiently proved by the Authority of this Author, and others, That a Breach
of the Office and Duty of a King is an Abdication ipso facto; and if so, that
of King James II. may bear date from the day he first erected the Court of
Ecclesiastical Commissioners, established a standing Army in the Nation, or
took those Customs, the Grant whereof expired by K. Charles the Second's Death,
and ought not to commence again till given by another Parliament. This was done
in the very Infancy of his Reign, whereby his Abdication became an early Act,
and did betimes cut off both such real and supposititious Issue, as might after
pretend by Birth and Title to bring in Popery and Slavery into this Nation.

Grot. de Jure Belli, Lib 2. Cap. 7. Sect. 27. N. 2.
Si de primaeva p^puli voluntate (in Successione controvertenda dictum)
quaestio incidat; non abs re erit, populum qui nunc est, quique idem cum eo qui
olim fuit censetur, suum super ea re sensum exprimere; qui sequendus erit, nisi
satis certo constet, olim aliam fuisse populi voluntatem, and ex ea jus
quaesitum.

If (in discussing of a Right of Succession) any doubt does arise, it would be
convenient that the People who now are, and may be supposed to be of the same
mind with their first Ancestors, should express the sense of the matter; which
ought to be pursued, unless it be manifest, That the original Will of the
People was otherwise, and from thence a Right was established.

Our Author, in his own Annotations upon this Paragraph, farther adds, That
such Disquisition may be made by Convention of the States (viz. The Lords and
Commons) as it was in England in the Year 1571 and 1572, according to Camden.
In the two former Paragraphs he puts Cases about the change of a Succession,
and resolves them; but by this and by his Annotations thereupon, when any other
Doubts shall arise concerning Succession, he leaves them to the Decision of the
People, and particularly to the States of England by express Name; as if they
were more undoubted Judges in such Controversies than the States of any other
Nation: and they, according to this Learned Author's Opinion, have regularly
and justly proceeded to assert their own Rights, and to settle both them and
the Succession of the Crown, for the future, upon such an Establishment, that
we may reasonably hope and believe, that all the Powers of France, or Prayers
of Rome, no nor the very Gates of Hell, shall ever be able to prevail against
them.

FINIS.

