THE LION DISTURBED



(...) Amsterdam by Steven Swart

portrait of Gusman Fonseca

GUSMAN FONSECA DE HARO GRAEF van MONTERY Goevernuer Vande Spaensche Nederlanden

THE LION DISTURBED: Containing An Historical Relation of the most remarkable
Passages since the beginning of this War, betwixt the United Provinces, France,
England, Colen, and the Bishop of Munster, unto this present.
ANNO 1671.
IN January a German Prince wrote unto one of the noblest Princesses of the Low
Countries, admiring that people were so secure in Holland, and not more
awakened, because of the great preparations of War by the French and their
Creatures, which he verily foresaw to tend to nothing else, but the invasion
of the Netherlands. Cunctaniem maxim Mars odit.

In Febr. the Bishop of Munster took on many Officers in service, pretending
his own security, which ^sed the States, as suspecting him, to choose four
Horse and five Foot Regiments, appointing their several Places of mustering of
them.

April 23. The King of France began his journey to the Spanish Netherlands,
which being in great Pomp and attendance, for to take a view of his Conquests,
caused not a little fear to the Spaniard. But the Earl of Monterie held a
vigilant Eye; yea, England it self would seem to be awakened, securing their
Coasts. This State also took care both for Ships at Sea, and strengthening the
Garrisons on the side of Flanders.

In May, when the French Court was at Dunkirk, abundance of French and English
Gentry came to and fro for to view the Courts, which by both the Kings were so
highly entertained, that it was judged far to surpass common civility, and
something else to lurk under it, as afterward did plainly appear.

In July, upon the tidings of the sickness of the Duke d' Anjou, the King
returned home, and arrived at St. Germain the 17. dito, finding his Son but a
little before departed.

In August, beside the continual taking on of Soldiers, and preparing Magasins,
an 187. Commissions were sent forth from Paris, beside Expresses to Germany,
Genua, Switserland, Savoy, Venice, Luqua, Corsica and Scotland, with other
places, for to leavy Regiments, and whole France through, Sea-Equipage was
hastened. At which time the States Fleet was before the Wielings, and the
Esquadron of Admiral van Gent was met by the Merlin, commanded by Captain Crow,
sent over to fetch the Ambassadrix Temple from the Hague; who making a bravado,
would have the whole Esquadron to strike, but as not having sufficiently
insisted, he was at his return clapped up in the Tower, which business proved
afterward the greatest pretense of the English to their breach of the league
between us.

In September, Soldiers were pressed both in England, Scotland and Yreland, for
France, under pretext of recruting Douglas his Regiment, but Indeed of greater
concern; it being afterward known that above 12000. were raised for the French
service.

In October. this State perceiving the mighty warlike preparations on every side,
and that vast sums of money were sent from France to England, and ma^y English,
Scotch and Irish Soldiers were shipped over from Dover to Calis; they resolved
also to increase their Militia, and to form a nearer instruction about a
Captain General, which had somwhile been in deliberation.

In November. The French were yet busy to form Magasins in Luyk, Bon, Nuys,
pretending it to be for the Bishop of Colen's service against the City; but in
the mean while, abundance of French entered upon diverse pretenses the Countries
of Overmase and along the Rhyne, which awakened Montrey, to visit and provide
the considerable Places of his Government as far as Navagnie: The States also
by their Committees visited their Frontiers, and resolved against Spring to set
forth a Fleet of 72. Ships, and by their Edicts forbad the bringing in, buying,
selling or consumption, of French Wine, Vinegar, Paper, Canvas, and Chestnuts.

In December. This State perceiving the mighty increase of the French Forces, and
their great endeavors to gain England, Spain, Sweden and Germany, on their
side; sent a friendly Letter to be delivered by their Ambassador de Groot unto
the King, who was kept from his audience the space of a Month: but in the mean
while, in the Hague on the 17. dito a defensive League was (much against the
will of France and England) concluded, betwixt this State and the Ministers of
Spain, and afterward was ratified and delivered over on both sides.

A LETTER to the King of France.
MAy it please your Majesty. After serious consideration of that bounty, which
the Kings your Progenitors, have always showed to this State, we could not
without regret give credence unto the reports abroad, that those mighty
preparations for War in your Kingdom should be intended against us, which
nevertheless by reason of advertisements from all parts, and the management by
your State Officers in the Courts of Kings and Princes round about, does cause
us to suspect. We therefore have strictly searched, whither there might not
something in the management of our affairs be found an occasion to move your
Majesty, to decline that friendship, wherewith it has pleased your Majesty to
honor us unto this present; but having found nothing to accuse our selves, nor
for which we have been reproved by your Majesty, we could not imagine, that the
Justice which is exercised in your Kingdom, would permit your Majesty to
improve your Arms against your most faithful and ancient Allies, without any
foregoing manifestation of those difficulties, of which you required
reparation. And really, it is so far from us to give any just cause unto your
Majesty, or in any thing to come short of the agreement concluded in Paris
December. 1662. that we apprehend, that we have observed the same with all
strictness and care, and do offer without any delay, to make satisfaction, if
through mistake we have come short thereof. It is true, Great Sir, that for
some time, there has not been that Compliance as to Sea affairs and
Merchandise; but this was very much to our grief, neither have we omitted
anything that might justly be required of us to prevent, and wholly to remove
the troubles that have fallen out on either side, even as we are ready ye to
do, and not only as to that, but in whatsoever may fully testify to your
Majesty our earnest desire, to render unto you the honor and high esteem we
are obliged unto as to your Person and Worth, and to give you all the
contentment, which you could desire from your best and most affectionate
Allies, for the restoring of Trade at Sea, and Traffic in the same way, as it
was at our last agreement; yea, in respect of our condescension to your
interest, to go to the uttermost, we are able without prejudice to what we
stand bound to other Confederates. To be short, Royal Sir, we do not believe to
justify those martial prepares, which are both at Sea and Land, according to
the intelligence we daily receive; but we would assure your Majesty, that we do
it not with purpose to wrong any, but through extreme necessity, and most
strong obligations to defend our State and Subjects: and that it shall be our
joy to lay down our Arms, when it shall please your Majesty to free us from
those troubles, which that War does bring upon us, that seems near
approaching on all sides, assuring our selves, we ought not to stand in fear of
yours. We have given Commission unto our Ambassador D' Groot, to desire a
particular audience as to these things by your Majesty, and to propound them
more at large, with addition of whatsoever may serve to assure your Majesty of
the uprightness of our intents. Here we will break off and not further enlarge;
but only to beg of God to preserve your Majesty.

Written in the Hague December. 10. 1671.

ANNO 1672.
Januar. 2. The Interim agreement between the Bishop and City, was signed at
Colen, by which also the City was necessitated to cause Bamphields Regiment
being in service of the States, to quit the City, which by reason of many
obstructions, the French urging to muster them, and to take out all of their
Nation among them, was retarded until the 4 of February, but without
molestation then departed to Rijnberck, and other Places on the Rhijn, when it
manifestly appeared, that the French, Munsters, and Colens designs, were
nothing else, but to fall upon us, to which end the Bishop of Colen claimed the
delivery of Rijnberck, and the Bishop of Munster the Children of the Earl of
Benthem: In the mean while, nothing more noysed than raising of Soldiers, and
shipping over of numbers of English to France; and then because of the low
waters, many flat boats were made ready here to lay upon the Rivers.

Febr. 4. The Ambassador d'Groot first obtained an hearing, to deliver the
States Letter to the King: receiving for answer that this Letter was already
communicated to him from other Princes, and that about the Spring it would
appear whereto this arming tended, to which end also the 6. dito a Letter was
sent to the States in answer as follows:

MUch endeared Great Friends and Allies: By the Lord d'Groot, your Ambassador
Extraordinary to us, we have understood what was on your behalf to be declared
to us, and have received out of his hand of December. 10. the Letter ordered by
you to be given unto us. We were well pleased in it to find the acknowledgement
you make to have received at diverse occasions the tokens of the goodness of the
Kings our Progenitors: but we could have wished you had not forgotten what has
fallen out since we came to the Crown, the remembrance whereof would have
prevented you of judging so sincerely of your transactions to us ward as you
do, in the managing of your affairs since that time, you might have called to
mind, that you have not always observed that fidelity, which our ancient
confederacy did oblige unto, and that we have not failed in your urgent
necessities to afford you requisite assistance, for the preservation of your
State: If so, it may be, the innovation you made in trading since 1662. would
not have seemed so excusable unto you as you make it, and which we are willing
to refer to the judgment of them that have less interest in it than we. If
what you acknowledge, be true, that Justice be the rule of our actings, and
that you are satisfied in the considering of our undertakings, then ought you
not to be troubled at our taking up of Arms; We grant that since our last
journey to Flanders, we have increased our Bands, to improve our foot in the
works of our Forts, and to difend our Subjects from danger, threatened by the
more than ordinary number of Foot and Horse by you raised, and the Fleet you
kept before our Coasts: as also because of importune Addresses of your State
Ministers at the Court of most Princes, for to combine with you against our
Crown: Wherein we followed the Law of sage providence, and what the defense of
our people obliged us to. We would therefore let you know, that we will go
forward with our arming, both at Sea and Land, and when it shall be brought to
that height, we have proposed to do, we shall so improve, as we shall think
becoming our Honor, of which we are bound to give no account to any, assuring
our selves, that God will bless our righteous undertakings, and that shall be
owned of all Potentates, who have not suffered themselves to be prejudiced by
those evil impressions, which now for a long time has been endeavored to be
done. This was our pleasure to give in answer to you Letter, although it was
written not so much for us, as to stir up the Princes against us, in whose
Courts it was common, before we had received the same. We pray God, very dear
great Friends and Allies, to keep you in his holy protection. Written at St.
Germein de Lay. 6. Januar. 1672.

Your good Friend and Ally, LOUIS. LE TELLIER.
Was subscribed Under it,

8. Dito, The Ambassador Downing, who some days had been in the Hague, made
his public Entrance, but little satisfaction was taken as to himself, and not
much exspected from his negotiation. About this time, the Lords, of Amerongen
went to the Elector of Brandenburg, and of Brasser to the Princes of
Lunenburgh, for to treat with them about supplies of Auxiliary Troops.

In France much people were now gathered, and the Militia was to be increased
to an 180000 of which 14. a 15. thousand were already in the Countries of Luyck
and Colen, with much Provision and Ammunition, and a Fleet of 30. Capital Ships
made ready to join with the English, and continually English and Scotch
Soldiers were shipped over to France, while in England they were gathering a
Regiment of 2400. fighting men, for the Duke of Monmouth, who with them and
much Gentry went unto the French service, they also hastened to set forward a
Fleet in England, to which end the King to get money, shut up the Exchequer,
portrait of Willem Hendrick de III WILLEM HENDRICK DE III by de gratie Godts.
PRINCE van ORANIE erf Stadthonder Cap: Gen: van Holl: Zeel: etc:
not permitting any moneys to be reimboursed to the Merchants, which was a
great hinderance to trade, not there only, but in most places also.

Febr. 4. The Ambassador Downing had his farewell audience, declaring that
forasmuch as he could not obtain an answer to his memorial and iterated
instances about striking the Flag, he was ordered to return home. Although the
State had diverse times proffered to give due satisfaction, in case all
pretenses were brought in to be together treated on: which also the said States
by their Letter had signified to the King: but Downing protested to have
express order to treat of nothing, before satisfaction was made about the
Flag, which the States declining he returned home, and soon after his return
was put into the Tower, and deprived of some of his Places of honor, the cause
not being discovered* only it was given out that he came back before he had
order: although afterward it appeared that the agreement betwixt France and
England was fully concluded, and subscribed the 12. dito, so that it seems
this was only done to abuse us.

9. Dito, The States of Holland took on Officers for 8. Regiments of Horse, and
5. on Foot, and the 12. dito by provision for two more: which choice of
Officers was pro rato also made in the other Provinces. In France, Patents were
given out for 20000. Foot, and 6000. Horse more: The Bishops of Colen and
Munster also gathered Forces amain. England hastened their Fleet under the Duke
of York Admiral: Here also they neglected nothing which might hasten their
Fleet.

25. Dito, After infinite consultations and disputes, at length his Highness
was appointed Captain General over the Forces of the State, but with all
possible restrictions, an Oath being taken of him, that he might never seek to
be Stat-holder of any of the Provinces, nor accept of it, if he should be
desired to it. Hereupon his Highness treated the Deputies of Knighthood and
Cities of Holland with a Royal Feast, March 1.

March 4. The frost, which this Winter was very long, now ceasing, here happily
arrived a great and exceeding rich Fleet of Merchandise, with their Convoyes,
having laid long at the Isle of Wight, fearing they might have been there
arrested.

14. Dito, The Ambassador Meerman was sent to England, for to prevent, if
possible, the breach feared, of which there was some hopes, because the Ships
were suffered without any molestation to depart from the Isle of Wight, and the
Embargo of their Ships in England was made null; and especially because many
English and Scotch Ships obtained Pas for Holland: On the other hand the mighty
preparations made both in England and France, promised but little good to come
from these overtures for peace; the rather because our Ambassador being come
thither, was certified, there was little appearance thereof, it now being too
late, which perhaps if had come sooner might have been attained.

20. Dito, Digby declared in France, that by reason of Downings mistake* his
Master the King of England, would be forced to begin the work two months
before it was intended, and it easily deserves credit, that it was not their
design to declare themselves so soon, so many Ships having so lately obtained
Pasport^ for Holland, and the season of the year not yet fit for a Field
expedition.

22. Dito, the Smirna's Messina's, and Mallaga's Convoy, returning with 50.
Ships richly laden, among which also were five Convoyers from Gales, to whom
the Convoy from Lisbon adjo^ned, being 20. in number, by a Catch from Zealand
in the Chanel were warned, not to sail into any of the English Havens, or to
trust their Ships, whereupon they also made all things ready for defense: and
the very same night 4. English Ships appeared, shooting but without Bullet, but
soon after, 12. more, who fired with shot lustily on ours, continuing all the
next day, and the day after, being reinforced with other Ships, they fell upon
the Merchant Men; but were so saluted, that with their battered Ships and many
slain, they were constrained to return home, paying dearly for their prey
taken, viz. one Smirna's, one Messina's, with two other Ships of small value,
all the rest getting safe into our Harbors, being a wonderful providence of
God, thus gently to awaken us, seeing the whole Fleet was in danger to have
fallen into their hands, or we might have been warned with a greater disaster.
And though the King by this unexpected and unjust attacque, did manifest what
his purpose was, yet would they seem to color it upon pretense of
unwillingnesse to strike, and to have satisfaction by constraint; But they were
Enemies in heart, as our foregoing observations do sufficiently declare,
especially the Kings Declaration of War, following hereupon the 29. dito.

His Majesty's Declaration against the States General of the United Provinces
of the Low Countries.
Charles R.

WE have been always so zealous for the Quiet of Christendom, and so careful
not to invade any other Kingdom or State, that We hope the World will do Us
the Justice to believe, that it is nothing but inevitable necessity forces Us
to the resolution of taking up Arms.

Immediately upon Our Restoration to Our Crowns, the first work We undertook,
was the establishing of Peace, and the settling a good Correspondence between Us
and Our Neighbors; and in particular, Our care was, to conclude a strict
League with the States General of the United Provinces, upon such equal Terms,
as would certainly not have been broken, if any obligations could have kept
them within the bounds of Friendship or Justice.

This League was maintained inviolable on Our part. But in the year 1664. we
were stirred up by the Complaints of Our People, and the unanimous Vote of Both
Our Houses of Parliament, finding it a vain attempt to endeavor the prosperity
of Our Kingdoms by peaceable ways at home, whilst Our Subjects were still
exposed to the Injuries and Oppressions of those States abroad.

That whole Summer was spent in Negotiations and endeavors on Our side, to
bring them to reasonable Terms, which notwithstanding all We could do, proved
at length ineffectual: for the more we pursued them with friendly Propositions,
the more obstinately they kept off from agreeing with us.

Upon this ensued the War in the year 1665. and continued to the year 1667. in
all which time Our Victories and their Losses were memorable enough, to put
them in mind of being more faithful to their Leagues for the future. But in
stead of that, the Peace was no sooner made, but they returned to their usual
custom of breaking Articles, and supplanting Our Trade. For fortifications BON

fortifications LEGNIGH

fortifications KERPEN

portrait of Karel de II KAREL DE II by de Gratie Godts KONINCK van GROOT
BRITTANIE
instances, The States were particularly engaged in an Article of the Treaty or
Breda, to send Commissioner^ to Us at London, about the Regulation of our Trade
in the East Indies; But they were so far from doing it upon that obligation,
that when We sent over Our Ambassador to put them in mind of it, he could not
in three years time get from them any satisfaction in the material Points, nor
a forbearance of the wrongs which Our Subjects received in those parts.

In the West Indies ^hey went a little further; For by an Article in the same
Treaty, we were to restore Surinam into their hands, and by Articles upon the
place confirmed by that Treaty, that they were to give Liberty to all Our
Subjects in that Colony, to Transport themselves and their Estates into any
other of Our Plantations. In pursuance of this Agreement, We delivered up the
Place, and yet they detained all Our men in it; only Major Banister they sent
away prisoner, for but desiring to remove according to the Articles. Our
Ambassador complaining of this behavior, after two years solicitation,
obtained an Order for the performance of those Articles: But when We sent
Commissioner^, and two Shipped to bring Our Men away, the Hollanders (according
to their former practice in the business of Poleroon for above forty years
together) sent private Orders contradictory to those they had owned to Us in
Public; and so the only effect of Our Commissioners journey thither, was to
bring away some few of the poorest of our Subjects, and the Prayers and Cries
of the Most considerable and wealthiest of them, for relief out of that
Captivity. After this, We made Our Complaints by Our Letter in August last to
the States General, wherein We desired an Order to their Governors there, for
the full observance of those Articles; yet to this time We could never receive
one word of answer or satisfaction.

But it is no wonder that they venture at these Outrages upon Our Subjects in
remote parts, when they dare be so bold with Our Royal Person, and the Honor
of this Nation so near Us, as in their own Country, there being scarce a Town
within their Territories that is not filled with abusive Pictures, and false
Historical Medals and Pillars; some of which have been exposed to the public
view by command of the States themselves, and in the very time when we were
joined with them in united Councels for the support of the Triple League; and
the Peace of Christendom. This alone were cause sufficient for Our displeasure,
and the resentment of all Our Subjects. But We are urged to it by
considerations yet nearer to Us, then what only relates to our Self; the
Safety of Our Trade, upon which the wealth and prosperity of our People
depends, the preservation of them abroad from violence and oppression, and the
Hollanders daring to affront us almost within Our very Ports, are the things
which move Our just Indignation against them.

The Right of the Flagg is so ancient, that it was one of the first
Prerogatives of Our Royal Predecessors, and ought to be the last from which
this Kingdom should ever depart. It was never questioned, and it was expressly
acknowledged in the Treaty at Breda; and yet this last Summer it was not only
violated by their Commanders at Sea, and that violation afterward justified at
the Hague, but it was also represented by them in most Courts of Christendom as
ridiculous for Us to demand. An ungrateful Insolence! That they should contend
with Us about the Dominion of these Seas, who even in the Reign of Our Royal
Father, thought it an Obligation to be permitted to Fish in them, by taking of
Licenses, and for a Tribute; and who owe their being now in a condition of
making this Dispute, to the Protection of Our Ancestors, and the Valor and
Blood of their Subjects.

Notwithstanding all these provocations, We patiently exspected Satisfaction,
not being willing to expose the Peace of Christendom for Our particular
resentments, whilst they ceased not on their parts to endeavor to provoke the
most Christian King against Us; of which they thought themselves so secure,
that for above these Twelve months their Ministers here have threatened Us with
it.

At length, hearing nothing from them, We sent another Ambassador to them, who
after several pressing Memorials in Our Name, could receive no Answer, till
after he had declared his Revocation. Then they offered a Paper to this effect,
That in this Conjuncture they would condescend to Strike to Us, if We would
assist them against the French; but upon condition, that it should never be
taken for a President hereafter to their prejudice.

Since the return of Our said Ambassador, They have sent an Extraordinary One
to Us, who in a most extraordinary manner has given Us to understand, That he
can offer us no Satisfaction till he has sent back to his Masters.

Wherefore, despairing now of any good effect of a further Treaty, We are
compelled to take up Arms in Defense of the Ancient Prerogative of Our Crowns,
and the Glory, and Safety of Our Kingdoms; And We put Our Trust in God, that He
will give us His Assistance in this Our just Undertaking, since We had no way
left to defend Our People from the Artifice of that Nation in Peace, but by the
Valor of Our Subjects in War.

We have therefore thought fit to Declare, and do hereby Declare, That We will
prosecute War both by Sea and Land against the States General of the United
Provinces, and all their Subjects and Inhabitants. Hereby enjoining Our most
dear and entirely beloved Brother the Duke of York Our High Admiral, Our
Lieutenants of Our several Counties, Governors of Our Forts and Garrisons, and
all other Officers and Soldiers under them by Sea and Land, to oppose all the
attempts of the States General of the United Provinces, or their Subjects, and
to do, and execute all Acts of hostility in the prosecution of this War against
the said States General of the United Provinces, their Vassals, Subjects, and
Inhabitants; Willing and Requiring all Our Subjects to take notice of the same,
Whom We henceforth straightly forbid, on pain of Death, to hold any
Correspondence or Communication with the said States General, or their
Subjects, (those only excepted who are necessitated thereunto for the
withdrawing their Persons and Estates out of the United Provinces) And because
there are remaining in our Kingdoms many Subjects of the States General of the
United Provinces, We do Declare, and give Our Royal Word, that all such of the
Dutch Nation, as shall demean themselves dutifully toward Us, and not
correspond with Our Enemies shall be safe in their Persons and Estates, and
free from all molestation and trouble of any kind.

And further We do Declare, That if any of the Low Country Subjects, either
out of Affection to Us, or Our Government, or because of the Oppression they
meet with at home, shall come into Our Kingdoms, they shall be by Us protected
in their Persons and Estates.

And whereas We are engaged by a Treaty to support the Peace made at Aix la
Chappelle, We do finally Declare, That notwithstanding the prosecution of this
War; We will maintain the true Intent and Scope of the said Treaty, and that in
all the Alliances, which We have or shall make in the progress of this War, We
have and will take care, to preserve the Ends thereof inviolable, unless
provoked to the contrary.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 17. day of March, in the 24. year of Our
Reign, 1672.
This was published in London the 7. April, and the very same day the French
King Proclaimed War against this State; which afterward was also done by the
Bishop of Munster. The frivolous reasons and idle pretenses, I refer to the
judgment of the Reader, it being sufficient barely to mention them.

portrait of Louis de Bourbon de XIIII LOUIS DE BOURBON DE XIIII by de gratie
Godts. KONINCK van VRANCKRYCK. en Navarre etc:


The Declaration of the King of France, by which his Majesty after resolution
to make War upon the States of Holland, forbids all Correspondence or
Trading with them. 6. April 1672. By the King.
The dissatisfaction his Majesty has had in the management of the States
General of the United Provinces some years since, in their actings toward him;
and it being come to that pass, that his Majesty can no longer but with stain
to his honor connive at the unworthiness acted against him by such manner of
doing, which so little agrees with the great obligations, wherewith his
Majesty and the Kings his Predecessors, have so liberaly filled up the measure
unto them: so that his Majesty has declared, and does declare by these
presents signed by his own hand, that he has arrested and fully resolved to
make war with the said States General of the United Provinces, both by Sea and
Land.

To this end, his Majesty commands all his Subjects, Vassals, and Servants to
fall upon the Hollanders; and has, and does forbid them from hence forward to
hold any Correspondence, Trade or Intelligence with them upon pain of Death.
And his Majesty to this end has henceforward revoked, and does revoke, all
Permission, Pasports, Safegards or Free-passes, which either by himself or his
Deputies, or other his Officers, may have been granted contrary to these, and
accounts the same as null and of no worth, forbidding all and everyone, who
ever they be, to have any regard unto them.

And his Majesty commands and appoints the Lord Earl of Vermandois,
Great-Master, Head and Superintendent General of the Navigation and Commerce of
this Kingdom; The Marshals of France; the Governors and Lieutenants General for
his Majesty in his Provinces and Armies, The Field-Marshals, Colonels, chief
Officers, Captains, Heads and Leaders of his Soldiers whither Horse or Foot,
French or Strangers, and all other Officers whom it may concern, that they
cause the Contents hereof to be executed every one in his Place throughout
their command and Jurisdiction, for such is his Majesty's pleasure, who wills
that these shall be published and affixed in all his Cities, and Seacoast
Towns, and in all Havens and other Places of his Kingdom, where it shall be
requisite, that none may pretend ignorance hereof. Acted in the Castle of
Versailles the 6. April 1672. Signed Louis, and yet lower Le Tellier.

It is ordered, that Charles Canto, sworn Herald of the King, shall Proclaim
and cause to be affixed in all places of this City, Suburbs, Provostships and
Markgraefships of Paris, where need shall require this Ordinance of the King of
the 6. of this present month and year, that no ignorance be pretended. Signed
De la Reinie.

Read and proclaimed at the sound of Trumpet, together by affixion in all the
common and extraordinary Cross-streets and Suburbs of Paris, by me Charles
Canto, Ordinary sworn Herald of the King in the said City, Provostships and
Markgraefships of Paris, in proclaiming whereof I was accompanied with five
Trumpetters, viz. Prosme Trousson, Endime du Bos, sworn Trumpetters of this
King, and three more, on Thursday the 7. April 1672.

Subscribed CANTO.

Now it was high time to hasten all warlike preparations, the Ambassadors of
the States the Lord Meerman, and D'Groot, returning from England and France, re
infecta; and the Generals being chosen both of the French and our Armies.

The Generals of the French Army.
The Army of the King.
^nsieur the Duke of Orleans, Gene-Mralissimo. ^arshal de Turenne, Captain
General. Earl of Soisons, Marquis de Rochefort. Earl of Lude, Earl or Gadaigne,
Duke de la Favillades Earl de Lorge; Lieutenants General. Chevalier de Loraine,
Marquis de Genlis, Martinet, de Montal, Field-marshals.
The Army of the Peince of Conde.
Marshal d'Humieres, de Bellefonds, Captains General. Foucault, de St. Arbre,
Earl de Guiche, Lieutenants General. Earl du Plessis, du Nogent, Magalotti,
Field-marshals.
The Army of the Marshal de Crequi.
Mons. de Nancre, Lieutenant General. Earl de Vaubrun, Monsieur du Plessis,
Field-marshals. Duke of Luxenburgh, General of the Army of the Confederates.
Mons. de la Valiere, Field-marshal. Mons. le Breast, Field-marshal toward
Catalonia. Mons. d'Elbeuf, General of a Body at the Seaside.
The King before the setting forth of the Army, having commanded the Marshals
d'Humieres, Bellefonds and Crequi, that if the Armies come to be conjoined, or
in absence of the Princes of the Blood, they should for the time of this
expedition submit to the orders of Turenne, which they excusing were put by in
disgrace, and Chamely, Gadaigne and Navaile, put in their room, but after some
time the former were replaced, yet with promise of submission to Turenne.

Generals of the Army of the States of the United Provinces.
The Prince of Orange, Captain General. Prince Maurits, and the Lord Wirts,
Field-marshals. The Rijngrave Senior, General of the Horse. The Lord of
Zuilestein, General of the Foot. The Earl of Horns, General of the Artillery.
John van Welderen, Earl of Nassau, Lieutenant Generals of the Horse. Alua, The
Earl Koningsmarck, Lieutenants Generals of the Foot. Mombas, Steenhuyse,
Commissary Generals of the Horse. Kirpatrick, the Earl of Stirum, Sergeant
Majors.
Afterward was chosen for the third Field-marshal, the Earl of Waldeck and
Kuylenburg.

The 13. dito, The State proclaimed a general fast against the 4. of May; and
so forwards to be kept upon every first Wednesday of the Month; and it was
resolved to increase the Militia, both for the State in general, as also for
Holland in particular, of which capitulations were formed to raise them of
outlandish Soldiers: Also some of our Foot Regiments were sent over to the
Spaniards, to be in Garrison, in Namen, Valencijn, and other places, and on the
other hand to us came some Regiments of Spanish Horse, of which some Companies
were sent to Mastricht.

16. dito, The Elector of Colen published a Manifest (though his whole Country
of Colen and Luyck was already a Magasin for France,) that he would maintain
neutrality, forbidding the acting of any hostility against the Subject of this
State, unto all in his Dominion; but in truth, this was only done for to
deceive us.

26. dito, Was the time appointed for the sitting of the Parliament at London,
which instantly was prorogued without doing of any thing, to the 30. of October.
and in place of Ayscue deceased, Sr. Joseph Jordan was placed jin the Fleet, to
which the Duke of York went the 29. dito, to set to Sea: and the Duke of
Monmouth prepared himself for France, there to command those of the English
Nation, and in special his own Regiment in the Kings Army, and soon after
departed with many of the Gentry.

27. dito, After that the French King had for a long time been raising an huge
Host, which was esteemed to amount to above 300000. men, which reckoning all
the Pages, Lacquyes, Coachmen, Carriers, Boys, Krauwels, Pioniers, Women,
Trosses and Whores, might well be, for the Muster-rowles amounted to 146270.
Soldiers at least, with Mortepaise, huge Artillery with an incredible quantity
of Provision and Ammonition, both at home and in diverse Magasins abroad. Thus
his Majesty, having committed the management of the Kingdom to the Queen and
her Council, departed from Paris the 27. of April with the Marshal Turenne;
three days together being spent in transporting of the Treine and Bagage, for
which were employed 40000. Horses, with a sufficient number of Carts and
wagons. The 28. dito, the Duke Orleans with many Grandees followed, who took
their march with his Majesty by Nantevil, Soisons, Lion, Rocroy, and the 5. of
May arrived at Charleroy. The same day the Prince of Conde passed by la Ferte
and Reims, and arrived the 30. at Sedan, for to come down with an Army apart:
In the mean while, much shipping came down the Moesel and Rijne, for to bring
all manner of necessaries past Colen unto their Magasin at Nuys, great numbers
also longst the Mase to Luyck, and the Troops which lay spread abroad thoughout
the Country of Colen, were now called together to Nuys, and the Bishop of
Munster also gathered his Soldiery together, preparing for the Field.

May the 6. at Colen on the Spree a treaty of mutual assistance and defense was
concluded between Brandenburg and the Lord of Amerongen, in which Brandenburg
engaged to raise for the defense of this State 20000. men, to wit, 12000. Foot,
and eight thousand Horse, to which Holland was to furnish the half of the levy
money, viz. 120000. Rijcksdollers, and for the pay of every Regiment consisting
of 500. Horse, 4977. Rijcksdollers to stulvers, and every Regiment of Foot,
consisting of a 1000. 4214. Rijcksdollers 4. stuivers per Month, besides for
the Artillery and other inevitable expenses 14841. Rijcksdollers per Month,
being together 79543. Rijcksdollers per Month, with proviso that Brandenburg at
his charges should provide 50. pieces, with all the Ammunition and Artillery
thereto belonging, obliging himself 2 months after the receipt of the first
payment, to have his Army in readiness; There was a Treaty also with the
Princes of Lunenburg, but without effect: in the mean while our Army gathered
near the Yssel about Doesburg, and the retrenchment along the Yssel was
completed, whither the Prince with most of the chief Commanders came, and the
Forts at Staphorst and Rouveen were with all diligence forwarded, and the Army
mustered.

9. dito, The French King having made a review of his Army near Charleroy, sent
the Marshal Turenne with 15000. men, 4000. Wagons, and 27. Canons, to march to
the great Cassey by Luyck, and Mastricht, and himself followed with the gros of
the Army, and on the 11, 12. and 13. dito, having lodged in three several
places of the Spanish bounds, came the 14. dito into the country of Luyk,
passing near by Navagne, and arrived the 18. dito at Vise, where he stayed, and
beset Tongeren with French Soldiers: In the interim, dito 16 the Avantguard
under Marshal Turrenne had surrounded, and shot upon Maseyck, requiring them to
deliver it up, and nothing, regarding the Luyckish neutrality possessed himself
thereof, and Turenne entering it, said that there a Magasin for the King must be
erected, and serve for a pas to the Armies, so departing, presently the French
fell at work to fortify the Town, demolishing whatever stood in their way.
Hereby Mastricht was as good as blockt up, and the rather because Conde came on
the other side of Mastricht, with an Army of 35000. men, which was come
marching from Sedan through Ardennes, longst the overside of the Mase, so that
it seemed, they intended to assault Mastricht; of which there was no great
fear, seeing it was well provided with all things necessary, and had a Garrison
of 12000. Soldiers, besides the Citizens.

14. dito, Upon the advice that our Fleet was at Sea, which at Schoonevelt yet
waited for some of our ships, and that the French Vice Admiral the Earl d'Estre
was come to Wight, The English Fleet under the Duke of York made out to Sea, to
join with them: which had not our Fleet come a little too late might have been
prevented, one of them that followed falling in our hands, was sent up to
Rotterdam: Our Fleet crossing there about some time, and seeing the Enemies
Fleet came not out, returned back to our coasts.

18. dito, The Bishop of Munster desirous to share in the ensuing war,
published upon frivolous pretenses a Westphalian Declaration of War against
this State.

Declaration of his Grace the Bishop of Munster against the States of the
United Provinces.
BE it known, that forasmuch as by intercepted Letters and Persons detained in
Prison, and by many other ways, it is confessed and made evident, that in the
United Provinces; many have been induced and misted through money and great
promises of reward to labor by themselves and their adherents to corrupt, and
by great soms of money to entice the Servants and Officers of our Gracious Lord
of Munster and Convey, to fire the Forts, Cities, and especially the Magasins
of his Highness, and through such horrid crimes to make the Senses possessors
of his Grades Forts and Cities, and to debauch his Soldiers from their oath and
duty, having stirred up ^ellion, fortifications CHARLEROY

fortifications MAESTRIGHT

and revolts by such damnable ways: yea, have also not feared to conspire
against the very life it self of his Grace, committing Crimen Assasinatus
against his Graces Person: Which thing also, horrible to relate, has in his
Country, Cities, Forts, Lordships, Towns and Villages been practiced, many
places set on fire, as verily suspected to have been achieved by these evil
Doers; as has been confessed and ocularly appeared: So as such horrid actions
have scarce ever been perpetrated by Barbarians and Turks. Wherefore his Grace,
both in care to his own Person, as also to preserve, as much as possible may be
his Graces Cities, Forts, Lordships, Towns and Subjects, in the Country from
further damage, does command most graciously and earnestly, all his High and
Low Officers, whiter Civil or Military, all his common Soldiers and Subjects
most strictly to take care that none of these incendiaries and traitors be
suffered to enter his Grates Dominions, which if any shall presume, to seize
upon them, and deliver them to the nearest Garrisons, and whoever shall bring
in any one of these, shall have a recompense of 100. Rijcksdollers. But to the
end, that hereby other honest and well-meaning people be not hindered to come
into his Highness Dominions, for to Trade in his Graces Cities and Country;
they are required to signify unto the Commanders and Officers where they first
arrive, the cause of their coming, that so they may drive their trade and
business in his Graces Dominions, having before obtained a Pas from them. His
often before mentioned Grace, does also command the more carefully and with
assurance, to prevent all treachery upon the highest arbitrary, and after
conviction upon pain of corporal punishment, as also confiscation of Goods,
that no man of what state or quality soever within his Jurisdiction, thither
Ecclesiastical or Laick, Civil or Military person, do without consent granted
correspond, with any of the said Netherlands, by interchange of Letters or
Commerce, so as all trading with them is, from hence forward unlawful: and
that no man may pretend ignorance thereby to excuse himself, these presents,
shall in all our Cities, Towns, Lordships and Villages, as also in all
Garrisons and elsewhere be publicly from the Pulpit proclaimed, and afterward
in usual Places affixed, that every one may have knowledge hereof, witness our
own hand and printed secret Seal. Subscribed at his residence in Ludgersburg
the 18. May 1672.

Christoff. Bernhardt. Locus Sigilli.

18. dito, Here happily arrived the Fleet from St. Ubal about 80. sail, of
which some that went toward the East Sea were taken by Scotch Capers. The same
dito, the States did of their mere bounty set at liberty all the detained
English and Scotch ships, which about the time of the breach and some while
after were with pas from the Duke of York come hither, to the number of 70.
Merchant men and more, allowing them freely to depart with ships and lading,
which the States by their last agreement were not bound to do, but might
according to the Law of Arms have made them prize. The day following the States
chose Officers for the raising of four Regiments, and gave the Commander
Stockheim an order to raise one Regiment more; also a part of our Foot, that
had been quartered in the Spanish Netherland returned home, and the rest
followed soon after. All Holland through the Pesants were armed and mustered,
and 1375. of them were sent from North-Holland to the Yssel.

18. dito, in open field the King of France held a great Council of War with
all his High Officers, and concluded to keep Mastricht blockt up with 20000.
men, and to march with the gros of the Army to the Rijn; Whereupon Conde the
21. dito brake up with his Army, passing through Gulicker-land, directly to
Keysers-Weert, where the 27. and 28. dito he passed the Rijn over a Bridge of
ships, and came the 1. of June before Wesel. Turenne with his Army followed
him, and passing the Maes, marched directly to Nuys, and from thence by the
west side of the Rijn, Orsoy and Rijnberg, to Burick, where he arrived the 1.
June. The King with his Army followed the 27. May, and 31. dito arrived near
Nuys, where the Elector of Colen had made great preparation to entertain his
Majesty, but the King excusing it, hastened his march directly to Orsoy and
Rijnberg, where he came 1. June.

1. June, with break of day Orsoy and Rijnberg were surrounded by the King
himself, Wesel by the Prince of Conde, and Burick which lay over against it, by
Turenne: At the same time the Bishop of Munster with his Troops, and some of
Colens brake up from Benthem, and falling into Twente, surrounded the City
Grol. But of these more in particular.

Orsoy, though a little, yet a strong City, having 700. Soldiers in it, for
defense whereof more then 2000. had been needful, was by the King summoned
June 1. but the Council of War, consisting of the Colonel Moulet Commander,
Major Koerbeeck, and 7. Captains with their under Officers, would not listen,
resolving to defend the City, wherefore the King was necessitated to plant his
Canon, which the besieged seeing and fearing the great power of the Enemy, as
having no hope of succor, they began to despair, and to think upon good
conditions of agreement, and were constrained to deliver up themselves the 3.
dito, to the discretion of the King, only reserving Life and Goods, which
accord the French not regarding, miserably abused the Garrison high and low,
keeping them as prisoners of war.

Rijnberg, gallantly and strongly fortified, and with great charge and labor
repaired and furnished with all things needful but Soldiers, there being but
about 1000. within, which were scarce half enough to defend the Counterscharps,
had for Governor the Colonel Bassen, and for his Assistent Colonel d'Ossery,
besides 15. Captains. The City besieged the first of June, as has been said,
saw on the 3. the King himself, after the taking of Orsoy before their Wall.
The same day the Governor with Ossery suffered the Baron of Hovelig
Mathematician of the Bishop of Straatsburg to enter the City, who pretended
that he heard, that those within would set the City on fire, desiring that it
might bestayed; but in the mean while, he secretly held correspondence with
Ossery, taking an exact view of the fortifications. The 4. dito a Trumpetter
came with a letter from the King, desiring Duke de Duras under hostages might
come into the City, which the Governor and Ossery consented to; the 5. dito he
came offering good conditions, among other things, that the Garrison should
freely depart to Mastricht, if the City were given up, and so he returned after
he had done his proposition, it being late, and was conducted by Ossory as far
as the outworks, all things being showed unto him. The 6. dito, the Council of
War, which hither to had not any thing made known unto them, was called
together, and the propositions of Duras laid before them, when as the Captains
through their cowardly advice, and the Governor by his actions carried
themselves not much better than Rogues, delivering over unto the Enemy such a
strong City, without almost any attempt done upon it, and no defense by it,
this being chiefly effected by the management of that cursed Traitor the
Colonel d'Ossery. The Garrison was conducted to Mastricht, fortifications WEESEL

fortifications BURICK

fortifications RYNBERCK

fortifications ORSOY

but they not standing in need of such Heroes, clapped all the Officers, except
such as escaped by flight, into prison.

Burick, right over against Wesel, being a small Fortress with 5. bulwarks,
and ruined fortification, no reparation a long time having been done to it,
three hundred soldiers only in it, also unprovided of Canons and Ammunition,
having for their Governor Peckendam, with 3. Captains, was also besieged the
1. of June by Turenne who (notwithstanding the besieged, considering their bad
provision, defended themselves courageously) advanced so strongly, that on June
3. early in the morning, he approached the Mote, and had almost half filled it
up, having made all things ready to storm, and resolved to attempt it the next
morning with 12000. men: The besieged having notice hereof, and finding
themselves unable to resist so great force, made their composition with
Turenne, and forthwith delivered up the keys to him, upon which the French
entered, and little regarding their agreement, spoiled the Garrison and kept the
Soldiers prisoners of war; Turenne not willing to loose time, removes with his
Army further downward, and besieged the City Rees.

Wesel, That known Fortress and Magasin of all manner of provision, but with a
sad ruined fortification, and unserviceable Canon on their Walls, their
Lipper-Scons much decayed, was also surrounded by Conde on the 1. of June.
As Soon as notice came of the Enemies approach, they began with might and main
to repair the fortification, but could Burgers and Soldiers together scarce
raise their Brestwork to a sufficient height, having only planted here and
there some Pallisades without being beset with Baskets; however they within did
shoot stoutly the first and second day, the French not answering them, who were
very busy in delving and making all things ready for the Battery, which the
besieged might have more invaded, if their pieces had had more force: and while
they thus manfully gave fire out of Burick and Wesel, they in the Lipper Scons
did nothing, having but 2. pieces, and both unserviceable, and standing upon a
Bulwark not completed, having no Pallisados yet erected, which encouraging the
enemy, they 400. only in the night about the 2. and 3. of June fell upon it,
surprising the Watch, and quietly coming over the Wall with out let, that
corner laying flat open, thus they marched to the Head-Watch, who thus
surprised, they within presently cried for quarter, which was granted them,
although they should all have been kept prisoners, but being two Companies, and
almost as strong as their assaulters, the most of them got out of the Schans
into the City, one or two, who stood upon their defense, being shot to death.
Thus this Schans was lost, and Wesels very heart vein pricked, which the 3.
dito caused so great tumult in the City, that the Citizens forsook the Wall and
carried home their Arms, and would watch no more, They especially the Women
and Soldiers wives requiring the delivery up of the City, and threatening sword
and halter to whomsoever withstand it, yea they were about to lay hold on the
Governor by one whom they had bedaubed with soap for this purpose, intending
to murder him, crying out, that seeing they had treacherously quitted the
Scons, and the Canon in it, now made serviceable to shoot upon the City,
nothing was to be expected, but it should be made a Theater of murder. The
Garrison consisting of about 15. or 1600. men was to defend the outworks and
those within together; therefore the Captains and Council of War desired to
deliberate about it, but Colonel van Zanten, who by reason of the absence of
the Governor Jucchen, had the command, would not admit the same, but only
treated with Major Copes, and some Colonels and Captains as were not well
affected, and they appointed, that the Soldiery should quit the outworks, and
only keep the Posts within, which the Citizens would no longer do. The same
day in the afternoon, the Burgomasters sent a messenger to the Head-watch, to
be let out with a Letter to Conde, which the Captain that had the watch would
not consent unto, without express order from the Commander, who agreeing
thereto, the messenger went and returned the same back again with two
Trumpetterss from Conde. The 4. dito, the Burgomasters rode in a Coach with a
Voeder of Rhinish-wine to the Prince, the Women stirred up thereto by some of
the treacherous Captains, crying for an accord. In the mean while, the
Commander, Major, Colonels, Hoenderbeeek, Nieuland, van Haesten, together with
the Captains Inyosta and Mengers, without calling together the Council of War,
or giving notice to the other Officers, deputed Nieuland and Mengers to go to
the French Army, and privately to make agreement for the Garrison. Oh treachery
of faithless and effeminate Rulers and Military Officers! Thus the 5. dito,
being Easter day, the subscription was concluded to be done, and the civil and
military Governors were early to be with the Prince upon pain of nullity, no
sooner the Commander was come, but Conde lays a paper before him, which he
must forthwith, after reading, subscribe, without a word contradicting: which
also he underwrit, blotting out in that treacherous act the Luster of the
State, and also herewith early before day the Enemies had the keys delivered
up to them, and before eight of the clock the Garrison was shut up as prisoners
of war in the Church, to whom, after a review of them, the Capitulation was
read. Thus this invincible City was in the space of 4. days forced without any
force, leaving so royal a Magasin full of Ammunition, with above a 100000.
pound powder in hands of the enemy, of which, as is reported the Commissary
Koeck was a principal instrument.

Rees, being reasonably well fortified, and provided with a sufficient Scons
over the Rijn, had a Garrison of 500. men for it self and Scons, This Turenne
had blockt up, before the King was Master of Rijnberck, or Conde of Wesel, and
no sooner was the Enemy come before it, but the Scons, commaded by Captain van
der Hoeve was shamefully delivered up by him, who a little before had vanted of
wonders he would: The Citizens knew nothing of this, till by the Canon of the
Scons turned against the City, they were untimely warned. They within shot
furiously, but after the loss of Rijnberck and Wesel being more strongly
assaulted, The King sent a Trumpetter to demand the Town, upon which the
Council of War sent Commissioners empowred to treat with him: The Army being
yet encamped about Wesel, and the Capitulation was signed in form as with them
of Wesel, that the Garrison should be 6. weeks prisoners, and after have
liberty of ransom. So this City also was delivered up.

Emmerick not so strong as the other, seeing it would now be their turn, and
not willing to prostitute the Soldiers to Massacre, or to be shut up prisoners
in the Church, seeing for want of men and slight fortifications, there was the
least fortifications REES

fortifications GROLL

appearance to defend the City, the Garrison retreated in time to Schenkescons,
at least to preserve that, as being a Bulwark to tho State, so leaving Emmerick
open for the French, who now with their three Armies came down upon them, the
King having appointed Mr. d'Estrade Governor of the Cities already conquered
upon the Rhyne.

When the French began to act, the Bishop of Munster also after a kind of
Declaration of War soon sent diverse Troops into Twente, who seizing on the
small Towns Otmarschen, Enschede, Almelo, Goor, Delden, and leaving Sauvegard
in them, the Bishop with his Army and some Troops of the Elector of Colen sat
down before the strong City Groll, which without much resistance gave up
themselves to the Bishop the 9. of June, whereupon the small Towns thereabout
were forsaken of their Garrisons, so as Herenberg and Borkelo also fell into
the hands of the Bishop.

This was the unhappy succes of the beginning of June on the Land, in which
more Cities and Fortresses were lost, than there passed days. In the mean
while a battle fought was at Sea.

After that our Fleet had often been in sight of the English, expecting they
would fall upon us, having the wind of us, yet continually turned off from us,
to them; thereupon, having intelligence the English lay in Soulbay, our Fleet
with a favorable wind on our approach made to them, and the 7. June early in
the morning got sight of the Enemy, and both parties ranged themselves into
three Esquadrons, and began the fight at 8. a clock; The French who bore the
white Flag, engaging with the Esquadron of Banckert, under whom were the
Zeelanders and Frieses: The Duke of York bearing the red Flag, with that of the
Admiral de Ruyter, and the blue Flag under Montague with that of van Gent. The
fight was furious, and dured most part of the day; the advantage regaining on
the side of the States. About noon, the whole French Esquadron was cut off from
the English Fleet, and followed by Banckert, and of both the Enemies Fleets 4
or 5. capital Ships were fired and sunk, under which was Montagues Ship, who
himself was drowned, and many persons of quality slain. Of ours only the
Josuah a Ship of middle size was lost, and at the beginning of the fight the
Admiral van Gent shot to death. The 8. dito, the English who got the wind of
us, were seen above us, sailing that whole day a mile loefwards, without coming
to us, and evening turning quite from us, so as on the morrow the 9. dito, the
Fleets were wholly out of sight, upon which ours cast Ancre before Walcheren.
The French had fought little or nothing, but left the English in the brunt, and
themselves as soon almost as the Battle was well begun, drew back, and perhaps
they might then have been wholly separated from the English, and their after
conjunction hindered, but it may be there was a particular reason, why ours so
soon returned upon the Coast of Zeland, which I am not willing at present to
enquire into my only aim being to rehearse the History of what passed, and
not to make comments upon it: But I return again to the affairs at Land.

9. June, The agreement with Rees no sooner was subscribed, but the Prince of
Conde drew his Army to the Yssel-side, and that very day took in Deutecom two
mile from Doesburg, which seemed to import, that Conde intended to fall upon
the Yssel: Turenne passed the same day by Cleef with 6000. Horse, as far as
Nimwegen, where the Prince of Orange himself then was, and appointed Lieutenant
General Welderen for Governor of the place, and in person went into the works,
and observed the motion of the enemy: and it is credible, what then was
reported, that the French design was to surround Nimwegen, and so on the land
side to besiege it; and that Conde woulst endeavor some way or other to break
through the Yssel: But forasmuch as then by the treachery of Mombas,
opportunity was offered to get into the Betuw, by the Tol-house, the former
design was stopped. However it be, Conde diverted his course from Doesburg
toward the Tol-house, and Turenne returned from before Nimwegen, passing by
Cleef to the Kings Army, which then was about Emmerick.

10. dito, Conde made an assault upon the Tol-house, for to come over the
Rhijn, but was repulsed and forced to retire, and cast up Batteries there. The
Betuw was betrusted to Johan Barton of Mombas, Commissary General of the horse,
having by him two horse Regiments and two of Foot, with a pretended order, that
in case the enemy should presson, and he be in danger to be driven back, by
which Nimwegen also might be in danger, he rather should in time retire to
Nimwegen, and command there: but whatever his order might be, this could not
excuse him, for himself acknowledges that the Field-marshal Wurts had the 9.
dito about evening, sent him a Letter, that his Highness had made van Walderen
Governor of Nimwegen; and that he, the said Mombas, therefore was discharged
of that care: But that it was his Highness pleasure, that he should take care
of the Betuw, and that five Regiment more were a coming to him for that end:
But notwithstanding that this was order full enough to him, yet in the morning
on the 10. dito, he sent away the Foot, and caused the Canon to be carried from
his quarters, so that the Regiment of Horse of Colonel Souteland was only left
to sustain the assault of the enemy, till that Mombas meeting the Regiment of
Scot with three Companies of Painevin, the rest of the succors by his Highness
being countermanded, because of Conde's approach so near Doesburg, to whom
Mombas said that necessity caused him to retire; but yet considering the enemy
now passed the Rhijn did not set upon Souteland, he with these and Colonel van
Gent, whom they also met with some Musquettiers, returned, and then forced the
enemy again to retire: But forasmuch as Mombas doubted not, but the enemy would
the next day pass the River, he would not stand to it, but resolved to quit
his Post, and took his way to Arnhem, and from thence to Dieren, where on then
11. dito about 9. of the clock, he came by the Prince of Orange, to the great
astonishment of his Highness, who commanded the Lord Wurts thither with 2.
Regiments to defend that Post, where he arrived toward evening, but found
neither Canon nor entrenchments there.

12. dito, The Prince of Conde accompanied by Turenne, fell early in the
morning upon that Post, where Wurts acquitted himself as a gallant Soldier, and
made great resistance, but being too weak, that Post through the hellish plot
of Mombas was lost, and our Horse pursued by the enemy, who in their flight met
with the Regiment of Alua, sent by the Governor of Nimwegen, as well knowing
what concernment the preservation of the Tol-house was, but they being
fortifications ARNHEM

fortifications SCHENCKEN SCHANS

weary and overtoyled with continual marching, were for the most part route,
and pursued almost to the gates of Nimwegen, where some of the French Troops
also surrounded Knotsenburg. However the enemy did not get into the Betuw
without considerable loss, Conde himself with 8. or 10. Dukes, Earls and Lords,
being wounded, and the Duke of Longeville, Mons. de Guytry, the Marquis
d'Aubusson, Earl of Nogent, du Plessis, Praslin, and other Great ones slain.

Before the French were got over, the Tower of the Tol-house, where lay a
Sergeant with 18. men, was deserted; but Turenne was no sooner got into the
Betuw, but he marched to Aarnhem, part of them running through the Betuw who
the 13. dito took Heusden and made spoil thereof, and from thence to Ysseloort,
shooting all the afternoon upon ours who were in the Veluw, and at night rushed
over the Rhijn upon the borders of the Veluw. And thus the 14. dito, being in
capacity to shoot upon Aarnhem on both sides, they within the day after, being
the 15. dito made an accord early in the morning, which was so hastily done,
that the French entered before the Articles were once signed, which also
remained unsigned, forsooth there being no pen and inck at hand. The same day,
Turenne was come before Knodsenburg, a strong Scons and reasonably well
provided, where some Troops had appeared, but Turenne came not till 8. of the
clock at evening, and the day after, the 16. dito in the forenoon was master of
it, through a treacherous disorder of a Drummer, and overgreat cowardice of the
Governor, without any force done upon it. The Garrison was permitted by
Turenne to depart to Groeningen, and then presently from the Scons fired upon
Nimwegen, and the same day marched with his Ledger to Schenckenscons, the 16.
and 17. dito sending some Troops before Thiel, who gave up themselves, and took
Sauvegard, which also was followed the 19. and 20. dito, by the impregnable
Sconses of Voren and St. Andries.

It was the 17. dito, that Turenne approached by his Loopgraves, that strong
Fort of Schenckenscons, wherein lay 15. Companies, which by a Trumpetter he
summoned, and the 18. dito had it delivered up to them: A Scons on which
depended the welfare of our Country, sufficiently provided of all things
requisite, and with a Garrison able to defend it, but commanded by a Rogue, who
without the knowledge of the Council of War had sent away the Outlayers, and
demolished the Forts there erected by the Lord Wurts, and so for money delivered
up that invincible Fortress.

The Bishop of Munster after the conquest of Groll sat not still, but mastered
Brevoort, Lochem, and what else was near about; and on the 14. dito, showed
himself upon the plain of Deventer, to fetch away their beast that were grasing
there; but was driven back with loss by the courage of some that issued out of
the City upon him: But the 16. dito he came with his whole Army, assisted by
those of the Bishop of Colen, to besiege it, The King of France also with the
gros of his Army sat down before Doesburg and summoned the same.

If these first nine days were fatal to our Netherland, the following were no
loss; especially, because his Highness was necessitated to depart from the
Yssel, for Aarnem being conquered, the Veluw lay open to the Enemy, and our
Army in danger of being fallen upon on all sides, and utterly to be ruinated,
so that his Highness having divided part of the Army, and put them in the
Cities on the Yssel under the command of Alua General for Friesland, and
brought the greatest Canons with the Ammunition and Provisions into Doesburg,
Zutphen, Deventer, he with the rest and lighter field Pieces departed thence,
and coming at evening the 15. dito, before Utrecht, the gates were shut upon
him, and his followers being wearied and hungry by continual marching night and
day, but were constrained to lay without the whole night, without any
refreshing. His Highness desired he might be let in, offering to defend the
City, in case they would suffer it to be fortifyed, as need should require, and
breaking off what was in the way; which they of Utrecht refused to do,
requiring that the Army should lay encamped without, pretending it would be to
the great damage of the Citizens, who would not be burdened by quartering of
Soldiers: but at length it was agreed, that the two Regiments of the
repartition of Utrecht should be admitted to come in: but the States of Holland
judging, that thus doing, they should not be able to maintain that Post, if set
upon, resolved for the preservation of Holland to beset their Passes; whereupon
the Ledger brake up the 17. dito from Utrecht, and set forward to Weesp,
Bodegrave, Goverwelle-sluce, Schoonhoven, Gorcum, and afterward also Uythorn,
which Posts being now fortifyed, are found sufficient to keep the Enemy out of
Holland. The amazement, because of the breaking in of the Enemy into the Betuw,
and our Armies retreating was greater than I am able to relate, and the fleeing
from all places to Amsterdam was unspeakable, thousands of Wagons and Boats
daily came in, all filled with fear and anguish.

To this retreat of our Army from Utrecht, they ascribe their damnable delivery
up their City, and so would lay that upon others, which their own faithlesness
and treachery brought upon themselves. As Soon as the Enemy was possessed of
Wesel, the Great ones began secretly to transport their goods, which the
commons perceiving, opposed the same; yea, not without affronting the
Magistrates themselves, openly crying out to the Burgemasters, you have ruled
long enough, it is now our turn, from which tumults no good being to be
expected, they sent to the French as soon as Aarnem was taken, and offered their
City also to them, desiring Safeguard; but they were fain to go farther, for
the King yet lay before Doesburg, thus they went seeking the Enemy, and invited
him to come, for 20. English mile in the round not a Frenchman was to be found;
Thus they of Utrecht were waiting for their Enemy, some of them being impatient
he stayed so long: They set a Trumpetter upon the Tower, to give notice when
the French came, which by sound of Trumpet he did the 18. dito to signify to
the City, and so to the whole Army, that the French were come into Utrecht: But
it proved a mistake, for those the Trumpetter thought to be the French, were
Burgers that had been sent forth, who returning saw no Enemy at all.

In the mean while reports were so various, that nothing almost could be
credited, but it was too true, the most of the great ones and Magistrates were
gone, many houses and shops shut up, the Citizens in expectation what the Enemy
would be pleased to do with them, not knowing whether he would only send in
Safeguard, or come with an Army and take possession, no conditions at all yet
being made, all being left to the Kings pleasure; Many were sorry at their
heart, and full of fears, but others well concept, as trusting to the civility
of the French; who, as fortifications HINDERDAM

fortifications NIEUWE^ SLUYS

fortifications MUY DEN

fortifications GOUDSE SLUYS

fortifications NIEWER BRUGH

fortifications PAIN ET VIN

fortifications WIERICKE

fortifications DEVENTER

fortifications DOESBURH

fortifications AEN DEN

fortifications ISEL

they said, kept promise in other conquered Cities; and therefore they pityed
Amsterdam and other Cities, that dared to set themselves in posture of defense.
But little did they dream of the misery hanging over their heads, for they
ought to have expected the certain reward of their treachery, by which they
were the cause of their own and our destruction, neither will it any whit clear
them, to say they were deserted of our Army, seeing they would not be helped,
for two Regiments could not do it, and their standing so much upon terms,
sufficiently evidenced, that this change was aforehand resolved upon by them in
power: It is true, most of the Citizens would yet have defended the City, but
being in a tumultuous way, and trampling under foot the respect of the
Magistracy, as a headless company not to be trusted, they were cause of their
own ruin. And put the case they had been forsaken, yet would it not excuse
them; for it was not likely that the French would have dared to fall upon
Utrecht, being a great City, but not fortifyed, and no place of retreat being
near it, where they might be secured. Certain it is, they had no cause to fear
as yet, for Conde lay wounded at Emmerick, the King was at the Yssel, and
Turenne before Nimwegen, far enough from them, gain of time in such occasions
being of great concern, as appeared by the stop of the French progress soon
after: and besides all this, they should have waited till the French had come,
then had been time enough to fall to parley, and make way for as good terms, as
they now have, being come in by invitations, for none of the conquered Cities
do complain more of the French, than they of Utrecht, and just it is upon them,
having dealt more treacherously than any* could they not as well have shut the
gates against the French, as they did against the Prince?

The 20. dito, Safeguard from the King came in with two Trumpetters, and soon
after a French Garrison: whereupon they presently Capitulate for the whole
Province, a thing never heard before, and cause of all subsequent disaster. For
hereby Over-Yssel pretended to be cut off from Holland, so follows the example
of Utrecht and make Capitulations also, a project also to do the same being
made ready in Friesland; yea, Holland it self almost gone, most of the Cities
speak of sending for Safeguard, and they in highest place knew no better
remedy; all this came from Utrecht, Overyssel following their example, and had
not Providence appeared for us in a wonderful and unexpected way, we had all
been delivered up to the fury of the Enemy.

The 16. July, the Bishop of Munster came before Deventer, a gallant fortified
City provided of all things with a strong garrison of Soldiers, besides 1450.
South-Holland Countrymen and resolute Citizens together, making up 10000. able
men, all resolved to stand out to the utmost against the Enemy. The Colonel
Stecke was Commander in chief over the Garrison, as also Head of the provintial
Militia: He held much communication with the Governor of Coeverden Colonel
Boersma, whom his Highness not trusting, had caused to come to Deventer, where
he thought, he could do no great hurt. The Enemy marched over the Yssel, where
was most convenience behind the hedges of the city gardens, to approach and
plant his mortar pieces, out of which the 20. early in the morning he shot into
the City with Bombes, doing little or no harm with them, whereupon the
Commander for to satisfy the Citizens, offered to make a sally upon the Enemy,
as also he did, not altogether without success; yet so purposely ordered, as
not to do to much hurt to the Enemy. In the mean while, they continued the
Bombes from the overside of the Yssel till the afternoon, when some of the
Magistrates without the knowledge of the Citizens or Garrison, sent a Letter to
the Bishop, desiring a cessation of Arms, and safe conduct for Committees to
go fetch the advice of the Cities Campen and Swol; this was done after that the
Bishop the day before had notifyed, that his intention was to join Deventer
again to the Empire. And the 21. in the morning they sent again a Trumpetter,
for cessation of Arms, the Canons sounding too loud in their ears, though they
hitherto have sustained little harm by them. Now they called the sworn Commons,
where by the most voices it was concluded to give over the City, and three were
deputed to capitulate, the Citizens and Soldiers knowing nothing thereof, save
the Governor insligated by that Traitor Boersma. In the mean while, upon pain
of death, no man might shoot, and the Soldiers who were on flame to ruin the
Enemies approches and Batteries, were not suffered to fall on. Toward evening
the agreement was made without the knowledge of the Council of War, and with a
damnable secluding of the Soldiery, who all, the very Pesants included, were by
this horrid accord to remain prisoners of war, and be shut up in the Churches.
The 21. dito, late in the night, the City was possessed by the enemy, none
almost knowing thereof, or any necessity pressing thereunto, save only the
treachery of these wicked Guests.

22 dito, It was not enough for Deventer thus to have betrayed it is self, but it
would have share also in betraying the rest. They had the 20. dito, seemed to
desire the advice of Campen and Swol, but now they would be their advisers,
sending a Commissary of the Bishop to them, with two Trumpetters and the
Burgemaster Lespiere to Swoll, where after relation of what was past at
Deventer, the same Capitulation was offered to them, which conspiracy being
smelt by the Colonels Bamphield and Ripperda, they did wisely in time retire
out of the City with their Regiments, though unjustly accused of some to have
hereby maliciously betrayed the same; for here being of the same crew, who
without the knowledge of the Militia had betrayed Deventer, these undoubdly
should have been served in the same kind, and all have been laid up in the
Church, as being before their departures they sufficiently perceived: for
though the remainder were afterward permitted to go out free, it was because
they thought it not worth the while to detain so few: as their practice was for
the most part where the Garrisons consisted but of few. However Swoll made
their agreement full enough, though the subscription were deferred to the
morrow after: In the mean while shamefully abusing the name of the States of
Over-Yssel, Swoll summons the other Cities of the Province, there to appear
with all speed, loosing no time, and to Capitulate for themselves: Whereupon
all the Cities and Forts of Over-Yssel were Provintially given up to the Enemy,
and the Ommer-scons, with the new retrenchment laying round about in a Moras,
was upon this news forsaken by its Garrison. I doubt not, but whoever hears
what has been related, will stand amazed; but this is the real Truth thereof.
Though some of these Cities have not blushed to write Apologies, deserving to
have been answered with an halter. The Enemy fortifications SWOL

fortifications CAMPEN

fortifications SUTPHEN

fortifications DOESBERGH

fortifications SCHANS aut HEEREVEEN

fortifications BLESSER BRUGH

fortifications STOCKSTER HORN

comes in all have taking possession of the places given up to him, viz. Swoll,
Hattem, Campen, Swart-sluce, Geelmuyen, Hasselt, Blockzijl, Steenwijk, Meppel,
Scons the Rouveen, Ommer-scons, yea rusheth into the Kuynder it self; the
Territory of the Frieses; and in case he had been in a posture to have marched
forward, he would easy have mastered whole Friesland, the General Alua with his
Militia being gone as far as Leeuwarden. After the Conquest of Over-Yssel the
Province was parted between the head parties, Deventer is allotted to the
Elector of Colen, Campen to the French, Swoll to all three together; the rest
fell to the Bishop of Munsters share, and so remain to this day.

17. June, The King of France was come before Doesburg, and though there were a
reasonable strong Garrison in it, yet without any great resistance, they gave
up themselves to the King, who from thence in haste went to Zutphen, taking it
in without trouble, though it were also provided reasonably well of all things,
and a Garrison in it: In both these Cities the Soldiery and also the Hollands
Waart-gelders or Auxiliary Troops, were detained prisoners of war. Thu^ there
being no more to be conquered at the Yssel; the King brake up from thence, and
came in Person with his Army the 27. dito past Aarnem hard by Utrecht,
encamping himself without the City, and put Garrisons in all the Cities of that
Province, as Wijck, Montfoort, Ouwater, Yselsteyn, Amersfoort, and the Gelder
Cities, Harderwijck and Elburg; yea, in Woerden it self a City in Holland, and
some few coming before Naarden, the dread was so great, that they within cast
away their Arms, some swimming over the Mote of the City, leaving it for the
French to possess: Muyen also was gone, taken in by fifteen men, but were again
driven out: These Successes so transported the French, that some few of them
asked the way to Amsterdam, as thinking to take in that also. The King remained
in the Ledger without Utrecht, and came the 5. July accompanied with Duke
d'Orleans, Monmouth, Luxenburg, and other Grandees, to take a view of the Town,
being on Horseback, but soon returned out again into the Ledger; appointing the
Duke of Luxenburg Governor of the City and Province, and Stoupa General of the
Switzers, Commander of the City. But we will leave the King here a while,
Turenne before Nimwegen, and the Bishop of Munster in Over-Yssel; for to take
notice, what fell out worth the observation about that time, both in the
Politics and the Militia, and so make progress in what was acted by the enemy.

It was a small thing to loose Cities and Forts, whole Provinces together
giving up themselves to the enemy. And though it seems ridiculous, that some
of the French would know the way to Amsterdam to go and take it in; yet I
verily believe, that if at that time 4. or 5000. horse only had gone forward,
Amsterdam it self and thereby Holland; yea, the whole State would have fallen
into the enemies hand, so great terror had seized upon all, and the Regents
void of Counsel: The Magistrates in their common Council disputing, whither
they should quit all, or endeavor a while to defend themselves: Many
pretending that it was impossible, as not being provided with necessaries,
wherefore their Counsel was in case the Enemy came, to meet him with the Keys:
Others would that Bulwarks should be erected, bridges broken down; scarce
knowing what they said or did, setting many times the cart before the horse. I
dread even to think upon the terror and astonishment of that time, especially
of the 25. June and there about, the most understanding of the Land then being
at nonplus: The Pensionary himself, who seldom or never was at a pinch,
plucking up his shoulders, and is said to have given no other advice than a
good and speedy accommodation with the Enemy, as the only expedient to be
found: In prosecution of which advice three Deputies were suddenly sent for
England, and three to the French Ledger, of whom the Lord d'Groot was the chief.
I know not what instructions they had, but it is said, that they for England
had no other Commission, than to learn what the demand of that King was, and
that they for the French Ledger had full power to treat with the King; that is,
to deliver up the Country, for in that conjuncture of time, what else could be
expected than an honorable capitulation.

But the Province of Zealand, June 29. rejected the reasons alleged by Holland
for this Commission, and protested against them, declaring it to be a thing
unheard of in the government of these Countries, to make any Plenipotentiaries
(without an arrested instruction) to treat with any Potentate, much less with
an open Enemy; especially when it concerned our Religion, Liberty and the
lawful government of the Land* wherefore they disavowed this Commission, as
suspicious and of dangerous consequence.

The Communalty, now taking notice of these transactions, and seeing the
astonishments of the Regents, and the thteatned danger, begin to raise tumults:
Others flee where ever they imagine a place of safety to be, transsporting
their families, and what was most precious East, West, to France, yea England
it self, transporting an inestimable Treasure out of the Country to their
extreme danger and damage; the remaining with trembling spirits, at last take
up Arms to defend their Country: The Magistracy in diverse Cities being fain,
as if they were willing to animate and encourage the rest, to contribute for
defense of their Cities, other places in the mean while wholly neglected; but
the Posts for Hollands security were beset with Soldiers, and made defensible,
the Banks and Dams about Amsterdam opened, the Country set under water, the
ways cut throw, bridges cast down, Trenchments erected, Out-layers brought
upon the Rivers, the Wall repaired, Canon brought up, the Watch doubbled, and
for security of the Citizens, the 29. of June it was published from the
Townhouse, that the Council was fully resolved to defend the City to the
utmost; and burgers were sent out of the Hague and Rotterdam to the Posts of
the Army, and out of other Cities to the Frontiers of Holland, Heusden,
Geertruydenburg, Breda, the Klundert, the Briel, etc. But all this could not
take away from the disturbed spirits of men, that impression they had taken
that many members of the Magistracy were guilty of treason, and held
correspondence with the enemy, as often it happens, the bad success of
undertakings is laid to the charge of the managers thereof.

June 20. A remarkable example of this impression was seen in the Hague, when
the two Sons of the Counceller d'Graaf with two other, coming at evening on the
Viverberg, and seeing light where the States of Holland were met, they
concluded that the Pensionaris was yet amongst them, who having the greatest
hand in the management of affairs, he was judged by many as the grand cause of
all our disaster; yea, a very traitor to the Country: Th^efore map of Holland
thought they should do good service to the Land, if they made away with him; so
he going home with two Servants, they fell upon him, and wounding him, left him
for dead, and went away; but his wounds were not great, but that he soon rose
and went home, one of the assassinates Jacob van d'Graaf being taken. At the
same time, came four unknown persons to the house of his brother Cornelis de
Wit, in Dort, who being the Ruard van Putten, and having been Plenipotentiary
on the Fleet, was now returned home sickly, whom these persons would speak
with, having a like design upon him; but were driven away by some of the City
watch. In the mean while, the murmurings of the common people increased against
the Magistracy, and in special against the two de Wits, and all that were of
their faction, laying to their charge the loss of the Country. Whither this
were so or no, I leave to the judgment of others, this only I know, of which
none are ignorant, that they had the weight of the Government in their hands,
directing the resolutions of the State according to their pleasure, and so
perhaps may truly be said to be the cause, or at least the Ringleaders of the
resolutions of that time: An extract of a Letter from Zeeland June 25. being
very remarkable to this end; viz. That one Nussau Advocate in the Hague, had
some days past, declared in the Council of Vlissing with weeping tears, that
some of his kindred sitting in the Council of State and Cities of Holland, had
discovered to him, how that Province had formed a Project, after what manner
Holland should be delivered up to the French. And another Letter from the Hague
dated June 27. This I can say, that within few days we shall inevitably be
brought under the French yoke: and it is my opinion, that the work has fully
been agreed upon. See, how far we then were come.

25. dito, They of Aardenberg in Vlaenders got tidings, that the French out of
their quarters at Cortrijck and thereabouts, had gathered many men for to
assault them, at which very time Captain Cauw Commander of Aardenberg, perhaps
being not ignorant of the exploit, was gone for Zeeland: Whereupon the Garrison
only consisting of 73. men, and 165. citizens were put into posture by the
vigilant direction of Ensign Beeckman, as much as possibly he could. At night
about 11. of the clock the French approached being 4000. Horse and Foot, and by
a Trumpetter summoned the City, which after refusal they fell upon by force;
but by the magnanimity of those few within they were so manfully repulsed, that
after three hours storming, they were forced with great loss toward the
morning to draw off, retiring out of Canon shot: and they of Aardenberg the 26.
dito, got 60. men for succor with some Ammunition, whereupon the Enemy
strengthened with 2000. more fell on again furiously, at one a clock at night,
their Foot being driven on by the Horse advancing, (though most manfully
resisting by them in the City) to the very walls and mastered a Ravelin before
the Gate, the Fall-bridge of the inner-gate let down, when happily at that very
nick of time Colonel Spindler came to assist them with 150. men, which so
increased their courage and strength, that the Enemy was forced again to
retire: They of the Enemy who were got into the Raveling being amazed, because
of the hot shooting, and of the bridge, which they must pass over, called for
quarter, which was not granted before they had cast their weapons from them,
and drawing up the outmost Fall-bridge, they were brought in, the rest escaping
from whence they were come. The way round about was strawed with the slain,
being to the number of a 1000. besides 200. wounded, whom they carried along
with them, not one being slain in the City, and 1. or 2. only wounded: The
prisoners were, 1. Colonel, 2. Lieutenants Colonels, 28. Captains and
Lieutenants, 530. common soldiers; a glorious victory for this Place, which
should have been, according to former resolution, demolished as not tenable,
but now has deserved better Walls than Utrecht, and such as they: for although
their walls were not defensible, and the moat not 3. foot deep, yet the
magnanimity of the citizens was their strength, yea every woman and maid, to
the very children themselves did service, as soldiers, supplying the defect of
bullets with their shop waits, broken pots and the like. Oh, had things been
thus carried in other places, our Netherlands had not so shamely lost their
renown.

29. dito, Jacob de Graaf was condemned to be executed by the sword, for
assaulting the Pensionaris de Wit, (though his wounds were not perilous at all
as to death) as having committed Crimen Laesae Majestatis, being brought to
execution. the gates of the Cities near about were kept shut up, and all the
ways beset with Horse, so that this work, notwithstanding the Executioner made
diverse blows before he could cut off his Head, was accomplished without any
great commotion.

Just at this very time, the Communalty throughout whole Holland and Zealand
were up in a dreadful tumult, requiring that the Government should be altered,
and more power put into the hands of the Prince of Orange: They began at Dort,
where the burgers by their Captains demanded of the Magistrates what they meant
to do, to defend the City or not, and would know themselves what provision
there was in the Magasins, which was found to be very slight, and the Key of
the Powder-Tower not to be found, which made the citizens yet more unrestfull;
requiring that the Prince of Orange should be made Stadholder without delay;
and that with high threatenings: whereupon Deputies from the Magistrate, and
Citizens were forced to go to the Ledger, to desire his Highness to come to
Dort, the which forasmuch as he often denied to do, the Deputies told him, that
in case they should return home with such an answer, they should be in great
danger to be put to death as traitors, which peril his Highness considering,
went the said 29. June to Dort, being received with the applause of the people:
being come to the Town house, the Magistrates made known unto him, that the
citizens desired he would be pleased to view the City Fortifications and
Magasin, not at all mentioning the Stadholdership; whereupon with some of the
Lords, he rode round about the City, and so toward the Pauw, to dine there.
The citizens perceiving, that they thought thus to put them of, began to
murmur; crying out, that they sought to delude them, and thereupon laid hold on
their Horses, binding their pikes and muskets to their Coaches, threatening to
massacre all of them, in case his Highness were not made Stadholder: The Lords
thus terrifyed, promise to content the people, and being come to the Pauw,
discharge themselves and also his Highness of their oath concerning the
perpetual Edict, and so made him Stadholder: Cornelis de Wit, old Burgomaster,
being come home sick from the Fleet, kept his chamber, therefore they sent
these Acts to him by the Secretary, to be by him also subscribed, but he
fortifications T^SAS VAN GENT

fortifications AERDENBURG

refused, saying he neither could, nor would consent thereto: but his
reluctance was in vain, for by the persuasion of his Wife, and the Lords
present, but principally by the threatenings of the citizens, he was constrained
thereto, as about that time, also the Magistrates of most the Cities of Holland
and Zealand, were either through actual insurrection, or threatened peril,
forced so to advance his Highness: Whereupon by the Deputies of the cities,
having a voice in Holland, the perpetual Edict was mortified July the 1. and so
by the annulling of that Oath the Members made capable to Elect a Stadholder,
as also the 2. dito in Zealand, and the day after in Holland, his Highness the
Prince of Orange was elected thereto, and also it was resolved to direct the
case of the Generality accordingly, deferring on him the power of issuing
Patents, as also to be Captain and Admiral General, in like manner as his
Predecessors the former Princes of Orange had enjoyed. Whereupon, the 4. dito
the said dignities and honor was proffered him, by most honorable Deputies in
the name of the States: and after that the 8. dito, the case of his Highness
eminent Character as Admirality was finished, his Highness arrived the 10.
dito early in the morning at the Hague, and being introduced by Deputies, and a
multitude of Gentry, into the gathering of the States General, he there
received his Commission, and took his Oath, as also was done in the Gathering
of the States of Holland, and he sat that same day as Stadholder at the Roll:
and the 16. dito, the Deputies of the States of Zealand came to the Hague,
proffering his Highness the Stadholdership of that Province, and took the Oath
of him; hereby re-establishing him in all the Dignities of his Illustrious
Predecessors. It ever any thing fell out to be wondered at, it was this, wherein
especially is observable, that both the brothers de Wits, were by
indisposednesse hindered, one at Dort the 29. June, the other in the Hague July
1. and 3. to be present at the Council, and the case was so praecipitated, that
there was no time for any to advise with these Lords: for who knows but by
their great subtility, they yet might have found some Remora to this work,
which on likelihood might prove fatal unto themselves.

But for all this, the spirits of the people were not appeased, they saw the
Government remained in their hands, against whose will and endeavor, his
Highness was established, who they thought would not cease, as much as might to
counter mine his Highness, and for to prevent their own fall, would presume to
plot his fall though to the ruin of the State: They saw that the power
deferred on his Highness, was fruitless without liberty to execute the same,
They saw the same management of affairs, were yet as formerly; therefore they
would have an alteration of the Government, and forasmuch as for some years
past the Magistrates of most Cities in Holland were brought in by the direction
of Pensionaris de Wit, that few other which were not of his faction, were
admitted to the Government; therefore the Communalty would have these removed,
terming them the States Party, Cabal of de Wit and faction of Louvestein; yea,
some said plainly they were Traitors of the Land, of whom they said, the
Pensionaris and his brother were Head, together with the Ambassador de Groot,
and some other; Insomuch that the Pensionaris complained in a Letter to his
Highness 11. July of Pamphlets against him, and in special that he was accused
to have managed the secret correspondence-treasure unfaithfully, and not to
have taken due care for the Armies of the State: Whereto his Highness answered
dito 22. that such Pamphlets were not to be regarded, that himself was fain to
suffer the like licentousnesse against him; That of the secret correspondence
money he knew nothing, but that the Lords Councellers of the Commission were to
be witnesses thereof: and that by reason of the multitude of affairs he could
not specify what defects of the Armies had been, nor what supply had from time
to time been made, directing for his desired justification to the actions of
his careful performance therein.

In Zeeland many of the Lords also were said to follow the party of de Wit:
whereupon a general rising was on a sudden throughout whole Holland and
Zeeland, some they assailed in person, others had their houses spoiled, many
were forced to quit their places in Government; yea, in some places all the
Magistrates put by; some Cities were by force of the Pesants taken in, and the
Magistrates constrained to act according to their will, which confusion
presaging the unavoidable ruin of the Country, caused the States to resolve
August 27. not only to empower his Highness, according as should be requisite
and his pleasure should be, to alter the Magistracy in all Cities, but also
entreated him for the common good, to do it with all speed.

The Bishop of Munster having put Garrisons in all Over-Yssel, and posted some
of his Troops on the borders of Friesland, he made toward Coeverden, that
famous and impregnable Fortress, coming before it the 8. of July, the 12.
dito, without much trouble became Master thereof; they within having scarfly
lost a Soldier, and though indeed the drought at this time were such, as has
not been in memory of man, yet the Enemy in their approaches were fain to run
knee-deep in water, and could not possibly have done any thing to the City, if
they within had manfully withstood them: But on the contrary, these faithless
wretches with all their might helped them out of the mire and moors. Thus they
gat fast footing and an open way into Friesland, or Ommelands, and appointed
the Traitor Boersma, who at the taking of Deventer, went over to him, Governor
the second time of Coeverden, taking 4. of the Companies of the Garrison laying
there, leading them about with him 5. weeks, and at length let them with their
Ensigns depart to Groeningen, the 4. Companies being decreased to 110. men, of
whom Captain Struyck remained with the Enemy, and Captain Clant coming to
Groeningen, had his Sword broken at his feet. After the Conquest of Coeverden,
the Bishop brake too into the Groeninger-land, making havoc through Drente and
the Ommelands, and came the 19. dito with some Troops before Groeningen,
possessing the 23. dito the whole Western Quarter, and the 27. dito fell upon
Adwerder Zijl, but was manfully repulsed, where in the night he raised a
Battery, and 28. dito began to fire on the City, formally besieging it, and
upon the approach of the Enemy, the Old and New Sconses were forsaken by ours,
as also Wijnschoter Zijl, The House the Wedde, and all what was thereabout,
being possessed by the Enemy, whereby the Bourtange was blockt up and summoned;
but through the generosity of Captain Prot had nothing in answer but powder and
shot, who afterward when 200000. Gildens were proffered for the Sconse,
answered, he would first gratify the Bishop with fortifications OUDE SCHANS

fortifications COEVENDEN

fortifications NIEWE SCHANS

fortifications de BOUR TANGE

fortifications GRAAF

fortifications GENNEPE HUYS

so many bullets: but Captain Huysman who had commanded the Old Sconse, was for
forsaking it by the Council of War hanged at Groeningen, and Lieutenant van der
Berge Commander of the New Sconse had his Head cut off for deserting the same,
as also the Lieutenant Colonel Taminga and a Major, which laid in Deventer were
arrested, and the Colonels Steck and Boersma cited to answer for their
betraying of Deventer.

Turenne, after the taking of Schenckensconse, was again come before Nimwegen;
but in the mean while, our Soldiers had quitted the strong House te Gennip, and
the Garrison being 4. Companies marched to Nimwegen, and the 7. and 28. June,
our Horse of Nimwegen went with 64. Carts to fetch thence 84. barrels of
powder, bullets, and match, with some lasts of Rye, intending with a second
Convoy to bring away the rest into Nimwegen: upon whom the French shot very
hard out of Knotsenburg, and 2 Batteries they had made, casting also many
Fire-bullets and Granados of 90. and 100. pound weight, by which three
Out-layers before Nimwegen were: But they within were not behind hand with
them: so that the French the 2. and 3. July passed the Waal by their
Ship-bridge, and rounded the City on the Land-side, bringing their Loop-graves
as in an instant to the Moat, and the 4 dito made a Battery with 5. half
Kartouwen, and assaulted by storm that night the Pesthouse-bulwark, entering the
same, but were driven out again, the Colonel van Gent, brother of the Admiral
deceased, being there slain: The 6. dito in the night they stormed again, but
were three times courageously beaten off, as also the 7. dito. In the mean
while, Patents were come to the Grave, to depart with most part of the Garrison
to the Bos, where the Governor having gotten in some Spaniards, but no order
to receive them, sent them back to the Grave, where being come near the City,
they were set upon by the French, and for the most part routed, by which also
the Grave was lost. By this time, the French before Nimwegen were advanced with
their works to the Borst-werings, and already undermined two Bulwarks:
whereupon the 8. dito they began to parley, and the 9. dito the agreement was
made, that the Garrison consisting of 7. Companies of Horse, and about 40.
Foot, with one Company Waartgelders from the Briel, should all remain prisoners
of War, excepting five Companies of Utrecht citizens, and of Rhenen and
Montfoort, who marched out free with their Arms* What the reason was, this City
did so hastily and without more constraint give up to the Enemy, is diversely
judged of, and it is said that the loss of the Grave was a thing plotted
aforehand.

Then 11. July, Turenne from Nimwegen went to the Grave, and immediately from
thence to the Bos, which wanting all things, sent Deputies to his Highness, who
well knowing what concernment the Bos was of, was fain to give this answer,
that he was sorry he could not help them, having no more power, than they to do
it: yet at length, because of the great importance of the place, some Canons
and Ammunition were sent by Ships thither; but coming therewith to Gorcum, they
had the tidings that Creveceur was lost, and therefore not possible to bring it
to the Bos: Therefore the Field-marshal Wurts commanding there, unladed the
Canon to use then for the defense of Gorcum. They of the Bos had quitted the
Sconses Engelen and Orten, and brought the Canon into the City, with all which
they had scarcely enough to defend the Brill as was requisite, the Garrison
also was but weak: The 13. July, they saw the enemy at Ulymen, and part
marching to Engelen and Crevecoeur, the first of which they put forces into,
and besieging the other with many more, after two days shooting on it, became
conquerors thereof; the gros of the Ledger laying at Boxtel and the Vugt, above
20000. strong.

The 11. July, the King brake up with his Army from Utrecht, lodging that night
in the Grep, and arrived the 12. dito to Aarnem, drawing forth the Garrison of
Woerden and Ouwater to Utrecht, they of Ouwater being pursued by some of the
Earl of Horns quarters, and some taken prisoners, besides a good booty of Money
and Arms. The King having given a visit to the Prince of Conde, and Duke d'
Auguin, both lying very weak at Aarnem; departed thence the 13. dito to the
Betuw, sending part of his Army to Bommel, soon mastering it, forthwith putting
forces into the smaller Towns, Heucklon, Asperen and Leerdam: The 14. dito, the
King marched over the Bridge by Nimwegen to the Grave, and arrived the 16. dito
in his Ledger before the Bos, being in person the 21. dito at Vugt, from whence
he betook himself again to Boxel.

Not only the Netherlands, but all Christendom stood astonished to see the
Enemy already approached within two dutch miles of Amsterdam, There keeping
Post, having in so short a time conquered so great a number of Cities and Forts.

A List of the Cities and Forts conquered by the Enemy, since the 1. of June to
the 19. July.
In the Dukedom Cleef.
Orsoy. Rhijnberck. Burick. Wesel, and the Lippe-Sconse. Rees and the Sconse.
Emmerick.
In the County of Groeningen.
Winschoten. Oude Sconse. Boonder Sconse. New Sconse.
In East-Friesland, and Friesland.
d'Eyler Sconse. Slijkenburg or Kuinder Sconse.
In Gelderland.
Spijckfoort. Schencken Sconse. Tol-house. Ysseloort. Hattem. Elbrug.
Harderwijck. Aarnhem. Wageningen. Knotsenburg. Nimwegen. Grave. Tiel. Bommel.
Sconse te Vooren. Sconse St. Andrews. The Retrenchment of the Yssel.
In Brabant.
Crevecoeur. Sconse te Engelen. Orte-Sconse.
In the County Zutphen.
Ysselburg. Anholt. 's Heeren-berg. Zevenaar. Heussen. Dotechem. Brevoort.
Grolle. Lochem. Doesburg. Zutphen.
In Over-Yssel.
Deventer. Hardenberg. Ommer Sconse. Rouveen Sconse. Zwoll, and the
retrechment, fortifications NIMMEGEN

fortifications SCHANS de VORN

fortifications SCHANS S. ANDRIES

fortifications BOMMEL

fortifications CREVECEUR

with three Sconses. Campen with the Scons. Hasselt. Swartsluce. Geelmuyen.
Fullenhove. Blockzijl. Steenwijck.
In the Drente.
Meppel. Coeverden.
In the Twente.
Enschede. Oldenzeel. Degnecham. Almelo. Delden. Goor. Diepenhem. Rijssen.
In Utrecht Province.
Rhenen. Wijck te Duurstee. Amersfoort. Utrecht. Ouwater. Ysselstein.
Montfoort.
In Holland.
Buuren. Kuylenburg. Vyanen. Heucklom. Leerdam. Asperen. Woerden. Naarden.
The Province of Zealand only being free wholly from them.

England it self was jealous because of these successes, unwilling that France
should become Master of all, thinking it therefore high time to see how the
work lay, and speedily sent Buckingham, Arlington, and Hallifax as
Plenipotentiaries to the King of France, with a Commission dated 31. June.
These Lords arrived at the Hague 4. July, and departed the day after to the
Army of his Highness at Bodegrave, without further declaring themselves,
except in exorbitant demands. The 6. dito in the afternoon, they departed from
the Princes Ledger to the King of France, who yet lay encamped before Utrecht,
and followed the French Ledger to the Bos, being every where nobly entertained,
and complimented: Where they the 16 dito renewed their treaty of Alliance;
thereby more nearly binding themselves to hearken to no propositions of Peace,
but with knowledge on both sides, and to come to no agreement, but with the
satisfaction of both, of which notice was to be given to the States by their
Deputies, as also by a Letter of the English Plenipotentiaries was done from
Boxtel dito 17. the same being communicated to his Highness, with an annex of
the Articles, upon which they might have peace.

Demands and Conditions on which his most Christian Majesty would make Peace
with the States General of the United Provinces.
THat the Proclamations formerly put forth by the States General, forbidding
the French Wines and Brandewine, with all the impositions upon French Wares and
Manufactures, be revoked: That within 3. months a Treaty of Commerce between
his Majesty and the said States shall be concluded, wherein also shall be
comprehended the regulating of the French and Holland East and West Indies
Companies.

2. That for the future, throughout all the United Provinces not only a full
liberty; But also shall the public exercise of the Romish Catholic,
Apostolical Religion: so that in all places, where more than one Church shall
be, one be given over to the Catholics: To whom also it shall be permitted to
build one where there is none, and they shall have liberty until such time as
the Church shall be built, openly to celebrate Divine service in such houses as
they shall to that end buy or hire. That by the States General, or every
Province in particular, a reasonable maintenance out of the Goods which have
formerly belonged to the Church, or such like, be allotted to the Pastor or
Priest in every of the said Churches.

3. And forasmuch as the Deputies of the said States sent to his Majesty, have
for special reasons desired, that it would please him by the Peace to permit
the Body of the United Netherlands to remain in the State, so as hitherto it
has been, and thereupon in change to give unto his Majesty for the Conquests,
wherewith it has pleased God to bless his just War, they have offered to him
in stead of the Provinces, Cities and Places which his Majesty already
possesses, to quit unto him other Lands, Cities and Places, which in Brabant
and Flanders by the Spaniard have been delivered up to them: His Majesty
although he be now Master of three whole of the 7. Provinces in the United
Netherlands, together with some of the Places and Posts in Holland, has willed
for to preserve the said seven Provinces in their first Union, to restore unto
them what by his forces he has posessed himself of in the said Provinces,
excepting what here under shall be specified and upon the following conditions.

4. That the said States shall quit unto his Majesty generally all the
Provinces, Cities and Places, which they have in Flanders and Brabant, and
those that have been quitted to them by the Spaniard, only excepting Sluice and
the Island of Casant.

5. The said States also shall quit to his Majesty the City Nimwegen with the
depencdencies and all belonging to it, The Fort Knotsenburg, Schenckenscons,
and the part of the Province of Gelderland, lying on this side the Rhijn, as to
France, together with the whole Island of Bommel, the Island and Fort of
Voorne, the Fort St. Andries, and the Castle of Louvestein, and the Fort
Crevecoeur.

6. The said States also shall quit to his Majesty Grave, with its dependencies
and all belonging to it, and shall give unto him the propriety of the City, and
the County Meurs, to dispose thereof according to his pleasure, with condition
that the said States shall indemnifie the Prince of Orange as to the said
County, and other Places, Cities and Countries belonging to the said Prince,
but yielded up to his Majesty.

7. That the said States shall yield to his Majesty all such claim as they may
have had or could pretend unto, in those places which his Majesty has taken
from the said States in the Empire, that also they yield the same in favor of
the Prince and Earl of East Friesland, of all such claims as they have or may
pretend, unto in such Places as they possess in his Land; as namely, the City
Embden, The Sconse van Leer-oort, and the Ylersconse, out of which they shall
recall their Garrisons.

8. That also it shall be permitted to the Subjects of his Majesty, in all
those Countries, Cities and Places of the States General, which have been
yielded up to his Majesty to go in and out both by Water and by Land, Rivers
and Streams, without paying any due or imposition, or be subject to be visited,
as to their goods, bagage, munition of war, and provision what soever.

9. The said States shall oblige themselves to the Order and Religion of Malta,
to cause to be restored unto the said Order all the Rights, which shall be
found belonging unto them.

10. The said States shall promise to cause the Children of the Earl of Bentem
to be restored to him, which by the authority and protection of the said
States, are by the Countess, wife of the Earl of Bentem, detained from him,
notwithstanding his often requesting the same; thereto also obtaining the
Letters of the Emperor, and of his most Christian Majesty, for the restoring of
them.

11. The said States shall promise to indemnifie his Majesty of part of the
excessive Charges he has been necessitated to in this War, and pay unto him
within the time that shall be agreed upon, the some of 20. millions, and then
his Majesty will acquit them of the three millions, with all the intrest
thereof, which they owe unto his Majesty for the said sum, his Majesty's Father
of happy memory, had lent unto them Anno 1651.

12. That in acknowledgment of the Peace, which his Majesty is willing then to
grant unto them, when he could have made his Conquests further in their
Country; The said States hall every year by an Ambassador Extraordinary upon a
certain stipulated day, cause to be presented to him a Golden Medal weighing a
mark, which shall contain; that they hold the preservation of the same Freedom
from his Majesty, which the Kings his Predecessors have helped them to obtain.

13. That although his Majesty does declare to content himself with the
foresaid Conditions, in case they be accepted within 10. days, after which his
Majesty pretends to be no longer obliged thereto; nevertheless, herewith he
gives to wit, that although the same should be owned by the States, they shall
not be of any force, and that his Majesty will enter upon no Treaty of
Cessation or of Peace, before such time as the King of England on his account
shall receive satisfaction from the said States, and that the Princes of the
Empire allied with his Majesty in this war shall likewise be content with the
Condition, that shall by the States be offered unto them.

Here follows a further Amplication of the forenamed Articles.
ANd that it may appear by the choice of more Conditions than one, how
uprightly his Majesty had been pleased to present to the said States General,
diverse ways for to obtain the Peace they desired of him, and not to bring so
far as was in his power the pretenses, which he justly might by force of Arms,
and the continuance of his Victories; Therefore his Majesty declares, that
without standing, precisely to the offers which here before have by the said
States been made, as also the Conditions which by form of alternative he had
required of them, He will content himself with keeping all the Conquests, his
Majesty at present possesses, together of those he may further Conquer, until
that the said States shall have consented to these Conditions; to wit, the
whole Province and Dukedom of Gelderland belonging to the States, the Province
of Utrecht and County Zutphen, all the Cities, Places and Fortresses, which are
in the said Provinces their appendencies, and what belongs to them without
exception; the Soveraignties of the Provinces, Lands, Cities and Places
conquered by his Majesty with the appendencies and all belonging thereto, to
remain for the future for ever to his Majesty.

And to the end, the said Conquests, Countries and Places delivered up to his
Majesty, may the better be brought to a capacity, through the assistance of the
Empire to be strenthened; the said States shall renounce all Soveragnity over
the Cities Mastricht and the Wijcke, as also of what they now hold in Overmase,
Dalen, Fouquemont, and the Country belonging to the Bos, together the City and
Meyerije of the said Bos, and all what belongs to the appendices thereof,
with the Fort Crevecoeur.

And that the Treaty upon the last Terms might serve, not only to re-establish
the friendships and alliance between his Majesty and the said States, but to
procure the rest and tranquillity of the Empire, which his Majesty as Guardian
and conserver of the Treaties of Westphalia, does in special lay to heart, his
Majesty will promise, after the Peace made, to renounce in favor to the
Princes of the Empire, to all that right which by law of Arms may appertain
unto him, as to those Places which his Majesty has taken from the States in
the precinct of the Empire, his Majesty reserving only to himself the liberty
to demolish the fortification thereof.

But forasmuch as his Majesty will of himself contribute to re-establis the
Princes of the Empire in the free possession of the Cities and Places belonging
to them; therefore he has also willed to procure, that the said States General
shall draw forth their Garrisons out of the Cities and Places, which they hold
as yet in the Empire; namely the City Embden, the Fort of Leer-oort, and
Ilersconse, which shall be delivered up to the Prince and Earl of
East-Friesland, with all the Privileges appertaining in respect of the said
County: and to the end that the needful correspondence between France and the
City Maestricht (which is to be given up to his Majesty) may be for the future
no occasion of Contest, It shall be by both parties estipulated, to endeavor a
grounded and free passage for the Troops of his Majesty from the French
Frontiers to the said Maestricht, from the Elector of Ceulen, as Prince and
Bishop of Luyck, yet upon condition, not to make use of the passages, but with
paying what charges they are at, that the Country be not burdened.

Furthermore, the Articles mentioned in the former notition, shall remain in
full as they are, even that concerning the quitting of the City and County
Meurs, only excepting those that concern the delivery up of other Lands and
Places, to be made by the said States to his Majesty.

Demands and Conditions, upon which the King of England would consent to make
Peace with the States General of the United Provinces.
1. THe King of England understands, that the Hollanders without any gainfaying
shall give unto him the honor of the Flag, yea, so as their whole Fleet shall
strike, and let fall their Top-sail for any one English Ship, bearing the Flag
of his Majesty throughout the whole British Sea, even to the Coasts of Holland.

2. Free permission for a whole year to all English that remained in the Colony
of Surinam, to depart thence when they shall desire, with all their goods, of
what nature soever they be, according to the Treaty of Breda.

3. Perpetual banishment out of all the Territories of the United Provinces of
all the Kings Subjects that are declared guilty of Crimen Laesae Majestatis,
together with all other, which shall be noted by his Majesty to have published
seditious Libels, or otherwise to have conspired against the Peace, and
tranquillity of his Kingdoms.

4. Restoring to his Majesty the expenses of the war, to the sum of one million
of pounds sterling, whereof 400000. shall be paid, between this and the month
October next ensuing, and the rest by 400000. pounds sterling every year.

5. A yearly pay for ever of 10000 pounds sterling, for the grant they shall
have from the King to catch Herrings upon the Coasts of England, Scotland and
Yreland.

6. The present Prince of Orange and his Successors, shall have the
Souveragnity of the United Netherlands, excepting of what shall fall to the
share of the Two Kings and their Allies, or shall at least enjoy for ever the
honor of Admiral General, and Stadtholder in the highest degree, that has by
the foregoing Princes been enjoyed.

7. That within three months after the Peace, a Treaty of Commerce shall be
made, as well to the regulating of Trade in India, according to demands
formerly made, as to the advance of the Subjects of his Majesty in their
trading, going, coming or habituating in any of the Countries belonging to the
said States, and with such advantageous conditions, as are agreed unto the
Nations most in favor.

8. The Island of Walcheren, the City and Castle of Sluice with its
dependencies, the Island of Cassant, that of Goeree, and the Island of Voorne
shall be put into the hands of his Majesty by way of Caution, for the
performing of the Conditions before specified.

9. And however his Majesty declares to content himself with the foresaid
Conditions, in case the same be within ten days accepted, after which his
Majesty understands himself no longer obliged; Nevertheless, he does
peremtorily declare, that although the said States should accept them, yet they
shall be of no force, nor that his Majesty will make any Treaty of Peace or
Cessation, before such time as the most Christian King shall in his regard by
the said States have received satisfaction, as also that the Princes of the
Empire allied with his Majesty in this War, shall be contented with the
Conditions presented to them by the said States.

I believe there will few be found that do imagine such an unreasonable project
to proceed from such prudent royal Councels, and nevertheless it pleased those
Lords to rise thus high, perhaps not well advised that the Holland generosity
(though at present much brougt under) was yet too great, thus willingly to
subject them selfs to the arroga^t cruelty of the French, and insupportable
yoke of the English.

The 19. dito, the English Ambassadors came in the Kings own coach, conducted
by 500. horse to Antwerp, where they had conference with the Earl of Montery,
having a Commissioner of France with them, laboring with all their might to
draw Montery from siding with us, forasmuch as hitherto, not only by order
from the Spanish Court, but through his own inclination and vigilance, he had
much assisted this State, by sending auxiliary troops in most of Frontiers in
Brabant, Flanders, Maestricht, and into our Army it self, wherefore they
desired, that he would call them back again, or make himself master of those
Cities in which they lay offering their assistance thereunto; but that noble
Earl was too honorable so much as once to listen to such an hellish plot,
declining as much as might be all conference with them and departed to
Brussels, shortly after augmenting instead of calling back his auxiliary
Troops. The English perceiving they could gain nothing upon him, departed the
26. dito from Antwerp over Calis for London, where they arrived the last dito.

The 26. July, the King brake up from Box tell, with Monsieur and other
Grandees, with a conduct of 14000. men, passing through the Meyery over
Beringen, St. Truyen, Hanuyt, Charleroy, Quesnoy, directly to St. Germein,
where he arrived 1. August: the Prince of Conde following him shortly after
with most of the Gentry and Voluntaries: in which return they of Mastricht, (as
formerly and afterward got very great booty, as daily going forth for prey, and
since the beginning of the war till now, have got an incredible spoil, of which
the Spanish Auxiliaries had not the least part, whose horse were most in this
service. The Duke of Monmouth went home over Flanders, his Regiment of 2400.
being melted away to 1500. And thus to the admiration of every one, this
Companies was before August broken up, Monsr. de Turenne also, Generalissimo of
the Kings Ledger in the Netherlands, left the siege of the Bos, and marched
higher up, some Troops at times appearing before Heusden, and the Bos, to fetch
in contribution, and burned some Villages about Breda.

The Bishops of Colen and Munster had begun 28. July to play with their Canon
upon Groeningen, and to open their Loopgraves. They in the City were reasonably
provided, and had prepared all things without for to hold out a siege. But that
which was most of all, they had a gallant Governor, the Lord Rabenhaupt, and a
notable Commander, the Duke of Holstein Pleun, and other worthy Officers: The
Governor took upon himself the whole management of the Militia and
fortification, being very strict in discipline of war, and very vigilant to
look to all things: Hereby the Magistrate was frustrated of their opportunity,
to play their parts, as they in other Cities did, and citizens and soldiers
kept from mutiny. The Enemy made his approaches both out of the Munsters and
Colish Quarters, shooting very hard continually, whereby they got to the
Counterscarp, casting without ceasing fiery Bullets, Bombes, Granados,
Stink-pots and Pitch-Garlands into the City. But they within both Citizens,
Studens and Soldiers, defended the City with unwearied pains: never appeared
the least discouragement amongst them; but contrary it increased, through the
success of diverse issuings forth upon them, and by the succors of such as
came from other places, as many Regiments of Konings mark, some Frieses, and
the whole Regiment of Jorman of Amsterdam, beside the supply of all necessary
Provision and Ammunition. When they saw their Houses through the force of the
Bombes tumbling down, instead of being disheartened, they were the more
encouraged, The Women themselves stepping over the ruins of their habitations,
to encourage their Husbands to the fight, they lightly esteemed the loss of an
Arm, Leg; Child or Friend, in respect of their purchased liberty, in which they
continued with such constant manfullnesse and unwearied zeal, until that the
Enemy the 28. August was forced with shame to quit the siege. Oh! Praiseworthy
Groeningers, how wickedly did other Cities betray themselves; yet in truth,
this of Groeningen could hardly be termed a siege, the City being only closed
at 2. or 3. Bulwarks, and the rest free, being provided of all necessaries,
never sustaining a storm, only furiously shot upon with Bullets and Granados,
which did little hurt except to the houses, although it is reported, they cast
in above 5000. Granados, many of them weighing 4. and 5. hundred pound a piece,
which indeed did ruin that part of the City, but did little hurt to the
people, there being not above 80. slain during the whole siege, but very many
of the Enemy, who besides the wounded amounted toy number of 4536. under which
were three Commanders, two Lieutenants Colonels, 63. Captains, with many other
Officers: many were taken prisoners, and about 5000. ran away, so that the army
of 24000. was decreased to 14000. and an infinite number of Fireworks
consumed. The Enemy leaving the City, set their Tents and Leger-place on fire;
but were fain to leave some Canon with much Ammunition and Ledger instruments
behind them, the which they of the City made good prize of, and slighted all
the Enemies works.

At Sea, since the battle of the 7. June, nothing considerable fell out, our
Fleet still keeping near Zealand, upon what ground is diversely conjectured; The
Enemies Fleet also seemed to have little stomach for another engagement, yet in
the midst of July they came before the Texel, in all appearance the design
being to Land their men some where or other, but the Heavens by a storm hindered
the same, which sooner than they were willing drove one of their ships a shore,
and sent back many shattered home again, the rest remaining crossing about our
Seaports, thinking in appearance yet to bring about their design: in the mean
while, our Fleet having no considerable loss. But the Enemy having repaired
their Ships for the most part, spread themselves all about on Sea, for to watch
our merchant men; but especially our Ships returning from the Indies. And the
1. August some Seamen came hither in an Advice-Yaght from Chilon, and being
pursued by the English to our very Coast, and seeing no way or escape, they
themselves sunk her, and so escaped in the Boat, however the English saved the
said Jaght, and brought it for England, but was of no great value. The 6. dito,
tidings came of 14. East Indies Ships, happily arrived upon the Eems, who not
knowing of the war, and having met with no English, saving two Frigates before
the Eems, who made signs for assistance, but in vain; and therefore were fain
to suffer them all safely to get in, which being at the time of the besieging
of Groeningen, the Fort Delf-zijl had the hap to be furnished with powder and
shot out of East India, the better to defend the ships. Suddenly many
Smack-boats were sent thither, to take out the finest Wares, and to bring them
home over the Wadden, and our Ships of War went to the Eems, to fetch off these
India Ships, all which by a special providence arrived at their several Ports
without any hinderance, and the Fleet returned again to Zealand. And it is very
remarkable, that the English who had so long lurked for to prey upon our
East-Indie ships, themselves, of which the certain news came the 17. August,
lost a very rich Indie ship of their own, called the Faulcon, being taken by a
Zealand Caper, and brought up at Bergen in Norway, esteemed to be worth
1500000. gildens; After this nothing was done by both Fleets, the design of the
Enemy, which was to Land on our Coasts, being continually hindered by hard
weather, in the mean while our Capers, which at the beginning of the War were
not permitted, with many other that had Commission from Zealand, went out to
Sea, and yet daily do, which already have so much endammaged the French, and
especially the English, that their loss is rated at many millions.

The condition of the remainder of our Country, we left under the sad tumult of
the Inhabitants, by which all things were like to come into a lamentable
confusion, and if I judge not a miss, in greater peril, than through the
Armies of the French, every moment we being in danger to strand upon the blind
Rocks of the incensed vulgar, of which the effects were so many and diverse,
that it would be too confused and tedious a work to rehearse or read them; it
will be sufficient to relate the chiefest, by which may easily be judged of the
rest.

Upon the general insurrection of the Citizens against the Magistrates, it was
in some Cities published, and Letters from his Highness divulged dated the 9.
July, wherein the Citizens were commanded to abstain from such manner of
proceedings, and to let things remain as formerly they were, upon pain of
displeasure, and to be punished as disturbers of the common peace, it being an
intrenchemend on his Highness authority as Stadholder, whose office it is to
dispose of the concerns of the Magistracy: wherefore if any in the Regency were
guilty, they might be orderly charged, and being found guilty, should be
according to desert punished. Hereupon the Citizens expected that his Highness
would make a general reformation in the Government, but nothing came of it; and
no wonder, for this Iron was too hot for him to lay hold on, the time not be
suitable to begin a work of such consequence: Nevertheless, the Commons would
so have it, and therefore they set upon the work again. Rotterdam and Dort
displaced the most part of the Magistrates, and nominated others in their room:
and in many other places, by threatening Petitions, the restitution of their Old
Privileges laid by, were required. Delf was taken in by the Pesants of
Maesland, and the Magistrates constrained to give them and the Citizens
satisfaction. The like was done at der Gou, and at der Tholen the Pesants came
to alter the Magistrates. At Zierickzee they brake the windows of the
Townhouse, but the Citizens shut out the Pesants that were entering, themselves
emptying the Townhouse, shutting it up, and displacing all the Magistrates. At
Middle-borough the Citizens and common people had set upon the Magistrates till
such time the Pefants came, brake open the City gates, and lifting up the Doors
from off the Bars, drew 7. of the Lords without the City, whom they would not
let go till they had received satisfaction. Vlissingen and ter Vere also turned
all upside down, and at ter Goes, the Citizens rose up against some whom they
termed Traitors: Leyden was deep in the reformation, deposing all their Lords
and shut up the Townhouse. Haerlem did not much less: In North-Holland the
Women themselves very busy, to have things ordered to their mind. At Amsterdam
also were meetings at their Doelens, some of whom, not satisfied to have
occasioned great trouble in the Church, by following of Labadie (who now is
said to be married with the Lady of Sommelsdick) were ringleaders also to do
the like in the Policy: But the Magistrates according to their wonted wisdom,
desirous to prevent the storm approaching resigned the whole Government, and
every one his charge to the free disposal and pleasure of his Highness, who
seeing the unavoidable necessity for the common peace, did according to the
resolution of the States General in date of 7. August, take in hand the
altering of the Magistracy, disposing thereof in some Cities as he thought best
himself, in others he chose out some of them that were upon nomination, in some
he did it by Commissioners, which notwithstanding gave not full content to all,
but much dissatisfaction still remained, which was not a little fomented by
such as imagined themseves injuried by this alteration. But blessed be God,
this drew no further disaster along with it, and that the Government was in
some measure brought to a more settled posture, by putting by such as the
commons suspected. What concerns the plundrings, and personal assaultings, they
were diverse, whereby also the greatest of the Land were in jeopardy, as
Burgemaster Graaf, the Ambassador de Groot, the Lord of Beverning; yea, the
ancient Prince Maurice himself; yea, such was the rage of the vulgar, as they
threatened to plunder the house of Admiral de Ruyter, which also was really done
to many of the Magistrates houses in diverse Cities: but it shall suffice to
note in its place one example thereof, happened at the Hague the 20. August.

After the King of France his departure, the quitting of the siege before the
Bos, the breaking up of Turrennes Ledger, and the delivery of Groeningen, no
great matter of concern passed between us and the Enemy, except some
skirmishes, of which I will note the principal as they fell out.

22. July, the Ambassador de Groot, who was the chief of the Commissioners sent
to the King of France, silently departed the Land with his Family, as
perceiving that the change of time, would not permit the transactions with
France to go forward, his Highness not being altogether satisfied with him
therein; but disavowing the same, declared, that he was ready to defend his
Country to the utmost, and to hazard life and all for the same. De Groot wrote
a Letter to the State in way of excuse, that he was only retired for to escape
the machinations of his enemies, and the rage of the vulgar, by which for some
while he had been in peril of being overwhelmed: That all his services had
been improved for the good of the Land; neither would yet undertake any thing
to the prejudice of the State.

fortifications GRONINGEN



26. dito, The Frieses under Alua, were unawares assaulted by 13. Standards of
the Bishop, between Dragten and Bergen, where the Frieses being allured into an
Ambush, would have fallen short, had they not been seconded, whereby those of
the Bishop were driven back with the loss of 150. horse, and only 25. of our
soldiers.

31. dito, The Pensionaris de Wit, for the first time went to Church, after his
recovery of his wounds, wherein he was the more hasty, for to have the
opportunity, to be assistant to the dangerous condition of his brother the
Ruart van Putten, who the 24. dito was brought from Dort to the Hague, and
there kept prisoner. The 1. August, the Pensionar went and complimented his
Highness over his Illustrious Character and advance. The 4. dito, he appeared
in the Session of the States General: where he made an Oration of his great
services and care of the welfare of the State, but perceiving that in this
conjuncture it could be no longer for the profit, but contrariwise to the
disadvantage of the Land, he therefore was come to lay down his office of
Pensionarship, perhaps because he foresaw he was not like long to hold, or at
least to execute the same, and withal desired that according to the resolution
before taken, he might have his seat in the High Council; but forasmuch as
there fell dispute about the Rank, and afterward Zealand was opposite to the
Session it self, and as is reported the Chair of State was denied in the
Church, he never after appeared in the Council.

Upon notice given in England of his Highness advance to the Stadtholdership,
came a rescription dated 28. July, which his Highness communicated to the
State.

A Letter of his Majesty the King of Great Britain, To his Highness the Prince
of Orange.
From Whitehall the 28. July 1672. Cousin,
MOnsieur van Reed having made report of the sad condition to which you are
brought, it went very near me, but which most troubled me was that you seem to
have an apprehension, as if I had less care and affection to you than
formerly: I pray you, that you be pleased to assure your self, that they are
groundless apprehensions, and without cause, but on the contrary that I have
the same tender respects and affection your person that ever I had, both in
regard of your own worth, as in respect of that blood of which we both partake:
Neither have I ever forgot any of the least good services which your Father in
his life time has showed to me, the obligations whereof shall always remain
engraven in the bottom of my heart. Be pleased, I pray, to believe, though the
present State of things, have not permitted me to correspond with you, and to
communicate my designs and Treaties, which in all transactions I have
undertaken with the most Christian King, I have always endeavored to advance
your Interest so far as the nature of the Treaty could any way permit. The
insolences and continual Machinations against me, by those that for some time
since have had so great direction in the Government of the United Netherlands,
have necessitated me to join with the most Christian King, (who also has the
same Subject of complaint against them) to the end only to cast down that
insupportable greatness of the Louvesteinish faction, and to assure our selves
from the like future insults and mockage: The trust that I have to the
Friendship of the most Christian King, the affection he bears to your Person,
and his aversion to them which have manifested themselves to be my Enemies as
well as yours, do promise unto me a good issue out of all these turmoiles as to
your self, and in case the Inhabitants of those Provinces, had in time
considered their mistake, and conferred upon you the authority and dignities,
wherewith your Illustrious Predecessors have so worthily been possessed of,
then without doubt, the said most Christian King and We should have continued
in a perfect and assured friendship with the foresaid Provinces.
Notwithstanding I am very much satisfied with what the Commons of those
Provinces now lately have done, choosing you for their Stadtholder. And when I
shall see, that affairs are brought to such a stay, that it shall be no longer
in the power of the said violent faction, or another as malicious, to dissolve
or make fruitless, what is done, and that I shall be able to free my Subjects
from the oppression and injuries they have so long sustained; I will endeavor
to protect you and your friends, and improve all my interest with my Brother in
law, the most Christian King, for to yield to such an issue to these embroiled
affairs, that the whole World may perceive the particular care I bear to your
Person, and what for your sake I will do for the interest of the foresaid
Provinces. To be short, I would assure you, and you may certainly believe, that
I have always all manner of good inclination and intention for your well
being, as such as you could desire, and which always may witness that I am,
and shall be,

Cousin Your well-affectionate Uncle, and was under writ CHARLES REX.


The Letter was diversely interpreted, which I leave to every one to judge of as
seems him good, but look upon it as merely complimental, and expressing the
Kings bitterness against this State, under the name of the Governors thereof;
and I pityed those who judged to see in it any affection of the King toward
his Highness, and for his sake to this Country, or did hope by this change the
easier to obtain an accommodation with England.

1. August, Toward evening went out of Utrecht about 3000. men, most Horse,
having some pieces by them, with which the day after they came before
Kroonenburg, where Captain Witze commanded with about 200. men, it was a strong
Fort, but not provided with Ammunition, of which the French with some loss
made themselves masters, carrying away our Soldiers prisoners to Utrecht, which
also they did to the Fort Loenersloot, in which lay only a few men, both which
Forts a while after they left; by powder demolishing Kroonenburg, and having
plundered all Loenen and what was thereabout, retired with the spoil to Utrecht.

8. dito, In the Quarters of his Highness, Captain de Hing Yossa, who had laid
in Wesel, was sentenced by the High Council of War to be beheaded, for
cowardice, mutiny, and treachery. Colonel Mombas, who had betrayed the
Tolhouse, was the same day his brother in law, de Groot, departed the Land,
sentenced to be deprived of all dignities and Offices, to be detained 15. years
prisoner; but in the sentence nothing was pronounced against his Person, but
not long after he escaped, and went over to the Enemy, upon which 3000. gildens
was set upon him by proclamation. The 28. August, Colonel d'Ossery for his
unfaithfullness at Rijnberck, was beheaded in the Princes Ledger, And the 23.
September. the Commander van Zanten and Major Copes, for their unfaithful
carriage in the delivery of Wesel, were disgraded and their Swords broken at
their feet, and the first of these, in the presence of the other, had the Sword
stroke over his head, his Goods confiscated, himself banished for 12. years out
of the Land: another Colonel of Wesel also was disgraded and sent away; other
Officers of Rijnberck, Wesel, and other places, for their cowardice were
detained prisoners, some at Mastricht, others at Gorcum and Bodegrave.

10. dito, Some Horse out of the Quarters of his Highness; advanced to the
very gates of Utrecht, rushing into the Enemies retrenchment, killing many and
bringing away 16. prisoners, with the loss of two men only. About this time,
our Militia was mustered by the Lord Beverning here, and by others in other
places, and were found to be 783. Companies, 200. whereof had their Officers
discharged, to be (as they speak) reformed, and their Companies added to other;
which also shortly after was effected by his Highness, and these reformed
Officers had a certain maintenance allotted them, with promise to be again
advanced according to merit, with the first opportunity.

12. dito, His Highness came to Amsterdam, all the 60. Companies with two
Companies of Horse were in Arms, and the 13. dito his Highness took Session in
the City Council, and of the Admiralty, having before taken a view of the City
fortifications, and at noon was treated in the Townhouse, then he departed to
Muyen, for to see the fortifications there, and so to Weesp, Hinderdam and
Abkow, from whence he again returned the 14. dito, and the day following
departed in pomp to Bodegrave.

18. dito, A Troup of French Horse of 17. Standards, intended to have surprised
Gorcum, but the Field Marshal Wurts having notice thereof, sent some Foot with
3. Pieces against them, forcing them after the loss of 60. Horse to return to
Vianen and Utrecht, 4. only of our men being slain.

The 20. dito, was fatal to two of the chief Persons of the Land, Cornelius and
his brother Johan de Wit, the first being old Burgomaster of Dort, and Ruard of
the Land of Putten, being late the only Plenipotentiary on the Fleet, The
other Great Counceller, and Pensionaris of Holland and West-Friesland: It was
the 24. July when the Ruart was by the Fiscale of the Court, brought prisoner
from Dort to the Hague, being lodged in Casteleiny, it being not known for
what, save only that a Barber of Bodegrave accused him, that by money he
sought to entice him, having also given a part of the promised sum, to kill his
Highness; whereupon being examined by the Court, and diverse times confronted
with the Accuser, he was the 6. of August brought from the Casteleinye into the
Fore-poort of the Court, his Accuser also being a while after there detained,
and after diverse confrontings, The Ruart was put to the torture, which he
endured as is said, two times, And the 20. dito in the morning, the Accuser was
set at liberty, the following Sentence being pronounced against the Ruart,
prisoner in the Court Gate.

The SENTENCE of the Court of Holland and West-Friesland, against Mr. CORNELIUS
de WIT, Old Burgemaster of the City Dort, pronounced the 20. August 1672.
THe Court of Holland having seen and examined the Papers, delivered up by the
Procureur General of the said Court, to the Charge of Mr. Cornelius de Wit, Old
Burgemaster of Dort, and Ruard of the Land of Putten, at present Prisoner in
the Fore-gate of the said Court, together with his Examinations and
Confrontations, as what by the said Prisoner has been delivered up, and having
duly considered what was in the case to be taken notice of, or might any ways
be serviceable in it; Do declare the Prisoner to be fallen from all his
Dignities and Offices by him hitherto possessed of; and further does banish him
the Country of Holland and West-Friesland, so as never to return again upon
pain of greater punishment, and that he depart the Country with the very first;
condemning him in the Charges and Mises of the Law, at the taxation and
moderation of the said Court. Acted by the Lords Adriaen Pauw President, Lord
of Bennebroeck, Aelbrecht Nierop, William Goes, Lord of Boeckhorstenburg,
Fredrick van Lier, Lord van Soetermeer, Cornelius Baen, and Matheus Gool,
Counselors of Holland and West-Frieslend, and pronounced upon the Fore gate of
the Court, the 20. August, 1672.

Witness hereof A. Dr. POTS.

The Citizens having a few days before heard a rumor that the Ruard was
escaped, would not be quiet, before he had shown himself before the grates of
the windows, and from that time kept the prison gate with watch. Seeing the
Barber come off free, and hearing that the Ruard only was banished, began
again tumultuously to rise up, and set on by the instigation of the Barber, all
the 6. companies rose up in Arms. In the mean while, John de Wit came with his
Father in a Coach, for to fetch away his brother, according to the Ruards
desire, the Father because of tumult riding away with the Coach: when now both
the brothers came from above, they were forced by the Citizens that kept the
watch to go up again, till that two whole Companies came to the Gate, who with
their Pikes and Muskets drove away the Horse that were coming thither; In the
mean while, the mutiny of the Citizens increased, crying now we have both the
Traitors within, they shall not escape us; and two of the Citizens Officers,
with some Gentlemen of the Companies and Commons went up to bring them down,
where they found the Ruard in his Gown upon his bed, and John sitting before
him, who with soft words and in way of excusing did pacify these Officers, and
prevailed with them to sit down at Table to eat: by which stay and the increase
of the vulgar, the tumult rose to an extreme height, and so shot they furiously
at the prison Gate, and at length with iron Instruments brake it in pieces, as
also some inner-doores: upon which the door of the prison chamber was opened,
John de Wit asking, well good people, to what end is all this force? but seeing
it was their intent to cause them to come down, he took his brother by the
hand, and went with much thrusting and kicking down the stairs: coming below,
John thought to have gone behind the armed men, and not through the ranks; but
was by the vulgar presently seized on, and by a citizen stroke on the head with
the thick end of his musket, so that he fell down, but soon rose up again; but
at the second blow he sunk down to the ground, and then a citizen setting his
foot upon his neck, shot him with a pocket pistol through the head: The Ruard
was served in the same kind, being fallen upon, beaten, shot, and thrust
through, and his dead Corpse trodden upon, and the Gown of the Ruard, and Cloak of
John torn into small pieces with their cloths, and so thrown about.

It remained not thus only, but their dead bodies were dragged to the place of
execution, and hanged by their feet stark naked upon the assents of the Gibbet,
in the sight of all the World; whereupon the vulgars fury not yet satisfied,
they toward the evening first cut off the two foremost fingers of John de Wit,
wherewith he had subscribed the perpetual Edict, and afterward cut of the
Fingers, Toes, Nose, Ears, and privy Members of both of them, and prying into
the innermost parts, plucked out their Bowels, winding them about their arms,
tore their Hearts out of their bosoms, screwed open their Bodies with wooden
pricks, offering to sale in all parts of the City; yea, in other Towns
inlandish and outlandish the torn pieces of their Garments, and Members of
their bodies; A Toe was sold for 10. the joint of a Finger for 12. a Finger for
15. and an Ear for 25. stuyvers, and so pro rato, accordingly, some of them
they dried, embalmed, and carried about to be seen for money, and they that
went to the highest pitch of inhumanity, did (horresco referens) roast their
Flesh and ate it. Who would believe that ever our Netherlands should have
brought forth Anthropophagi?

The night drawing her Curtains before this tragical Theater, the Actors and
Spectators departed; whereupon came a Coach with five Laquies, which took away
what was left of the Bodies, bringing the same into the House of John de Wit;
burying the same silently the next night in the New Church, in the Grave where
John de Wits Wife laid: Some there were that spoke of taking them up out of the
Graves again, to burn them to ashes, and fling them into the air; fearing
perhaps, least by another change of time, their bones should rear them up, a
Grave of honor as Martyrs of the State, as was formerly foretold, should be
done to Barnevelt. However, they satisfied themselves in putting their hands to
the last work of breaking to fitters their Arms, which were made to be hung up
in the Church, for they would root out their memory, if they could, as well as
their Lives from the Earth.

Their kindred complying with the intemperance of these times, did not appear
in mourning apparel: Strangers spoke of the transaction, as their fancies led
them, some judged it an act of Chivalry and restoration of our oppressed
liberty; Others did not commend, yet would not blame it, looking upon it as a
special judgment upon them; yet many condemn the whole action, fearing the
destruction of the whole Land would follow hereupon; but they who would seem
the most impartial, judged that in this conjuncture of time, it was a good
service to the Land, that these men were removed, though they were the greatest
Intelligents and Politicians of the World; yet the action it self they looked
upon as barbarous and abominable, and which has stained our Nation with the
black mark of fury, which shall never be wiped of, and the more because no
certain evidence, or confession of the one, nor accusation of the other has
been made known. This is remarkable, that at the very same time the Citizens
were here busy to take away the life of John de Wit, who had resigned his
Pensionaryship, even the States of Holland, during these tumults were employed
in the choice of another Pensionaris, unto which the Lord Griffier Fagel was
propounded.

1. September, The Field Marshal Wurts went with some Troops out of Gorcum, to
the House Pouroyen, which the French had fortified, and garrisoned, which he
soon mastered, taking some prisoners, the rest retiring to Bommel: and while
ours were busy in this work, they of the Bos went before Crevecoeur, to impede
that no assistance from thence might be sent to Pouroyen, which being sometime
beset with our men, was soon after demolished by Gunpowder.

2. dito, Some Frieses with help of them that cross upon the Souther-Sea, fell
upon Block-zijl, and gained the Sconse by them erected, upon which the
Inhabitants fell upon the Munsters, and cut the throat of the Commander, and
forthwith by help of ours Soldiers did drive out the French, whereupon
Vollenhoven was also left by the Enemy.

About this time, also some Yaghts and Small-ships with Soldiers under the
conduct of one Muller, went from Amsterdam with a design upon Swart-sluce,
before which after long hinderance by contrary wind, they came; but the plot
not being well laid, did not prosper, the Munsters being seconded by their
friends, whereupon some of ours returned to Amsterdam, leaving there the Yaght
of Muller, which was fired: but most of ours made for Block-zijl, from whence
the 11. dito, Captain Holbaarn with 240. men made a gallant assault upon
Slijckenburg, or the Kuynder-Sconse, soon putting 250. of the Episcopel to
flight, taking 28. prisoners, a Coach with horses, and other booty, few being
slain or wounded on either side, Captain Holbaarn remained Commander there.

7. dito, Toward evening 2000. Groeningers with 12. Field Pieces went forth out
of Groeningen, under the chief Lieutenant of the Governor Rabenhaupt, to
Winschoten, which the Episcopal were a making strong, by that Fortress to
straiten the Bourtange, Delf-zijl, yea Groeningen it self; Whereupon the
Episcopal being 800. Dragoons went the 8. dito out of Winschoten, and set
themselves in posture by four Esquadrons in the Field till ours came, but were
soon put to flight, and withal driven out of the Winschoter Sconse, loosing
about 200. man, six pieces, many wagons, spades, and such like Instruments,
retiring unto the Old and New Sconses; after which ours put a Garrison in the
Fort Te Wedde, which is the Pas to the Bourtange, whereby the Passes of the Old
and New Sconses are as much as possible could be shut and blockt up.

16. dito, Some Troops from the quarter of the Earl of Horn, marched into
Oudewater, putting forces into it, making soon after his quarters there,
leaving the Post of Gouverwelle sluice beset with some Troops only: Which also
his Highness would have done at Woerden, if they had not been unwilling to
spoil their Tile-houses, so desired they might be excused, whereupon his
Highness seeing he could not be secured, put no forces into the Town, but the
French awakened through our strengthening of Oudewater, the Duke of Luxenburgh,
Stoupa, Mombas, and many other Officers, marched from Utrecht with about 4. or
5000. Horse and Foot, 4. Pieces, and much bagage to Woerden, where arriving the
Duke, by a Trumpetter desired of the Lords passage for some Troops, which was
granted: whereupon they all entered, and held their Post there, to the great
astonishment of the Inhabitants: The 19. dito, many boats with bagage and
provision, also carts with instruments and bullets, and two Canons, (for the
other did stick in the way) were sent in, and with all speed the Pesants round
about with the Citizens were forced to work at the fortification, for the
strengthening of the City, and to leave all they had without the City, and
demolish whatever stood in the way, so Luxenburg returned to Utrecht, leaving a
Garrison of 2000. there.

20. dito, Some French went from Crevecoeur to Heusden, and on a sudden rushed
into a Redout and Horn-work, which they of the City perceiving, were alarmed,
whereupon the French were forced again to retire out of those Posts, taking
along with them some prisoners; but on the other hand, at the same time a
French Troup of Horse near the Village Capel, a little higher than Schoonhoven
were soundly beaten, and many slain, without any great loss of our men.

4. dito, The Summer season passing, our Fleet came in, some lighter Frigates
keeping Sea near our Ports, the greater ships retiring to their several homes,
upon which also the greater English ships were laid up, one Esquadron of the
lighter ships only keeping at Sea, The French Esquadron also prepared to go
home, but were kept at Sea by contrary winds till the midst of November, before
they got to Breast: And it is past apprehension, how these two Fleets Enemies to
each other could be so long, without any engaging.

The War which till now has been so sore upon us, was driven on by the
professed enmity of 2. mighty Kings, one Elector, and the Bishop of Westphalia,
besides many other who under hand did favor and assist them: where on the
contrary, we only a little supplied by the Spanish Netherlands, were forsaken
of all our former Allies. With Brandenburg indeed a Treaty defensive was made,
but hitherto without any effect, until that the Lords of Amerongen and Pelnits
took their journey thither with vast sums, but the ship in which they were,
happily met a boat from Hamburg before the Weset, who told them there lay three
English ships before the Elve, which waited for the coming of an Holland ship
with money, and that, if they would but look up they might see them; wherefore
it seemed most safe to these Lords, to sail with the money to Bremen, where
they well arrived; from that time forward, there was a gathering of some
Soldiers, of which continually was much spoken and long expectation; At the
same time also the Emperor raised forces at Egra, according to a league
defensive between him and Brandenburg, for the security of the Empire against
France, in which league Spain and Denmarck also were included, which to us
seemed to promise some good, and the rather because it was certainly reported
the Brandenburgers train came down, and the Elector himself 26. August arrived
at Halberstadt, where also the Earl Montecuculi, General of the Imperial Troops
came the 10. September. It was expected that both these Armies would have come
further to the Rhijn side, and press into Wephalia: were upon, also Turenne
gathered his Forces and encamped between Wesel and Doesburg, for to have a
waking eye upon them: but the Auxiliary Troops having laid some while about
Halberstadt, changed their course, returning back to Franckfurt, The Elector
leaving some Forces upon the borders of Westphalia, and the Auxiliaries sat
down at Fridburg and Butspach; whereupon Turenne also marched up higher with
his Army, along the Rhijn, and pitched over against Ceulen.

And notwithstanding, we here were altogether ignorant of the intent the
Auxiliaries had in this march, yet it put some courage into us; for hereby
Turennes Army was kept off from us, and in the interim our Armies increased
mightily with inlandish and outlandish Forces, as diverse Regiments of
Konincksmark, The General Polens, of the Duke of Holstein Pleun, of the Earl of
Witgenstein, and the like, which came out of other Countries, the method also
of the Militia was better ordered; the Ledger Posts in better defense, and the
commotions at home sedated, all which gave more satisfaction to the Citizens;
but on the contrary, it increased the misery of the conquered places, and daily
augmented their oppression: On the plains all was ruinated by fire and sword,
in the Cities excessive burdens and contributions raised, and Soldiers
inquartered in the Citizens houses, and themselves disarmed; and upon high
threats of punishment required to bring all their Arms up to the Townhouse to
be locked up: Diverse of their Churches, contrary to agreement, taken from them,
and thorowout all the Conquest the following Proclamation of the King was
published Whereupon on the other hand by way of retorsion, a like Proclamation
was published by the States.

A Declaration of the French King, against the Inhabitants of Gelderland,
Over-Yssel, and the Sticht Utrecht.
FRom the King: His Majesty being well informed, that a great number of the
Inhabitants of the new conquered Lands by his Arms in Holland, have abandoned
and forsaken their Lands, Houses, and Inheritances, retiring themselves
elsewhere; His Majesty's pleasure being to force them to return, does ordain
and command expressly, that the owners of the said Houses thus abandoned, do
come and dwell there again, and that before the end of this month now running
on, without any longer delay, upon pain, the time being past of confiscation of
all their incomstes, and to be obliged every day to pay 50. gilders for the
maintenance of the Troops of his Majesty, and in case of no payment, their
Houses to be rased down to the ground, their plantations ruinated.

portrait of Raymundus Graef RAYMUNDUS GRAEF van MONTE CUCCOLI Generalissimus
van t. Keiserluck Ledger:


fortifications NAARDEN

fortifications UYTERMEER SLUYS

fortifications WEESP



His Majesty commands and ordains to his Lieutenants General, Commanders of his
Troops in the conquered Countries, as also to the Lord Robert Intendant of the
Justice Polity and Finances, in his regard to look unto the execution of these
presents, the which his Majesty will have published, and in all places affixed,
where it is require, that none may pretend ignorance hereof. Given at
Versailles, the 9. September. 1672.

Was subscribed LOUIS. Yet lower LE TELLIER.

In England the time of the Parliaments coming together approached, but it
pleased the King to prorogue them until February next coming, of which there
were diverse thoughts, but most judged it a sign of small inclination to peace,
which seemed the more credible, because of the news, that France and England
bad prolonged the Alliance for 6. months.

The 28. dito, Ours made an attempt upon Naarden, to which end many ships went
with Soldiers from der Gow to the Southern Sea, and from Amsterdam and other
Posts with boats to Weesp, for to fall upon Naarden altogether at one time
early in the morning, both by Water and by Land; the Soldiers at Land, with
whom his Highness was in person being ready at the set time, and were advanced
near unto the City, they within not yet knowing of it, but by reason of an
extraordinary calm, the Soldiers in the ships, nor the Float-boats with the
Canon could come up, so the attempt came to nothing, for his Highness not
willing to hazard his forces, which might have been fallen upon from behind out
of Amersfoord and Utrecht, drew off the Militia to their Posts, only leaving
some Posted in Grave-land and Ankeveen.

October. 7. Some French (who upon the attempt of Naarden were come from Utrecht)
fell upon ours, who were Posted in Graven-land, putting to flight, and taking
some of them prisoners; whereupon the French advanced before the Sluice of
Ankeveen, where Prince Maurice had planted some Pallisados, and cast up of a
sudden a Brest-work, upon which the French sell on with great fury, but were
repulsed with the loss of fifty men, and on our side only one Captain.

10. dito, An attempt upon Woerden was made, the Lord of Zuylestein out of the
Princes Quarter, and the Earl of Horn out of Ouwater, coming in the night
before it, but passed by to their appointed posts; Zuylestein with the Regiment
of Solms, and some other Companies Groven-bridge, betwixt Utrecht and Woerden,
to hinder succors from Utrecht, posting there with a Battery toward Utrecht:
The Earl of Horn having by him some Companies of Mariners lay Posted upon
Polanen and the Saw-mills, to shoot upon the City from thence. The 11. dito,
with the breaking of the day, the Watchman on the Tower spyed, that there were
Forces come before the City, and sounding twice the Bells, all was alarmed in
the City, and the sound of Muskets heard, answered one another: Whereupon the
Watch made a fire upon the South-east Corner of the Walk, for a sign to them of
Utrecht, that they were in stresse for succors, and the wind blowing very
hard, the Tower, Church, and 15. or 16. Houses were consumed to ashes, the fire
during till the afternoon. In the mean while, his Highness made his approaches
to the City from the side of Bodegrave, to make an attempt upon it; but they
within sent forth some to set on fire the Tile-houses, it being about the
evening which in measure succeeded, but they were soon driven in again by ours:
At which time the Duke of Luxenburg with 6. a 7000. men, fell upon the quarter
of Zuylestein, but was manfully resisted: The 12. dito, early in the morning,
the Princes men scaled the walls by the favor of Fireballs and Granados, upon
which they within issued out, but fell short, and soon returned back to the
City, leaving behind many dead, among which were 18. Officers, being followed
by our men to the very gates, which the French had out of a sudden fear left a
good while open, and without guard, so as it might by our men have easily been
taken, had they gone forward.

While this was a doing, and all things prepared to force the City, for which
the Prince himself in person advanced to the very Gate, the Duke of Luxenburgh
(who the night before was beaten off from the quarter of Zuylestein) through
the help of some Pesants was led along the Houdijck to Camerijck, and from
thence came by the Cruipin (though the waters were knee-deep and higher)
betwixt Woerden and the quarter of Zuylestein, and on a sudden fell upon them
from behind, where it was naked and the Canon turned: and however they fought
manfully, yet that quarter not able to stand out against the whole power of the
French, would have been ruined, in case the Earl of Horn, had not come to their
assistance, who fell upon the French with such courage, that many were slain,
fighting with the rapier in their hand, and the Mariners with their knives. By
which defense our men had opportunity to retire in order, only the Canon of
Zuylestein, with his Ammunition was taken; but the Earl of Horn brought of his
men, and summoned the City before he departed: And his Highness hearing the
tidings hereof, gave order to retire with the whole train, and to return to the
Ledger posts, the city by these succors being too much fortifyed, for to
attempt further upon it. In this encounter indeed the design upon the City did
not prosper, yet there was no disadvantage in the battle; there being lost on
our side not above 500. men in all, both prisoners and slain, among was the
Lord Zuylestein, and Lieutenant Colonel Schimmel-penning, on the other hand the
French lost above two thousand, among whom were some of great quality with many
high and inferior Officers, so that France it self did not greatly boast of
this encounter.

At the same time it was appointed, that the Garrison of Schoonhoven should
make a diversion, under the Marquis de Lovigni, and alarm Vreeswijck, otherwise
called de Vaert, over against Vianen, which was also done, with such success
that our men approaching longst the Dike, with the loss of 7. or 8. under
which were two Captains, entered the same, but instead to advance further and
fall upon the French, who not above an hundred meanly retrenched lay below the
Sluice, every one fell a plundering, and with their booty retired, setting some
houses on fire; whereupon the French came afterward and burnt down the Church
it self with some other houses. At the same time also it was ordered to make a
false alarm about Naarden, but had no effect.

fortifications WOERDEN

fortifications OUDE WATER



17. dito, 36. Out of Aardenburg assaulted the Fort Knock, laying on the
Vaart, upon the Steen-straet, where the French had a Custom-house, which they
took in, killing many of the French, and taking 25. prisoners, among whom was
the Custom-master and the Controller, brought with them the Kings Arms, with
good booty, setting the Forton fire, but was afterward again reared by the
French.

The 17. dito, the great Council of War was held at der Gow, where were present
his Highness, and the Generals of the Ledger, but their Consultations were kept
very close: but soon after, a great number of Inland-ships to the number of 800
or 1000. were arrested, with which the 26. dito and following days from
Rotterdam and der Gow were shipped the most part of the States Horse, and some
Regiments of Foot, to the Brabants Coasts, being followed by some of the
greatest Commanders and his Highness himself, who brought them into posture
about Breda, and marched into the Country of Luyck, with what design is kept
very secret.

26. dito, The Munsters with 1400. came along the Long Acker or New-sconse, and
fell upon ours for to raise the siege of the Belling wolder or Old-sconse, but
were so welcomed, that they were forced soon to retire to the New-sconse, 200.
and more being slain and stripped, whereupon those of the Old-sconse the 27. dito
began to parley, and departed thence with burning match, to the number of 400.
of which scarcely an 100. came into Coeverden, and our men did with all speed
labor to block up the New-sconse, as close as possibly might be; but forasmuch
as it cannot be well approached to, and they within well provided, it may in
all appearance hold out long.

The Emperial and Brandenburger Forces kept along while about Franckfurt, where
were held diverse Conferences with the Princes thereabout, touching the
marching of these people through their Territories, the Elector of Ments, being
resolved to hinder their coming over the Rhijne; and therefore took away the
Bridge before the City, whereupon the Confederates in the beginning of November
made a Ship-bridge over the Main near Fleersheim, where fell out skirmishes
about Usingen, where some of the Emperialists guarding a Pas over the Lhaan,
were set upon by some Companies of Turenne, who himself with his Army marched
from Colen up higher, and was already advanced near Coblents and the
Wester-wald: This encounter fell out to the advantage of the Confederates, they
keeping the Pas, though they were fewer in number, and the 7. and 8. dito, they
passed over the Bridge they had made; the Emperial General Montecuculi being to
depart to Weenen, and the Duke de Bourneville to come in his place to command
the Emperial Troops: And at this time the Prince of Conde was come to Mets, to
gather an Army about the Moesel, to withstand the Confederates, to which end
all was brought together in France, what possible could be, to send to Conde:
The 24. dito, the Duke of Anjou, who was born, while the King was in the Field
died. The French fearing that the Emperialists would march longst the
Bergstraat through the Palts, and pass the Rhijn at Straatsburg over the
Bridge, to come into the Elses, thereupon the Commander in Brisack shipping
700. men, came the 16. November in the night and burnt the Bridge at
Straatsburg, ruining 8. arches thereof, to the great astonishment of the
Straatsburgers: but the Emperialists not seeking that way, made a Bridge over
the Rhijn a little higher than Maints, and in part marched over the same;
Whereupon also the Marshal Turenne laid a Bridge over the Rhijne, somewhat below
Coblens by Andernach, and departed with such speed out the Bergsland and
Westerwald, that the sick and overweary were left behind above a 1000. in
number, all which by the Pesants there about were put to the Sword.

November 4. 400. French came into the Village Waverveen, where the Pesants at
first made some resistance, but soon retired; an Outlayer having in it 28. men,
and some iron pieces, defended it self courageously, but ran a ground, and so
was mastered, whereupon the French plundered the Town, much abusing the
Pesants, and before they departed, set the Town on fire. The 7. dito, they
burnt down the remaining Tile-houses about Woerden, as also the 8. dito the
Villages Newveen and Over-meer: and the 9. a Fort by Newerbrugge, and wholly
consumed by fire that fair Town of Jaarsvelt, and the 16. dito, set on fire
Abkow, nothing being exspected, but this Winter they will ruinate all the open
Country where ever they can come.

14. dito, A party of 400. out of Ouwater, surprised 14. ships with Hay by
Monfoort, with Oats, Straw and Corn, intending for Utrecht, some they brought
with them, the rest they burnt. And the day following, the Marquis De Tours
Commander of the Goverwelle-sluce with a gallant party, set upon many Boats
with provision, going for Utrecht and Woerden, taking 30. of them, and sunk 8.
before Woerden, whereupon soon after the French deserted the Cities Ysselstein
and Monfoort, blowing up the Tower of the Fort of Monfoort.

16. dito, The Munsters forsook the Yler-sconse, because, as it seemed, 2500.
Horse of the Prince of Courland, taken into service of this State, were arrived
at Lier in East-Friesland, for to come here into our Country through
Groeningen. About an hundred of our men laying before the Old-sconse, were
commanded to take possession of the Yler-sconse; whereupon a day two or three
after 3000. Munsters fell on again, driving our men out, and taking some
prisoners, as also routed 200. of the Courlanders, who were gone a grasing too
far in Westphaly, yet many of these afterward made shift to return to their
main body: the Munsters lost not many less in this rencountre, and quitting
the Yler-sconse, it was well nigh wholly ruinated.

2. dito, 50. men out of Block-zijl made a party, and hard by Hasselt
encountered 36. of Colen with a Lieutenant whom with 24. they took prisoners,
and killed the rest. The 28. dito, The French came to the Post of Ankeveen,
from which they were forced to retire with the loss of 8. men, and 4. or 5.
prisoners; yet in their retiring burnt some houses behind the Town. The 30.
dito, they came again to Abkow, thinking to burn down the remaining of it, but
our men falling out of the Fort, hindered the same, and took 30. of them
prisoners; and some other of ours in a boat, went to Breukelen, and fetched 19.
French from thence, and brought them prisoners to Abkow.

26. dito, In the afternoon 1000. men went forth out of Utrecht and Vyanen,
joining with some Horse and Foot of Cuylenburg, from thence they marched to
that fair Town, or rather City of Armeyde, which had a retrenchment at the
fortifications SWART SLUYS

fortifications HASSELT

Sluice, with Palissados, where Colonel Bamphield with his Soldiers had the
watch: In the night the French fell on, and made themselves masters thereof,
finding, as it seems, little resistance, for the Field Marshal Wurts at the
noise of the shooting, hasting from Gorcum to their assistance, found the works
yet entire, only one Palissado hewed down, after the French had plundered and
burnt down part of the houses, they returned back with 64. prisoners, of
Soldiers, Countrymen and Women: but many of their own were wounded, among whom
was the Marquis de Castelnou, a chief Commander and Head of this action, who
dyed of his wounds at Utrecht: They had 4. times as many slain, as we, among
whom were many Officers, for our Outlayers or Boats shot with their Canon sore
upon them. Many of the Regiment of Bamphield ran away, and he himself was
accused of not performing the charge of a Commander, and as it is reported, was
put in prison at Langerack; The French seeking by all means possible, through
one or other of our Posts to break into Holland, made some few days after an
attempt upon Schoonhoven, but were beaten off with great loss.

29. dito, 500. men from Block-zijl and the Kuynder, came before Swartsluce
with 30. Capers, and 3. very great Flat-boats, which were fenced and provided
with great Guns, or half Cartows, having about a 1000. men in them for to Land,
and so altogether to fall upon the Sluice: 200. of our Land-soldiers fell on so
stoutly at the appointed time, that they had even got the mastery of the Fort,
but the Ships and Boats advanced not, but kept off, shooting at a distance,
doing little or no hurt to the Enemy; our Men on Land making sign with their
Hats for them to sail forward, but in vain, though they had both wind and
stream for their advantage; whereupon a party of Horse from Hasselt and Meppel
came rushing on, falling upon the back of our men, and took in the Fort again,
about an 100. of ours, either slain, drowned, or wounded, and near 200. taken
prisoners, which was imputed to the treachery or cowardice of some, for had
they that fell on, as was meet been seconded, they had not only got
Swart-sluce, but Hasselt also, which was the intent of the enterprise; but this
was the second time brought to nothing, to our shame and loss.

The season of the year, the badnesse of the ways, and ill success of our
undertakings, did sufficiently show, that this Winter time very little good was
within the Country to be exspected: as also it could not help much to the
redressing of our decaying State, in case it could have been attainable for us
this Winter to gain Naarden, Woerden, yea, Utrecht it self; therefore it was a
most prudent and praiseworthy resolution, and an undertaking of a more
glorious and higher design of his Highness, leaving the Land in a good posture
of defense, to go forth and meet the Enemy upon the borders, not shunning to
face them in the Field; hereby peradventure being like to put a short issue to
a long War. And however it might fall out with the undertaking, the success
whereof depends on the blessing of the Lord; nevertheless, the Impartial will
in equity free him from that imputation, wherewith the enviers of his Greatness
and prosperity have bespattered him, and be constrained to confess, that the
liberty of his Country is more precious than his Life, and that his Princely
youth does not come short of any of the noblest undertakings of his Illustrious
Predecessors.

This State not being satisfied with the pretended neutrality of the Country of
Luyck, where the French had put Forces in the Cities of Maseyck, Tongeren, and
Valckenburg, and fortifying the whole Country (though against the will of the
States of Luyck) and kept under their devotion; Therefore on our side also the
said Country was set under contribution, and with force furthered, upon which
there followed enmity between Luyck and Mastricht, all commun^cation being cut
off: In the mean while, they of Luyck by Deputies in the Hague, and the
intercession of the Spanish Ambassador, desired a cessation of further
proceedings in way of enmity, and for Treaty of friendship, upon which the Earl
of Slodorp went for Luyck, and the former correspondence was re-established;
especially, when his Highness was come thither to whom they sent Presents, and
proffered all necessaries and assistance of men for the service of the State,
so that all endeavor was made to secure that Princedom to this State, and his
Highness with all his power labored to engage Duras, who commanded the French
Troops in Luyckland, following him even to Colen; but he with great days
journies leaving the Maas, retired to the Moesel, though he were recruted with
some of the Forces of the Earl De Lorge. In the mean while, our Forces seized
upon Valkenburg, and demolished it, taking 200. prisoners in the same, and
brought to Mastricht, and blockt up Tongeren with the help of the Spaniards,
who now did no longer secretly with some bands, but openly with all might and
main, Horse and Foot and Artillery oppose the French, and in their public
prayers begged for a blessing on their Arms against them: and, as is said, by
their Ambassador at Paris required the restitution of the Places taken from
them in the last War, by the French.

The Imperialists and Brandenburgers still remained with their Forces betwixt
the Main and the Rhijn, guarding their Bridges over both those Rivers, and by
some Horse had secured to themselves Keyserlauter, being a Pas to Mets,
whereabout the Prince of Conde yet lies, and on the other side of the Moesel
the Marshal de Turenne, to whom the Earl Duras has adjoined himself: What will
be issue of these Armies so near one another, time will discover; but the
Troops of Brandenburg left on the borders of Westphalia, under the General
Spaan and other Commanders, are now grown to a formal Ledger, and have begun
already to act as Enemies, being fallen into Munsterland, even to Warendorp
hard by Munster it self.

Here in our Country all possible care is taken to resist the Enemy, and in
this month of November, upon the advice of his Highness, a General Amnestia
was proclaimed for all former differences and insurrections against the
Magistracy, to be wholly forgotten and pardoned, thereby upon pain of death
forbidding, to undertake any account in word or deed against the present
Government established by his Highness, that so the Governors being the better
secured, they might unanimously watch for the well-being of the Commonwealth:
as already for the straitning of the enemy, they have caused all Provisions
which are in the open Country, where the Enemy might come by, as Hay, Turf,
Butter, Cheese, etc. to be brought into Places of security, and augmented and
fortifyed their Posts, and the better to defend them, five Regiments of Foot
which were going with his Highness to Mastricht, were sent back, and that no
fear of danger might be by the frost to be surprised by the enemy, the Cities
of Rotterdam, Gouda, Delft, the Hague, Leyden and Haerlem, are fortifyed.
Amsterdam by its Outworks and strength being made formidable, and seats for
320. Canons already placed upon the Wall, of which many are already mounted the
most being whole, three quarter, and half ^artowen; the Rivers and Streams with
Outlayers filled with Mariners are secured, in which posture we are waiting
upon God for his blessing on the righteousness of our War.

This is according to the best Demonstrations and Intelligences, a true
Relation of the wonderful revolutions from the beginning of this unhappy War,
unto December. 1672. in this our Land, which not long since being at the very top
of prosperity and wantonness, on a sudden is cast down into a poole of all
manner of distress, in all appearance without any hope of ever rising again
out of the dust of abasement, to its former luster. What following Ages will
give credit to the Histories of this time? What Nations will be able to
comprehend the possibility thereof? We see it before our eyes, and are
depending betwixt doubt and astonishment: and with great reasons we stand
amazed over so sudden a ruin, and in doubt, as not knowing from whence this
fatal stroke is come upon us, at which many have guessed; but every one
judging according as his Fantasy leads him, as may be perceived by the
Pamphlets and Books spread abroad of the causes of our disasters, whereof some
are without any ground, other are built on a false foundation, and the best
only upon probalities, and not on evident Demonstrations: But for my own part,
contenting my self with the bare Relation of what has passed, do commit the
further consideration and judgment thereof unto others.

Faithfully Translated out of Dutch into English, according to the Copy Printed
at Amsterdam by Steven Swart, Bookseller. November. 30, 1672.


