Profitable Charity: A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable Sir THOMAS
LANE, Lord Mayor of LONDON, AND THE Honorable Court of ALDERMEN, etc. AT THE
Parish Church of St. BRIDES, ON EASTER-MONDAY, 1695.

BY ROBERT Lord Bishop of CHICHESTER.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1695.

Lane, Mayor.
Martis secundo Die Aprilis, 1695. Annoque Regni Regis Willielmi Tertii,
Angliae, etc. septimo.
THIS Court does Desire the Right Reverend Father in God, Robert Lord Bishop of
Chichester, to Print his Sermon preached at the Parish Church of St. Brides on
Easter-Monday last, before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Governors of the
several Hospitals of this City.

Goodfellow.

A SERMON ON 1 COR. xiii. 3.
Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be
burned, and have not charity, it profits me nothing. THE Apostle having
declared that all the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, which God was pleased
to bestow upon his Church in the first Ages of Christianity, were of very
little or no Consideration, if they were not joined with Charity; he describes
that, which only was able to give any real Value to all the rest, by some of
the most genuine and proper Effects of it: As that it Suffers long, that it
is Kind, that it Envieth not, and the like. He then commends it from its
Duration, because that all the other Gifts and Abilities, how necessary soever
they might be for the propagation of the Christian Religion for the present,
should yet fail, cease and vanish away, as things that should be of no further
use in the other World. But this alone should never fail, but continue with us
for ever in that blessed State of Happiness and Perfection. He then mentions
the three most eminent Graces, Faith, Hope and Charity; but gives the
preference to the last, and concludes positively, The greatest of these is
Charity.

In the beginning he had affirmed, that without this, the speaking with the
tongues of Men and of Angels, was no better than a loud and insignificant
Noise: And that Prophecy, and the deepest Knowledge in the Mysteries of
Religion, and the glorious Power of working Miracles, were in themselves of no
more Account than the other. He then proceeds to assert the same concerning the
greatest Liberality to the Poor, and the laying down our very Lives, which
seems to be the utmost that can possibly be required of us, upon any Occasion.
But yet, says he, Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I
give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits me nothing.

It is here manifestly employed, that a Man may part with his whole Estate, and
his Life too, and yet that he may want Charity. This may seem a very strange
and surprising Supposition to us, that can see no further than the bare outside
and appearances of things; but God, that is intimately acquainted with all the
secret motions and imaginations of our Hearts, knows that too often the most
specious external Acts may proceed from a false or corrupt Principle. And then,
though they may be highly esteemed and magnified in the Opinion of the World,
they cannot be acceptable to Him that is pleased with nothing that does not
flow from a sincere and truly pious Disposition of the Soul.

I shall confine my Discourse to the former part of the Words; and here I shall
show:

First, What is that Charity that will make our Alms any way profitable to our
Salvation.

Secondly, That without this, whatsoever we give, it shall be of no Advantage
at all, as to our Eternal Concerns.

And Thirdly, What are the Reasons that whatever we bestow on the Necessities
of our poor Brethren upon the Principle of true Charity, shall through God's
gracious acceptance, be Profitable to us in the great Day of Accounts.

I. What is that Charity that will make our Alms any way profitable to our
Salvation: For in this Sense we must understand the Apostie, who was perfectly
crucified to the World, and therefore could esteem nothing really Profitable,
that had not some tendency toward the procurement of a better Life, which was
the only thing that he valued. And when it is said here, that without Charity
all that we can bestow is not Profitable, or Conducive to the promoting of that
great End, it must be employed that with it, it is.

Now the Charity that produces this excellent Effect, is a Charity that arises
from the Love of God; that loves him as the supreme and original Good, and
every thing else for his sake; that admires and adores his infinite Fullness,
and esteems other things as the Streams and Emanations from that inexhaustible
Fountain.

When we have not a due regard to this heavenly Standard of our Affections, our
Love will quickly degenerate into a silly Fondness, or a covetous Desire, or
some turbulent, uneasy and exorbitant Passion. But when the Love of God rules
in our Hearts, when it presides over our very Thoughts, and governs the most
secret and inward Motions of our Spirits, it will keep all steady and even; in
a due composure, without any excess or irregularity.

The Love of other Things, whether it be of Pleasure, or Profit, or Honor, or
if there be any thing else that vain Men are wont to set their Hearts upon, it
is the universal Grievance of all the World, the unhappy Occasion of all the
Miseries that Mankind has groaned under ever since the Fall of our first
Parents. All the Fraud and Treachery, all the Violence and Injustice, all the
Rapes and Murders, all the Cruelties and Barbarities that ever were committed,
are owing to nothing but the excessive Love of some earthly Enjoyment.

The Divine Love, as it is placed on a different Object, so it has very
different Effects; it rejoices the Soul, and fills the World with a settled
Calmness and Serenity; it puts an end to all Strife and Contention, all
deceitful and undjust Dealing; it considers that whatever it possesses, is all
received from the good Providence of God; and in gratitude to him, it makes
some returns to any of his poor Creatures that it sees in a worse Condition
than it self. It has a tender and compassionate Sense of all Men's Calamities;
and is ready to the utmost of its Power, to assist their Infirmities, support
their Weakness and relieve their Necessities; and where it can do no more, it
will comfort them at least with its good Wishes and hearty Prayers. It is like
the Sun in the Firmament that enlivens all things that come near it, and casts
a cheerful and pleasant Smile on those frozen Regions that lie beyond the
influence of its Heat. This excessive and universal Charity is the very Temper
of Heaven, the Image of the Divinity, the Wisdom that is from above, which is
so gloriously described, James iii. 17. It is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality, and without hypocrisy.

The Philosopher tells us, that Prudence is the common tie and ligament by
which all the Virtues are united; and the Apostle says the same of Charity,
that it is the bond of perfectness. Col. iii. 14. Without the one there can be
no moral Virtue, and no Christian Grace without the other.

Again, Owe no man any thing, but to love one another. For he that loves
another has fulfilled the Law. For this thou shall not commit adultery, thou
shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou
shall not covet, and if there be any other commandment it is briefly
comprehended in this saying, namely, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Love works no ill to his neighbor: therefore love is the fulfilling of the
Law. Romans xiii. 8, 9, 10. This is a Duty of so wide and comprehensive a Nature,
that there must be a mixture of it in all our good Actions, and in our Alms in
an especial manner. And it is this that gives them the only Value and Esteem in
the sight of God. It was this that inhanced the Price of the Widow's Mite, and
made it outweigh all the abundance of the Rich. When it is given with a good
inclination, a Cup of cold Water shall not go without its reward. For if there
be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not. And whatsoever we thus do with a sincere and
honest Heart shall turn to our eternal Advantage in the great and terrible Day.
The Proceedings then shall be determined by Acts of Kindness and Benificence;
and whatever we shall do for any of his poor distressed Members, shall be
rewarded as if it had been done to our Blessed Lord himself. For so it shall be
declared before that general Assembly of Men and Angels: Verily I say unto you,
in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye
have done it unto me.

II. But if this Charity be the only thing that makes our Alms profitable to
us, then Secondly, without this whatever we give shall be of no Advantage at
all, as to our eternal Concerns.

In all Matters of a Moral Nature the End and Motive upon which they are done,
is always the thing that is to be principally considered. It is that which
specifies the Action, and makes it Good or Evil, when it was before in it self
indifferent. And therefore, though a good End can by no means justify a bad
Action, yet a bad End does certainly spoil a good one. It will not sanctify a
Murder, if a Man should imagine he committed it for the Glory of God; but it
will turn our Charity into Malice and Revenge, if we relieve one poor Man, with
a design to enable him to ruin another. It must be Compassion to our Neighbor,
and Obedience to Almighty God, that can make our Liberality to the indigent and
necessitous any way acceptable. When a thing is discovered to be bestowed with
an ill will, or a sinister intent, it does not oblige even him that receives
it: The poor Man may be glad of the Dole, but he cannot have a good Opinion of
him that gave it.

But taking it for granted in the general, that it is the kind and charitable
Intention of the Donor, and not the bare distribution of our Goods, that makes
our Bounty really valuable in the Eyes of God and Men; I shall lay down a few
particular Instances of some of the false Ends, which Men may sometimes propose
to themselves, and which are too often the chief inducement they have to be
Liberal to the Poor.

1. And the first, and it may be the most common of these, is Vainglory.

This may incline Men to give freely enough to the Necessities of those that
are in Distress, but it is only to purchase a Reputation, and gain the good
Opinion of the People, and to be admired and applauded for Persons of noble and
generous Minds. This was that which oppened the Hands of the proud Pharisees;
they were griping and rapacious to the highest Degree, but their Ambition and
Thirst after Praise, was stronger than their Covetousness. They would therefore
give Alms, but it was that they might be seen of men. They would have their
good Deeds proclaimed and published, as it were, by the sound of a Trumpet. If
they happened to find an object of Pity in the Street, or the Marketplace, or
the Synagogue, where the People might crowd about them, to observe what they
did, they would not fail to relieve him; but if they had met the same Person in
the Wilderness, where there had been no Witness of their Actions, they would
have suffered him to perish without any remorse. This is the Charity of the
Pharisaical Hypocrite.

But he that is sincerely Charitable, rejoices at all opportunities of doing
Good, and rather prefers that which is the most Secret, and is best pleased
when he has no other Witnesses of his Bounty, but only God and his own
Conscience. It Is true, indeed, it is our Savior's Command, Mat. v. 16. Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and glorify,
not you, but your Father which is in Heaven. We must not altogether decline the
being seen when we do Good, but we must not do it only to be seen. It must be
for Example and not for Ostentation; that others may be excited and encouraged
to do the like; to benefit our Neighbors, and bring praise unto God; and not
to gratify a foolish itch of popular Applause. Otherwise, as we are expressly
told, Mat. vi. 17. We have no reward of our Father which is in Heaven. For he
that seeks Honor to himself by an external show of Charity or Piety, or
whatever it be, makes himself his own Idol. He serves not God, but an idle
vainglorious Humor, and he may possibly gain what he so earnestly desires; he
may be admired and magnified here, but he shall get nothing hereafter, but
shame and everlasting contempt.

2. A Second false End that Men may have is an opinion of Merit.

This mistake we know is mightily favored, and industriously nourished by
those of the Romish Communion. They persuade their Votaries to be liberal to
the Poor, (and so far it is very well done) especially, they encourage them to
be very bountiful to the Mendicants and other Religious Orders, (as they call
them) who pretend to have renounced the World, and make profession of a kind of
voluntary Poverty: And in this, what Design they may have, we are not ignorant;
but whatever it be, their Doctrine of Merit is a very high Presumption, and
that which will loose them the Fruit of their Labors they might otherwise have
expected. For when we have done, if we could do, all those things which are
commanded us, we must yet acknowledge and say, that we are unprofitable
servants. For though God has been pleased of his mere Goodness and special
Favor, to accept of the little Services he inables us to do him, and has
encouraged them with the promise of eternal Life; yet we cannot claim it, as
that which is in strictness due to our weak and imperfect performances. The
Reward is of Grace, and not of Debt. The Wages of Sin is Death: indeed, it is
that which it has earned and most justly deserved; but the Gift of God is
eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord: This is a Gift, a Thing freely
bestowed, not purchased with Alms or any Works of ours, but by the precious
Blood of our blessed Redeemer. And he that should exact it as in Justice due to
any thing he had done, would setup a wrong Title, and let fall that by which he
held before.

The Case is much the same, as if a Sovereign should not only Pardon one of his
rebellious Subjects, but besides that, settle an Inheritance upon him of an
inestimable Value, and only require him to be kind to his Fellow Traitors, and
dispose of some small matter of what he had given him among them for his sake,
and not the hundredth part, it may be, of what he owed him neither: Now if this
insolent wretch, upon the laying down such a pitiful trifle, should imagine
that he had made a real purchase and refuse to accept the Estate, as it was
conveyed to him by an act of mere Grace, but insist upon it as his undoubted
Right; he would by that Plea totally quit his proper Claim, and forfeit all,
and incur the highest displeasure of his Lord, for the unsufferable arrogance
of such a proud and groundless Demand. It is dangerous pleading of Merit, when
the matter in question is a pure Favor.

3. The third false End is near a kin to this, and maintained in the same
Church, and that is, a Conceit that Men by their Alms may make Satisfaction for
their Sins.

When the Guilt that has been contracted lies as a heavy Burden upon the
Conscience, and Men are frighted with the dreadful apprehensions of what must
be the necessary consequence of a lewd and vicious Life; they will think
nothing too dear to procure a Pardon. The miserable Worlding will then be
willing to part with some of his ill-gotten Goods, to escape the Punishment he
knows to be due to his Rapine and Injustice; especially when the Terrors of
Death are upon him, and he cannot retain the Treasures of Unrighteousness any
longer; he will then gladly throw any thing, or all that he has into the
imaginary Bank of the Church, for the hopes of an Indemnity. This Fancy has
erected many stately Monuments, and given large Endowments to many rich
Foundations.

And it must be confessed that when such things as these are done, with an
humble sense of our own unworthiness, they are very good, if not some of the
best expressions of our Love to the Brethren, and our Gratitude to the
Almighty. But then we must beware, that they are not polluted with a fond
Opinion, as if they were able to take away the gilt of a Sin. We must not to
think expiate a Murder, by building a Monastery; nor to make an atonement for
the wickedness of our whole Life, by founding an Hospital when we are dead: No;
We were not redeemed with corruptible things. There is no such commuting in the
Court of Heaven; there is no bribing of Justice there, nor buying off the
Sentence with Money. God will be merciful unto us, and accept our Alms, when
they are given in the way of Acknowledgement and not of Satisfaction.

4. There is one false End more, which I shall name, and that is, when Men will
give only for the support of a particular Party.

All mankind is the complete and adequate Object of our Charity; common
Humanity gives every one an Interest in our Affections, and intitles him to a
share of our Bounty. It is the Apostle's command; As we have opportunity, let
us do good unto all men. Gal. vi. 10. it is true, he immediately adds;
Especially to them who are of the household of faith. And it will be readily
granted, that we may and ought to have a more peculiar regard to these, but not
to the total exclusion of others. We should be more liberal where the
Obligations of the same Religion are superadded to those of the same humane
Nature; or where it is not in our Power to Relieve both; we may lawfully prefer
a Relation before a Stranger; a Christian before an Infidel; one of our own,
before one of the Roman Church. But no Christian of any denomination
whatsoever, no Jew, no Turk, no Heathen, no Man whatever he be, but should have
some small Portion, at least, of the good Things we possess, if his Necessities
require it.

This is the true Christian Charity that extends it self over the whole World;
but it is nothing but peevish Bigotry to be kind to none but our own
persuasion. Like the Jews that could be Bountiful enough to their own Nation,
but had no manner of Bowels or Pity for a poor Samaritan. This is a bitter
Zeal, that quickly runs out into downright Cruelty; as when some shall be
content to give profusely to the good Catholics (as they call them) only to
animate and abet them in the extirpation of Heretics. This is a Love that is
begotten of Hatred; this is to be Charitable in Spite, and to do some kind of
Good for the sake of a greater Mischief. At best, he that restrains his
kindness to a Party, has, indeed, no kindness for any but his own dear self:
for he loves others only because they Act and Think as he does.

These are the things that will make our Alms-to profit us nothing: When they
are corrupted with Vain Glory, or an Opinion of Merit or Satisfaction, or when
they are too much confined to one particular sort of Men.

III. I proceed now to the third Thing, to show, what are the Reasons that
whatever we bestow upon the Necessities of our poor Brethren, upon the
Principle of true Charity, shall through God's gracious acceptance be
Profitable to us in the great Day of Accounts. And that it shall be: 1. Because
Acts of Beneficence are necessary to preserve the Principle. 2. Because they
are the surest Evidence of our Love of God. 3. Because they are the plainest
demonstration of our Faith and Trust in Him. 4. And because they do in a
peculiar manner incline Him to be merciful unto us, when we are thus merciful
unto others. These are the Reasons for which our Alms are profitable to us, and
pleasing to God.


1. First, Because Acts of Beneficence are necessary to preserve the Principle.
The Principle by which these are to be produced, and which is the only thing
that can make them accepted, is Charity; the true inward Charity of the Heart,
as I have showed, and which I have endeavored to describe unto you, though very
imperfectly. Now where this Principle has no other opportunity of exerting it
self, a sincere desire only of doing Good may be sufficient to keep it alive.
The kind wishes of the Poor and Impotent shall be enough, when they have not
Ability to afford any further Assistance.

But those whom God has been pleased to bless with a plentiful or but a
competent measure of worldly Goods, if they do not communicate something of
what they enjoy, to those that are in want and necessity, it is an undeniable
Proof that they have no real Affection for them. For if a Man does not do that
which lies within the compass of his Power, it is a plain indication that he
has not any desire or intention to do it; or if he had, yet if he frequently
suppress it, and will not suffer it to discover it self in some Overt Acts;
this will by degrees stifle and extinguish that very Desire. A Fire may be
kindled and begin to burn, but if it be stopped up in a close place, it will soon
be smothered and go out in its own Smoke; But when it has room to dilate it
self, and is ventilated by the open Air, this increases and spreads the Flame,
and it grows stronger, and enlightens and warms all that is about it. In like
manner, Charity shut up within our own Breasts, languishes and decays and comes
to nothing; but when we give it Vent by frequent exercise, it feeds it self by
being spent, and one good Deed fits and disposes us for another. Like the
Widow's Oil, the more Vessels it fills, the more it multiplies. It is produced
and confirmed like other Habits by the same repeated Acts; but it is weakened,
and at last quite destroyed by a long intermission.

And from hence we may gather, that Almighty God is very well pleased with
those Expressions of Kindness which do maintain and coroborate that excellent
Principle of Charity; which is a faint resemblance and some kind of imitation
of his own essential infinite Goodness.

2. Secondly, Such Acts as these are the surest Evidence of our Love of God.

We may indeed, deal our Bread to the Hungry, and cast our Money among the
Poor, and all this may be nothing but an hypocritical Pretense of Kindness. We
may do it upon wrong Motives, as I have showed; and this notwithstanding, we
may have no true Love neither for God nor our Neighbor. But of this he is the
only Judge; we must have a charitable Opinion of every thing that is Good, though
it should be but in appearance.

But though we cannot tell whether he that gives has therefore any real Love of
God, yet we may know that he that refuses to give, has certainly none. For he
that will not part with any thing for God's sake, is that covetous Idolater
that loves his Money better than God, or rather, he makes a God of his Money.
Who so has this has this world's good, says St. John, and sees his brother
have need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the
love of God in him? It cannot be: for as the same Apostle observes in another
place, He that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God
whom he has not seen? It is a vain thing to talk of Raptures and Ecstasies, and
being wonderfully affected with invisible Things; and not to be at all moved or
concerned at that which lies before our Eyes.

The best way to show our Regard to our Creator, is by our Tenderness to his
poor Creatures. If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is
perfected in us. 1 John iv. 12. The Love of God and our Neighbor, are so
intimately united, and so closely joined together, that they cannot be
separated. And the most convincing and sensible Argument that we unfeignedly
love the one, is to be really kind to the other. And with this God is highly
pleased and honored: For every Ray of Mercy, every Beam of good Will, that
falls directly upon our poor Brethren, is by consequence, reflected upon Him.

3. Thirdly, These Acts are the plainest demonstration of our Faith and Trust
in God.

That in which the Men of the World are wont to put their greatest Confidence,
is, their plentiful Estates, the abundance of their Riches, and the largeness
of their Possessions. But he that is willing to resign up these or any
considerable Portion of them, and cast himself upon the Providence of Heaven,
to make what Returns it shall seem good to the wise Disposer of all things,
does thereby declare, that his Chief Dependence is upon God, and not upon his
Wealth.

And this Trust in God is that which gives us the surest Title to his Favor
and Protection; and that which brings Him the greatest Honor. For it is that
by which we do effectually show, that we do esteem him the Supreme and
Sovereign Goodness and Truth, and that we are verily persuaded, that he will
never leave us nor forsake us. This was the Touchstone by which our Blessed
Lord did sometimes try the sincerity of those that offered themselves to become
his Disciples. Go sell that thou have and give to the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven: and come and follow me. He that was afraid to accept the
Condition, went away sorrowful; and we never hear that he made a second
Application. But they that durst believe him, and forsook All, though that All
were but a little, were immediately comforted with the Promise, and are long
since entered into the Possession of everlasting Bliss and Immortality. This
was the Reward of their Faith; For he that quits a Treasure in Hand, for a
Treasure in Reversion; he that leaves what he has upon Earth for the Promise of
what he expects in Heaven, gives the best assurance that it is possible, that
he does really believe the Truth of the Promise.

But he that will not be persuaded to give something liberally to the relief of
the indigent and necessitous, by all the great and glorious Encouragements that
are proposed to induce him unto it, does not heartily believe the Scriptures.
But he is, indeed, a sort of an Infidel, that accounts Bonds, and Mortgages,
and ready Money a better Security than the Word of God.

4. Fourthly, Acts of Charity are Profitable, because they do in a peculiar
manner incline God to be merciful unto us, when we are thus merciful unto
others.

It is one of the Beatitudes pronounced by our Savior, Mat. v. 7. Blessed are
the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. This seems extremely congruous and
agreeable to the Nature of God and to the Nature of the Thing. God is always
inclineable to Mercy; and it is reasonable to think that he will extend it to
none more readily, than to those in whom there appear some little resemblances
of that his most lovely and adorable Attribute.

He is sometimes set forth, as if he did temper and accommodate himself, as it
were, to the different dispositions and various qualifications of the several
Subjects. Psalm. xviii 25, 26. With the merciful thou will show thy self
merciful. With the upright man thou will show thy self upright: With the pure
thou will show thy self pure; and with froward, thou will show thy self
froward. This is but just and equitable, that Men should be proceeded with by
the Rules and Measures they have practiced themselves. And therefore the
hard-hearted and remorsless wretch cannot complain, if he be used with rigor
and extremity, nor repine when he sees the kind and compassionate Soul treated
with the greatest Clemency and Sweetness. This is a way of dealing that is but
suited to every one's Actions. The cruel and revengeful shall be severely
punished, but the pious and charitable shall be graciously pardoned.

Therefore, To do good and to communicate forget not; for with such sacrifices
God is well pleased. Heb. xiii. 16. Our Alms are called Sacrifices here, not
that they have any proper expiatory Power to take away sins. For the Sacrifices
that were offered under the Mosaical Economy, had not that; but they were
accepted as they were Types of the Grand Propitiation to be made by Christ. And
through Him, whatever Virtue the Legal Sacrifices had, the Sacrifices of the
Gospel shall be much more Effectual. For even while the first Tabernacle was
standing, God had frequently professed that the blood of Bulls and of Goats,
and the fat of Rams; that Incense and Oblations, and whatever he had commanded
them to bring to his Altar, was nothing at all regarded by Him, in comparison
of Mercy.

Mercy is the thing which shall principally regulate the Proceedings at the
great day of Judgment, as I have already mentioned. When the Dead shall be
raised, and all the innumerable Myriads that ever were born, shall stand before
the dreadful Tribunal; then shall those that have been relieved by the Merciful
Man appear as so many Intercessours for him: As if they should say, Lord, This
is the Man that refreshed our Bowels when we were pinched with Hunger, that
came in seasonably to support us when we were ready to perish, that delivered
us from the hand of our cruel Oppressor, that had pity on our Children, and
gave them good Education when they were left poor distressed fatherless Infants.

On the other side those that have been forsaken, or undone by the Covetous
Miser, shall look upon him as if they would thus implead him at that impartial
Bar: Lord, this is He that suffered us to languish, and pine away for want,
when a very little of that he never made any use of would have rejoiced our
Hearts; this is He that let us be exposed to Cold and Nakedness, when the Moth
consumed his unnecessary changes of Apparel: nay, this is He that has griped
and oppressed us, that has made himself drunk with our Tears, that has wearied
us out at Law, and born down our righteous Cause by Wealth and Power, and
robbed us of the little that we had, by Violence and Injustice. Thus might they
justly plead against him, if his own Conscience did not prevent all other
Accusers, and pass the first Sentence upon him, which shall be quickly followed
by that of the great Judge, who shall render to every Man according to his
Works. Then shall the Good and Merciful be taken up into the Regions of
everlasting Joy; but they shall have Judgment without Mercy, that have showed
no Mercy.

Thus have I showed what is that Charity that will make our Alms some way
Profitable to our Salvation, but that without it they are not so in themselves:
and now lastly, I have laid down some Reasons that make them acceptable and
advantageous, when they proceed from such a Principle of true Charity; It is
because they nourish and preserve that Principle; they are a Proof of our Love
to God, and our Trust and Dependence upon him, and they do particularly incline
him to be merciful to Us.

The Design of all that has been said, is to excite you to Give, and to do it
so, that it may tend to the real Benefit of him that Gives, as well as of him
that Receives; or in the Words of the Apostle, I seek fruit that may redound to
your account.

To this purpose I shall lay before you what Expenses have been lately made in
this way, and what necessity there still is of further Expense; what has been
done already, and what yet remains to be done, that is fit Matter for the
Charitable Benevolence of this great and honorable City: And this I cannot do
better, than by Reading to you, A true REPORT of the great Number of Poor
Children, and other Poor People, Maintained in the several Hospitals, under the
Pious Care of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London,
the Year last past.
Christ's-HOSPITAL.
CHildren put forth Apprentices, and discharged out of Christ's Hospital, the
Year last past 104; eight whereof being instructed in the Mathematics and
Navigation, are already placed out. And two others well qualified to be placed
out with the first convenience, to Commanders of Ships, out of the Mathematical
School, Founded by His late Majesty King Charles the Second, of Blessed Memory
-- -- 104

Children Buried the Year last past -- -- 25

Children now remaining under the Care and Charge of the said Hospital, which
are kept in the House and at Nurse elsewhere -- ^18

The Names of all which, are Registered in the Books kept in the said Hospital,
and are to be seen, as also when and whence they were admitted.

Which being so many in Number, and the Charge of keeping them very great, (and
being still depressed by the very great Loss, which was sustained by the late
dreadful Fire) it is not doubted, but many worthy and good Christians will
liberally assist toward so useful and beneficial a Charity: The stated and
certain Revenue of the said Hospital, amounting to very little more, than a
Moiety of their necessary and unavoidable Charge.

St. Bartholomew's HOSPITAL.
THere have been Cured and Discharged from the Hospital of St. Bartholomew the
Year last past, of Wounded, Sick and Maimed Soldiers and Seamen, and other
Diseased Persons, from several Parts of the Dominions of the King's Most
Excellent Majesty, and from Foreign Parts; many of which have been relieved
with Moneys and other Necessaries at their departure, though (as it has pleased
God) the greatest part of the Revenue of the said Hospital was consumed by the
late dreadful Fire -- 1961

Buried this Year, after much Charges on them -- 199

Persons remaining under Cure in the said Hospital -- 312

St. Thomas's HOSPITAL.
THere have been Cured and Discharged from St. Thomas's-Hospital in Southwark,
this last Year, of Wounded, Sick and Maimed Soldiers and Seamen, and other
Diseased Persons, from several Parts of His Majesty's Dominions, and from
Foreign Parts; many of which have been relieved with Money and other
Necessaries at their departure, though much of the Revenue of the said Hospital
has been destroyed by several dreadful Fires in London and Southwark: And most
of the Buildings of this Hospital being very old, low, damp, and incommodious
for the reception of Sick and Wounded Persons: The Governors have begun to
rebuild some part thereof, and have already laid out of their own Free Gift,
some Thousands of Pounds, but cannot possibly finish what is further intended,
and absolutely necessary, without the Assistance of Good and Charitable
Persons; the yearly Revenue of this Hospital, being much less than will defray
the constant Charge of those Persons that are sent thither for Cure -- -- 1969

Buried this Year after much Charge in the time of their Sickness -- 179

Remaining under Cure at the Charge of the said Hospital -- 323

Bridewel HOSPITAL.
REceived this last Year into the Hospital of Bridewel, vagrants and other
indigent and miserable People, many whereof had both Clothing, and such other
Relief as their Necessities required, being in great Distress, and sent by
Passes into their Native Countries -- 969

Maintained in the said Hospital, and brought up in diverse Arts and Trades at
the only Charge of the said Hospital, Apprentices; notwithstanding it pleased
God, the Hospital and all the Houses within the Precinct thereof, (which was
the greater part of its Revenue) were wholly consumed by the late dreadful
Fire; besides the great Loss sustained in the remains of its Revenue by two
terrible Fires, the one in June 1673. and the other in November 1692, which
happened in Wapping -- 103

Bethlehem HOSPITAL.
THE Hospital of Bethlehem is of great Necessity for the keeping and curing
distracted Persons, whose Misery, of all others, is the more deplorable,
because they do not apprehend the same, it disabling the Mind, as well as the
Body.

Brought into the said Hospital the last Year, distracted Men and Women -- --
-- -- 61

Cured of their Lunacy and discharged thence the said Year -- 52

Distracted Persons buried the last Year -- -- 16

Now remaining there under Cure, and provided for with Physic, Diet and other
Relief, at the Charge of the said Hospital -- 112

The Charge whereof is great, and the Revenue of the said Hospital so small, as
not to amount to one half part of the Yearly Expenses thereof; and the Building
of the Old Hospital of Bethlehem being Ruinous and not Capacious to receive and
contain the great Number of distracted Persons; for the admission of whom,
daily Applications are made to the Governors thereof.

Upon a Christian and charitable Consideration of the Premises, the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London, did lately grant
sufficient Ground to Erect a more commodious House for the keeping and curing
the said Lunaticks and distracted Persons. In the Building and Finishing
whereof, the Governors of the said Hospital have laid out and disbursed about
Seventeen Thousand Pounds, whereby not only the whole Stock of the said
Hospital is expended, but the Governors thereof have been necessitated to take
up great Sums of Money for the Finishing the same; and therefore the said
Hospital is a very fit Object of all good Men's Charity, to do as God shall
enable them, toward the Relief of the said poor Lunaticks, and payment of their
Debts; there having been, and daily are, by the Blessing of God, and the Charge
of the said Hospital, and the Care of those that are entrusted therewith,
diverse reduced to their former Senses.

You see here how many indigent and calamitous Persons of several sorts, have
been plentifully Relieved by the standing Endowments, and occasional Bounty of
their pious Benefactors.

How many poor helpless Orphans have been carefully provided for, liberally
Educated, and put out to honest Employments, to the great Credit and Advantage
of the Public!

How many Thousands of Sick and Wounded have been perfectly Cured, chiefly of
those that have bravely ventured their Lives for the Service of their King and
Country, and to defend Us from the Fury of an enraged and Potent Enemy!

How many Vagrants, whom pure Necessity, it may be, had driven from their
Homes, have been employed and furnished with Conveniences, and returned to
their respective Habitations, in a far more comfortable Condition than they
left them!

How many Lunatic and Distracted Creatures, the most pityable Objects of all,
have been recovered, and are now able to Praise and Worship God again, with
those Senses and Understandings which he at first gave them; and to which, by
his Blessing upon your Endeavors, they have been happily restored!

All these great, these truly generous and Christian Things have been done. And
what remains more to be done, but only that you would be pleased to take a due
Care, as I know you will, that they may be transmitted down to Posterity
without interruption.

The yearly Revenue of the several Foundations, though very considerable, is yet
not any way answerable to the necessary Charge In some it scarce amounts to the
Half. The rest has beenhitherto, from time to time, constantly supplied by the
voluntary Bounty of Eminent and Charitable Citizens. And it must be
acknowledged to the Honor of this renowned Body, that very great accessions
have been made in this way; but great as they have been, the Necessities of the
Poor have been greater. Their Rents have been exceedingly lessened by the
dreadful Fire; and the Expense of Building has lain so very Heavy, that nothing
but the Generosity would have undertaken it; and nothing but the Wealth of
sucha City as this could have born it so long. But by thesemeans the Hospitals
are become so far indebted, (notwthstanding the Prudent Management of those
that have the Care of them) that one of them in particular, that was wont to
maintain about a Thousand Orphans, or more, will not, as I am certainly
informed, be able totake in one poor Fatherless Child this ensuing Year, unless
it receive some very unexpected and liberal Assistance. What pity it is, that
those Streams that have flowed so plentifully for so many Ages, should be in
danger of being dried up, or at least, of receiving a stop in ours.

But I cannot entertain any such Fear, while you still retain the same pious
Inclinations of doing Good, which you have always expressed. I need not use any
Arguments to urge you to it; I need not put you in mind of your worthy
Ancestors; I shall but desire you to imitate your selves; do but as you have
been wont to do, and all other persuasions will be wholly superfluous.

Some there be, that may be like enough to talk of the Charges of the War, the
Decay of Trade, and their Losses at Sea, and make this the Pretense for their
not Giving. But I know that your Charity will disdain to make use of such
frivolous Excuses. The more you have Lost, the more you should Give of what
remains, that Providence may be engaged to preserve the Rest. I belive it is
the forwardness that many of the Members of it have shown to succor the
distressed, that God has seemed to make this City a part of his peculiar Care;
that the Fire has but built you more convenient and stately Houses; that the
War has served but to whet your Industry and declare your Resolution; and that
notwithstanding the many sad and amazing Accidents that have befallen this
Place within our own Memories, it still continues, God be praised, in a
prosperous and flourishing Condition; if we were but wise and grateful enough
to know it.

But if it should not make us Rich, Charity will certainly secure us from Want.
For Truth it self has promised that, He that gives to the poor shall not lack.
And this is as much as any Man need to desire. And it is a far better assurance
than the most plentiful Fortune is able to give us; for that we know may be
presently snatched away and leave us absolute Beggars within less than an hour.

But why should I insist upon a Consideration that has respect only to this
World, when what we bestow on the Poor, if it come from a hearty Charity, shall
be amply rewarded in that which is to come. According to that of our Blessed
Lord. Luke vix. 12, 13, 14. When thou make a dinner or a supper, call not thy
friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors; do not
spend all thy Kindness upon these, lest they also bid thee thee again, and a
recompense be made thee. But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the
maimed, the lame, the blind; the proper Inhabitants of the Hospital: Be kind to
them, and thou shall be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee, for thou
shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just. When we place our
Kindnesses where we may reasonably expect to have returns made us, God looks
upon these but as mutual Civilities betwixt Man and Man, and it is enough if
they be repaid in kind. But when we do good without any hopes or prospect of
secular Advantage; when we give to the Poor who we know are never able to
requite us, this being done for his sake, he is pleased to undertake the
Payment; he makes himself the Debtor, and will be sure to see the Obligation
satisfied to the utmost; and that not as the thing it self does deserve, but as
becomes the Munificence of the Supreme Lord. He will give us Eternal for our
Temporal Things, and whatever we have thus done upon Earth, he will Reward it
in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Of which, God of his infinite Mercy make us all partakers, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.
Amen.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 20. for Excessive read Extensive. Page 12. lin. 13. for expiate
read to expiate.

FINIS.

