Guido Faux Revivd: OR, THE MONKS LATE Hellish Contrivances Exposed. Being a
full Account of the Horrid Bloody Designs of the Papists, at their Mass-House
Convent Chapel IN St. JOHNES'S.
TO Enumerate the Secret Plots, Public Cruelties, and Private Conspiracies of
our Indefatigable Enemies, the Papists, would be a labor as unnecessary, as
their Contrivances are endless: Those, as they are the Design of Ages, would be
the Subject of Volumns, being not able to be comprehended in so narrow a
Circumference, as the following Narration. As for Instance.

The Violence of the Rabble at St. Jones's exceeding even the Insolence of the
Tumults so much exclaimed at by the Royal Martyr, and of as fatal Consequence,
as it is the dreadful Object of our Eyes, so it is the Subject of our present
Discourse, which is a True and Genuine Account of all the Secret Plots,
Machines, and Bloody Engines, which are pretended to be discovered by the
Rabble in the Popish Chapel, their unreasonable Grounds and Jealousies, and
the unavoidable Fate, which generally attend such Rash and Precipitous
Undertakings.

This Indigested Lump, the Rabble, animated by some Zealous Whisperers, made
their first Approaches on Sunday Morning, the Eleventh Instant at St. Jones's,
resolving to pull down the Chapel of the Benedictines there, newly Erected in
the Lord Bertlett's House: This Celebrated Structure, which at present
consisted but of two Persons and Servants, was designed for a Convent, which
ought rather to be a Wall of Defense against their Assaults, than an Inlet to
the Multitude. In all Ages the Temples of the Gods were in great Veneration,
and Cyrus's attempt, to rob the Temple of Jupeter Ammon, was but the loss of
the Sacrilegious Undertakers, who lay buried in the Ruins; but these Faries,
or rather Furies of the Night, yet more audaucious, assault the Gates, and the
Knot, which like Alexander, they could not with ease untie, with Violence cut,
having forced their Passage through the Tyles and Glass and Windows; after
which they discovered several terrible Engines, which were enough to scare Men
of the greatest Resolution and Conduct, out of their Seven Senses. For Example.

First, Three large Caldrons, or Boylers, of such prodigious Depth and
Circumference, that they could easily boil a Thousand Heretics in it at one
time, and not one of them hear the other cry. Secondly, Grid-Irons, as large as
the Bowlling-Green at Mary-Bone, so that Four several Companies, one at every
Corner, besides Two in the Middle, might fry all Day as patienrly, as St.
Lawrence, without disturbing one another. Thirdly, Several Iron Spits of a vast
Extent, some as long, as the May Pole in the Strand, others at the Mainmast of
the Royal Sovereign, where Dissenters might roast in Couples, as quietly as
Cased Rabbets. Fourth. A Vault, which reached from the said Popish Chapel, as
far as Chick-lane, in which were discovered (by an Eye of Providence to the
blind Rabble) Guido Faux with his Dark Lanthorn, Martialling his dreaeful
Artillery of Gunpowder Matches, and Fireballs, which was far more formidable
than a Gunpowder Plot, to blow up the Lord and Commons of the Rabble, that sat
Triumphant on the Roof of the House. Fifth. As many Cart Loads of Links, as
would serve to convey the Kings Carriages into the West: These were destined
(by way of Exquisite Torture) for Heretics, to extort Confession placeing them
lighted under their Feet, Arms, Hands and Thighs, like the Saints formerly at
Amboyna, though others believe they were rather Sausages to tie about the
Dissenters while they were Roasting upon the Spits. Sixth. Several Hundreds of
Chopping Knives, and other Engines to reduce the Revertion into Minced meat, to
make a Ragoo.
These with many others, as Iron Whips, Rods of Steel, and Cats with Nine
Tails (no less terrible than those of a Spanish Armado) were Discovered in
this Chapel by the short sighted Rabble, who see all things double, and yet
can discern no further then they can throw a Millstone.

No matter; a Plot's Discovered, and the Conspirators must suffer, right or
wrong: The next day being Monday, the Second Assault was made which proved more
fatal; the Trained Bands and Guards being scarce able to suppress their Fury,
till some of them fell a just Sacrifice to the defending Party; some
Desperadoes were killed in the Attempt, and many of the Guards wounded by the
Rabble; nor did their Fury end here, but Order was given for the removing of
the Goods which were conveyed away by the Guards to keep off the encroaching
Assailants, yet this was not done so closely, but that the Rabble seized upon
some Carts, out of which taking all the Goods, they made a Bone-fire in
Holborn, without distinction; having no more mercy for an Holy Relic, than
Sir William Waller for a Crucifix.

Thus far the Violence and Groundless Jealousies of the Rabble transported them
beyond all degrees of Report or Reason: It is now our Province to unriddle this
Sphinx and show in short upon what slender suggestions they laid the Foundation
of all these Tumults.

As for the Chaldrons, there was indeed one small Boyler which was no more than
of a common size, a such as is made use of for the ordinary Service of a
Family. Another small one there was for the same Use, in a New House adjoining,
and a Thi^d, which was somewhat larger which belonged to the Lord Bertlet's
Family, when he kept a Bagnio in his House, which being old and of no use, was
laid in a low Room, into which they threw all their old Lead, Iron; and Lumber
in the repairing of the House.

One Grid-Iron indeed there was; but of a very small size, and very unfit for
the use the Rabble pretended. The ground of this Suspicion, (and what might
give some Cause to the deluded Multitude) was, that there were found in the
Cellar, Two Iron VVindow Frames, which formerly belonged to my Lord Bertlett,
and of no other Use, but as Old Iron.

There were also, a Couple of Spits; but of no other Size, or Quality; but such
as are commonly used in a Family.

As for Links, or Flambeaus, there were never yet, Two in the House at one time.

For the Vaults, and Barrels of Gun Powder; they are like the Blank
Commissions, or the Doctors Black-Bills, or Army of Spanish Pilgrims hid under
Ground.

By this short Narrative, you may discern, to what desperate Attempts, and on
what Groundless Occasions, the Fury of an incensed Rabble will transport them.
All Ages afford us sad Instances, even before the bold Massaliano to our own
Days; who, from so small a Number at first, often bring a whole Land to
Desolation, if not timely prevented? which cannot better be done, than by
observing the Wise Rules, and Prudent Conduct of our Chief Magistrate, and
Court of Aldermen; who, upon the like Disturbances, have made an Act of Common
Council, strictly injoyning all Masters of Families upon Penalty to keep in
their Servants upon such an Occasion, for by preventing the Cause, the effects
may cease.

FINIS.
LICENSED, November the 16th, 1688.

London, Printed for W. Beale, 1688.


