SEASONABLE ADVICE TO THE Citizens, Burgesses, and Freeholders OF ENGLAND,
Concerning PARLIAMENTS, AND THE Present Elections.

By a Divine of the Church of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1685.

SEASONABLE ADVICE TO THE Citizens, Burgesses and Freeholders OF ENGLAND.
Dear Contrymen,
WHEN it seemed good to the Divine Providence to remove our Late King (of happy
Memory) from the Cares of an Earthly Crown, to the Joys and Rest of his
Heavenly Kingdom, he left the World entirely beloved, and generally lamented by
all his Loyal Subjects; and the deep Sense of having so wise, so just, so good
a Prince almost unexpectedly snatched away from us, was enough to drown the
whole Nation in perpetual Sadness and Tears. But to support us under that
inestimable Loss, our Most Gracious Sovereign, that now is, has (by the
Assistance of the same Almighty Goodness) been peaceably established on the
Throne of his Ancestors, in spite of all the desperate Attempts, and restless
Endeavors of a few turbulent Spirits, to deprive him of his most undoubted
Right of Inheritance. A Prince of mature Age, and great Experience; and so
admirably qualified for Government, that, if it had not been his by
unquestionable Succession, his own personal Worth might have been thought
enough to have preferred him to a Crown: And to quiet the Minds of his People,
and silence all the imaginable jealousies any of them might have been possibly
seduced into, by the false and malicious Suggestions of Factious Men; the First
thing he did after his coming to the Crown, was to confirm the hearty
Professions he had often made before, To preserve this Government both in
Church and State, as it is now by Law established. For this he has already
received public Thanks in several of the Addresses that have been presented
unto him; and though it be not expressly set down in some, yet we may reasonably
suppose it is employed in all; otherwise, whatever Protestations they may make,
it will not be believed that they can have any true Zeal for God, or Respect
for their King, that think so gracious a Promise, so frequently repeated, does
not really deserve their most grateful and solemn Acknowledgments. But this,
and the rest of His Majesty's Expressions of a very great Care and Tenderness
for His People, had that good Influence, that the Suspicions of the most
timorous did immediately vanish: His Advancement to the Throne gave present
Ease and Satisfaction, and was attended with the most universal Acclamations of
Joy from every part of the Nation. And certainly now it must be confessed to be
the Duty and Interest too, of every Englishman indeed, to do whatever lies in
his power, for the Continuance of our present Happiness. And because the
Welfare of the public may very much depend on the Issue of this first
Parliament: It will highly concern all those whom the Law has entrusted with
the privilege of Electing, to make Choice of persons of approved Prudence and
Integrity, that may be able to assert the known Liberties of the People,
without intrenching upon the Dignity of the Crown. For we must needs be
involved in endless Miseries and Confusion, unless the Prerogative of the King
be as carefully preserved as the Property of the Subject. These two must
mutually support the one the other, or else they will be both in danger of a
Fall. But we may chance to meet this Argument again before we have done.

In the mean time it is like enough to be objected, That to undertake to give
Advice in these Cases, is a very improper Work for a professed Divine. I know
indeed, that of late Years, if we did but preach Obedience to Magistrates, or
reflect, though but gently, upon the most horrid and unnatural Sin of
Rebellion, we were presently condemned for going beyond the Bounds of our
Calling, and being too forward to intermeddle with Matters of State. And at
Elections of Members to serve in Parliament, we could not appear in some
places, without undergoing some public Affront. Attempts were made to raise a
general prejudice against us, and all those that had any Respect and Kindness
for us. It was sometimes esteemed Exception enough against Gentlemen of very
great Worth, if they stood but fair in the Opinion of the Clergy. But it was
then easily perceived, and since plainly discovered, which way the Stream was
running, and by what sort of Men, and upon what Occasion all that Noise and
Clamor was raised. The Clergy were generally firm to the established
Government, and professed Enemies to the designs that were then setting on
Foot. And it was but necessary for those that were endeavoring to subvert the
Government, both in Church, and State, under pretense of reforming abuses, to
make the multitude jealous of them, and blacken them as much as possibly they
could in the eyes of the People: And they wanted neither cunning, nor malice to
do it.

But to return some answer to what has been objected: If the things I have
mentioned may be called Intermeddling with matters of State, they are no more
than what may be very well justified. When we were made Ministers, we did not
cease to be men; and the Church being, as it were incorporated with the State,
He that has an Interest in the one, must not be wholly unconcerned for the
other. The Laws allow us a Vote in Elections; and without immodesty we think
our selves as capable of Judging, who may be fitly qualified to be made our
Representatives, as other Ordinary Freeholders are: And it would be very
unjust in those, that talk so loud of Liberty and Property, to blame us for
desireing the concurrence of our Friends, much more to Abridge us of the
Freedom of our Voices in the choice of a Knight of the Shire: Besides it is the
indispensable Duty of every Minister of the Gospel 1 Pet. 2. 17.
to exhort the People to Fear God, and Honor the King; to Preach Subjection to
the Higher Powers, not only for wrath, but Conscience sake. And this they are
Romans 13. 1. 5. Tit. 3. 1.
obliged to, by an express Divine Command, by the Canons of the Church, by the
common Laws of Humanity, and the respect they ought to bear to true Piety and
Holiness of Life: That they may contribute what they can to the preventing the
Miseries of Civil, as well as Foreign Wars; and the great increase of
profaneness and irreligion, which unavoidably follows all popular Tumults, and
Insurrections; when the Commands of Almighty God, concerning Obedience
especially, are quite forgotten, or distinguished into nothing; the Laws of the
Land insolently trampled under Foot; and all reverence to Authority wholly laid
aside: And because it is well known what a Powerful influence a Parliament may
have upon the Settlement, or ruin of the Nation, no less in our Religious, than
Civil concerns; this consideration alone may be sufficient to excuse a
Clergyman, if he shall undertake to Advise the Choice of such Worthy
Gentlemen, as to him seem the most likely to promote the real Interest of
Church and State, in this very Critical juncture of Affairs.

But this had never prevailed with me to adventure these Papers into public
view, if there had not been a strange Rumor spread over the Nation, that we of
the Clergy were Enemies, and despisers of all Parliaments. This Groundless
calumny was so industriously propagated through the whole Kingdom, not without
a mixture of many other False and uncharitable reflections, that many of the
People firmly believed it; and it was so deeply rooted in the minds of some,
that wherever we appeared, they were easily persuaded to take the contrary side
at all Elections in diverse places. It is not now hard to conceive for what
purposes this malicious report was invented; what effect it had we all know.
But to undeceive some well meaning men, that may still be mislead, by such
unjust and Scandalous Aspersions; I shall acquaint you with the true occasion
of this report; and then show the Honorable opinion we have of Parliaments.

The true Occasion then of this report, That we were Enemies of Parliaments,
was really and plainly no other than this: We could not express any great good
likeing for some things, which sometimes happened to be carried by a Majority
of Votes; and because we could not always admire all their Proceedings, those
who served a Design by rendering us Odious, endeavored to make the World
believe, that we hated the very Constitution; which is a most false and
malicious Scandal. I must confess, I never thought that any Man was obliged to
yield a blind and implicit Assent to all the Determinations of any Assembly
upon Earth: This were a kind of Civil Popery, and more I believe than they
themselves will require of us. And then what fault have we committed, if we
honestly profess our Dissent; and have not learned the Art of Flattery, to
magnify, and applaud, what we do not approve? Where every Man is concerned,
every Man may be allowed to speak his own Judgment, and to differ from whom he
pleases; provided he do it with Modesty, and due respect: And to be menaced,
and frighted out of this Innocent Freedom, is of all Slaveries the most
Intolerable. We find even some Parliaments censured in our Chronicles, and very
odd Epithets sixed upon them; there is one that is called the Wood Parliament;
it was the Language of those times, and the Veneration I have for these great
Assemblies, will not permit me to put it into more Modern English. But you may
see by this, that the truth will out at last; and I cannot Prophecy what
Character some of later date may expect in the Histories of after Ages, when
the Writer shall be secured from a Sergeant at Arms, and out of danger of being
brought upon his Knees at the Bar of the House. The time will certainly come,
when all Men will Speak, and Write their Minds freely of all Debates, and
resolves whatever. And we cannot be therefore justly condemned, if we have been
so open hearted, as to express some kind of dislike of some Proceedings, which
as far as we were able to judge, might be made the Occasions of very great and
public Inconveniences. Nor ought we for this to be esteemed Despisers of
Parliaments, any more than we can be said to be Enemies of Monarchy, because we
will not undertake to justify every thing that has been done by every Crowned
Head in the World. But to deal frankly and plainly with you, I will give you
some Passages, which we could not be so well pleased with, in some of our late
Parliaments: Some of them relate more immediately to the Commoners of England,
and some of them to the King himself.

That which especially regards the Commoners, is the punishing many of them,
severely enough, without any Offense against any known Law of the Realm There
was a great Noise made about Abhorrers, and Betrayers of the Liberties of the
Subject: Very strange and frightful words! but what unpardonable Crimes may
lurk under them, will be very difficult for an ordinary man to Conjecture. I
have searched the Statute Book, and there I cannot yet discover the very names,
much less any Punishment appointed for the Fault. Now if a Man should be
punished, when he has not been Guilty of the Violation of any Law; his
Punishment cannot be esteemed Legal and Just, but merely Arbitrary, and must be
resolved into nothing else, but the Will, and Pleasure of him that inflicts it.
And yet, very many (and it might have been any Man's Case) were forced to leave
all their private concerns, and brought up to London, from the remotest Parts
of the Land, at any Season of the Year; sometimes under great Infirmities of
Body, to the certain Detriment of their Estates, and hazard of their Lives;
and then put under a very Chargeable Confinement, during Pleasure, and not
dismissed at length without a Censure, and the Payment of very Liberal Fees.
And all this not for any Offense against any Law, that any one could tell of;
but only for Words, casually let fall, that would not bear an Action in any
Court in England. What a Miserable Condition is this? Who could tell when he
was safe, unless he hung a Padlock on his Lips? What Patrons of Liberty are
these? And what Englishman is there, that had not much rather be governed by
an Act, deliberately passed by the Lords, as well as Commons, authentically
confirmed by the Royal Assent, and sufficiently promulged to the notice of all
Men, than to lic at the Mercy of every hasty Vote of the lower House? This is
what was most of all complained of in some late transactions, wherein all
Freeborn Subjects are more directly concerned.

That which more particularly respected the King, was a certain kind of
resolved stiffness, in turning of many of his Gracious Messages; not always
expressing so much Loyal reverence, as was due to Majesty, under whose
Protection they enjoyed their Lives and Fortunes, and that Freedom of Speech,
which they sometimes made use of to the very utmost. But to say no more of
that; among other things of a high Nature, His Majesty was precluded, as far as
a Vote could go, from advanceing Money upon any part of his Revenue; and all
Men were frighted, as much as was possible, from considering the emergent
Necessities of the Kingdom, and lending any thing in the greatest Exigencies of
State. This seems extremely harsh, and puts the King in harder Circumstances,
than the meanest of his Subjects. It contradicts the most Fundamental and
Divine Principle of all Justice, and Equity: Do unto all Men, as ye would they
should do unto you. For some of them might have remembered, that without a Power
to take up Money on what Estates they had, they could not have treated the
several Corporations so liberally as they did; and then they had not been put
in a Capacity of giving their concurrence to that, or any other Vote. Without
borrowing, the Reckoning could not always have been discharged; and I Am sure,
if all the Claret, and other good Liquor, that was spent at Elections, had
never been paid for, it had been one of the greatest Grievances the Nation ever
groaned under since the Conquest. But this is not the worst Mischief that might
have followed: Suppose the People had been generally overawed by this Vote, and
an Invincible Armado had appeared on our Coasts, with a potent Army ready to be
put a Shore: What a Case had this poor Nation been in? No Money, no Men, no
Ammunition sufficient to oppose the Invader. We had been made an easy Prey to
a Foreign Enemy: We must have tamely yielded our Throats to the Sword of the
Conqueror: Every Penny of Money we had, every Foot of Land we possessed, had
been at his Disposal; the whole Kingdom might have been suddenly surpised and
enslaved: And who had been the Betrayers of the Liberties of the Subject then?
I believe the greatest and soberest part of the Nation was something startled
at such Proceedings as these, that by Degrees might have made us perfect
Vassals to our Fellow Subjects, that would have quite disarmed the King, and
Kingdom, and exposed our Lives, and all that we had, to any growing Power, that
had but the Confidence and Ambition to invade us. But to imagine that we are
therefore Enemies to Parliaments, is a very great mistake. And to convince you
of this, I shall show you the Excellent use, and public Advantages of
Parliaments; What it is that too frequently hinders the good Effects they might
otherwise have; and What are the pernicious Consequences of that; And then
desire you to accept the most Hearty, and Seasonable Advice, I am able to give,
concerning your present Elections.

As to the Excellent Use, and many public Advantages of Parliaments: I must
here profess, (and I think I speak the Sense of a great many more) that I
really esteem it my greatest Temporal Happiness, that I was born in a Land,
where the Government is so admirably Tempered, that the King has all the Power
that is requisite to enable him to execute Justice, and protect his People, and
which may be enough, by the Blessing of God, to make him Great, and Victorious:
And his Subjects enjoy so much Liberty under him, as is abundantly sufficient
to make their lives pleasant, and easy: And as the power of our Kings has not
been known to degenerate into Tyranny; so I wish and hope, that the Liberty of
the People will never be turned into a froward petulancy, and contempt of the
Royal Authority. The Parliamentary way of consulting for the public good, has
been a very Ancient usage in all these parts of Europe, and some Footsteps of
it are still remaining in most of our Neighboring Nations: But the Freedom and
Dignity of those Noble Assemblies has been no where so entirely preserved, as
it is in this. And the Benefits we might all receive from it, if not prevented
by our own Folly, are exceeding Great; I shall name a few that seem very
apparent.

And one is, That it tends directly to the increase of that Love, and care
which ought to be betwixt a King and his People; for it gives them both the
fairest opportunity of knowing, and understanding one another; which is always
the Original Ground, and first occasion of all good will, and kind inclination.
And this being once produced, by the intercourse of Parliaments, between the
Sovereign, and his Subjects, will be easily preserved in the Breast of the
King, and may quickly be propagated, by the respective Members, through every
Town, and County in the whole Kingdom. The ordinary Method of proceeding, in
those Honorable Assemblies, seems purposely contrived for the most happy
procurement of this good effect: For when all the Nobility, and many of the
principal Gentry meet together, from every quarter, they must needs be
intimately acquainted with the State and concerns of all and every part of the
Nation. And after they have considered, and agreed upon Bills for the Public
good and Interest; these cannot pass into Acts, till they be strengthened by
the Royal aslent; which being granted, is the most generous expression of the
King's Grace and Favor to his People, when he gives them Laws to be Governed
by, which were proposed, and advised for their particular advantage, by their
own Representatives. On the other side when the necessities of the Government
have been intimated to the Parliament, and they freely consent to the raising
such Sums, as the occasion requires; what might indeed be esteemed but a Duty,
may be received as a kindness. And here is the best Foundation imaginable for a
mutual indearment: When the King lays the highest Obligations upon his People,
by consenting to such Laws, as make for their ease and prosperity; and the
People return their thanks for these Royal Favors, by begging his acceptance
of such supplies, as may be sufficient to maintain the Dignity, and Power of
the King. The advantages of such a reciprocal Love and affection are so very
great, and manifest, that it will not be necessary to mention more; but there
are some which Spring from the same root, which may be a further evidence of
the excellency and wisdom of our established Constitution.

It gives the greatest security that can be had that the Public Treasure shall
not be misspent: Not only because the misapplication of what had been raised, is
the only pretense that can be made use of for any backwardness to a further
supply; but because it is inconsistent with the generosity of a great Prince,
to lavish away the best expressions of his Peoples Gratitude, for the
Liberties, and Protection they enjoy under him.

It affords the best encouragement to every man's private Industry, to make
what improvement he can of his Estate; when he is assured that whatever he
gains is his own Property, and that not one Farthing shall be demanded of him,
without the Consent of prudent and worthy Persons, freely chosen and entrusted
by the Body of the Nation. And Industry increases Wealth, and Wealth brings
content, and satisfaction to them that enjoy it, and preserves the People in a
prosperous, and flourishing condition.

Besides, our most excellent Constitution, might, if any thing can, engage the
minds of all men, to an unconstrained and cheerful Obedience to the Laws: Since
our submission is required to nothing else, but what has been seriously
weighed, and deliberately resolved, by Legal Representatives, empowered to do
it, by our own choice. And there can be no possible excuse for the man, that
will not be bound by his own Act; that refuses Subjection to what has been, at
least implicitly, consented to by every Freeholder in the Kingdom.

And now let any Man judge what an admirable Constitution it is, where the
Prince and the Subject are strongly engaged to Love one another; where the
Public Treasure is guarded by Loyalty, and Honor; where Industry is
encouraged, as much as is possible; and where a cheerful, and voluntary
Obedience cannot be denied! Let other Nations call themselves Free, Let potent
Princes assume what Titles they please, there is none can boast of more
Liberty, than the Englishman injoys; there is no Monarch more absolute, and
really Great, than a King of Great Britain, inthroned in the Hearts and
affections of his People.

Having thus briefly mentioned some of the more manifest and plain advantages
of Parliaments, I shall in the next place show you, What it is that too
frequently hinders the good effects they might otherwise have. And the general
occasion of this, Is a strange notion, that has been almost universally spread,
and will very hardly be rooted out of many men's minds, That the Court and the
Country, the King and his Subjects are two quite different Interests. This has
been slyly infinuated by some, and easily believed by others, and eagerly
fomented by those, whose profit, or Ambitition made them desirous of a Change.
Such are always very forward to Discharge their private Discontents upon the
Government, and hope to advance themselves, and repair their shattered Estates,
by dissetling the Foundations of our Peace. But the pretenses, on which these
men are wont to bear up themselves, are manifestly vain, and supported by
nothing, but a most palpable mistake. The true Interest of a King, and his
People is still the same. For it is certainly the Interest of the People, that
the King should be in a condition to administer Justice, and preserve the Peace
at home, and likewise to defend them from their Enemies abroad: And it is no
less the Interest of the King, that the People should thrive under his
Government, be free from discontents, and in a capacity to contribute Liberally
to the Public necessities. What King could Reign happily, where the People
were extremly poor and indigent, in danger of being ruined by a six months tax,
and unable to give what the exigencies of State may require? And what People
could esteem themselves safe, where the Exchequer were so low, and the King so
straightened, that he could not curb the insolence of unquiet, and Seditious
Spirits among his own Subjects; nor repulse the force, and assaults of a
Foreign Power? The thing is so exceeding plain and abvious, that there is no
man, but he may presently perceive, how these Lines, which seem to be drawn
from the most opposite parts of the Circumference, do meet at last, and must
always center in the same Point.

But this notwithstanding, there are some that would fain persuade us, that the
Distance betwixt them is so very great, that it is impossible they should ever
be united. And when they have practiced upon the credulous Multitude, and made
them believe it, their Heads are easily filled with a thousand Jealousies, and
wonderful Chimera's. They are like Melancholy musing Men, that draw Pictures
in the Clouds, that can discover fiery Dragons, and most dreadful Apparitions
in the clearest Sky. They are mightily troubled, not with any thing they see,
or feel; but with very strange imaginary Fears, created only by their own
Fancies.

But I shall endeavor to disabuse those, if there be any such, that do not yet
see through the Design; And to this end I shall lay before you the most common
Pretenses, upon which these Jealousies have been advanced. They are no other
than what you have often heard; and it may be, you have been very much
concerned about them; and there was Reason enough for it, if they had been
true. We have been told therefore, of Grievances of the Subject; that our
Liberties, and Properties, were like to be invaded; and that we were in
imminent Danger of Arbitrary Power, and Popery. These were the things with
which the whole Nation was alarmed; and the cry was sometimes so strong, and
almost universal, that it might have something discomposed a very sober, and
steddy-minded Man: But when the fright was a little over, and he had time to
recollect himself, he would quickly find, that he had no just ground to be much
disturbed with these terrible Apprehensions: And that they were but like a fit
of the Nightmare, in which the Party affected Dreams he is so horribly
oppressed, with some mighty Weight lying on him, that he can scarce fetch his
Breath; when all the pressure is occasioned, only by feculent Humors in his own
Body, and gross Blood too much thickened with Melancholy. But whatever they be,
or from what cause soever they may arise, I shall briefly examine the several
Pretenses that have been wont to be made.

The most common and general is that of Grievances; a Word of a loose and
uncertain Signification, and in Vulgar Acception implies any thing, that any
Man is displeased at, and can declaim against with some show of a popular Zeal
for the good of the Subject. And the Invective is always the easiest part of
Eloquence, at least it makes the deepest Impressions on the Minds of those,
that are readily disposed to entertain an ill Opinion of their Governors. But
you know what sort of Men they are, who if a waggish Boy do but tie a Straw
about their Finger, imagine presently they are in Chains, and most heavily
loaded with Bolts, and Irons. Complaints have run high, and the talk has been
loud, but it is hard to conceive what Grievances we have suffered, since the
happy Restitution of the Royal Line; unless it be, that our Trade has been
encouraged, our Shipping and Navigation exceedingly increased, and that we have
lived in plenty, and ease, and enjoyed our own quietly, and been almost
miraculously preserved in Peace, by the great Wisdom, and continual Care of a
most Excellent Prince; when most of our Neighbors were harassed, and miserably
wasted with Fire and Sword, and felt the Extremities of a most Bloody and Cruel
War. I cannot tell of any other Grievances but these; yet I will not deny but
that there may possibly be some Inconveniences not formerly foreseen, which may
be provided against by future Acts. But if any such shall be really found, and
Bills prepared for the Redress of them; no Man can have any Reason to doubt,
but that His Majesty will be so far from rejecting them, that he will be glad
of that, and all other Opportunities, of Expressing the Passion he has for the
Ease, and Satisfaction of his People. In the mean time, if we shall murmur and
be discontented still, and complain of Grievances, when we feel none, but what
every Man's private Misfortune, or Negligence, or Prodigality has brought upon
him; instead of the most happy, as we are, if we could but be made sensible of
it, we may be justly esteemed the most foolish, repining, querulous, ungrateful
People in the World.

Another Pretense has been, that our Liberties and Properties were like to be
invaded. Liberty, and Property are Words that chime well enough, and have been
a great while yoaked together, and men have been taught to tune them over, in a
most Lamentable note, as if all they had were ready to be seized on, and they
hurried to Goal, and made absolute Slaves and Beggars immediately. For this, if
the consternation he may have been in will give him leave to consider, let
every man consult but his own Experience. Has he ever been illegally
imprisoned? Has any part of his Goods been violently wrested from him? Has his
House been rifled? Have his Barns been Robbed? Have his Cattle been driven off
his Ground? Has he Suffered any thing, under color of Authority, that could
not be justified by the known Laws? If he do not find himself to have been thus
injured; or if he do, if the Courts be open, and ready to vindicate him, in a
fair, and equal Trial; he may then reasonably conclude that neither his Person,
nor Estate were in that hazard, which the Noise that was made, might incline
him to imagine. For certainly our Liberties, and Properties are as well
secured, as any thing on Earth can be; they have all the defense that Human
Prudence could possibly give them: they are established by Law, and have been
confirmed, and ratified, by the constant Practice, and many Gracious
Declarations of a long Succession of excellent Princes. And we can have no
greater Assurances than these, on this side Heaven. But if we have not too
highly provoked Almighty God, by our great unthankfulness, for the many
Blessings bestowed upon us; but can be persuaded to trust him with the Event,
and depend upon his Wisdom for the Issues of the future; the Divine Providence
might then be engaged for our temporal Good, and the preservation of those many
Earthly Felicities we now enjoy. But our Fears, and Jealousies are the most
effectual way to defeat our Hopes, and put all in Disorder; they provoke God,
Who knows we have See Mat. 6. v. 25. 26, etc.
need of these things, and has forbidden us to disturb our minds, with
distracting Cares for what is to come; they highly disoblige our Sovereign, by
manifesting an open, and professed Distrust of his Royal Goodness, and Favor;
and they certainly bereave us of the fruit of that happiness we had in
possession, by racking our thoughts with vain surmizes of unknown evils, we
conceit may possibly befall us hereafter. This weakness, and folly of our
Nation, has not escaped the notice of Strangers. There is a little Book written
some years since, and got into public, I know not how, wherein the Author
chalks out the way to the Universal Empire. And among other remarks, he tells
us, that, If the King be obliged to maintain strong Garrisons, though for their
necessary defense, this will make the Traitte dela Politic de France. c. 14.
People of England believe, that he is forming great designs against their
pretended Liberty: So he is pleased to call it. And this he observes, not
without Reason, is one thing, that will contribute very much to the hastening
of our ruin. And if so, then those that seemed so very full of Apprehensions,
that they would have had his late Majesty's ordinary Guards disbanded, did but
pursue the Methods laid down in the French Politics; and if there were any
Pensioners, it may be easily guessed, who they were; unless the Gentlemen had
so great a Zeal for the Service, that they would do the work freely, without
expecting any Wages for their pains. But they might pretend what they pleased
for the ripening the Projects, they were then framing: Our Liberties we saw
were not attempted, and God be praised, they remain unviolated still; and are
not in any Visible Danger, unless we betray them our selves, by our own
Groundless and Extravagant Fears.

The next Pretense is not much unlike unto this; And it is, as we have been
told, that we were in imminent danger of Arbitrary Power; that all things
should be managed by the present Will, and uncertain Humor of those that
Governed, and that our Lives and Fortunes stood continually exposed to their
Pleasure; just as we remember it was in the time of the late unhappy
Confusions. For answer to this we need but to examine again, and consider,
whether every thing has not been administered in the due Form and Course of Law;
and then why should we entertain these frightful and uncharitable suspicions?
Princes do well understand, that the Throne is established by Rightiousness;
Prove. 16. 12.
and that it is their most unalterable Interest, to take care that Justice be
duly, and impartially executed. They whom the Laws have settled in the highest
place of Eminency, and Power, will always have a tender regard to those Laws by
which they Reign, and do support their Royal Dignity, and Prerogatives. But all
that invade the supreme Authority by Usurpation, must needs be Arbitrary. They
seat themselves by force at the Helm, they come in with a storm; and the
Violence of the tempest unavoidably dashes the Vessel upon this Rock. What they
have gotten illegally cannot be managed according to Law. What was the purchase
of the Sword, must of necessity be maintained by the Sword. Intruding Powers
will always be the most Arbitrary, and Tyrannical. Lawful Princes have a kind
Sympathy for their Subjects; and are sensibly affected with any Miseries, and
Inconveniences they suffer; as the pain of every Member, is immediately felt by
the Head. But an Usurper is not such a Sympathizing, but a Rider, as it were,
of the Body Politic; he leaps into the Saddle, and puts on Furiously, and
Whips, and Spurrs without any Mercy to the poor Creature he has got under him.
He comes at first with his fair Promises, and smooth Pretenses, and, it may be,
inveighs most vehemently against Arbitrary Power, and Invasion of the Rights of
the People. But it is time to look to your Money, when the Pick-pockets bid
you, have a care of your Purses. There was never any great Cry made about this
Arbitrary Power, and the like, but that they who opened the loudest against it,
had a design to introduce it themselves. It is beyond all question; we have
seen the thing effectually experimented, more than once. We have reason
therefore to be always Jealous of these seeming Zealots for the Public good;
but there can never be any just occasion of suspecting our Prince; especially
since his Majesty has been pleased to assure us: That he cannot wish to be a
Greater Monarch, then the Laws of England are sufficient to make Him. Which
most Gracious expression, if we had no other Arguments for our Confidence, were
alone abundantly enough to quiet all Men's fears, as to this Particular.

But yet we have been farther told, that there is great danger of our being
suddenly overrun with Popery. This indeed is a thing, if it were true, that
might justly fill the minds of all sober men with very sad apprehensions. But
you know that it was this very pretense, that was made use of to bring on and
strengthen the late Rebellion. The People were then generally persuaded to
believe, that the whole Church of England was, at least, Popishly affected; but
when they had destroyed, or Eclipsed it, by these malicious suggestions,
seconded by the force of Arms; how very few were there of that Communion who
did then revolt to the Church of Rome, when they lay under the strongest
temptations! Nay did they not even then, among all the pressures, and
difficulties they were in, most stoutly oppose all Popish Innovations, and
write most learnedly, and convincingly against them? And if the Priests, or
others of that Church should nourish a vain hope, and imagine they had gotten
some present advantage; and should be thereby encouraged to try their Arts of
Insinuation, and begin to practice upon the weakness, and credulity of the
Vulgar; I do not doubt, but they would quickly find very great Numbers, who, by
the Grace of God, would be ready, and able to encounter them with Success, and
expose their Fallacies, and evidence to the World, that the Additions that have
been made to the Creed, are inconsistent to Scripture, Reason and Antiquity,
and that it is our Church, as it is now by Law Established, that does
constantly maintain the true, and Ancient Catholic Faith. So that there cannot
be that appearance of Danger here, which some have very uncharitably suspected.
Besides we have the Countenance and Security of the Laws, all on the side of
the Church of England; and at once to banish the wildest Fears, and most
unreasonable Jealoufies, His Majesty has been pleased to give us his most
Gracious Promise, that he will always take care to defend and support it. And
who can entertain the least doubt of the sincerity of his Royal Word? Flattery,
and Dissimulation are base, and plebeian Vices, that can never gain Admittance
in a Noble and Generous Mind. The Honor of him that speaks, gives a
proportionable Value, and Credit to what he says; and the word of a King ought
to be esteemed as sacred, and inviolable as his Person. And when we have the
Word of a King, and such a King as was never known to fail of his Word, it is
the vilest Ingratitude, and the highest Affront, and Dishonor we can do him,
not to rest perfectly satisfied, but to express a distrust, where he has given
us the greatest Assurances Imaginable. For to conceive that a Prince of the
most unspotted Honor, and unquestionable Generosity, should so often, and so
solemnly declare, what he did not really intend, and firmly resolve to perform,
is little less then a Contradiction: I am sure it is far beyond the ordinary
rate of a Moral impossibility. And they that will not be convinced by this,
stand in need of daily Miracles to create a Belief. But God be praised we have
great Reason to be full of Hopes; for the danger of the prevailing of Popery,
for ought we can see, is chiefly seated in our own cowardly, and mistrustful
Fancies: unless it should please God to punish us, for pretending too great a
solicitude for the future; which is a degree of Infidelity toward him, and in
this Case, the most unpardonable indignity, and disrespect to our Sovereign.

I have touched upon all the most common Pretenses that have been made use of
to engender Differences between the King, and his People; and they all appear
to be great mistakes, or vain surmizes. The truth is, they have been usually
promoted, for the carrying on of some Design. Some that have raised the loudest
Clamours, had been discontented on some Occasion, or other, and did it only to
be revenged on the Government: Some intended to Signalize themselves by bold
Speeches, and hoped to be silenced by Places at Court: And some, it is to be
feared, endeavored by this means to put all things in Confusion, and then
expected to enrich themselves, with Comfortable Shares of plundered Goods, and
Malignant Lands. But however it were, if a prevailing Party could but be
possessed with these Jealousies, they might be able, to be sure, to entangle
Matters of the greatest Importance, and obstruct the most weighty Proceedings
in Parliament.

And I now come to mind you of the Pernicious Consequences of this. For as the
Constitution of this Kingdom is the most happy, that Human Prudence can Invent,
when there is a blessed Harmony, and Agreement, between the Head, and the
Members: so it is the most unfortunate, and deplorable of all, when such
mis-understandings arise, as cannot be speedily reconciled. These will beget a
perpetual struggling, and very dangerous Convulsions in the State. Jealousies
will be increased, and these will give a check to the most material Debates,
that they will hardly be brought to any good Issue. When a cheerful concurrence
to the King's most Reasonable Demands, shall be obstinately refused, out of I
know not what Fear; he cannot be well pleased with the Disappointment. And when
Parliaments return Home full of Dissatisfactions, whether they be Just, or no,
the several Members, instead of making a kind Construction of their Princes
Actings, as they should in Duty do, will be too apt many times to sow their own
private Discontents all the Country over; and the Multitude will be easily
impressed with suspicious Thoughts, and imagine that there are some very
strange Designs upon them. This will breed secret Animosities, which will soon
discover themselves in Words, or Actions; and then the King cannot be secure of
their Obedience, but will be forced to have a watchful Eye upon all their
Motions. And there needs no more, but this mutual Distrust, to make this Nation
Miserable enough.

But I will further evince this in the Grand Instance of Pecuniary Supplies.
These every Man knows are frequently Necessary for the support of the
Government, and Defense of the Kingdom; and if they be withheld in some
Junctures, must undoubtedly prove of very Fatal and Ruinous Consequence to
both. For the Laws have given the King the Sole Power of Peace, and War; on the
other side, no extraordinary Levies are to be made, without the Advice and
Consent of Parliament: So that the one has the whole Power of the Sword, and
the Purse is born by the other; and it may be very well, so long as a good
accord can be maintained betwixt them. But if a Difference should be started,
which cannot be adjusted in time; this would lead directly to the Subversion of
the Government, and might be made the sad Occasion of bringing the whole Nation
into Slavery. The thing is Plain and Visible to every Eye: For when the Sword
is put into the Prince's Hand, if the People should wantonly bind the Arm, or
cut the Sinews, by which it should be managed; he must either let it drop to
the Ground, or it might be wrested from him without Resistance. Suppose the
King engaged in a War, and the necessary Supplies for the carrying it on,
should be stiffly denied; what must be the Event of such an obstinate Refusal?
The Enemy would be hereby mightily heartned, and the English Courage extremely
damped; many favorable Opportunities of Action must be lost; many Damages
suffered that might have been prevented; none but a very faint Opposition could
be made; we might possibly linger out a while, like a man in a deep
Consumption, and be forced at length to yield to the pleasure of an Insolent
Conqueror, or to strike up a Peace on such dishonorable Terms, as could be
procured; which if the same Retentive Humor should still continue, he would be
tempted to break upon any trifling pretense; and then the same Inconveniences,
and Dangers, would return again. Or if we could be secured from these, yet the
Poverty of a Prince might Encourage daring and Seditious Spirits, among his own
Subjects, to attempt a Rebellion, and to destroy all by Civil and Intestine
Broyls. I speak not this out of any present Apprehensions I have, that such
Miseries are like to befall us now: For, God be praised, we have a Sovereign fo
excellently adorned, with all Accomplishments befitting that high Station, that
are sufficient to make all both at Home, and Abroad, very careful how they
become his Enemies; and I hope we shall have a Parliament of that Wisdom and
Sobriety, that will contribute what shall be needful to make His Power to be
feared, and His Alliance valued, and to contain His Subjects within the Bounds
of their Allegiance: But what I was saying was only to intimate what a
lamentable Condition we might be brought into, in Case the Money necessary for
our Defense, should be obstinately denied. It might be the Occasion of our
inevitable Ruin; by infeebling the Nation, and exposing it weak and naked to
Foreign Invasion, or Domestic Insurrections. And either way, it tends
apparently to the total Dissolution of the Government: which must involve all
in endless and inextricable Calamities. This seems very evident of it self, but
I shall illustrate it a little by two very pregnant Examples.

The one shall be fetched out of the History of another Age, and Country: And
it is what is observable to this purpose, from the sacking of Constantinople by
the Great, and Cruel Mahomet. When the Tyrant had advanced his Forces to the
Walls of that Mighty City, and began to press it very hard; the distressed
Emperor within was forced to go about himself, from House to House, begging and
entreating the Wealthy Citizens, with Tears in his Eyes, that they would
consider the Danger, that was then at their very Doors, and lend their
Assistance for the necessary Defense of the Place, in that great Extremity. But
all in vain, nothing could move them; they make Excuses, plead Poverty, and
murmur at that little they had already expended for the public safety. Upon
this the City is taken by general Assault; the unfortunate Emperor trodden to
Death in the Crowd; their Houses are ransacked, and an incredible Mass of
Treasure discovered in them, which fell all into the Enemies Hands, who scorned
and derided their preverse Frugality, in hoarding up the Whole for them, when
thry could not afford their Natural Prince a small Part, in his and their own
most deplorable Necessity: They are slaughtered by heaps in the fury of the
Storm; the Persons of the best Quality that escaped then, are reserved to be
Butchered in cold Blood, after they had seen their dearest Relations suffer the
greatest Indignities before their Eyes; and the poor remainder of those that
were left alive, are made pitiful Slaves to the Savage, and Inhuman Barbarians.
Thus that proud and stately City, which had been the Seat of the Eastern Empire
above a thousand Years, became a Torphie of the Ottoman Greatness, and remains
a standing Monument to the eternal Shame and Infamy of the besotted Greeks, who
rather than part with a very small Proportion of their Estates, lost all, saw
their Country laid Defolate, their Friends Slain, and themselves, and their
Innocent Posterity wilfully betrayed into the most Miserable Thraldom. This is
the Effect of so much good Husbandry, when the welfare of the Public lies at
Stake.

I will take the other Example from home, and from what has happened within the
Memory of many now living. That blessed Martyr King Charles the First, at his
coming to the Crown found himself engaged in a War, which for want of such
supplies as were largely promised, met with a very unhappy Conclusion. Other
mis-adventures there were, proceeding chiefly from the same Cause, which did
very much impair the reputation of the English Valor, and Conduct. This made
us but meanly esteemed by our Neighbors, and some of them hereupon began to
dispute the Dominion of the Seas; nay the Algerines, nothing so strong then, as
they are now, had yet the boldness to ride in the very Channel, and sometimes
to come on Shore, and take whole Families out of their Beds, and carry them
away into the most wretched Captivity; and if an inconsiderable Nest of Pirates
were so far encouraged by them, what might have been expected, if a more potent
Enemy had taken the Advantage of the Necessities we were then in? But these
Mischiefs being pretty well provided against, by the Care and Vigilance of the
King; at length came the Parliament of Forty One; who being animated unto it by
the King's wants, and most ingratefully abusing the greatest Concessions that
were ever made to any Subjects, brought on the late Unnatural War; which ended
in the most Execrable Murder of that Incomparable Prince; and after all the
glorious Cries about Liberty, and the like, we found our selves wheadled into
an absolute Bondage, to a standing Veteran Army, and a pack of the most
Notorious Villains, that could be picked out of the whole Nation. The thing is
true, and the Words cannot seem harsh unto any, but such as approve the Fact,
and would be glad to see the same Tragedy acted over again. But he that shall
well consider this, will not stand in need of any other Arguments to convince
him, of what lamentable Consequence it may be, when Parliaments will not be
induced to comply with the Just and necessary Demands of their Sovereign; it
lays us open to the Power of Strangers, and the Designs of wicked Men among our
selves; it leads to the ruin of the Government, and exposes us to the
inexpressible miseries of Slavery, and Confusion.

Now that I have shown you what it is that sometimes hinders the good effects
that Parliaments might have; and what the destructive and pernicious
Consequences of that are; you may easily guess what kind of Members I should
advise you to choose. And every County being so well stored with great variety
of Loyal and Worthy Gentlemen, you would be now wholly inexcusable if you
should fail in your Elections; and instead of discreet and judicious Persons
who would be able to create a good understanding between the King, and his
People, you should send up Men openly disaffected, who would make it their
business to foment Jealousies, and turn your Brains, and make them Swim with
idle suspicions. This would be the way to defeat our hopes, and obstruct that
happy composure of all our Fears, which we expect from the meeting of this
Parliament, which is now at Hand.

For prevention of this you should be persuaded to make choice of men of Good,
at least competent, and sound Estates. For the necessitous are the most liable
to the temptation of being corrupted, and biased any way with the hopes of a
little gain. If you are indeed afraid of Pistoles, there are none so like to
be overcome by that kind of Arms, as men of mean and indigent Fortunes. But
setting that consideration aside; it is in it self an unbecoming thing, that
they should have any power of laying Taxes upon other men, who cannot, or will
not pay their own Debts; that any should be suffered to get into the House,
only to be protected from their Creditors; and take Sanctuary at Westminster,
to escape the Fleet, or the King's Bench. But I suppose such as these will not
be forward to appear, or if they should, you that know them will easily put
them by.

In the next place therefore you should be very cautious that you do not favor
any, whom you can suspect to have the least taint of the Bill of Exclusion: A
Bill of a most daring, and dangerous Nature; and such a one in many respects,
as was never brought into Parliament before; you can scarce imagine what a heap
of miseries you escaped, when it was bravely and resolutely rejected in the
House of Lords. You are now God be praised, in perfect Peace; you possess your
own quietly, and converse together with a Neighborly Kindness, and Familiarity.
But if that desperate Bill had taken place, you had at this moment been
sheathing your Swords in one another Bowels; you had seen your Houses in a
Flame, the Country smoking round about you, your Cities and Towns laid in
Ashes; and been subject to all the Calamities that the most Bloody Civil War
could bring upon you. For Princes are not to be Voted out of their
unquestionable Rights, nor debarred of their inheritance by a Scrowl of
Parchment. A Title to the Crown was never decided in Westminster Hall. Those
Disputes cannot be ended, but in the Field; and of all the Nations in the
World, England has the greatest reason to dread the starting of such a
Controversy. The Competition betwixt the Houses of York, and Lancaster cost us
dear. Look into your Chronicles, and see what Lamentable devastations were
every where made! How many cruel Battles were fought! How many thousands of
English lives were spent in the Quarrel! How many Ages almost the wound was
kept bleeding, and never fully closed, till the happy Success, and happier
Marriage of Henry the Seventh! What can you expect from those that had the
confidence to attempt the Interruption of the Royal Line, and to dig up the
surest Foundation of our Legal Settlement? They that were for Excluding our
Gracious Sovereign, might quickly stretch their destractive Principles a little
farther, and be easily induced to assault him now, that, by the Blessing of
God, he is peaceably Seated on the Throne of his Ancestors. But I trust that
the same Providence which placed him there, will continue to defend him, from
the Subtilty and violence of all His, and our Enemies. And I cannot but believe
that you will be very careful, how you give those a fresh opportunity of doing
mischief, that would have suddenly plunged you into the most miserable
Confusions.

But after you have delivered your selves from the Fear of these; be sure you
put none in their room, but men of approved Wisdom, and Integrity. None else
can be safely entrusted with any concern; but these, you may securely venture
your Lives and Fortunes in their hands. These will be able to foresee a Danger,
and willing, and ready to prevent it; they will consider all circumstances, and
weigh every thing impartially, and carry themselves evenly between the King and
the Subject. They will presently discern any inconveniences the People may lie
under, and prepare suitable Bills for the remedying of them. When the King's
occasions require their aid, they will grant it freely, without pinching any
thing from him. They are not imposed on by that great mistake, which seems too
common, as if they were always to drive a kind of Bargain with their Prince: So
much ready money, for so much Prerogative. This is unkind, and disobliging, and
a very unequal way of Dealing. For money that is given, may be gotten again;
Bulloin may be imported, and the Circulation of Trade will bring it in: But the
Prerogative once diminished can hardly be repaired; there is no trucking for
such Goods; our Merchants cannot furnish us with this sort of Commodity from
the Coasts of Gninea, or Spain. At this rate the greatest Prerogative might be
soon exhausted; and a King some years, if he could be supposed to be so easy,
might sell away the whole Regal Power. But Sovereigns have as much reason to be
careful of the Prerogative, as the People can have to be Jealous of any Right
or Property whatsoever. Nay the People themselves, if they would but understend
it, are equally concerned in the preservation of it. For it is the main
foundation of their Security; and they that should Foolishly go about to
undermine it, would find it fall heavy upon their own Heads. Without a full
Power of Calling and Dissolving Parliaments, of Signing, and Rejecting Bills;
of Raising, and Disbanding Forces; of Pardoning Offenders, and Executing
Justice, nothing could be rightly managed. A Prince that should be divested of
such an Authority, would be no more but a Royal Statue; he must be rendered
weak, and contemptible to all, and utterly unable to defend his People. Of this
Wise and Honest men will be very sensible; and no other will be chosen by
those, that have any value for their own private, as well as the Public safety.

In the last place you should be very careful to choose men of known affection
to the established Church of England. A Church against which there cannot lie
the least just exception; that has purged it self from the errors, and abuses
which a long tract of time had by degrees brought in, and mixed with the
Primitive Practice, and Belief; that has been always highly esteemed by all the
Reformed beyond the Sea's; and those at home that have professed a Dissent from
it, have generally approved the Doctrine of it; and the controversy, how high
soever it may have been carried, has been only about matters of external
Discipline, and the refusing Obedience to a few Indifferent Rites. And that
which, it may be, is a Glory Peculiar to this Church, no Member of it has been
ever known to be engaged in any Rebellion against their Prince. His Majesty is
very sensible of this, and has publicly signified, how satisfied and assured
he is of our Loyalty, and has promised to support us; and you cannot then
better express your hearty thanks, for the Gracious Declarations he has made
you, then by the showing your Zeal for that Church, which he has taken into his
Royal Protection. There are none of any other Denomination amongst us, who have
not either openly abetted some Factious Design; or given too great occasion of
suspecting their Fidelity to the Crown. And if any of you should be prevailed
with, upon any pretense, to make choice of any such Persons; you must not think
it strange, if it should be looked upon as a manifest Testimony of your
Disaffection to the King. For if such as these should creep into the House
through your carelessness, or credulity, it is like enough that they would soon
fall to their old Practice, of amusing men's minds with the most horrible
Fears, and Jealousies, they could possibly invent; and these are a kind of
Wildfire, very easily kindled, but exceeding hard to be put out: And how then
would you be able to excuse your selves from the Guilt of the infinite
mischiefs that might follow, if by these means any misunderstanding should
arise, which might blast the hopes we have conceived, and prevent that
universal satisfaction which is expected from the Prudence, and Loyalty of the
Ensuing Parliament? But I need not use any further Arguments here, your own
safety will best Admonish you what to do. Many of you in your Addresses, both
formerly, and of late, have Solemnly promised to Elect none but Loyal men; and
if you should do otherwise, those very Addressess would remain as the most
dishonorable Records of your fickelness, and inconstancy. The King will never
violate his Word he has given to you; and you are bound to be as good as yours,
you have passed to Him, if you have any regard to you Credit, Interest, or
Conscience.

I have now taken the Freedom to Communicate some of my most serious Thoughts
unto you, with Reference especially to the present Conjuncture. It is not any
forwardness to busy my self with Matters of this Nature, that has occasioned
the Publication of these hasty Conceptions, but that I might remove a false
Imputation. I have therefore shown you what an Honorable, Esteem we have for
Parliaments; what great Advantages we might reap from them; what are the most
common hindrances of the good Effect they might have; and what are the
Mischievous Consequences that follow from thence: And upon this Occasion I
could not forbear to offer some Friendly Advice for the preventing those Evils
which such Miscarriages might bring upon us. I have not troubled you with
things of a nice Consideration, but such as are easy and obvious to every
Man's Notice; and no more, I believe, than what you your selves have thought,
and often discoursed with one another; and if these Papers should chance to
come to your Hands, after some of your Elections may be past, I hope you will
have followed the same Counsel, before you had it from me; and that instead of
Advice what to do, this may be but a just Commendation for what you have done.
You may perceive all along, that my chief Aim has been to root out those
Causeless Jealousies, which may often endanger the public Peace. These are
always to be carefully avoided: They are the very Bane, and Pest of all
Societies: They are like the Fits of the Cholick; they afflict us with the most
sharp, and intolerable pains, and tear our very Bowels, and yet they proceed
from nothing but a light, and flatulent Humor. They are the most dangerous
Rock, against which our fairest Hopes have been many times most unfortunately
split. And if any of these should be cast in, and cherished in this Parliament,
they might breed that Allienation of Affections, which the wisest Conduct of
many Years might hardly retrieve. The first tincture that is given, is scarce
ever wholly to be washed out. But God forbid that any such thing as this should
happen unto us. The Eyes of all Europe are upon you, expecting the Event of
this next Session. If it should have that agreeable Conclusion we promise our
selves, it might by the Blessing of God, not only secure our own selves, but
tend to the Preservation of the Neighboring Countries round about us: But if
it should be ended in any Discontent, who can foresee the many sad Consequences
of that? This is certain, our Friends would be exceedingly discouraged, and our
Enemies grow unsufferably insolent, and scorn and deride us for it, while they
made their greatest Advantages of our Folly. It is in your Power to contribute
something to the prevention of this, by the Elections you are making. You have
a Prince of the most approved Gallantry, and Resolution; that is the Blessing
of this and the Envy of other Nations; that is able to strike a terror into
his Enemies; that has often hazarded his Life for your sakes; and still to
express what a tenderness he has for you, he has lately, and the very first
Opportunity, endeavored to give all possible Ease and Satisfaction to your
Minds by his most Gracious Declaration. Show how sensible you are of the
highest Obligations that can be laid upon Subjects. Send him up Men that will
assist him in the Brave and Generous Designs he has entertained for the public
Good; and not Cavil away their time in impertinent Scruples, and never bring
any thing to an Issue. His Majesty has hitherto had the Felicity of David, that
in all Acts of Government, Whatsoever the King has done, has pleased all the
People: I wish that by your prudent and discreet 2 Samuel 3. 36.
Behavior the Proposition may be happily converted, That all that the People
shall do, may please the King: That so both King and People may live together
in mutual Love, and Confidence one of another; that the Government may be
preserved, our Established Religion maintained, the Glory, Strength, and Riches
of the Nation daily increased; and that these Blessings may be always continued
to the present, and all succeeding Generations: And to this there is no true
Englishman, nor Christian, but will heartily say, AMEN.

FINIS.

