HUGO GROTIUS, De Rebus Belgicis: OR, THE ANNALS, AND HISTORY OF THE
Low-Countrey-WARRS.

Wherein is manifested, That the United Netherlands, are Indebted for the Glory
of Their Conquests, to the Valor of the English; under whose Protection the
Poor Distressed States, have Exalted Themselves to the Title of the HIGH and
MIGHTY.

Faithfully Rendered into English, by T. M. of the Middle Temple.

London, Printed for Henry Twyford in Vine-Court Middle Temple; and Robert
Paulet at the Bible in Chancery Lane, 1665.

Licensed,

March 13th 1664/5. ROGER LESTRANGE,

TO THE Right HONORABLE, CHARLES Viscount Fitz-Harding, AND Earl of Falmouth.
MEN, as the Philosopher says, Most Noble Sir, are rude, barbarous, and worthy
of nothing but Contempt, unless their Natures be refined by Learning and
Knowledge; a main Instrument for the attaining whereof is History; which, as the
Learned Livy says, Hoc illa praecipue agit in rerum cognitione salubre et
frugiferum, omnis te exempli documenta in illustri posita monumento, intueri,
unde Tibi tuaeque Reipub: quod imites capias, unde foedum incaeptu, foedum
exitu, quod vites: This I take to be meant by him in general of History; which,
without offense of the more Learned, I hope may be extended to the various
Discourses of particular Countries; especially such, whose near vicinity, as to
Friendship or Enmity, is requisite to be known, as well in its greatness, as
mean beginning: A Wiseman ought not to find fault with those things, which he
sees written, because he does not approve thereof, but rather will set a high
esteem thereon, because others are experienced in those things whereof he is
ignorant; wherein the Candor of your Lordships Judgment appears glorious, as
using to try all things rather by the measure of unerring Truth, than the
deceitful Fancy of a biased Judgment.

The famous Author Hugo Grotius, though eminent for Learning in his Country,
and by his own Repute able to bear up against the Malevolent Blusters of Envy,
yet were his Posthume Works glad to crave the Protection of Superiors, by
whose Approbation, they have gone through the World, meriting the highest
Applause. And therefore, I humbly hope, the unworthiness of the Translator, in
his being unknown to your Honor, will not in any measure lessen the well-known
Repute of the Author, whose Impartial Pen, has with that Candor delivered his
Countrey-mens Actions, as gives not the Credit of their Greatness, to their own
Policy or Strength, but yields a deserved Laurel to the honor of the English,
whose Aid was not only as a Hand to uphold, but a vivifying Medicine to a
fainting Body, that recals and gives new Spirit to a formless and cadaverous
Lump. I shall not trouble your Lordship with the Reasons inducing to this
Translation at this time, as well-knowing it would be too great an Intrenchment
upon the full Occasions, which hardly afford your Honor any time of Repose:
And therefore I humbly crave your Lordships Pardon, for this bold Intrusion,
beseeching your favorable Respect to Patronize this Translation, which I
prostrate to you, as the most hopeful Stem of Rising Nobility, as being replete
with all the Advantages flowing from a large and plentiful Fortune; wherewith
not only your Body is enriched, but your Mind copiously embelished, with all
the Helps both of Art and Nature. Accept then hereof, and make it receive a
value, if not from its own Worth, yet from your Approbation: Which that it may
do, is the Desire of,

MY LORD, Your Lordships in all service to be commanded, T. MANLEY.

To the READER.
IT is a Crime too incident to Humane Frailty to be finding fault, though they
undergo the Lash of the Satirical Poet for it, Turpe est Doctori cum culpae
redarguit ipsum; And I cannot expect to be free from such Calumniators: But I
hope better things from the Ingenious Readers, who, if I flatter not my self,
will be enforced to acknowledge, That if I have not arrived at the highest
Pitch of the Author's Fancy, yet that I have not deviated from the same.

You have here the first Rise of the Quondam Poor Distressed States; which, as
the Author confesses, was by a Revolt from their Lawful Sovereign: And the
Sacred Scripture parallels Rebellion to the Sin of Witchcraft. But, Success
brought in that Pagan Principle, Prosperum Scelus vocatur Virtus: And from this
Step they assumed the Title of High and Mighty: Yet is it not forgot, that
Babel should have reached to Heaven, but was destroyed.

Our Author, as he ingeniously acknowledges the Rise and Growth, so he often
brings them forth with their Humble Suit for Aid and Assistance; and
afterward, with the Expressions of their humble and hearty Acknowledgments to
Queen Elizabeth, as their main Support, in their most distressed Condition: And
with more Humble supplications to her, Not to leave them to the Rage of their
Enemies, but to continue them under the Wings of Her Protection; unto which
Protection, out of her mere Mercy and Compassion, she admitted them; Because of
the Inhumane Cruelties committed upon them by the Bloody Duke D' Alva: And
though They in all humility offered unto her Submission, as to their Prince,
(such was their low Condition) yet, notwithstanding their Preservation by the
English Nation, so often acknowledged by Themselves; they, like the ungrateful
Snake, endeavor to destroy their Foster-Father, forgetting all their
Obligations to England, and offering all the Violencies imaginable, which, with
Amboyna, shall not now be particularized.

These are the Wars, which most Christian Princes were concerned in: writ they
have been by others; but this the only Protestant Writer, whose Impartial Pen
needs only to be named to give in Credit.

And how season^ly Translated at this Juncture of Time, their own Confessions
in those past, and their unjust Proceedings in the present Affairs, will
sufficiently testify.

T. M.

GROTIUS OF THE Affairs of the Netherlands. The ANNALS of Hugo Grotius,
concerning the Dutch Affairs, from the Departure of King PHILIP.
The F^rst B(...).
I Intend to Discourse the most famous War of our Times, and which may no
improperly be c^lled Sociall, or a War of Confederates, while the Spaniard
and Dutch, People accustomed to live under one Government, and who had as well
been Victors, as Companions in Arms, differ between themselves, nor wants
Reason why it may not be termed a Civil War, the Parties herein concerned under
the several Title of the Prince, and the Laws being Domestic: And whether we
mind the Policies either of Civil or Military Government, we shall not find a
more fertile Field of Examples, nor in any Age more fierce and tedious
Conflicts, in such an unequal Quarrel: You would admire how the Seeds of this
Hostility were long before sown, but after they began to grow up and appear, it
would even tire Curiosity to observe the great Men's Power and Craft, the
desperation of the meaner sort, the new Leagues, and immediately the
Home-Discords, and at last the unhappy endeavoring of Foreign Aid; whereto,
in short time after, were added the frequent Assaults, takings, and re-takings
of Towns and Castles, Marches and Re-Marches of Armies, till sometimes they met
to Battle, Passages to and fro by Sea, long Sieges, and indeed all kind of
Martial Discipline, improved to the utmost, by signal Experiment: But these
things being done in public, whereby each Party strengthened his own Affairs,
and turned all occasions into Force, I shall more easily accomplish, in regard
I have them, as nearer, so more certain, and consequently not to be prevented,
much less amended by others at a greater distance. The beginnings of this War,
though very uncertain, because much unknown and dark in its occasion, many
famous Writers have undertaken, even in the Latin Tongue, to describe: But in
regard you cannot well understand those without some further Director, I
thought it not amiss to declare at large, the first Causes of those Tumultuous
Proceedings, which intervened there from the beginning, that at one short View,
Counsels and Policies may be compa^ed one with the other, together with the
Event produced by the same. And in truth, so great and famous have the Actions
there done, been, that even Strangers have been cu^ious in writing thereof; and
therefore we certainly should be accounted most ingrate to our Country, and
envious of the good of our Posterity, if we should not give them a most exact
Relation of those things which happened so near them; Especially since most of
our Modern Writers have too frequently deluded their Readers Credulity, with
vain and uncertain Rumors, as either Party, for their own advantage, published
the same; or else if any had Desire or Opportunity of knowing the Truth, even
such contented themselves to write only a Diurnall; My Design is to lay open
and discuss the Peoples Commotions, the Consultations of the great Ones and
Governors, and whence a new Sovereignty sprang, where the first determined.

The People that ^ h^bit the Land within the Rhene as also on both sides
thereof, to ^he Se^ of ^he Morim, and the River Amasius, on this side called
Germany, on the other, Old Belgium, their Country; but most of them are
beholding to Germany, as well for their Language, as their Original; whence it
was, that while the Romans strove to bring in their Arts and Commerce these
jointly taking Care, both of their Liberty, and the War, at once, were
Companions in Loss or Conquerours: Neither did they ever l^se the Repute of
good Warriors, though they most showed their V^lours, either in others Aid, or
their own Rebellions. But when the Generality of People, as it were upon one
S^gnal, made violent Incursions into the Roman Empire, all this ^ract fel^ to
the share of the Franks; until in the Division of their Power, part became the
Possessions of the Kings of France, and other part the Emperors of Germany
claimed as their Right. But both, when they themselves were from thence far
distant, s^t Governors, by the Names of Earls, Dukes, and the like, to rule and
defend all the Cities therein, saving only such as for the sake of Religion,
were given unto Bishops, when Christianity began to increase and flourish: Such
as were sent forth to the Wars in Command, were called Dukes, to whom Earls or
Counts were such as took Care of the Accounts of Subsidies, and other Taxes,
for the Soldiers Pay, and were chief Judges: But it is a thing hardly
credible, how both these and those did augment their Power in a short time, by
these three means, their own Valor and Virtue, their Princes neglect and
Carelessness, and the Favor and Good Will of the Provincials. For first, they
got themselves Power and Authority, by doing good to all; nor did they show
more Audacity and Courage in time of War, than Moderation and Religion in Times
of Peace. In this manner strengthening themselves, instead of a Lieutenantship,
(which was all they had at first) they attain to themselves a perpetual and
Hereditary Dominion, which was with the more Facility and Compliance granted to
them, because when any Wars broke out in those Parts, they were the more ready
to meet and undergo the Dangers and Hazards thereof, in regard they defended
their own Territories: For, in those Times, the Seas were almost covered and
the Shores even beset and filled with Danish and Norman Fleets: Not long after,
taking a Privilege, either from the Fear or Favor of their Followers, or the
Breach and Decay of a greater Lordship, though they kept the same Resemblance
still in Name, yet they established a Sovereign and lawful Authority even with
the Peoples good will. Lands are set apart for the Princes, and moderate
Tributes: yet enough to support and maintain their Dignity; for they gave not
themselves over to Covetousness and luxury, or those other Crimes, which in the
Innocence of that Age were scarce known to the World: Only the Desire of Rule,
and Thirst of Dominion (aged almost as Nature) they could not excuse themselves
from. Hence it was, they had perpetual Wars, either among themselves, or with
their Bordering Neighbors; for managing whereof, they never hired Foreign
Soldiers, but used their own People, who for the safe keeping of their
Borders, would strive who should be foremost in the Watch; and if Ambition or
Honor had invited the Prince beyond, they forthwith followed him with
Alacrity, moved thereto as well by the hopes of Praise, as Reward: The
Conqueror bestowing in Gift on his Noblest Soldiers, Lands in Fee-Farm, and
confirming on Cities and Citizens, their Franchises, Customs. Laws, and
Magistracy, the sure Guards and Defenses of their Liberty. Nor did their
Successors take upon them the full power of Government, before they had
confirmed by Oath these Grants, on whom they were at first bestowed.

The whole Charge of the Commonwealth, was of old said upon the Shoulders of
the Nobility and Governors of Towns, which consisted of the Communalty, to
whom in some places the Clergy were added: These, where it was necessary, met
together concerring Embassies; These Consulted of the great Affairs of State;
nor was it lawful, without the general Consent of all, to set a Tribute or Tax,
to alter the present state of Affairs, nor to much as enhance or debase the
value of Coy^^. So much Caution was there used, even when they had good
Princes, to prevent the encroaching of Evil Ones. The most Noble and Virtuous
amongst the Citizens, underwent and performed all public Offices, and all
Strangers were kept out of the Princes Court, the Senate, and all other places,
either of Honor or Profit. By the observance of these good Customs, long did
the Commonwealth continue fixed on a good Basis. But at length by little and
little Seditions growing up, wasted this flourishing and rich People, until by
many Victories, Affinities, and Treaties, most of them were glad to submit to
the Burgundian Government, who being sprung from a Royal House, Warlike,
Crafty, and dating, to undertake any thing, to Arm his Power from the
D^ss^n^ions of the Nobles, Promises to one, Threatens another, and give Rewards
to a Third: Thus, in a short time, all things bow, either for Reward, or fear
of Punishment; and he is ready to destroy the Force of their promiscuous
Liberty, by an extraordinary Act of Authority, according to the French
Exemplar: For every several Nation has his own Senate appointed him, but all
were to attend the Common Justice of M^cklin, by which means they more easily
represented the Form of one City: A College also, or Fraternity, by the Name
of the Golden Fleece, was Erected, whereby he obliged the Princes admitted into
the same, that were famous both for their Extract and Merits, to be to him both
an Honor and a Safeguard. Among all these Policies, the States maintained the
Peoples Right, whom out of the several Nations, he called to meet in one
Common Counsel, as often as the Common Treasury was drained by his Wars, or other
Necessity required the same: Being sent thither, they oft-times did great
things for the Commonwealth; and that which added to their Courage was, that
they might speak what they had in Commission. There was not a Castle, nor in
time of Peace a Soldier, except a few Garrisons upon the uttermost Borders,
suspected from the frequent Motions of the French; together with Three Thousand
Horsemen, the Flower of all the Nobility, yet Commanded by the Chief of the
Popularity, and were in readiness against any sudden Incursions, and such a
Number of private Ships, ready upon my unexpected Occasion, as would
over-^umber a good Fleet.

This great Accumulation of Fortune, being transposed unto the Austrian Family,
though it made the Power of Spain greatly to increase, yet the mild Natures of
those in Authority, by their Moderation, augmented their Power; and certainly,
sooner by this Act is Liberty overthrown and conquered, than by Force: For
Fierceness grows into Fury, while it resists Compulsion, when Meekness and
Courteries will even hand men into Obedience; until accustomed Duties being
commanded, the long License of Evil Habits, makes that Obedience seem to be
Slavery. In the mean time, to the Commons who meddle not with Arms, the
Benefits of Merchandising and Trades is frequently shown, whereby the Customs
and Tributes are increased, and that private men grown rich, if they would be
innocent, must with Care shun public Employments. This Spanish Conjunction,
was a very great Augmentation: But now, as if grown more wise, as the Wealth of
those in Superiority over them mightily increased, they began to suspect with a
kind of Dread, from the Spaniards Behavior, which they had Opportunity enough
to look into, in the time of their Service together in the Wars; as also, from
the Difference between them, a Change of their Commonwealth: For while
Bordering Nations have from a like Stock, by the same Endeavors increased,
they easily agree between themselves, engaged thereunto by a kind of Brotherly
Relation: But the Spaniard and Dutch differ in many, nay in most things; and in
those they agree, they meet with too much vehemence. Both have been famous in
Martial Exploits for many Ages, unless that these have disused, those by
Italian, and other Foreign Expeditions, are encouraged through long Discipline
and Rewards.

The Dutch are very sedulous and diligent, and, for the hope of gain willing to
undergo any labor, do by that means acquire both Trade and Peace; yet do they
not use to take and put up Injuries: and as they are greedy after other men's
goods, so in defense of their own they will contend to the uttermost; which
has been the cause, that in this single Region there are so many Cities, and
those that are situate near the Sea, or any other River, strongly fortified,
and every where else so replenished by their own, and a mixed multitude of
persons from other Countries: Thus since those monstrous Incursions from the
Northern Parts of the Earth were blown over, have they for Eight Ages continued
unconquered and free from the spoils of foreign Armies. But Spain, after it
had contracted from the variety of its Victors, many of their Customs, and
great diversity in their manners, at last was forced to yield her Neck to the
Gothish Servitude: by which mixed cohabitation and intermingled breeding, they
came even to unite in nature and disposition, of whom both Ancient and Modern
Authors have given us this Character, That they were of invincible spirits to
undergo all manner of hardships and dangers, whereby it was scrupled by the
rest of the World, Whether they were more greedy of Honor or Wealth? They are
proud and arrogant beyond meaure, even to the contempt of all others; they are
very great honourers of things Sacred, having Religion in high esteem, which
makes them neither unmindful of nor ungrateful for benefits received; but in
revenge so furious is their heat, and in victory, so barbarous their cruelty,
that they think nothing in such case done to an enemy either unlawful or
dishonorable. The^e things are quite contrary to the Dutch a Nation innocently
crafty, and after the manner of their situation which is between France and
Germany they are moderate both in their Customs and Conditions, in some
measure participating of the Vices of both, yet not altogether without some of
their Virtues: You cannot easily deceive them, you must nor unadvisedly insult
over them. Nor in matters of Divine Worship, in former time did they in ought
come behind the Spaniard, being unanimous eve^ since they first put on
Christianity; not so terrified by the Norman Arms as to change their
profession, nor yet ever infected with any damnable error: They bestowed so
much upon Religion, that the very Priests themselves were necessiated to
prescribe bounds to what they might possess; They learnt from both, between
whom they seemed engrafted, to honor and reverence their Princes: But the
Dutch thought the Law ever above them, from which pretense sprung many
troubles. The Castilians love to govern, somewhat more strictly than other
Nations, and yet what liberty soever they usurp to themselves, they will not
allow the like to others: Hence arose very great danger, because as in two
divided Empires, neither for Fear or Love to prevent the trouble or win the
favor of their Princes, would the Dutch en^ure any superior, nor the Spaniards
an equal.

Al People h^^ labor with the thirst and ambition of Rule, if their first
actions thrive into a Success, their next Work is to draw the Nations with whom
they converse or hold correspondence under the subjection of their Law, to
appoint Ju^g^ and Governors, to assess and impose Tributes and Taxe^, that it
may be at their option and pleasure to use and command the common strength:
Thus the Spaniards, accustomed to domineer in Italy, and at their will to lay
waste and destroy in America, sought either the same power, or else, for
denial thereof, a cause of Quarrel with the Dutch, who, by a long succession
of Princes, were even united in an indissoluble league. Neither did Adrian,
shortly after Pope, a holy and just man, and yet a Hollander, forget the
hateful authority of the Spaniard, the lofty pride of Crojac, and rapacious
dealing of Ceury, among whom all things whether temporally honorable, or
Ecclesiastically Sacred, were sold; yet not thinking (though scarcely by force
withhel^) when they laid down their Command, that they had done ought amiss.
Wherefore by soothing up those that were most powerful, they made a mock of
that vain shadow of Empire, where Magistracy must either be by the favor or
for the good of the People, and where the Princes can hardly with the most
gentle and persuasive blandishments obtain for their most necessary and
difficult affairs, an inconsiderable pecuniary aid. In vain it is, without
doubt, to talk of the limit of Dominion beyond the Tyrrhene Sea, and utmost
extents of the main Ocean; if the subject must become slaves to their Lords at
home. Nor yet did they deceive or turn upon those whom their own Country's
scarcity, and the known modesty of this Nation had drawn into these
Netherlands; Although the Emperor Charles seriously consulted of the
alteration of the State, and erecting a Kingdom out of the Cities, especially
where the Victory at Pavy had in a manner half brought to pass his desire over
Flanders and Artoys, which by that were totally rent from the French
possessions, but deterred he was by diverse settled Laws and Customs, which he
durst not abrogate. On the other side, he would not so make the Spanish
Provinces, he himself having often averred, That if their Pride were joined
with the Dutch Patience, they would certainly produce some eminent mischief:
much blaming his Son, who spending his Youth among the Spaniards, took no
notice of the nature of these people, but rather slighted all conveniences
that were offered him for the survey and knowledge of these Regions. He was
indeed an equal Judge of Virtues, and sharer of Honors, behaving himself as
one and the same Prince to all his People, not suffering such daily usurpations
here, as the Spaniards were free to in their new gained Kingdoms, whereat they
were troubled; endeavoring to be present in these his Netherlands, if his
Affairs would bear it, and it hindered not his taking care for his more
immediate necessities.

He that was he^e the Princes Lieutenant, had a threefold Classis of
Counselors. To the first of whom, was the care and managery of Peace and War.
To the second, the distribution of Justice according to Law, with the
moderation thereof by equity; as also the power of judging and determining the
public Controversies of those Regions. The third supervised the Treasury, and
therein took care of the Prince's Wealth, or to supply his Necessities.

That first Council or Assembly customarily made up of the most noble of the
Dutch, and eminent and famous for the many great and weighty Affairs there
frequently handled, we will call by a proper name, The Senate; To which Philip
between the greatness of his Kingdoms, and the insinuations of such who
flattered the actions of his Youth, forming himself to the Spanish Mode, and
using no other language, used to come with an assumed austere gravity, few
words, and eschewing of much company. And when his Father had withdrawn
himself, that he might spend his old age in a private retirement they presently
urge him to raise new Imposts, in whom the old ambition and thirst of Rule, not
yet repressed by experiments, was such, as would scarcely suffer either measure
or bounds. Nor is it to be doubted, but that most beautiful order of Government
gave credit to the faith and virtue of the Spaniards: How great a desire
harbored in the Breasts of Princes to subvert the Law, which kept under the
violent ebullitions of their power; the notable ruins both of Princes and
People have left us too many both new and old pregnant examples.

Of this endeavor and intention of Philip, some of the Spaniards themselves
were afterward sensible, but the Netherlanders (for so for the greater part of
them, are they to be called) being now mastered into obedience, but yet not
willing to bear an arbitrary Government, though they would seem to bear the
yoke the better, from a long use, so that hence were hoped many great and
seasonable opportunities against Neighbor Kingdoms both by Sea and Land. Nor
was there wanting the seeds of future discord: for when Philip had undertaken
the French War, invited thereto rather by their Civil Discords, than the
Peoples will or assistance, after many delays and controvertings, a Tax was
granted by the States; but so, as if they had had a power to have denied it,
ordaining, That the very Collectors and Receivers thereof should pay toward
the same: This was charged upon them as an unaccustomed thing, and a crime by
them committed against their Liberty, which indeed then was but small. Hereupon
the meeting of the States being interpreted as a Meeting of confederacy, was
strictly forbidden: Nor did the Spaniards doubt to make the offense seem
greater, some of them ^ffecting honor, others minding only rapine, which while
the Laws stood, they knew would not admit them. How necessary it is for wise
Princes to keep in possession, since by their presence not only the Netherlands
formerly, but even Spain it self, had been kept in good order; yet
notwithstanding Phillip is persuaded, the Peace with France being concluded, to
take a Journey into Spain, or other parts of his Dominions, as well because he
feared some Troubles in that Kingdom, and the increase of the Turks power at
Sea, as also because he should be nearer to take a ca^e of and secure his
American Treasures. At this time also the ancient and magnificent Nobles
appeared glorious in their Dignities, but were mean in their Estates, either by
their own Luxury, or the Prince's Policy, who under pretense of Honors, had by
extraordinary Charges exhausted every honorable Person. Among all whom,
William, by succession of the Cabellonian Family, Prince of Aurange within a
Province of France, did excel the rest in diligence, courtesy and policy; but
originally descended from the ancient Family of Nassaw in Germany, which
formerly having contested with the Austrian Family for the Imperial Wreath,
afterward submitted himself under the Patronage of the more fortunate
overcomer. He was from his tenderest Infancy separated and taken from his
Father, who professed the German Religion; he was the Courts softer-Child, and
by Charles admitted into his Counsels, became not only skilled, and employed
in the conduct of War, but in very great Embassies: he was renowned by an
ancient stock of Nobility, had many large and rich Possessions in the
Netherlands, of a great Spirit, which embellished it self, his wisdom and
Prudence equalling his height of Spirit, so that he was capable even of the
greatest Fortune; cruelty and covetousness were absolute strangers with him:
Valiant in the search of the remotest matters, and when found a memory so
faithful as ever to retain them, by most pleasing allurements growing potent
with the People. He had the Government of Holland, Zealand and Vtrecht, and
within those bounds, his care and power managed all the affairs both of War
and Peace, the Law and the Sword; but Lamoral Count of Egmond, governed
Flanders and Artoyes, a man of a more open nature, and like a Soldier,
somewhat fierce, trusting much to his wealth and strength, much to his fame;
and the truth is, (had he not too much blamed others) in those two famous
Victories obtained against the French at St. Quintius and Gravelin, he merited
an immortal wreath of Honor and Renown.

These two far outwent all the rest, both in the greatness of their charges and
honor; for Brabant being a common part of the Empire, had no proper Governor:
the rest of the Provinces are mentioned hereafter. The Command of the Sea,
which in it self is most honorable, rested advantaged in Mommorency Count of
Horn, sprung from a noble Family in France. These great men thus qualified, the
Spaniard found he must remove before he should enjoy the Netherlands, according
to his aim; and it seemed the more easy to be done, because while they wholly
endeavor to attain estimation and Authority, and to that end, cavel at the
Spaniards haughtiness and pride, they had already made a breach in friendship:
in li^e manner, the rest of the Nobles in no manner (though but) comparatively
wealthy, made factions, and most of the meaner sort had shipwrack't their
credit, either by luxury, or among a wanting and necessitated Soldiery. In
which streights they were not continually thrust out of their power, as their
enemies expected, but they used all their industry and diligence, by all ways
and means to maintain their dignity: many in these public distempers, seeking
either to hide or amend their own, the vulgar rout were ready for mischief, and
would commit spoils on others, as they were led thereunto, either by their hope
or desperation. These bickerings among the Belgic Peers and Nobility,
discording in affection, did in some manner for a while, put a stop to the
careere of the audacious Spaniard, while part take part with the Prince of
Aurange, and the others before named, others follow the factions of several
great Houses. But neither the hatted of War, the suffering and undergoing its
evils, the love of peace, nor the loss of honors, no whit moved the Commons,
whose whole study was Merchandising and feasting; by the first to get money,
and by the second, prodigally to spend it: But they took it heavily to heart,
that men should be tormented or killed for any manner of worship of God, and
this was irksome, even to those that were not within the fear or danger of that
cruelty. Long did grief stand wavering between sighs and tears, before the
incitements of good could make it burst out. Of this matter, because to some it
gave cause, to others only pretense, I will discover it fully from the very
beginning.

Christian Religion, that of old was reverenced for its naked simplicity, was
shortly after set out with the various flourishe^ of congregated Philosophers,
by the additions of each, according to their several fancies, among whom also
Jews, Greeks, and others, cast in the several Ceremonies of their particular
Countries, that so the Majesty of their Religion might the more splendidly
appear (nor indeed was it without reason), but these continuing long free to be
used or left, at last admitted by the Opinions of some private Families, or the
advice and judgment of some Churches, by little and little increased by use,
till the Eloquence of the Learned, and the suffrages and Decrees of Counsels,
changed them into necessity and Law: which, through the ignorance of succeeding
times, and by subtle and dark disputations and circumloquutions, have been ever
since defended. In which Interim, the Bishops of Rome, men of an unlimited
Authority, emulous Constantinople being removed, as also the Cities of Asia and
Egypt, established a kind of Ecclesiastical Kingdom, wherein the Cardinals
being as Judges Laterall, they have assumed the height of Empire, and have
continued in a long Series of Dominion, none in any manner contradicting them,
because most of the European Nations had received their Christianity from
instructors sent from Rome. Hence it was that the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Latin Church were all received, and the Latin Tongue only used in all acts
of devotion by the Church. But they, after they had thus brought all things
Sacred within their own reach, set forth new Decrees, interpret the old, take
the holy Scripture out of the hands of the vulgar, protesting it a most
pernicious thing, if an unlearned curiosity should dive into the understanding
of so great a Mystery. Thus turning all things ^o their own honor and profit,
and so great a liberty is given by the Priests, that vice is come to that
pitch, as they themselves confess it wants correcting. But by a sudden breaking
forth of Learning, which dispelled, by a new way of preaching, the darkness of
that age: there did appear, some who promised as well to reform Religion as the
arts, and to call all things relating to Religion, to the Test of the holy
Scripture.

This was well pleasing to the People, who weary of the charges and injuries
they underwent, did exceedingly rejoice, that now they should no longer serve
God, and seek for Heaven, with anxious dread, and in blind obedience, but with
a more firm and settled confidence, and with fewer Precepts. Neither were some
Princes backward in breaking in upon this Priestly Power, which had now almost
subjected unto it self the Kingly Diadem. But here the Proverb was truly
manifested, the hand always follows the hurt, certain people of troublesome
natures, that could not endure any quiet: what was publicly to be desired,
they will though private persons, extort, and now they fall together by the
ears about the manner, nor will they admit any to compose the differences. But
it was no easy matter to pull asunder those joints which for so many Ages had
grown together. And the discomposed face of Affairs was very displeasing, the
peoples minds being set a madding, and no apparent way to bring them into order
again: for here were revived the opinions of Husse in Germany, of Wicliffe in
England, of the Waldenses in France, whence by the meetings of their several
Inhabitants by the company of the foreign Soldiers, and by commerce and
Trading, they were transpersed over the Netherlands, and grew common. And
liberty being allowed of once, changing brought in many impious and nefarious
Sects: Nor would any one believe, that here was any Land more fertile in the
producing such kinds of Monsters in those times, than the Netherlands, if he
should but thoroughly look over the villainous and reproachful Speeches of David
George of Delph, and the seditious sayings of John Bucoldus of Leyden (...) of
these people, but rather slighted all convenience that were offered him for the
survey and knowledge of their Regions. He was indeed an equal Judge of Virtues,
and shares of Honors, behaving himself as one and the (...) Prince to all his
People not suffering such daily (...) (...) Spaniards were (...) to in their
(...) (...), endeavoring to be present in these his Netherlands, if his
Affairs would bear it, and is hindered not his taking care for his more
immediate (...).

He that was here the Princes Lieutenant, had a (...) Glass^ of Counselors. To
the first of whom, was the care and managery of Peace and War. To the second,
the distribution of Justice according to Law, with the moderation thereof by
equity; as also the power of judging and determining the public Controversies
of those Regions. The third supervised the Treasury, and therein took care of
the (...) Wealth, or to supply his Necessities.

That first Council or Assembly customarily made up of the most noble of the
Dutch, and eminent and famous for the many great and weighty Affairs there
frequently handled, we will call by a proper name, The Senate; To which Philip
between the greatness of his Kingdoms, and the informations of such who
flattered the actions of his Youth, forming himself to the Spanish Mode, and
using no other language, used to come with an assumed a^stere gravity, few
words, and eschewing of much company. And when his Father had withdrawn
himself, that he might spend his old age in a private retirement, they
presently urge him to raise new Imposts, in whom the old ambition and thirst of
Rule, not yet repressed by experiments, was such, as would scarcely suffer
either measure or bounds. Nor is it to be doubted, but that most beautiful
order of Government gave credit to the faith and virtue of the Spaniards: How
great a desire harbored in the Breasts of Princes to subvert the Law, which
kept under the violent abullitions of their power; the notable ruins both of
Princes and People have left us too many both new and old pregnant examples.

Of this endeavor and intention of Philip, some of the Spaniards themselves
were afterward sensible, but the Netherlanders (for so for the greater part of
them, are they to be called) being now mastered into obedience, but yet not
willing to bear an arbitrary Government, though they would seem to bear the
yoke the better, from a long use, so that hence were hoped many great and
seasonable opportunities against Neighbor Kingdom both by Sea and Land. Nor
was there wanting the seeds of future discord: for when Philip had undertaken
the French War, invited thereto rather by their Civil Discords, than the
Peoples will or assistance, after many delays and controvertings, a Tax was
granted by the States; but so, as if they had had a power to have denied it,
ordaining. That the very Collectors and Receivers thereof should pay toward
the same: This was charged upon them as an unaccustomed thing, and a crime by
them committed against their Liberty, which indeed then was but small. Hereupon
the meeting of the States being interpreted as a Meeting of confederacy, was
strictly forbidden: Nor did the Spaniards doubt to make the offense seem
greater, some of them affecting honor, others minding only rapine, which while
the Laws stood, they knew would not admit them. How necessary it is for wise
Princes to keep in possession, since by their presence not only the Netherlands
formerly, but even Spain it self, had been kept in good order; yet
notwithstanding Phillip is persuaded, the Peace with France being concluded; to
take a Journey into Spain, or other parts of his Dominions, as well because he
feared some Troubles in that Kingdom, and the increase of the Turks power at
Sea, as also because he should be nearer to take a care of and secure his
American Treasures. At this time also the ancient and magnificent Nobles
appeared glorious in their Dignities, but were mean in their Estates, either by
their own Luxury, or the Prince's Policy, who under pretense of Honors, had by
extraordinary Charges exhausted every honorable Person. Among all whom,
William, by succession of the Cabellonian Family, Prince of Aurange within
Province of France, did excel the rest in diligence, courtesy and policy* but
originally descended from the ancient Family of Nassau in Germany, which
formerly having contested with the Austrian Family for the Imperial Wreath,
afterward submitted himself under the Patronage of the more fortunate
overcomer. He was from his tenderest Infancy separated and taken from his
Father, who professed the German Religion; he was the Courts foster-Child, and
by Charles admitted into his Counsels, became not only skilled, and employed
in the conduct of War, but in very great Embassies: he was renowned by an
ancient stock of Nobility, had many large and rich Possessions in the
Netherlands, of a great Spirit, which embellished it self, his wisdom and
Prudence equalling his height of Spirit, so that he was capable even of the
greatest Fortune; cruelty and covetousness were absolute strangers with him:
Valiant in the search of the remorest matters, and when found a memory so
faithful as ever is retain them, by most pleasing allurements growing potent
with the People. He had the Government of Holland, Zealand and Vtrecht, and
within those bounds, his care and power managed all the affairs both of War
and Peace, the Law and the Sword; but Lamoral Count of Egmond, governed
Flanders and Artoyes, a man of a more open nature, and like a Soldier,
somewhat fierce, trusting much to his wealth and strength, much to his fame;
and the truth is, (had he not too much blamed others) in those two famous
Victories obtained against the French at St. Quintius and Gravelin, he merited
an immortal wreath of Honor and Renown.

These two far outwent all the rest, both in the greatness of their charges and
honor; for Brabant being a common part of the Empire, had no proper Governor:
the rest of the Provinces are mentioned hereafter. The Command of the Sea,
which in it self is most honorable, rested advantaged in Mommorency Court of
Horn, sprung from a noble Family in France. These great men thus qualified, the
Spaniard found he must remove before he should enjoy the Netherlands, according
to his aym^ and it seemed the more easy to be done, because while they wholly
endeavor to attain estimation and Authority, and to that end, cavel at the
Spaniards haughtiness and pride, they had already made a breach in friendship:
in li^^ manner; the rest of the Nobles in no manner (though but) comparatively
wealthy, made factions, and most of the meaner sort had shipwrack't their
credit, either by luxury, or among a wanting and necessitated Soldiery. In
which streights they were not continually thrust out of their power, as their
enemies expected, but they used all their industry and diligence, by all ways
and means to maintain their dignity: many in these public distempers, seeking
either to hide or amend their own, the vulgar tout were ready for mischief, and
would commit spoils on others, as they were led thereunto, either by their hope
or desperation. These bickerings among the Belgic Pee^s and Nobility,
discording in affection, did in some manner, for a while, put a stop to the
careere of the audacious Spaniard, while part take part with the Prince of
Aurange, and the others before named, others follow the factions of several
great Houses. But neither the hatred of War, the suffering and undergoing its
evils, the love of peace, nor the loss of honors, no whit moved the Commons,
whose whole study was Merchandising and feasting; by the first to get money,
and by the second, prodigally to spend it: But they took it heavily to heart,
that men should be tormented or killed for any manner of worship of God, and
this was irksome, even to those that were not within the fear or danger of that
cruelty. Long did grief stand wavering between sighs and tears, before the
incitements of good could (...) it (...) out. Of this matter, because to some
it ^ (...), to other only pretense, I will discover it fully (...) the very
beginning.

Christian Religion, that of old was reverenced for its no^ simplicity, was
shortly after set out with the various flourish^ of congregated Philosophers,
by the additions of each, according to their several fancies, among whom also
Je^^ Greeks, and others, cast in the several Ceremonies of the particular
Countries, that so the Majesty of their Religion might the more splendidly
appear (nor indeed was it without reason), but these continuing long free to be
used or (...) at last admitted by the Opinions of some private Families, ^ the
advice and judgment of some Churches, by little and little increased by use,
till the Eloquence of the Learned and the suffrages and Decrees of Counsels,
changed them into necessity and Law: which, through the ignorance of succeeding
times, and by subtle and dark disputations and circum^^ q^utions, have been
ever since defended. In which Interi^^ the Bishops of Rome, men of an unlimited
Authority, emulo^ Constantinople being removed, as also the Cities of Asia and
Egypt, established a kind of Ecclesiastical Kingdom, where in the Cardinals
being as Judges Laterall, they have assume the height of Empire, and have
continued in a long Series of Dominion, none in any manner contradicting them,
because most of the European Nations had received their Christianity from
instructors sent from Rome. Hence it was, that the Ri^^ and Ceremonies of the
Latin Church were all received, and the Latin Tongue only used in all acts
of devotion by the Church (...) they, after they had thus brought all things
Sacred (...) their own reach, set forth new Decrees, interp^^ the old, take the
holy Scripture out of the hands of the vulga^^ protesting it a most p^^^cious
thing, if an unlearned curiosity should dive into the understanding of so great
a Mystery. Thus turning all things to their own honor and profit, and so great
a liberty is given by the Priests, that vice is come to the pitch, as they
themselves confess it wants correcting. But by a sudden breaking forth of
Learning, which dispelled, by a new way of preaching, the darkness of that age:
there did appear, some who promised as well to reform Religion as the (...),
and to call all things relating to Religion, to the Test of the holy Scripture.

This was well pleasing to the People, who weary of the charges and injuries
they underwent, did exceedingly rejoice, that now they should no longer serve
God, and seek for Heaven, with anxious dread, and in blind obedience, but with
a more firm and settled confidence, and with fewer Precepts. Neither were some
Princes backward in breaking in upon this Priestly Power, which had now almost
subjected unto it self the Kingly Diadem. But here the Proverb was truly
manifested, the hand always follows the hurt, certain people of troublesome
natures, that could not endure any quiet: what was publicly to be desired,
they will, though private persons, extort, and now they fall together by the
ears about the manner, nor will they admit any to compose the differences. But
it was no easy matter to pull asunder those joints which for so many Ages had
grown together. And the discomposed face of Affairs was very displeasing, the
peoples minds being set a mad^ing, and no apparent way to bring them into order
again: for here were revived the opinions of Husse in Germany, of Wicliffe in
England, of the Waldenses in France, whence by the meeting (...) their several
inhabitants, by the company of the forreig^ (...) ^^diers, and by commerce and
Trading, they were transpersed over the Netherlands, and grew common. And
liberty being allowed of once, changing brought in many impious and nefarious
Sects: Nor would any one believe, that there was any Land more fertile in the
producing such kinds of Monsters in those times, than the Netherlands, if he
should but thoroughly look over the villainous and reproachful Speeches of David
George of Delph, and the seditious sayings of John Bucoldus of Loydem against
Christ: Both which being Hollanders, the one being a Painter of Glass, by
counterfeiting divine inspirations, ^^ more than an ordinary living, and begot
a Sect to survive him. The other, a kind of a Tailor, who began a War, and
also to set up a Kingdom at Muister, but both with unlucky (though deserved)
event.

I have observed the wisest of Princes, to have endeavored remedies, by way of
prevention, against these contraries in Religion, in regard of the greatness of
the error, and the multitude of the errings; As when there has been equal
power, sometimes two of a Sect have been brought forth into public, under
strict custody of the Law, that they might not by that pretense make a
disturbance.

Another time, when the Emperor and his Council have, upon heating, found
cause to condemn any, such have been excommunicate, and thrown out of the
Church. And if there were any more heinous mistrust lay upon them, then were
they also deba^red from private meetings: But we may not utterly condemn those,
who punished such as held forth Doctrines obnoxious, and dissonant to good
manners, either by banishment, or Sequestration of their Honors and Estates:
But that Judgment belonged to the Magistrate, who, by such punishments, cannot
be said to revenge their own injuries. It is granted, that Priests may correct
those that deviate through ignorance, and to keep them from participating of
the Sacred Mysteries; and then too, there was a lawful course used for
discovery thereof, facts were punished, thoughts went free; but to rage and
tyranize over the lives of those, who have neither forfeited their faith to God
nor their Princes, seems barbarously inhumane in Bishops, and not altogether
safe for Princes themselves. But the Roman Bishops, crept on by little and
little, to that height, that they strengthened that Law by terror, which was
obtained by subtlety, which secular Princes, favoring too much their
greatness, made sharp and rigorous as against Traitors; for nothing would
satisfy them, but to have as sharp Laws against such as usurped at their
Decrees, as if they had Rebelled against God himself by Blasphemy. Nor was it
only enjoined to Bishops, to visit their Diocesses; but also they were wont,
when they thought it meet, to send Inquisitors, with a most ample Power, (which
first began about Four Hundred Years since) and these chose to be assistant
unto whom they pleased; who had Authority to examine upon Oath any person
whatsoever, wheresoever, or under whose Obedience soever he lived: And by these
subtle Dealings, they not only did wind themselves into the Secrets of
Families, but dived into the Closet of Men's Hearts; for as any one was more or
less Conscientiously fearful of Perjury, so did he accordingly, more or less,
by closer or more open Discoveries, betray himself. But if this were not, yet
were it a hard matter for men to conceal themselves there, where it is
accounted Religion to fall down before the Shrines of Saints, their Host
exposed in the Churches, or else when it is openly carried about. Suspicion
sends a man to Prison; but the meanest Discovery is enough to commit him to
Torture. Nor is it permitted, for the Accused Person, Guiltless or Guilty, to
hear or refute the Witness; as if such Allowance would be dangerous to the
Witnesses, and destructive to Truth it self. The Temporal Judges are commanded
to punish all that are condemned, although it only proceed from Ecclesiastical
Cen^ure, in the cruel executing whereof, many strive to show their Zeal and
Piety: Others there were, who did foresee these manner of Judgments, to be
subject not only to Scandal and Hatred, but Covetousness; because when Goods
happened not to be Confiscate, they would not suffer them to be taken out of
their Cognizance and Power, to the use of the Parties, until they had
satisfied the Charge of the Complaint: But the Spanish Inquisition, for
Sharpness and Cruelty, exceeds all other; for the management whereof, some
Monks, of the Order of St. Dominike are chosen; and it was of old, and
originally, instituted against the Jews and Moors; who being, by their Kings,
compelled to own and profess Christianity, did yet clandestinely relapse into
the abj^^^d Errors.

This, at first, was, not unworthily, made use of against those Barbarous
Nations, though with their Hatred; but afterward it was by a wondrous Sagacity
of Inquiry, laid premiscuously as a Burden upon all. For the most wary
speeches, nay, silence it self, Decoles and Treacheries in Friendship; nay,
sideling and oblique Accusations were admitted so that it was plainly evident,
no man could behave himself with Innocence, as could preserve his Safety and
Honor, if they were minded to question it; which makes me think that they are
not to be mistrusted for Forging, who say only the real Truth, not out of
Envy, that they have heard in Spain it self, and almost all over Italy, most
grievous Complaint of this Inquisition, made by Romanists themselves in the
very City of Rome.

In the Netherlands, the Emperor Charles first set out a^ Edict concerning
Religion, after he had condemned Luther upon a full Hearing before the Synod of
Worms in Germany and here it began from pecuniary Mults, and other Corporeal
Sufferings, to punish with Death; and by reason of the Lenity of the Judges,
the laws were site ched, and seve^ times proclaimed. There was likewise great
Care taken that no Books should be published, but what had the Approbation of
the Doctors of Lonvayne: They who would Preach, or argue out of the Scriptures,
were fain to meet ^ private Assemblies; Death, by the Sword, was threat^ unto
Men, and to Women Inhumation, or Burial alive, together with the Confiscation
of their Goods: yet so, that the ^ight first come in, and acknowledge their
Error, for the Obstinate were to be burned. Also, if any detected ^ (...)
false Opinions, and innocent in the rest; wo^^^ repeat, he should be degraded
from all his Dignities: They who harbored such, and did not bring them forth,
should be liable to the same punishments, as the guilty themselves, but Rewards
and Impurity to all Accusess. Many severe Edicts were set forth against
suspected Persons, and such as fled, but most terrible against Relapsers: And
the very Judges, though terrified by Penalties, yet, least, under the pretense
of Pity, they should moderate the Laws, had Inquisitors, fully instructed by
Caesar himself joined to them; Only the City of Antwerp, whom a moderate
Liberty, together with extraordinary Obedience had mightily enriched, daring to
complain to the Germans and English, that the Severity of that Edict, had
driven away the best part of her Commerce, obtained, that Strangers should be a
little more kindly used; and that, that part of the Decree whereby Alienations,
and Testaments of Delinquents, even before Judgment, should be rescinded, (an
evident Ruin of all Merchandising) should not in that City be of any force:
These Laws being Dictated by a Disposition, or Nature, in it self otherwise not
at all cruel, we may the less wonder, that the strength of Religion made them,
being impatient of any Dissentors; which, as in it self, should rather mollify
and unite men's minds, yet is, by the wickedness of Humane Frailty, made the
main Cause of most bitter Discords and Factions: Most of the Princes made it
their Business, to bind up the United Body of the Commonwealth in one Religion,
as in one Heart, and to be as well fixed, and well satisfied in the Reason of
Sacred, and of Profane Laws; which might, certainly, if they were not so
commonly admitted to vulgar handling: whereby Caesar also was the more easily
persuaded, after the German Method, that they might not with the Despised
Reverence of the Clergy, cast off the Bond of their Obedience to him, by some
few Penalties, to take away the strength of that Poison, which had its only
Aliment from Liberty. But the Event proved quite contrary, for though many
suffered and perished, by putting this in effect; yet instead of a Decrease
from thence, they infinitely multiplied; and the Reason hereof might be,
because those things which we corporally act only, by the Fear and Threatening
of Death and Torments, are obnoxious to Authority and Power: But the Mind, as
it is free, and not to be limited or bound up, if it receive any Principles or
Documents into it self, it will not be evinced either by Fire or Sword, but
rather incites and scores danger, accounting it a Blessed and Glorious thing,
to suffer. Ignominies and Cruelty, not being Conscious to themselves of having
committed Evil, which they learnt not only from the Primitive Christians, but
many Examples of these very Times. For after the Butchery of no less than One
Hundred Thousand Men, to make a Trial if this Fire were to be quenched with
Blood, such vast Multitudes made Insurrections all over the Netherlands, that
sometimes the public Executions, especially if upon any more eminent Criminal
or Exemplary Torments, were hindered and impeded by Seditions. And this moved
the Queen of Hungary, that had the Government of these Netherlands, under her
Brother Charles, to go to him while he yet staid in Germany, and to let him
know, how great a slaughter those things, which were pretended for Remedies,
had made.

But Philip, not at all moved or frighted with these things, did more earnestly
press what his Father had begun, by sharp and threatening Edicts, and preparing
other Remedies, which might repress this Evil now getting Age: The Cause, above
all others, and which we may with most Reason conjecture, was the Pope's
Authority, by which he had ordered many of these things to be done; For having
obtained, by the general Consent of so many Nations, to Distribute of Kingdoms,
and to be a Moderator, and Judge of Law, Equity and Right, while he by
submissive Obedience, and large Gifts, was made their Friend and Ally, they
might confidently rest assured, in the Success of their Affairs, which he had
thoroughly learned by his Fathers, and his own Experiments, How terrible it was,
and injurious to his, Affairs, to have that Power adverse to him, from which,
even they who had Conquered it in War, were glad to crave a Pardon: These were
the state of Affairs, and these the Conditions of the People, when, upon the
Departure of King Philip, strife began about the Chief Government. In the
attaining whereof, both the Prince of Aurange, and Count Egmond, had pitched
their Hopes and Expectancie; but neither of them had it, for this Reason, least
either of them singly being preferred, should, by perpetual private Feudes,
disturb the Peace of the Commonwealth.

There was likewise Ambitions of the same sort among Women, to wit, Christian
that had married Francis Duke of Lorrain, Uncle of the Emperor Charles and
Margaret, base Daughter of the said Charles, first married to Alexander
Medices, afterward to Octavius Farnese Duke of Parma. The Prince of Aurange,
and the Netherlanders, endeavored by all means to promote Christian: but
Ferdinande Alvares of Toledo, Duke of Alva, and Anthony Perenot Granvell Bishop
of Artoyes, having been jointly Servants and Counselors to his Father in his
greatest Affairs, and by Philip received with the like Honor, were of a
contrary Opinion, for Margaret. Alva, one of the greatest and noblest
Spaniards, in many places esteemed a great and famous Soldier, by the getting
some notable Victories for the Emperor, had won great Renown: Perenottes
Father, one Nicholas a Burgundian, as he was of a mean Stock, so he was more
readily obsequious, and by his extraordinary Watchfulness and Industry, so
acquired the Humor of the Court, that he became a Privy Counselor, and had
the keeping of the Emperors Seal; in which, having performed his Duty, by the
space of Twenty Years, he at last left the same to the enjoyment of his Son.

But as Alva's proud and cruel Nature, so Perenottes subtle Disposition, while
they only seek to enlarge the Grandezza of the Prince, who likewise desired
nothing so much, they do both of them find fault with as many Nations as they
knew, especially the Germans; who imputing the Landgrave's Imprisonment, to no
other than their Counsels, did esteem and reckon their too great Power, among
the principal Causes of the War. Again, when it came to the Point of giving the
Government of the Netherlands to Margaret, although there wanted not specious
Causes enough for the giving of that Counsel, as such a Tie of Blood, and that
her Husband would be a Pledge for her Fidelity, and her Person be in the
Command of the Spaniards, both in the City and Castle: Yet the departure of the
King, no less suspected by the Great Ones, than bewailed by the meaner sort
inflamed the angry Minds of the Nobles. And that very Day was the chief, in
which Philip was solicited for Liberty, and that the Netherlanders showed
themselves contumacious or saucy toward their Prince: For just upon his
Departure, resolving to leave a Garrison of above Three Thousand Spaniards,
under pretense of defending the Borders against the French; but, in truth, that
he might, at his pleasure, bridle the Licentiousness in Religion, which had
been increased by a Company of Foreign Soldiers in the Wars: The Prince of
Aurange, and Count Egmond, whom he appointed Commanders of those Forces, on
purpose to assuage their Envy, refused the Charge as being contrary to their
Laws: and at the very instant of the Kings going away, the Assembly of the
States, whom he had only called together; to give a Farewell to, asked him,
That he would remove away with him those Soldiers, when they would not endure;
adding also, a Warning, or Monition, That he should use the Counsel of none
but Netherlanders, in the Government of the Netherlands. And from hence, there
sprung an implacable Hatred, because they seemed to give out, as if they
understood the Art of Governing, and foresaw the approaching Tyranny. But
openly He agreed to their Request, and thereupon forbore to add Gemessa
Figueroa ^ Spaniard, and Earl of Feria, unto that Great Council, though lately
destined to that Intent. But in this Dissimulation, he nourished Anger in his
Heart, and in his Mind studied nothing but Revenge: So departing, but
disdaining to pass the Borders of Strangers, he went by Sea, where in the
Shipwreck of his Fleet, through many great and imminent Dangers, with much ado
he got safe to the Port of Gallicia.

The Soldiery for a little while after remained there, but very unruly and
burdensome, until at Gerbis, or the Island of Gelues, (called by the Ancients
Meninx) having received a loss by the Turks, they were taken from them (as the
Netherlanders interpreted it) not so in favor of them, as to supply the Loss
there received. In the mean while, the Government of the Netherlands. Nominally
was in Margaret, but in Deed and Power in Granuel; in whom, Industry,
Vigilance, Ambition, Luxury, Covetousness, and, in truth, all manner both of
Good and Evil, were eminently to be seen. Nor did he advantage himself more by
his own Prudence, than by the Folly and Sloth of Others; who growing weak by
Riot, had let slip those Opportunities of present Power, which, of old, was not
without great difficulty and hazard to be attained. He therefore minding
cunningly, to oblige his Prince, by diving into Secrets, and by advancing his
Followers, contracted unto himself, the Intriques of all Embassies, and all
sorts of Characters, and what ever else was to be known, either by Spies, or
Pensioners.

Between this Grandee, and Count Horn, there were some old Gudges; first,
concerning Lalayn. Count Horn's Sisters Husband, whom he taxed with the Crime
of an ill performed Embassy; Another was, that Horn had missed the
Praefectureship, or Lieutenancy of Gelderland, (which he had much sought after)
for want only of one word's speaking of his.

He had not yet Declared himself to the Prince of Aurange, the only hope of
increasing his Dignities resting upon him; but, as the Custom of Ambition is,
had hitherto only looked upon him with an evil Eye, least he should grow too
great for him: For which cause when Magistrates were to be chosen at Antwerp,
he had endeavored to procure him to be absent: But the Prince of Aurange, who
above all things, the empty Boast or bare Title of Honor, and that one Man, a
stranger, and of men Extract, should possess what he listed, not without the
disgrace both of himself and others, stirred up with many provocations Count
Egmond, who then by chance had observed himself to have received some Injuries
from Granuel in assuming to himself, and not bestowing the Governorship of
H^sdin, and the Abbacy of Trully, which Egmond had desired for his Kinsman, and
by him was denied: Hereupon, many of the Companions of the Order of the Golden
Fleece, (for at this time they were often called to meet together by Margaret,
that they might Consult about Defending and Fortifying the Borders, drew their
Colleagues into Parties, as if these Managements of Affairs tended wholly to all
their Disparagements, by whose Counsels formerly the Princes Business had so
well succeeded: After which, these Three Noblemen, to shun any further
Converse with Anthony Granuel, whereas they used to sit together in the Senate,
publicly sell out with him. Antony seeing this, began to bestir himself, to be
able to resist those men, who were not only powerful in themselves, but
strengthened by the Love and Favor of the People: To which purpose, he drew to
his Side, by Benefits and Favors, Men active and ingenuous; among whom, were
Charles Barlamont, and Viglius Zuich^m, which were also of the same Senate, He
being the Chief of the Treasury. This, though not of any great Family, yet
famous for his Understanding, and Knowledge of Affairs, was the Chief of the
Judges of the Law, who by their secret Meetings, and private Conferences,
concerning unknown matters, made such an exulcerated Odium appear against them,
as became the public sign and token of faction.

Now Philip, before his departure, that he might the better settle affairs of
Religion, had obtained from Paul the fourth then Pope, that all His Provinces
of the Netherlands, should be exempt from the care and charge of foreign
Bishops. For the Archbishops of Colen and Rhomes, which were, of old, chief
Cities, that of Lower Germany, this of Gallia Belgica, had nothing now left
them of that so antique division besides the name. Their Jurisdiction therefore
being taken away, together with the Bishops of Liege, Triers, Oiuburgh,
Munster, and Paterborgh, losing also part of their Command, and three Bishops
in upper Burgundy, to wit of Mechlin, Utrecht, and Cambray, renounced, and
under these many more, of whom in the Borders of Brabant, Antwerp, and Senlis:
of Gelderland, Rurimunde: of Flanders, Gaunt, Ipro, and Bruges: of Holland,
Harlem: of Zeland, Middleburgh: of Overissel, Daventry: of Artoyes also with
Audornarum: thence Namur, Groining and Torney, Cities that bear the names of
the Countries they stand in. This was an ancient Custom, and much used by the
Popes, upon the multiplying of people, and that Religion might be the more
easily taken care of, to erect new Bishops Seas, so to share among many the
burden which grew too great for one, and the Emperor Charles minding other
things, had omitted this care which of old was taken by the Princes of the
Austrian Family. But the causes of the reviving this Policy or appointment were
hated and grown odious almost to all. One was, that they who should overlook
and inquire into the manners of the Clergy, and the peoples errors, might be
more in number and nearer, and this the very Authors thereof openly professed,
complaining that vices did mightily increase by the neglect or connivence of
those who should take care to prevent the same.

Another was imputed to Granvell's cunning, who had take from Rome, both the
Bishopric of Mechlin, and the Dignity of a Cardinal, most men guessing in the
future, that would be as when Priests of old had by Prerogative a right ^
suffrage in the Assembly of the States, that he being the chi^ of that number,
with others which he should, by his mea^ and endeavors, allure (for the right
of naming Bishops w^ by the Popes granted to the King, reserving to themselves
only the right of approbation) might, by an underhand confederacy with the
Spaniards, suppress their liberty. When Revenues were to have been settled upon
Bishops, out of Monastical Possessions, the Abbots were the first that gain
said that purpose, of which society, at that time, all, with free and
unanimous consent, avowed, they would not admit underminers of their Wealth and
Authority: The Brabander^ confederates with these, by Books, commend the care
of the Laws to the Prince, wherein they advise, that Ecclesiastical Promotions
should not be increased without the consent of the Nobility and Commons; Hereto
we e added many answers of men professing Justice, That it was an act of
irreligion and profaneness to tear away the pious and charitable liberalities
of other men, and to question the judgments and integrity of dying persons, by
diverting their gifts to other uses than they intended them. And some of the
ancient Bishops, especially He of Liege, cried out, the Pope was circumvented,
and with all eagerness prosecuted their right. Hereupon many other Cities
refused to receive their new Bishops, and who were admitted, were so generally
hated, that they could never officiate without mocks and taunts. Now the Nobles
taking notice of the general hate of the Netherlanders against Granvell, did
think it most necessary, for the better managing of their public affairs; That
there should be a general Assembly of the State: Therefore as often as there
happened complaints of the poverty of their Treasury, or of the fear of Seditions
(for there was much pay behind, and due to the Soldier both Horse and Foot,
and Merchants began to be restrained among Foreigners for public debts, and
the Tributes promised for nine years were even now at an end.) They began to
cry up the old Custom, of which (they said) good Princes would never think
amiss.

What marvel is it now, that all things were in a deplorable Condition, when,
in all their evils, the basest flattery could rob them of their only remedy.
The adverse party took notice of all, to little purpose, therefore it was for
them to dissemble how far their malice tended, in prosecuting, with hatred, the
man that had been industrious for the King, more than they would have had; and
therefore, the Ministers of State, under Philip, were to inquire out any that
were emulous of the Princes Power, and who those should be, to whom all would
submit in this great alteration, the Abbots were troubled for their own private
lucre sake. The Nobility were obnoxious to these; and the rest, under the
notion of the States, were doubtful, and in suspense, for the use of their
temporal usages. So that dissembling here modesty and obedience, their
foresight of, and providing against dangers, and the Laws left to them by
their Ancestors, and virtuous Discourses, every one did strive to make himself
greatest; Furthermore, those three before named, taking the boldness to write
Letters to the King, denied it possible to divert the public ruin of the
State, unless Perenotte were removed from his abominated Power, praying also
for themselves, an exemption from the Assembly of States: but promising very
largely, as to his Government, his Sisters Dignity, and the maintenance of the
Roman Religion.

Philip sends them an answer, full of courteous Language, wherein he said, that
he did not use to set aside Ministers of State, without hearing and perpending
their cause of Complaint; but if he could not have his Revenue, upon whose
payment he did depend, he would that some of them should come to him, from
whom, being present, he would take cognizance of the whole matter. They
earnestly write back again, That it was not for them to lay crimes to any ones
charge but they believed it was a part of his duty, rightly and truly ^ have
informed his Prince, but whether he had so done or not, the imminent danger, if
they should be silent, would speak; and they hoped, that their Births and
Merits would gain no less credit ^ their betters, than their words; but now
chiefty, when the absen^ of Governors from their Charges could not be well
admitted.

The King was much moved at these lines, but finding necessary a little to
yield, he sends secretly to Grannell (whom now these foregoing passages began
to vex, partly a^ a by-stander, and partly as being guilty to himself of the
deadly hatred of the people toward him) commanding him to depart into
Burgundy, whither he was ordered to retire for avoiding the danger of his life
so much fought and laid wait for by his enemies. And a long time after, he kept
all the Netherlands, or the greatest part, in fear of his return, but few
joining with him in his hopes, till at length, either by Command, or his own
free will, he went to Rome. There they who hitherto had been kept out of
office, were, at the Request of the Regent Margaret, recalled in the Senate of
Assembly, and that they might give some proofs of themselves, they begin with
all diligence to advise and take notice of choice things; of others there was
no great need. And the praise and thanks of dissembling their Crimes, was so
much the greater toward them, by how much he would divert them from the sense
of their evil, so that now, acting wholly as Victors, they had taken all
things into their own hands, whether belonging to public accounts, or to the
Law, saying, it was the Sovereign pleasure of the Senate, and that to it all
the other Assemblies ought their Service and Obedience.

But how many faults do attend where some few bear the Sway, and in how little
time do they grow ripe? The Kings Revenew neglected, the Authority of the Law
among potent discords laid aside, the greatest Crimes and villainies unpunished,
Honors given for favor, either much done through ambition, by such as coveted
the praise of all, or else evils, never to be remedied, overcharge the Credit
of the great ones; They dissembled less in point of Religion, maintaining it
was better taught by persuasion than compulsion, till at length they found,
what they supposed as remedies, proved rather food to nourish the Disease: But
when they granted this in favor of the People, whether it were out of their
own disposition averse from cruelty, or that they suspected under the veil of
the Inquisition, that there lay hid slavery or danger to the valiantest men, I
will not undertake to discover: But this is most evident, that they themselves
did not depart from the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, and he who was the
chief in all these Consultations, in his own Principality of Aurange, would
suffer nothing in matters of Religion to be changed. Besides this, and for
other weighty Causes, Egmond was sent into Spain, to pry into the Kings nature
and affections, and is there received with so much Honor, and such high Gifts,
as no man before him ever had the like.

Here Philip protests much of affection to the Netherlanders, and that he may
prevent any desire of his return to them again, he says, he has resolved in
himself for the Turkish War, and likewise gave him some hope, that he would
moderate the rigor of the Sentence, and Edict of the Bishops; least either by
severity or impunity, he might provoke the Secturies licentiousness, whereas in
truth he intended to make it far more strict: For when first he came into
Spain, and found there many, and some of the chief, of the Covent of St.
Isidore, to think otherwise than they ought of the received Rites and Doctrine,
he was not only content to have commanded into the fire, Learned men and noble
Women, but rejoiced to see the same; with the terror whereof, having appeased
the discords there, he believed either the sloth or timidity of his Judges
hindered, if not envyed him the like success in the Netherlands; And at this
time Elizabeth his Wife, Sister of Charles King of France being sent, together
with the Duke of Alva, to ^ajon, whether the same Charles and his Mother
Medicos, met at a Conference, for rooting out innovators and disturbers of
Religion, he bound himself by some private Covenants, to be assistant equally
therein: The like League was made between Henry and Philip, after the Peace of
Cambray, and this being by the imprudence of Henry, discovered to the Prince of
Orange in his Embassy into France, as he was by chance ^ hunting, made him
often assert with Protestations, that he only feared those Counsels which were
concealed,

Egmond was scarce returned, full of his vain hope, but the Kings Letters
immediately followed, cruelly commanding the Inquisitors to execute judgment
upon violators, and novelties in Religion, adding certain other Assistants to
the number of the Judges; and though Viglius, and many with him, persuaded the
contrary, presently they were published, to the great trouble of all men's
minds, and shortly after, were the Decrees of the Council of Trent put forth:
by whom nothing being amended, either in Doctrine or Ceremonies, some whole
Nations separated and fell off from the Church of Rome; only there was a
Decree made for reformation of Priests Lives and Manners, wherewith indeed they
were offended, but never cured. And truly in the Netherlands, those men's lives
were most vicious, who being admitted into the Sacred Order of Priesthood, got
nothing thereby but the name and Revenues, yet were these men most fierce for
the publishing of these Decrees, which in some places were obeyed, but with
exception underwritten to which Philip had consented, that they should not
derogate from any man's right, which was added, by reason of Patronages of
Churches, and bounds of Jurisdictions.

But the Brabanders, with one free consent, went further: First, their Cities,
and afterward the Senate or States of their Nation, did Declare, That this
Custom of the Inquisition, insensibly creeping in daily in a high manner into
their Countries, was against the Law, by which all their Judgments should be
directed, and which should set Bounds to the Priesthood wherein they should
walk. The Constancy of these, was followed by others; but especially the Common
People were infinitely perplexed, with the Terrible Rumor of the Spanish
Inquisition, whose Authority with the King, though manifest, and its Usage and
Example in all Kingdoms how profitable, and though commended by the French, yet
the Name of it in the Netherlands, with great Regret of Spirit, was abominated:
There were, who at this time wrote to the King, the whole Sum of this
Discipline, which he, under the Name of Heresy, gave hearing to, with an evil
Will, least he should in any manner give Credit, to a thing so profane and
detestable, however glosed over by those malicious People. Here, by the
Industry of the Prince of Aurange, were excited George Cassander, and Francis
Balduin of Artoyes, Men well skilled in Antiquity, and that persuaded to
Moderation: There is of this Man's extant, an eloquent Oration, desiring the
free use of that Religion, who now, by being grown strong, could not be
esteemed a Disturber of the Peace, with whose Interest such a Liberty would be
consistent, as well as with that of Commerce: The Pope having, in these
inferior things, to the very Jews given leave to purchase Impunity, for the
Exercise of their Religious Rites: But all these things proving of no effect,
some for fear of punishment, others desirous of novelty, cast out ambiguous and
doubtful Speeches, send abroad Libels, the only Allurements of the Vulgar;
and, as a thing indifferent, there being no War to retain the Assertors of the
German Religion: The Roman Superstition is again thrown out of England; as
also, by the Danes and Swedes: Nor in France do Slaughters pass unrevenged,
where not being able to bear the cruel Natures of those who Tyrannized over
them, they Resolved openly, to defen^ their Safety, either by Peace or War,
there being no other Mediums for their Liberty: For certainly, there is nothing
can more strictly oblige the People to their Duty, than the Prince to a
moderate and just Government.

By making use of these Alterations, the Minds of the Nobles were confirmed,
who already judged themselves in their own Thoughts, to stand condemned in the
Kings; and some of them being married to Women, that were Forraigners well by
Country, as by Religion; as the Prince of Aurange to a Saxon, and Count Horn
to a Nionarian, gave the Cr^dulous King also from thence also cause of
Suspicion, which they were not insensible of; because the King had already
showed his Dislike, against the new power of the Senat^ which they had
introduced and assumed. And therefore that they might the better strengthen
their Cause, by the Assistance of the Vulgar, they endeavor to quiet Religion
and if they cannot firm a public Peace, at least to settle Domestike One, they
making the fear of the ensuing Mischiefs so much the greater, by how much the
rest did under valuingly slight them, they endeavor to hide these Practices,
under the Notion of Civil Disturbances, which they also themselves were partly
the cause of; or else by these means they hoped to move the King: however, they
doubted not in these Novelties of Assistance, if not out of Love to them yet
out of Envy to the Spanish Greatness. Departing therefore from the Senate, as
if they had foreseen Commotions, which they were unable to help, now under
pretense of Solemnizing Marriages; another time, intermingling Festiv
Societies, to make them seem the more solemn, they gathered together, and
obliged to them many, either by the Ties of Blood, or the Obligations of
Friendship. But long it was not, ere the main matter, at which all these things
aimed, burst out; for after it was perceived, that there were many which looked
that way, while they solicit much both the Commander and Soldier, find fault
that a Woman should be chief in Authority, dissuade the States and Governors
of Cities from Cruelty, and to suffer patiently. Many other Noble men, but all
wi^ (...) any Government or Command, among whom were some of the Roman
Religion, made a (...), which was drawn up by one Marnye, against the
In^sition, wherein they promised to aid and assist one another, ^ any of them
should thereby be questioned, or brought into ^nger; And that it might not be
unknown upon what main strength they relied, among the Leaders of that Faction,
the most eminent was Lewis of Nassau, Brother to the Prince of Aurange, an open
Dissentor from the Roman Profession. So (...) now it was no difficult matter
to understand, that although the real and greatest Heads of the Faction, did
not yet appear, yet to judge who they were, that, when time should serve, would
uphold them, whose Interest and Authority, in the mean while, was a sure
Safeguard to all Pretenders for the rest, against the bitter Invectives and
Tyranny of those, who by Arms would endeavor to stifle or suppress this
growing Rebellion.

There joined with the before-named Lewis, the Counts of Herenburgh, and
Culemburgh, and Henry Brederode, of an ^ntient Family of the greatest Nobility
of Holland, and generally beloved of the People, whose hopes were blown up too
high, and were vain and uncertain, unless more had appeared.

These, accompanied with Four Hundred Confederates, the fifth Day of April,
1566. came all unarmed to the Court of ^ruxels, where then the Prince of
Aurange, and the rest, scarcely entreated by the Lady Margaret the Regent, to
return ^hither, had taken their Places and were sitting: These were their
Desires (for so they called them) That the King's Edicts concerning Religion,
might, by the Order of the States of the Netherlands, be changed, and that they
would acquiesce till it, could be done. The one of which, when the Regent
promise she would recommend to the King, and protested the other not in her
power; they urged the same with an earnestne^ rather befitting Judges or
Justices who had power of Command, than Petitioners, who knew to (...) ^^rate
their Zeal w^ Temperance. Then first was heard of that name of Guise, ^terwards
no less famous than those of Protestants and H^gonets, when therefore some had
cast into the Teeth of the Confederates, their broken and decaid Fortunes, they
not the king notice of the happy Fortune of that Name, but wholled by Honor,
confirmed their Faith to the King, to sta^ by him, even to the hazard of their
Estates: Which thing being now evident to the whole World, there were various
Consultations both in Spain and the Netherlands: Of the^ who were attendant
upon the Councels and Person of t^ Lady Margaret, some reputed those Requests,
or rather Demands of the Confederate Nobles, to be just: Others thought them
only necessary: But some of the Great Ones, who began to suspect the Cruelty
of the King's Intentions toward them, without any Dissembling, demanded Pledges
for the Security, and to prevent the fear of suffering punishment which
otherwise might happen to be the cause of a War and if these things were
denied, they having under the Commands most valiant People of several Nations,
a^ likewise some Troops of Natives, which would prove the main Props of the
War, would not draw a Sword in Defend of those Laws, by which the Citizens
being slain by each others hand, should fall only for the pleasure and
advantage of the Spaniards.

After many several Letters sent to the King, at last John Montigniac the
Brother of Count Horn, and John Marquess of Berghen op Zome, glad of the Honor
of their Embassy, that they might clear themselves of the former, and take
themselves off from the future Troubles, came to him; who, troubled every day
with fresh Messengers, and bad News, di^ often advise with the chief of those
Spaniards, who had been in the Netherlands, and of the Senate there, what was
best to be done.

The Form of Laws (wherein was contained, that Ministers teaching Heretical
Doctrine, Receivers and Abettora of Conventicles, and such as by their evil
Examples, had done great harm to the Public, should suffer Death, either by
the Halter or Sword, and the rest either abjure their Errors, or fly*) of
which, amendment and moderation was desired, and transmitted from the States,
was altogether unpleasing, because he was more careful of his own Dignity, than
fearful of any Danger, in that he would not seem to be compelled by
Threatenings, to grant such things as were contrary to his Nature and Will: But
hitherto he seemed to bear therewith, that the Authority of the Bishops might
be well settled, whose Duty it was, if any Trouble should happen, diligently to
take care to prevent the same; otherwise, by the Pope's express Command, they
were not, without Order, to meddle further. He refused to grant any Pardon,
without Examination of the Cause; and unless he might with more Severity, take
notice of the Confederacy, than those times would bear, though formerly he
would willingly have granted them more; yet he promised they should partake
both of his Presence and Climency: But to call a General Meeting of the States,
though the Cities most faithful and Loyal to him desired, the whole
Netherlanders persuaded, his Sister urged, and without which it was almost
impossible for him to keep his Government there, he most obstinately denied,
rather commanding them to take Arms; and the easier and more readily to raise
an Army, to take the Germans into present Pay. Adding moreover, That he doubted
not, but th^^ as his Father had often had Experience of the Fidelity of the
Dutch Nobles, so he should likewise find them ready and obedient to him,
desiring only to put in Execution, the Laws made by his Father: For though any
man may dissent in Opinion, yet still the Decision and Judgment thereof is left
to the Prince, and Obedience only to the Subjects. But o^ the contrary, they
had so brought it about, that no Force could be raised, by laying open the
Poverty of the Treasuries; and if there were any gotten together, the
Confederate Nobleman anticipated the same; giving out also, that Foreign
Soldiers on all hands offered to serve under them Which Rumor, as it was
spread to terrify the other Party so was it altogether dissonant to the Truth.
For they recheck the Haughty and Tyrannical Humor of Philip, boasted, that
they had both the Strength and Wealth of some of their Neighbors, who, either
in Point of Religion, were of the same Mind with them, or very little
differing, to ass^ them, by which means they proceeded at Home, both with
greater Surety and Safety.

Now of those who denied the Authority of the Pope, there were three sorts in
the Netherlands; the Anabaptists, whereof many were in Frizeland, and the
Neighboring Parts, were not greatly to be feared, by reason of their rashness,
and infinite Disorders amongst themselves; as also, because they did renounce
both Magistracy and Arms: But that Profession, which received its Name from
Luther, and the Augustane Synod, was maintained and upheld by the (...) king
and favor of many of the German Princes, and a certain Form of Law: Now
because the Emperor Charles had taken these his Netherlands into the German
League, and tha^ this Part had upheld the Majesty of his Empire; there were
that said, that the Settlement of Religion was also included which may be
easily answered thus; That although the Netherlands might participate with
Germany, both in Tribute and Immunities; yet it was very well known, that for
man Ages last past, they were neither subject to their Laws, no^ the Decrees of
their Synods: Not much differing from this Doctrine, there is another,
illustrated chiefly by the Ingenuity of Zuinglius, and Calvin, and now for some
time growing up together with the Augustane; unless it may be said of
Religions, that they are all made more subject to Obstinacy in Opinion, or
Singularity, rather than Concord: That (to wit, of Zuinglius) part of Germany
and Switzerland follow; but the other of Calvin, only the famous City of
Geneva, within the Dukedom of Savoy allows of: The same was also used in
England, different only in the Retention of some of the ancient Rites; but the
main and violent Followers of this Sect were in France; nor did the rest come
near them in number: and therefore, both those and these, to wit, Zuinglians
and Calvinists, judged this new Ordinance proposed by Philip, no less cruel,
than he himself esteemed it mild* There was too another Complaint, that in
stead of the desired Meetings of the States General, the Judgments of the
several Provinces were separately required, and that too but partially, not of
all, not after the accustomed manner: In which Commotions, while the Regent
expected further Orders from the King, and either to receive from him
Soldiers, or Money to levy Soldiers, hoping Delays would blow over, or else
mitigate the greatness of the Danger; behold, on the contrary, the Vulgar, who
till now had been frighted with the noise of Fire and Sword, begin now to
affright others. They come out of their Corners, and appear in public: they
Celebrate their Devotions, and preach after the new Mode, as if they would
publicly convince their Enemies of those Lies, wherewith they had slandered
their private Meetings; Exiles also, and such as had been persecuted only for
Religion, of whom there were not a few, even weary of their Lives, joined with
Straglers and Fugitives from Monasteries: So that now there did appear a
Formidable Multitude and so great, beyond Expectation, that those who had
frequented and used their Meetings, could hardly believe the same.

This overmuch assumed Liberty confirmed their Presumption; for now, if at any
time they fear Danger, they go Armed: All which Rabble, the Confederate Nobles
receive into their Protection, and arm them, as the common Vogue was, but that
is not always infallible. And not long after, a great Sedition began of the
Rascality of the People, but by whose Instigation is uncertain, wherein were
seen many known Thieves: This is not meddling with Towns or Fields, invades the
Churches, where only the Altars and their Furnitures, with the Shrines of
Saints, went to wrack; resembling herein the like Commotions of the Jews, and
altogether imitating that Barbarous Tempest of Image-hate^ that overran
Greece; for their Savage Rudeness did not abstain from the Persons of Priests,
and Religious Men, but vented it self further on their Books and Sepulchers; as
if in this so sudden a Rebellion (for other it cannot be called) there had
been one general Agreement, to set all the Netherlands into a Combustion: in
some places the Magistrates by either Civil or Armed Authority hardly
prevailing: Only the Inhabitants of Antoyes, Heynault, Luxemburgh, and those
adjoining to them, kept their Faith and Allegiance, both to the Roman Church,
and the King, unspotted and untainted, in the midst of this Horrid Contagion.

In some places, the Magistrates, to prevent the Licention Fury of the People,
did first begin to remove and take away Images; to some of whom boasting of
their Service, Viglim said very ingeniously, That they too were mad but with a
show of Reason.

Many things which were thus stolen from Churches, the Teachers urged, might
be restored, but without any effect to the great Scandal of their Religion,
which by these mean had contracted new Infamy.

The Lady Margaret, in this great Perturbation of Affairs, being vehemently
affrighted, was not able now so well to obey the King's Commands, who, though
too late, had heard all these things at a distance, in regard of the imminent
dange, because she was forced to give place to the Times, and submit to the
Counsels of the Confederate Lords; without whose Authority, they could not
endure to hear of any thing.

At length therefore, though with much Reluctance, she was drawn to this; that
she promised the Lords, that none of those former Actions should be drawn into
question. They, now one, now another, as long as they could have any Security,
renounced the League, under this condition, That all that slighted the Name of
the Romish Religion, or moderating thereof, should not be de^ied Pardon. And
now, while the People lay aside their Arms and Faults together, they are
allowed to have Sermons in those places, which even till that time, they had
had for their Instruction; and the Edicts were laid aside, until the King and
the States should take other Order in that behalf. Presently Messengers were
sent to several places, to prohibit any further Force, who did affirm, they
had obtained this by Treaty, which in truth they extorted by violence.

First, the Prince of Aurange sent to Antwerp, being th^n troubled with a
dangerous Sedition; where, having obtained the Name of Viscount, or Sheriff, as
due unto him from his Predecessors, he quickly brought that most strong City to
his own Will, where not so much minding the necessity of the time, as to shun
the Regents displeasure, he caused not only the new Discipline, but Sermons
also to cease; not only in the Fields, as in other Places but within the very
Walls. The same also did Count Horn, and others, whose Brother being now
returned out of Spain, related unto him the Kings implacable Anger: But the
Letters sent to the Lady Margaret, and by them surprised, troubled them beyond
measure, they being thereby destined to Accusation and Destructions whereupon
they all meet to counsel at Dendremond, where Count Egmond was the chief man
looked upon, as being well-skilled in Warlike Affairs, and well-beloved of the
Soldiery.

But he, whether allured by fair promises, or mindful of his duty, affirmed he
would not in any thing be wanting in his Allegiance to his Prince, let him do
what he would, but would rather seek to appease his mind with good Counsel and
wipe away former errors by future fidelity. Unwise man that would not take
notice, that when great things, in disobedience to Princes, are begun with
danger, after the first setting out, the (...) of reward and safety, is in
going on, for revenge attends every step backward; But the Prince of Aurange
had a more prudent foresight, for seeing these begun undertakings failed, he
writ Letters to the King, humbly desiring, that he permit to lay down all
Offices, and that he might betake himself to peace and rest in some private
part of Germany.

To whom Philip craftily sent answer, (and how far will deceit prevail under
the mask of simplicity?) entreating him, that he would not now desert him,
while his Affairs were in such an unsettled Estate, and when there was most need
of his help; withal advising him, that he should for a time send away from him
his Brother, who was suspected of innovation in Religion, until all things
should be better considered off. But Aurange the more crafty and subtle of the
two, still urges for License to depart, and in the mean time, going back into
the places under his own Government, forbidding all severity, and to prevent
his surprise of the fortifications within those Provinces, by foreign
Soldiers that might to that end be provided, under the pretense of liberty, he
by his single industry and policy, stirred up all the valiant and courageous
people to be at his Command.

1567. He set forth also in writing, the Counsel which he had given to the
King, to this effect, That unless he gave Toleration to these Religions, which
the Neighboring Nations had granted as necessary, it would be a matter of
dangerous consequence: for at the best, his Conquest would be attended with
great mischief, in exhausting the wealth, and destroying the people of the
Country.

But Count Horn retreated to his own home, and there betook himself to a
private life. These thus dispersed, the Regent, easily perceiving whence at
first these perturbations did arise, betook her self to Viglius his former
Counsels, which had been slighted, to wit, to break the connection and band
which was between the Lords, and the better and inferior sort of the people;
which she brought to pass, either by her self or others, with them that so
receded, first by cavilling, by and by more openly, as if she had been
terrified thereby, would cast out the falling away of others; for no sooner was
she advertised by the private order of the Judges, that they had proceeded
against the persons who had committed Sacrilege in the tumult before
mentioned, who had gone beyond words against the public rites, even to the
taking up of Arms, the rest, knowing themselves not able to go through with the
management of their cause, and likewise that they differed among themselves in
point of Religion, broke up their strength. Nor did the confederate Lords,
either by hope or fear, divided among themselves, less betray the
Weal-publick: for Conscience a little accusing for their evil deeds, some of
them running over and submitting, obtained Pardon; others dissuade the
gathering of Taxes, and levying Bands of Soldiers, as things not fit for
private men to undertake; another sort, while thus every one was minding his
own particular, are forgotten by all. And now, for the better maintaining the
peace of the State, the Regent, beside the German Soldiers, under the Command
of Ericus of Brunswick, commanded another Regiment of Walloons to be forthwith
raised; for by that name, the people in that part of the Netherlands, which
borders upon France, are called, and are distinguished from the others, by the
use of the French Tongue, and beside, are more valiant, and not so dull-witted
as the rest; And that she might the better choose able Commanders over them,
she caused them to take an Oath, to that purpose contrived, that they should
take all persons without exception, for enemies, whom the King should so
declare.

This Oath was taken by Count Egmond, Charles Arscot of Croya, a person quite
unconcerned in the former troubles. Charles Baylaymont and his Brothers; the
Counts Peter Mansfield, Governor of Lutzenburgh, Count Megem, Governor of
Gelderland, Count Aremberg, Governor of Frizeland, and the Count of Noricum,
that in Henault held the place of the Marquess of Berghen: And quickly did they
begin to make the truth of their Oath appear by their actions; Egmond infesting
those in Flanders, the safeguard of whom he had undertaken.

The Count of Noricum marches against Valenciennes, where were others of the
Rebels, and by Siege forcing them to surrender, punished them with great
severity: by which examples terrified, the best and greatest Cities, the
troubles being thus for a time ended, received their appointed Garrison, the
rest destroying and slaughtering all the remains of those mad people, that they
could find any where together: only the Prince of Aurange and Hochstraten,
denied to change their old Oath, by which they were obliged to defend the King
and Laws, for any other; Aurange adding further, that his Wife was one of that
number, which by that Oath were destined to destruction.

While these things were in agitation, the Spaniards (as they can see when they
have an opportunity) did not sluggishly manage that happy occasion. And first,
while the danger was yet scarcely removed, it was agreed almost on all hands,
that the Presence and Majesty of the Prince would be very available for the
quieting and composing of all parties; the most faithful and loyal among all
the Netherlanders, telling and assuring, that if the King should send another,
and not come himself, it would produce more hate and less obedience; which the
Emperor Charles, the Kings Father, well knew, when upon a small disturbance,
only in the City of Gaunt, he made no delay to come thither immediately,
though at that time France even yet breathed out War against him; But now a
great deal of time was wasted in vain and frivolous Discourses, which was the
safest way for him to pass by, for they suspected France would hardly afford
him passage either with or without any Army, and a Voyage by Sea was not judged
fit, in regard of the many certain hazards thereof, besides his landing in
Zeland might be doubted, for they could nor tell how far either the Prince of
Aurange, or the English might attempt upon his person. Therefore the Resolution
was, that he pass over into Liguria, and thence into Germany, and there to
speak with the Emperor, and to try his pulse.

The Emperor then was Maximilian, the Son of Ferdinand, who upon consideration
had of the Dutch Affairs, said, that unless Philip would in some measure give
place to the present necessity of the times, it would be a dangerous
undertaking for him, by reason of the Princes of the Augusta^ Confession, that
were bound to the Dutch Lords by many ties of friendship, alliance and
benefits; but if any way of moderation might be proposed, he offered himself as
a Peacemaker between them; but this was somewhat ill resented, as Augustus
Elector of Saxony said, who was very great in Caesar's favor, and allied to the
Prince of Aurange by his Brothers Daughter.

Letters now are sent to the Lady Margaret, which declared the Kings approach,
but not without an Army, for so it befitted his Majesty to keep up his Dignity
among strangers; as also either, by the terror thereof, to appease all tumults,
or if any durst stand to contest with him, that then he was prepared for the
future, not to receive, but to give Laws. And indeed a little time made it
manifest, that the Spaniards not content that they were quiet, began to look
back for revenge, by making the Kings anger the means to compass their private
ends and advantages, for they offered as a pretense for enslaving the Dutch,
that they were all to be looked upon as Traitors, either because they had began
those novel mischiefs in Church and State, or else because they had not brought
the persons that durst do such things unto condign punishment; There are also
that add, the Authority of an Oath formerly made by the Pope to Philip, when
undertaking the Government, he bound himself up to the Laws, that the
Netherlands should be governed as America, and the greatest part of Italy were;
And the great credit given to the Duke of Alva's Counsels (who was no new
fomenter of Tyranny) made all men believe, that unless so horrid an Example of
Rebellion were signally corrected with some remarkable punishments, that it
would cause others of his Subjects to kick off their Allegiance, and therefore
that not only the present force, but fear of like reward should keep them
within their bounds: Nor was this so fit time of subjecting the Netherlands to
be lost or neglected, for all the Kingdoms lying round about, do faithfully
observe the peace they have made with him, and if there were any thought of
troubles, it was domestic, and arise at home.

Thus were they overruled, who persuaded Peace and moderation, Prince Charles
the Son of Philip, offering his endeavor for the pacifying and ruling the
Netherlands, but so much in vain, that it did prove to his harm, by increasing
those suspicions before conceived against him. At last, it was declared, the
King having retired, as if upon matters of greater concernment, or else upon
pretense that he might not be in danger, that the Duke of Alva should be sent
thither with most ample Authority, nor is it to be doubted with what
Instructions, he being a man always used to War and Bloodshed, to whom being
in Italy, the Messengers reported the Companies of old Spanish Soldiers from
Naples, Scicily, Sardinia, and Millaine, to be joined with the Horse; the
Prince of Aurange not thinking it fit to stay any longer, goes to Nassau, being
then possessed by his Brother, protesting openly at his departure, before a
great multitude of people that followed him, that he would not stir one foot
further in this difference, unless he were assaulted or damnified.

In whose absence, the Lady Regent commanded Maximilian, Earl of Bossu, to take
charge of his Lieutenancies. Brederode, when he had fortified what was his, and
hovered about Vtrecht, near the Rhene and Amsterdam, two very wealthy Cities,
(the Prince of Aurange favoring his first attempts) either by an underhand
assistance, or deceit, is shortly after forcibly driven out of the Country.

Egmond, and some other meaner Lords, whose minds and fortunes could not suffer
banishment, were led about with the hope of living, till they were brought to
their ends untimely; but most of the Nobles, and many of the Commonalty, for
fear of the Spaniard, (though part of them fearing punishment returned, being
not prepared to fly for Religion) went some into the next parts of Germany,
some into England, and some into farther distant Countries: the Regent,
enforcing them by one Edict to fly, commands them by another to stay. So that
they being voluntarily departed, who were displeased at the present carriage of
Affairs, and other matters, by the notable cunning of a Woman set in order,
there was a settled Peace, such, as if nothing further had been coveted, might
have longer continued.

The second Book of the Dutch Annals.
1568.
BUT the Duke of Alva, retarded somewhat by his Disease, but more by the
exceeding coldness of the Alps, at last being past Savoy, reached Burgundy, by
a Journey not only tedious and troublesome, but accompanied with great wants;
but there was some satisfaction for the same, by the present amendment of his
quarters here, by whose pleasantness and delight his Army was well increased;
which, notwithstanding there were therein above eight thousand men, he kept in
a mo^ orderly and strict Discipline; The Spaniards then being first showed the
way, through so great a Continent of Land. After this he met with no kind of
stop, as far as Lutzemburg^ the chief of whose Governors, he had (the King
being not wholly ignorant thereof) drawn to his party, for the better upholding
the strength of that broken and disjoynted Dominion. At this time, as if it had
been by agreement, Wars broke out in France, the King having levied and taken
into pay certain Companies of Switzers, under pretense of suspecting some soul
play upon his Borders. And the truth is, Alva's Army had been scouring the
places thereabout, of all such as took part with, and upheld that new Religion
so much hated by them.

All this while, there was not a Netherlander stirred, whether out of an
extraordinary Panick fear, or too great Security, is doubtful, to resist or
withstand this furious Invasion; for though coming as a General in War unto
a quiet People, he was received by the concourse of the People, not seeming at
all discontented; for at the beginning, he took to himself no other Title,
until Margaret, weary of this empty shadow of troublesome honor, and thought
also to have done much harm to the Government, by her feminine imbecility; and
so much the rather, because she had by polite and well composed Letters,
presaging many of the future evils, dissuaded the sending of Alva with an
Army; by her departure thence, wholly left the Regency of the Netherlands to
his care and ordering, none now doubting, but he would now make himself a
Magistrate contrary to those Laws, by whose rule, and with whose safety he
could not attain thereto; It being provided therein, cautiously from antiquity,
that none but a Netherlander, or a Prince of the blood, could take that upon
him.

The first Experiment of his Tyrannizing Authority, was showed upon Egmond and
Horn, who being by Policy wrought to come in^o the Court, were apprehended, and
put into Custody; and when they demanded the Privilege of the Golden Fleece,
to be judged only by the Companions of that Order, their Peers, it was not
only denied to them, but they were sent out of Brabant with a strict Guard,
contrary to the Rights and Liberties granted even to the meanest of the
Commons: And, from this time, Garrisons were set in the prime Cities of the
Netherlands, which consisted chiefly of Spaniards, who were almost the only
men thereof; for other Soldiers were made use of only in times of danger, and
upon extraordinary occasions: Nay further, the Troops of Horse, which were
mostly made up of the Netherlandish Gentry, having some Spaniards thrust in
amongst them, were sent into France, under the Leading of Count Aremberg, that
by a present Supply, they might confirm the League made with King Charles: In
the interim, the Castles are begun to be filled, with unarmed and peaceable
Citizens; and which was most grievous to them of all, was, That their Thraldom
was made use of, to raise Moneys for supply of their Enemies Expenses and
Charges: When Things had proceeded thus far without any gainsaying, there were
almost Twelve Judges, the greatest part of them Spaniards, the rest but
Servants to them, and in that regard, as cruel, if not worse then they,
appointed to call before them all such as had any any hands in the late
Commotions, or but seemed to wink thereat, and to punish them as they saw fit;
not in the least manner taking notice of them, who, by the Laws of the Country,
had a Jurisdiction proper thereunto: And this very Thing, of enjoying the
Judicial Power, and consequently, that of Life and Death, was the main prop of
their Authority; which adding a Majesty to the Religion before violated,
Recriminations, as hateful to good Princes, as they are commodious to Tyrants,
urge, That all Guilty Persons should be p^ out of the Protection of the Law,
and that only the Cruelty (...) Alva's Name might be sufficient almost to
convince them. The strictness of the Guards, set upon the Guilty Persons, wa^
the cause of the Death of very many People; so that every place carried the
Resemblance of a City sacked, and taken by the Sword: For there were not only
Armies, but by reason of the Troubles, many sought Refuge, and here put in
practice their ill-boding Counsels: Here also were some earnestly laboring for
Honor; and others, on the other side, by all means avoiding it, while the
slaughter of the Nobles, and all others, whose Wealth or Authority grieved
them, made great Additions by their Deaths to the Authority, and by their
Fortunes, to the Treasury and Prey of the Spaniards: And the truth is, Alva
never dissembled his Intentions; for from the very first, he protested, with
great Threats, suitable to the Cruelty of his Nature, that a few Salmons Heads
were of more worth than many Thousands of little Fishes; Thus after a new Mode,
making use of that old Sentence, which teaches, to strengthen a Kingdom, by
taking away some of the Heads of the chiefest Commonwealths Men.

All the Mischiefs which had intervened here, since the first Breach with
Granvel, unto this time, were now objected against Egmond and Horn, together
with a shrewd Suspicion of a Conspiracy, between them and the Prince of
Aurange, to throw the King, by Force, out of his Dominion over the Netherlands,
and then to divide them among themselves. These two, that by all men's
confession, were most eminent men, and as well Renowned by their Actions, as
the Nobility of their Birth, at Bruxels, after Divine Service, according to the
Roman manner, had been performed, in the public place of Execution, yielded
their Necks to the Sword of the Headsman, and their Heads for a while after
fixed upon Poles, was to the Dutch both a lamentable and terrible Spectacle;
and although the Soldiers every where about in Arms, watched but for an
Opportunity from the Words, and almost Looks of the People; yet they bearing
the same deeply in Mind, the pity of all, but the Revenge of the more valiant,
became settled, when the Solemnities of their Funerals were Celebrated, and
their very Coffins washed with the Tears and Kisses of an incredible Multitude
of the common People, while others, after the old manner of Mourning, in a
vowed Habit, promise and swear, Never to cut their Hair, until they had
revenged the Blood of those Noblemen.

The Prince of Aurange, with many others, are cited by a Proclamation to
appear; and because being absent, and out of their reach, he laughed at their
Threats of Punishment; all his Goods are confiscated, and his Son which was
bred up at Levain, in the Study of the Arts, is seized upon, and carried
Prisoner into Spain.

It was a very sad thing to take notice of the Desolation and Wast that was
here made, partly by Slaughters, and partly by Flight: Some few, whose
exceeding Poverty would not bear out their Banishment, retired into the Woods,
and there hiding themselves, where they lived like Salvages upon the daily
Spoils committed upon Priests, not taking Notice of the Magistrates, who came
to suppress them by Force, but robbing and killing them, as they could find
advantage; until at last they were destroyed and driven away by the greater and
more powerful strength of Alva: So also, at the Rivers Maze and Rhene, a few
unadvised persons being scatteredly met together, and having sworn the Dukes
death, at the very first Rencounter, were all overcome and slain: And to cut
off all thoughts of hope, the Messengers and Curriers from Spain brought word,
that then was nothing of moderation more to be expected from the King than from
Alva, for that a public punishment was there inflicted upon Montaigne, who was
sent thither, in vain bearing with him the Name of an Ambassador as to Enemies,
which among all Nations is sacred, and not to be violated; for it was not
thought fit for Subjects, to treat or deal with their Prince after such a
manner, and so positively denied. The Marquess of Berghen, by a seasonable
Death, prevented to himself the like Fate, though not without Suspicion of
Poison: But the very Thoughts of such a thing was condemned as a Crime, because
Alva had a hand therein.

There was about the same time a louder, though more mystical Rumor of the
Death of Charles the Kings Son: It was evident, that he, though the Heir of so
many Great Kingdoms, was put into Ward; whether his too much forwardness in his
Youth, had raised a Suspicion of him, that he was ambitious of Rule, as if his
Care for the Netherlanders had been too great for his Interest there; or
whether the same Crime were laid to his Charge, which had taken off his
Stepmother, is uncertain: But this is sure, that shortly after he died, though
still very dubious, what Causes could so provoke the Fathers Wrath to that
height, as to work his Son death.

The Exiles, who now, though at distance, were every where against their Wills,
and in Poverty, being much grieved at the Oppression of their Country, did
earnestly sollicies the Prince of Aurange to take up Arms, which of his own
accord, he was not at all propense to do; willing rather, the the Spaniard
should over-un all, until all his Counsels were laid open, and there might be
hoped a more safe Opportunity for the Distressed to gather and unite a Force,
while the King should, for the most part, be taken up with other Wars.
Nevertheless, some of the Exiles, at present, being drawn together, under the
Leading of Lewis of Nass^ brake into Frizeland: There, by the Death of Arembery
there slain, whom the heat and reviling of his Soldiers comp^lled to fight
(though he thought it more Prudence^ weary them out by Delays) by the Rout and
Overthrow his Forces, became Conquerours; but staying, with a fruitle^
Expectation of some Towns falling off to them, their Mo^e^fell short for the
Soldiers Pay, so that all Discipline was neglected, when suddaintly by the
Surprise of Alva, they were almost all slain, Adolph, the Prince of Aurange his
Brother, and Lewis his also, being killed in the former Skirmish, they had
tincted the War alternately, both with their own, and their Enemies Blood.

The Prince of Aurange, being thoroughly moved with this Carriage of Affairs,
that he might be the better able to relieve his Parties, both by strength, and
the Justice of their Government, he sets forth in Books a Narrative, the
Reasons, Causes, and Justice, of their taking up Arms; refuting, at once, both
the Judge, and the Crimes objected against him; not dissembling, That now being
taught better things, he had l^ft the Church of Rome; yet calling God to
Witness, That he took Arms for the Public Weal, and freeing his Country from
Slavery: That this was the Duty of every good Citizen, much more of a
Nobleman: Of Philip he spoke honorably, whose Goodness (he said) was
perverted by the Spanish Counsels; and that he did not yet despair, but that he
would, at length, resume better thoughts of his faithful Subjects, and uphold
their sworn and settled Laws. In the mean while, according to the Law of
Brabant, in regard of his many Errors in Government, Obedience was due unto
him, as to their Sovereign. Lastly, that which seems to make most for the
Justice of their Cause, was this; The Brabanders, as they had a more special
and wary care than the rest, for the maintaining their Liberty; so likewise to
prevent the Incroachm^nt of their Princes, who, under pretense of the Public,
did not stick som^times, to break up and dissolve their State-Conventions; they
used to Covenant of their own proper Right, that when any Prince infringed the
Laws, they should be free from the Bonds of their Fidelity and Obedience to him
until the Wrongs so done should be removed and satisfied. And this confirmed
by many Examples of their Ancestors, who when formerly some of their Princes,
either through their own weakness, or the Delusions of Flatterers, had been
drawn away, they drew to more moderation (among whom the most remarkable was,
John the Second of that Name) either by Force, or strong Decrees, by them drawn
up; which, before they would conclude any Peace, they made the Princes freely
promise, That they would without any violation confirm and establish the same.
Now, the Prince of Aurange, though born in Germany, yet had obtained many most
Noble Heriditary Jurisdictions in Brabant; to the Lords, or Possessors whereof,
ancient Custom had given the Dignity of being a Peer, or chief Governor; by
which Right, he urged, That is did belong to him, not only to see the Laws
well executed, but also to defend and maintain them.

But here it is not to be omitted, that the same Right was claimed by the like
Customs, by diverse other of the Netherlandish Provinces; and also, that the
Decrees of Maximilia of Austria and Mary of Burgundy, were to be taken notice
of; which had made them, by the same Sanction of the Laws, individually equally
with the Brabanders themselves: And this appears, by what the People of
Frizeland, Utrech^, and Gelderland did, in the time of the Emperor Charles
their Prince; when, among many other peculiar Agreements and Covenants, there
was this one common and general, That they might never be divided from Brabant
and Holland. While these Matters were argued pro and contra, Maximilian the
Emperor much troubled thereat; and also taking into commiseration, the Prince
of Aurarge his Condition, so suddenly thrust out by violence from such great
Estates and Prehemnences, (though that Design of his, wrought no milder Temper
toward those Dominions) sent his Brother Charles into Spain, to inform the King
in his (to wit, the Emperors) Name, and the rest of the Princes of Germany,
That they thought it not convenient for the Public Good, that the
Netherlanders should be used so harshly any longer.

But Philip, as well as he could, dissembling his Anger; yet churlishly
commanded, to be returned for Answer, That the Care of managing his own
Affairs, belonged properly to himself; who, as he knew when it was fit to show
Mercy, so likewise he was not to learn, when to use Severity to such, who
having first laid aside their Duty toward God, would, in a short time, not
fear to shake Hands with Obedience to their Prince; and that it would be an
Action more safe and honorable for them, if they would desist to intermeddle
in Affairs, in which they were altogether unconcerned.

There were some, that counseled the regaining of those Parts of Lower Germany
by War, which had been torn from the Body by the strong Hand of their Lords:
But the Emperor, of his own Nature, always loving Peace; and being lately
allied to the Spaniard, by a new Tie of Affinity sat down, and meddled no more:
But a few of the Germans, either out of their regard to Piety, Envy of the
Spanish Greatness, or Hatred of Alva, too well known among them, did aid the
Prince of Aurange with Men and Money; and it may be also moved with Suspicion,
that Alva had a Design upon some Cities, near the Rivers Rhene and Amasis, to
subject them to his Master, because they had been Receptacles to many of the
Netherlanders, banished for their Religion: Many of the Neighboring People,
had bound themselves by Hostages, to be true to, and assist the Prince of
Aurange in his Expedition; and something also was given by the Netherlanders,
who now being compelled to inhabit abroad, either the Desire of return to their
Country, or private Wishes of enjoying Liberty at Home, prompted: But many of
those Promises failed in their Event; so that having, by the Dictates of his
own Judgment and Foresight, gathered together Six Thousand Horse, and Fourteen
Thousand Foot, chiefly, and the greatest part out of Germany, where great
Multitudes of Men, caught with the Bait of present ready Money, never thought
of the future, nor minded whose part they took, but were ready for any that
would hire them best, the remainder of the said Army was made up partly of
Netherlanders themselves, and partly of French: These Forces letting slip the
first Opportunity of fighting Alva, at the Passage of the Maze, being then
unprovided, were afterward by him easily weakened, and brought to nothing, by
not fighting getting the more noble sort of Victory: Which Policy of evading
Fight, had before that been fortunate to him ^ Italy, when he stood in
opposition to the Duke of Guise Therefore, for three and twenty days together,
he lay stil^ in the Rear of them, as they marched, with his Camp so
circumspectly, and with Prudence, fortified toward the Enemy, that they could
never force him to fight with their Desperation: Then was put in practice that
Villainy, which will never be left off; to wit, that both Parties should
maintain their Right, by Countries living in Peace; for whether a Passage was
given, or denied, through the Lands of Cleve or Liege, always the one Party
would revenge it self, either by robbing the Country, or burning it: However,
at last this great Army, being neither admitted by one City, nor relieved with
any Provision, in a short time mouldred away, through an extreme want of all
things, but chiefly of Pay; with the slender Remains whereof, the Prince of
Aurange being hardly able to march into France, carried thither, together with
it all his Hopes; where, for some time, finding Employment in that Foreign
War, 1569.
though the cause thereof were something his, (for Alva had sent thither Forces
also to help the King) yet by the sudden making of Peace, he was disappointed;
and not only so, but Traps laid to ensnare him.

The Army being thus broken, whereby, without doubt, the Nassauian Strength was
much impaired and exhausted, as he grew very wary how he ran into Dangers: So
Alva, great now with Success, esteeming himself a Conqueror of those People,
whom he had yet never felt as Enemies, did ambitiously desire the Glory of his
Authority, thus won (as he supposed) by Conquest: And under this Notion, and
Name of Conqueror, he is presented with a Consecrated Sword from the Pope,
with an Inscription of his Deeds, as Fame had reported them: which being a
Piece of most excellent Workmanship, he placed in the beautiful Castle of
Antwerp, that serves to no other use, than to keep under the People; as the
Situation thereof, averted from the River, does plainly testify: Moreover, he
erects a Statue in his Honor, with a large Eulogy thereon; to wit, that by
appeasing the Sedition, destroying and punishing the Rebels, and promoting of
Justice, he had restored Peace to these Provinces.

At this time he settled many things, no less profitable than specious, as
concerning money, Merchandises, punishment of vices and enormities, and rash
divulging of Books, works in themselves so good, that they will never be
forgotten; unless by the Odium of his name, who was the first settler thereof:
But now the Inquisition, as to matters of Religion, the Acts of the Council of
Trent, the new Bishops, and things hitherto winked at, if not utterly
repudiated, were received willingly as it were, for otherwise it was in sight
that would compel them; their hatred being now grown to that height, that who
over had been baptized by the Protestants, according to the Rules of
Christianity, should yet be rebaptized, though contrary to the institution and
practice of the Ancients; Nor did this new Tribunal grow less furious against
the old crimes of Treason, to the number of whom, were added all such as were
but suspected to have wished good success to the late undertakings of the
Prince of Aurange, or to have grieved at the ill fortune and miscarriage
thereof; yet while these things are thus doing, there was a way studied, how to
make their Victory seem more honorable, by the report of Clemency; which was
this, By setting out an Edict in the Kings name, wherein a Pardon should be
granted to all that would come in and confess their former misdeeds, but still
excepting and reserving to punishment, all Teachers and Ministers of Religion,
and those which did assist or har^ them; all those whose impious villainies
violated the Sacred ^cesses of Churches, or holy places, and all such as here
Arms, ^ took preferment, or were consenting to the confederacy of t^ Nobles s
certainly, a goodly Company of Exceptions, the Liberties also of Towns and
Universities, and whatsoever the Kings Treasury was indebted to any man, being
reserved to the Kings pleasure.

Now having thus laid aside all fear and shame, the ve^ utmost intentions and
designs of the Spaniards were laid ^ pen in their open boastings, for the
bringing to pass thereof that not only the charges of the Government, but if
ne^ were, War should be maintained at the charge of the^ Provinces; and to
make this good, Alva commands for the present, the hundredth part of all the
Revenues of the people to be levied; which in it self was very grievous,
because ^ was forcibly commanded by the Soldier, which ought ^ have been
collected according to the Custom of the Country; nor did he exempt the Priests
from this payment: af^ter this be takes the twentieth part of Lands, and the
tenth of all other thing whatsoever, sold upon every alienation, affirming to
the Spaniards, that it was necessary thus to tax the Netherlanders, that they
might the rather think themselves bound in equity to obey, being bound by the
Law, and conquered by Arms, and not otherwise capable of Pardon.

It may easily be imagined, that these Impositions ha^ spoiled Merchandising,
and broken the connection of most Arts and Trades, by the flight of so many, so
that the chiefe^ support of the People was utterly gone; for the profit
accrewing by buying and selling of Wares, using to be dispersed into several
Channels, if so great a burden should be come to be a part, of the price, there
would be no Chapmes found to buy, when in another place, they might have them
so much cheaper; And if any durst be so bold as to find straight they were
seized on by Soldiers, and most exquisitely punished. Nay, some Provinces and
Cities being somewhat stubborn and self-willed, were sometimes majestically
summoned and questioned, both what they had done themselves, and what they had
suffered others to do against the Kings Edicts, being objected against them;
and though the madness of some private persons, for the common cause, were not
compelled to their evil deeds, yet were they sentenced, that they should be
out of the protection of the Law, excluded from all public Counsels, and for
the future, be governed by no other Law than that of the Kings will. Nay, some
were punished for appealing to the King, and the intercessions of the
Magistrates were restrained by a mulct, which they should pay out of their own
Estates upon forfeiture; with the severity of which examples, the rest being
terrified, did endeavor to redeem themselves from this infinite oppression
with a certain sum of money. And yet for all these so many and great
afflictions, the wrath of God was not yet appeased toward these people for
their sins; but as if the cruelty and avarice of men had not been sufficient
for the persecution of a Land, most flourishing and opulent, both in Wealth and
Inhabitants: the Ocean breaking over its bounds with such an overflux, 1570.
as the like has scarce ever been seen before, by its inundation, made one
great slaughter of men, and foretold another. For this was the time, in the
small Punctillio whereof, the basest of servitude, and the highest point of
liberty being divided, by both names continued equal miseries and misfortunes:
And now anger suggesting unto the oppressed, the desire to free, or revenge
themselves by Arms, they were taught, there was no concord so firm and stable,
as that which is contained within the Bond of private concerns.

And now that Nation which had so patiently seen her Citizens burnt, her
Governors slain, her Laws, Religion, and Commonwealth almost to be violently
taken away and devoured, first consented to take vengeance for the former, and
to prevent and keep off th^se evils that immediately h^ng over their heads.

And so in the City of Bruxels, though Alva himself were present, and with a
strong Guard did sternly exact the tenth, yet every one shut up their Shops and
Warehouses, scorning to own or confess their slavery, though with the peril
of their Heads. Now were Gibbets and Hangmen prepared for the Rebels (as they
were termed) when news came of the Commotions in Holland, which I shall
presently declare to you, and put a stop to their cruelty; The fury and
indignation of the People increasing, infused new Courage into the Prince of
Aurange, that he might once more try the fortune of War, though yet his
Confidence flagged, till his Resolution became settled, by considering, that
part of Philips Forces were employed against the Turk, and that Spain it self
was yet scarce quiet from the disturbances and incursions of the Moors; if
therefore he could but get Arms, himself would be Captain, and he hoped through
their dissentions, he should be able to find or make a way.

1571. To that purpose, he sends choice persons to all Princes, that professed
themselves Reformers of Religion, praying them, either publicly to take his
part, or at least to grant him private Ayds toward the support of the common
Cause.

The Dea^ and Swede positively deny him, as fearing to cope with an Adversary
more powerful than themselves; not durst the Queen of England disturb her
Neighbors greatness, although the Pope had given Her over to be a prey, and
Alva for the Genoa Merchants money, detained in England for present use, and
under assurance of repayment, beginning a difference, and bringing it almost to
Pledges, sought long ago a Cause of War against that rich Island, as was
suspected; and now lately, when there were some troubles in the North part of
that Kingdom, he sent some to view the Ports, that might, if opportunity
succeeded to his desires, upon such occasion be leaders; and without
peradventure he was a great encourager of the Endeavors of the Queen of Scots
against Elizabeth; the knowledge of all which things, were for the present so
dissembled, and Spain so far obliged, that the Nassavian Messengers were
commanded without any delay, by a certain day, to depart out of the English
Territories: But in France, they who had laid aside the Rites of the Latin
Church, that they might give credit to the Peace they had, were admitted into
the Grace and favor of the King; and therefore, that they might be the better
able to assist the Prince of Aurange, they add fresh fire to ^e old Burgundian
fuel, repeating the Controversy that first ^ose in the Council of Trent,
between these Kings for priority of place; urging also against Philip, the
poisoning of his Wife Elizabeth, whose murder ought to be revenged, and that he
was in Honor obliged to the like for satisfaction of those French Subjects,
murdered by the Spaniards in Florida, a Province of America; which Counsel,
King Charles listening to with greedy ears, would have to believe that he was
sensible thereof; another motive wherewith they enveighed him, was upon the
Marriage of his Sister, agreed with the King of Navarre, they gave him cause to
think himself deceived therein: It was good Counsel, to meet a powerful Foe
with the Conjunction of Neighbors, and here the ingenuity of the French, found
it needful to have War that they might keep peace.

It was cast out as a Secret, but with great diligence, the League being
broken, what the Emperor Charles said to the King, being his Prisoner, in
repro^ch of the name and Honor of France, That the old limits of France should
be restored, and the Empire extend even to the Rhene; what was beyond, the
Prince of Aurange in words had already assumed to himself, as the reward of all
his pains. By these instigations, the King was so wrought upon, that moneys are
speedily dispatched to him, together with Counsel and advice by Lewis, who went
between them; whom Caspar Colimac, a chief Leader in the new Religion, had
brought to treat and discourse with the King.

The Kings Navy also, upon the Coast of Guyen, was fitted and prepared, and
Prizes taken in Spanish Vessels were publicly sold in the City of Rochel; The
Spanish Ambassador in vain complaining, made their confidence increase by their
deceits: In the interim, the Prince of Aurange full fraught with the same and
repute of so potent an Allye, either by Embassies or Letters, promises to the
banished Netherlanders, resettlem^^^ in their own Country, and to those that
are oppressed at ^^^me, Liberty: and does persuade many Governors of Cities,
either to mutiny or revolt, not valuing either the force, fear, or hate of
Alva. Thus relying on his strength, and the industry of his People, he made a
good force at Sea; for every banished Netherlander, who had any Courage, and
all those more indigent people, that were afraid of banishment, got aboard into
some kind of Ships, and taking others, which they met, by force from their
owners, they much increased their number, they hovered to and again upon the
Coast, and not only there, but even in the very Ocean or high Sea, as Pirates,
got their Living, by robbing all they could seize on.

The Prince of Aurange had the show of Authority and Command over this insolent
multitude (though indeed, there was neither civility nor Government among them)
by Letters missive, and the like, authorizing them as by Commission.

The Admiral of this Fleet, William Count Marque, Surnamed Lumey, of a
disposition that rather inclined to cruelty then Courage, which was accounted
his chiefest virtue, his Counsel to most of his Companions and followers, as
well as his own mind, intended nothing but depredations. Thus accoutred and
followed, as it seemed good to the Supreme Providence, whom it had pleased
hitherto in the Affairs of these Countries, so to frustrate humane Confidence,
and Counsels, that great and over-blown hopes should never be attended with
happy success.

1572. Twenty four indifferent Ships, being Commanded off the English Coasts,
Sail toward West-Frizeland, to try their Fortune in the beginning a War
against the chiefest Potentate of Christendom; but the Wind being against them,
drove them through an extreme scarcity of necessaries, on one of the biggest
Isles, they call it Vorne, and there is the mouth of the River Maze, where the
Soldiers and Seamen between fear and Courage, with a sudden fury set upon the
Town of Brill: not that they intended to make any long stay there, but only
intended it as a place of refreshment for a few days; But the more prudent of
them, together with the convenience of the place, desired that they might
become sensible of their Victory, in the retention of the place: Thus all
things among them happening by chance, except difference in opinions, insomuch,
that when some Bands of Spanish Soldiers entered the Island, under the Command
of Maximilian Bossu, their Captain, who then was Governor of Holland; the
Invaders, as if they had been distracted by a sudden fear, fled, not one of
them daring to go against him; and this, forsooth, because the Townsmen had set
fire upon their ships.

Bossu, in his return from hence, required passage through Roterdam; which
they, sensible of the Mischiefs of a Garrison, granted; but with this Proviso,
that the greatest part of the Soldiery being sent away, the rest should enter:
But contrary to these Covenants, the Soldiery forthwith broke in, and made a
great slaughter of the Inhabitants within the Town.

This Barbarous Treachery so incensed the enraged Minds of the Hollanders, that
most of them voluntarily, part forced by the violence of the People, the
appearance of their Neighbors in Arms, or else by the necessity of Commerce,
openly declared their great Affection to the Exiles, and their willingness to
admit them: For the Duke of Alva had ^ no Castles here, believing himself safe
enough, in the de^ right simplicity of the People, who having hitherto bin ^
quiet then all the rest, did now, being abused, break out ^ the greater Fury.
Besides, part of the Spanish Forces, b^ little before, had been drawn thence to
punish Vtrecht, her Warlike Injuries done them; for that City, under Confidence
of her Religion, had most vehemently withst^ the commanded Impositions: And
Alva, at the first Ne^ of this Tumultuous Insurrection, had sent for those who
we in Roterdam, vainly fearing they should have been Besiege there.

The Town of Flushing followed the Example of Holland being greatly disturbed
with the sight of the Castle, which was in Building, to keep them in awe, and
not willing to receive a Garrison, which was intended to be placed among them:
These having seized Bacies a Savoyard, the most excellent Surveyor of Alva's
Works, and hurried him away ^ punishment, they Declare Themselves for the
Common Cause.

In like manner, others in Zeland turned out the Spaniards so that now from
this new Face of Affairs, and the Assistance that daily almost came to them,
out of the Kingdoms o^ France and England, they began to hope for Liberty. Cou^
William, who was by affinity related to the Prince of Aurange, rather trusting
to the Honor of that Name, than b^ own strength, assures Gelders, and
Over-Issel: Hereupon Nederwormter, and shortly after Schoneberge, make
Incursions into Frizeland, being admitted into their strongest and best Cities,
with the free good will of the Citizens: The Prince of Aurange did not much
rejoice, when he received the News of these Commotions of the People,
complaining, That he was prevented by such a Chance, and that his Force was not
as ready, as his Consent with them. In this disordered an unsettled Body, some
of the Nobles of Holland, and Commissioners of the Chief Cities, meeting at
Dordrecht, assumed and put on the first Species or Habit of a Commonwealth:
Hither did the Prince of Aurange send, whom the States of Holland, although
absent, because his Lieutenancy and Governourship was taken from him, without
any lawful cause, chose to be their Governor, as also to be the General and
Manager of the War, against the proud Domineering of ^a.

Now there began to be daily Fights both at Sea and Land; wherein, as to the
Land-Fights on Foot, the Spaniard was too hard for the other, being rude yet,
and undisciplined, but at Sea was not able to meet, for it was their proper
Sphere, in which they were as it were born. The Zelanders, in these parts, got
many notable Victories thereby, and by their Depredations at Sea, relieving the
Public Wants. And the Duke of Medina-celi, being lately named Successor to
Alva, that he might be made pliable to Entreaty, by Repentance, his Fleet being
happily taken, wherein he was brought from Spain, and himself hardly escaping,
refused to meddle in the Government, least in so great Differences of Affairs,
he might reap to himself the blame and disgrace that another had merited.

Alva not at all moved with these Dangers, was as outrageous as ever, and would
neither look upon them as Enemies, nor take notice of their strength; but when
at any time he got any into his power, he exercised his Malice upon them, as
upon Rebels: And now Revenge, and a like Cruelty, raged upon all Prisoners on
both Sides without Differences; so long as mutual Necessity, which of old had
taught People that were Enemies, made them also know, that to spare the
shedding of Blood, was not available to the finishing of the War. Being now
thus well acquainted at Land, with the use of Arms, the Nassauians coutagiously
kept possession of the Sea: A space of Breathing is given to these of Holland
and Zeland, whereby they may unite the stronger, while they are left to
themselves, and the greatest part of their Garrisons drawn off (...) Alva, to
the Siege of Mons a City in Henalt, which Lewis (...) Nassau had taken by a
Military Stratagem; the Soldiers (...) Valenciennes turned out of their
Neighborhood to them in t^^ Castle, being also come to the Spaniard: For the
Relief (...) Nassau, who defended Mons in Henault, there came out o^ France
Five Hundred Horse, and Five Thousand Foot, the King taking no notice thereof;
which was them looked ^^on as a Confirmation of their private League: The
Pri^^^ of Aurange came likewise out of Germany with an Army greater than that
he had in his first Expedition; It was probable, that this War might have
spread it self far abroad with greater Terror, if the Spaniards had not
intercepted the unwary French, in their well-known March, by Surprise; whereby
they took Prisoner their Captain Jenlisius, the General of the whole Army, and
diverse other Nobles, for who t^^ Safety King Charles earnestly interceding, was
the last Act of this Jained D^vise: for suddenly a Messenger brings the Prince
of Aurange the terrible News of the French Treacheries, and informs him also of
the Imprisonments, both of Navarre, and Conde; and that the Confederate Power
of the Faction of Guise, having first seasoned it self with the Blood of
Coliniac, proceeded thence over all the Kingdom, whose only Law then was
Murder; and the Hatred of the madding Vulgar, doubly armed against the
Followers of the new and abominated Religion.

This was the end of that dissembled Peace, of that deplorable Marriage, and of
all those Delusions of their Friendship and Society.

Being thus deprived of his main Hope, the King of France having thus broken
his Promises, to clear himself to Philip, and regain his Friendship, he pays
off some of his Troops, and by such Counsels and Actions gets it: The Prince
is forced to Disband his Army, and scarce avoiding a Mutiny, with what Fortune
had left him, goes into Holland, where, being disappointed of all his Hopes and
Endeavors, he accepts of what they, beyond his Expecta^n, had freely cast upon
him: The Surrender of Mons f^ws not long after, with which Victory flesht, they
insulted over Mechlin, and other Cities, which had either assisted the Prince
of Aurange, in his passage by them, with Money or Provision, as if they had
been absolute Conquerours of them: Thence the Terror of them spreading further
all those Places, that we mentioned before to be seized in Frizeland, and near
the River Issel, were, by the Cowardliness of their Governors, left to be new
Garrisoned by the Spaniards: Zutphen also is taken by Frederick, the Duke of
Alva's Son, while they (...) to surrender; where raging in Blood, after (...)
all manner of Villainies and Rape^, upon the (...) the Town, they slew all,
without any regard either (...) Age.

Not long after, Narda, a Town of Holland, rece^ like Barbarous usage, and
their Walls are pulled ^o^ sides, after the method of Revenge taken by the Anti
^ The Spaniards were wont, in other Wars, to do tha^ believing these Crueltes
were convenient, for the accelerating and speeding their Victory; when, on the
contrary, Experience affirms, that men are overcome by no means so soon as
Cleme^cy, when the other does rather heighten men's spleen and courage, when all
trust and hope of Pardon being taken away, they fear the Mischiefs of Peace
greater and heavier than those of War; by which means, their Desperation
carrying them beyond Hope, their Counsels are more deliberate and their Actions
valiant; so that after this, no City ever will be rendered, until it has
suffered the uttermost Extremities.

I suppose it very convenient, to take a View of all the Parts together, of
this growing Commonwealth, when in this Tempestuous Storm, there is a strong
Contention begun by War for Liberty, which then no mortal man could judge,
would be so long time before they ended. The Hollanders only and those of
Zaeland continued still in Arms, the Situation of which People, together both
with their Artie^ and Modern Names, I will declare, that they may the better be
understood, throughout the whole Series of this Discourse This was, in Elder
Times, the most famous Isle of the Batavi, in the middle between Germany and
the Gauls, most fitly situated, for the transmitting and carrying over of
War The Inhabitants took both their Name and Original from the Catti; on the
Outsides and Skirts thereof much frequented by the Romans, and partaking of
their Civility, which the rest wanted: For their Skill in Horsemanship and
Swimming, and the Fidelity and Valor of their Auxiliary Forces, most famous:
Nor were they less than eminent in that War, which beginning in the Emperout
Vespatians time, stirred up the Gauls to seek their Liberty. After which,
sometimes the Frankes, other whiles the Saxons; and lastly the Angles, or
English, seated themselves in these Parts^ some others, the Slavonians and
Varni. The Rhene distinguished into two Channels, one of its own Name; the
other called Wale, and running chiefly in two great Streams to the Ocean,
surround this Island: That on the Right-side, were out not far from Leyden, of
old but small; but after obstructed with Satid, brought thither by the Force of
Tempestuous Weather, turned his Waters into the Leck. On the Left, the Wale
being mixed with the Maze, was kept in by Banks: At this day, before it comes
thither, by the interposition of sundry Islands, and its often overflowings, it
may almost pass for a Sea.

The Third Mouth of the Rhene, which from the Right run further into the North,
Drusus opened; for a River being brought by the Soldiers Labor, in the Flood
of Issel, and thence drowning it self in a Lake, which bounded the Frisons, and
incurvating it self toward the Island Fly, runs into the Sea by this same
first received Name.

But the Face of Things and Places here are now so changed, that there can be
no River seen; but on the contrary, the Sea has broke in upon the Land; and
though at first it seem from a narrow Entrance, but a little to increase, yet a
little further, you may presently see it open like a great Gulf. The beginning
therefore of this Country of old, called Batavia, retains in part its old Name,
and is called Geldres, whose Lordship growing into wideness, is bounded by the
River Maze and Issel. Over-Issel joins in Neighborhood to thy;, having on its
side the Greater Frizeland running out as far as the River Eemes, then turns
about its back to other Parts of Germany: Below Geldres, where it is called
Welawe, is Utrecht, with some Neighboring Towns, which are under the Rule of a
Bishop, as likewise all Over-Issel; until the Emperor Charles first of all
added them to his own Government: Next, we find Holland now most plentifully
stored both with Cities and Villages, running out with two Corners in the Wale,
and the beforementioned Gulf, by little and little getting from the Water on
both sides: It spreads a large Shore to the Ocean, whose more Northerly Parts,
were sometimes part of Frizeland; but partly by Arms, and partly by Agreement,
now joined to Holland; who lying over against the Fly on the West, have kept
the Speech of West-Frizeland. All the Country of Holland is full of many Arms
of Rivers, and Inlets of Lakes, and Watercourse made by Art and Labor, and
is more fertile in Pastures than Corn; there no is Country abounds more in
Fishing and Navigation, both in Rivers and the Sea, than this Zeland, divided
into several Islands, borders on this, being environed with the two Rivers Maze
and Scalde, on the Back also joined with Brabant by Honta, and by the River
Scalde divided from Flanders; which, among Foreigners, has merited to give
the Name to all the Netherlands: This Tract of Land, lies all upon and open to
the Sea, even unto Calais, and is that part of the Netherlands, which is now
under the Dominion of the French. Some have conjectured, that the Danes plying
up and down these parts as Pira^ have left some Relics of their Speech behind
them, in the names both of Holland and Zeland; but I having perused many
Monuments of Antiquity, find this a common name to all the Islands; but I
believe it was a more proper and peculiar name, to a small Region, not far from
Leyden, barred and rough, by reason of thick Woods, for the name signifie^ so
much.

This is clear, that when those Northern Nations raged over all these parts of
the World, committing Rapes, Murders, and daily depopulations, it made these
people for their own safety, advise together concerning the choosing ^
accepting of Princes, which they did by the name of E^ or Counts, who at first
were bound to observe their dutie^ with so much strictness to the French, and
afterward to the Emperors of Germany, that they had no Laws of their own
distinct: Very uncertain it is, of what House sprung or ^ what Antiquity their
first Princes were; There is an Opinion vulgarly received, that they were sent
out of Acq^tayne; but there are better and stronger proofs, that the^ were
Natives, who of old in the same place, now known b^ the name of Holland, had
but narrow limits to their Domnion, till by little and little, they became so
much enlarge as they have been, while by Claims from the Female it had
severally descended unto the Lords of Henalt, Bavaria, Burgundy and Austria; of
which last is come King Philip the Second, but in the number of Earls is
reckoned the one and thirtieth.

At this time the greatest difficulty and evil that attended the War, was
that Amsterdam in Holland, and Middleburg^ in Zeland, two most flourishing
Cities, were both repugnan^ to all the undertakings of both these Provinces;
their bigness making them beyond Command of the yongling Commonwealth,
especially because all Alva's care was fixe^ for their preservation, not only
placing in them choice Governors, but strong Garrisons of Soldiers. On the
other side, the Isle of Bommell, belonging to Geldres, encompassed by the
Rivers Wale and Maze, was drawn into the association, and fortified for the
defense of Holland: Certainly, there was not any thing could have fallen out
more happily to the management of these Affairs, then the coming of the Prince
of Aurange; for he being well skilled in what was necessary for a good
Government, made a quiet settlement of whatever was out of order, and by
discretion, and his innate moderation, kept their strength together, which
otherwise would have quickly come to nothing, which virtues his very enemies
applauded in him; for Marquius, while he managed the Government of Holland in
his absence, by his cruelty toward Priests, and all other kinds of immodesty,
had brought a great scandal upon their now growing Liberty, for being of a
cruel nature himself, he spurred on the French, who being accustomed to blood
and licentiousness, revenged the evils, which they escaped at home, in
foreign Service: for this Cause, as also, for some Act of disobedience, by the
Prince of Aurange his Command, he is suddenly taker, and accusations framed
against him; but the times would not permit him to have any further punishment.

But the Prince of Aurange laying aside his Name of Prince, and embracing his
Power, began, with a selected Counsel, to bestow Commands, set forth Laws and
Constitutions, to order and direct the Affairs relating to the War, both by
Sea and Land; and in brief, to settle all things in the Commonwealth; and if
any matter of greater moment then ordinary fell out, it was taken into
consideration by the great Assemby of the States, among whom he sat President.
Whose frequent meetings, besides the show of a popular State, were very
advantageous in this, that more of the whole number might be knit together by
parts; and to that end, where before only six Cities of Holland, together with
the Nobility, did consult of most matters; which six Cities were, Dordrecht,
Harlem, Delfe, Leyden, Amsterdam and Gaunte, now the Prince of Aurange did
admit of twelve more less Towns, which without doubt would be faithful to him,
by whose favor they had obtained the Privilege of a Suffrage: Not truly was
it without great foresight, that these were made Partners in Counsels, in
regard they would the more willingly help to bear that burden, of whose use
and necessity themselves were Judges; their Names and Order follow thus.

In the South part, Rotterdam, Gorrich^m, Scydam, Schonhouen; and in the Isle
of Maze, Brill. In the North, Alema^ Horn, Enchaysen; and also in the Marshes
there, which a^ called Waterland, Edam and Monkedam, and not far thence
Medemleke, and Purmeren: In the place of them that refused to come, by public
Judgment and Choice, he appointed other Substitutes.

There was a great scarcity of men, that did either desi^ or deserve these
savours, when most of them, seeing the smallness of their strength, or out of
scruple of Conscience would endeavor to exempt themselves from these matter^
which seemed to them troublesome and unsafe: And tha^ they might avoid the
Odium of falling rashly from their obedience, being underpropped by no
alliance, the name ^ Phillip is used in all Cases, though positively in
opposition to Philips Commands; Nor wanted they a President for this even from
the Spaniards themselves, who being beyond measure oppressed with Taxes, when
the Emperor Charles was gone into Germany, opposed the Kings Deputies, or
V^roy^s.

By such and the like practices did the Germans at f^ strengthen and associate
themselves in the Smalcalde Leagy for the Cause of Religion; After whom, the
French Nobility had by many Writings declared, that inferior Magistrates did
not falsify their Allegiance, when they fight for the defense of Religion, and
the Laws, and to Protect the lives of Innocents, although therein they not
only disobey the Kings Command, but resist his Person. This did in some small
measure help the Nassavians, because they took Arms against Alva, the King
being absent, which they would have let alone, if he had been there; But they,
who, in defense of the Kings Power and Greatness, boasted, that they would lay
down their lives, were, by a more fatal necessity, compelled not only to bear
Arms, but to fight many bloody Battles against the same.

Now were the Roman Ceremonies quite cast out of their Churches, and who were
of that Judgment, were not easily admitted unto any great Offices or
Employments; not that there was any Law against them, but it was so ordered cut
of common Prudence, least they bearing a grudge to all that dissented from
them, might, by that License, probably disjoyn and separate their own from the
public Cause, and the Discipline which was taught at Geneva, and here and
there dispersedly in the Palatinate of Germany, was publicly received and
owned; but with this difference, that many of the same Religion vary in the
toleration of diverse things; for the teachers in this say, not only that
Cities and Magistrates were ordained of God, for prevention of injuries, either
to men's Persons or Estates, but that he commanded in what manner he would be
worshipped; but that says, it is enough to worship at large; of which duty,
many being negligent, had drawn upon themselves the punishments due for the
impieties of other men. But on the contrary, those people judged it not only
fit to give them all aid, but all of the Religion voluntarily did abhor the
very name of the Laws of the Inquisition; and from thenceforth did dispute,
that no man would willingly go astray, neither could any man be forced to
believe against his will; And that a true opinion in matters of Religion, was
only by God infused into the minds of men; no devotion being acceptable to
him, but what is voluntary. And that it has been found true, that erroneous
opinions have not been stifled so well by force and humane Laws, as eaten out
by length and process of time; Under these pretenses and vizors, not only the
public Rites of Religion were despised without punishment, but sometimes
absurd and impious discourses would be published among these evils of too much
liberty.

Now were the Tributes and Revenues of the Prince, Priests and Monasteries,
together with the Estates of all such as were fled, and lived in the Enemies
Country, and also all Prizes taken at Sea, brought into a common Treasury for
the public use.

1573. Then were found out the several names of Taxes imposed on men's Heads
and Estates; then were invented exactions under the names of Loanes, and
Impositions laid, even on those things which were consumed by use; and all
these increased more and more, as the War grew more fierce. They bore so
great a spleen against Tyrannical Sovereignty, that they had rather part with
all, then pay the Tenth before spoken of.

There was also found out a new way of gaining from the Enemy, which by selling
Licenses, that Provisions, and other Commodities might be transported; and this
profitable Custom is used yet, both publicly and privately; and though many
times forbidden, yet never left off.

There was somewhat also paid out of Merchandises, for Ships of Convoy, when
Merchants Ships were attended at Sea for their security by Ships of War. All
these things thus settled, the lack of money notwithstanding was the main
matter; because the Spaniards might make incursions into the Hollanders
Country, first by Vtrecht and Amsterdam and then through Narde, (for that is
the way ^ut of Gellerland.) Most matters were achieved by the valor and
industry of the Citizens, not by hired and foreign Soldiers; for there was
hardly Provision enough for those already in Service: The Captains were yet not
skilled in managing their Men, and the Men were untoward to be commanded: This
only helped them, that they had as much skill in the assaulting and taking of
Towns, as their Enemy: Hence it proceeded, that Sieges became so long, and the
main force they used, was to starve the Enemy out; till by many slaughters and
wounds, they became more expert, having out of each others blood learned
perfectly the art of War.

Great was the oversight of Alva, that he did not bend all his force against
Zeland, in the instant, while all things were discomposed and out of order; but
he was frighted by them, as being ignorant of the way of such fights.

The Spanish Army lay seven months about Harlem, a City of Holland, loosing
many thousands of their men, as well by the sharpness of the Winter, as by the
Sword: and that time both strengthened and confirmed the minds of men, and the
State of Affairs; and though by a long Siege, yet at last, after a late and
unhappy relief, the besieged fell into the cruel hands of their enemies; a
great part of whom they either hanged or drowned: But by this it appeared, that
it was impossible to overcome them, who had been so long getting a Victory; and
least their Successes should have gone on, while the amazement for the late
loss continued, their own dissertions put an obstacle in the way, by a mutiny
for want of pay: which was an unavoydable evil in those parts, though in wages
under a most wealthy King.

By the sufferings and punishments of the Inhabitants of Harlem, the Peoples
rage was again set on fire, in which fury, Alemar, a Town of Holland, lying to
the North, first made a breach upon the Spaniards strength, by beating them off
from their Siege; and afterward, they received more comforts in their misery,
for the Nassavians took G^eretruydenburgh by force, a Town of Holland,
extending it self to Brabant, and Bossu himself, with his whole Fleet, was
taken, while, both at Sea and Land, he daily did infest West-Frizeland with
War. The Spaniards had given this Fleet, the name of the Praetorian
Inquisition, arrogantly thereby hind^ with scorn at the Cause of the War.

Alva now grown old, and solicitous to preserve his fam^ upon his humble
Request in that behalf made to Philip, is b^ him recalled, perceiving that his
violent proceedings di^ little good, and that as long as his memory remained, ^
would be an obstacle to any other means that should be ^ sed, without any
notice taken of his desire, that his Son might succeed him, who was partaker as
well of the hatred contracted against his Father, as of his actions.

1574. Five years and a little more, he governed here being wont to boast, that
in that time, he had caused the execution and slaughter of eighteen thousand
men: His Acts especially that for the Tenth, the King durst neither openly
approve and confirm it, nor positively repeal it. He remained in the Court,
without any question, and with Honor, until after some years, he was, together
with his Son, who had committed a Rape upon a Noble Virgin, thrown into Prison,
whence he did not get free until the Portugal War required the presence of
an expert and knowing Captain.

Lewis de Requesens, was sent to succeed him in the Government of the
Netherlands, who ensnared diverse by cunning and more remiss dealings; Liberal
and mild beyond the Spanish guise, but nothing so subtle as Alva. He was no^
quite ignorant in Military Affairs, as witnessed that famous Victory obtained
at the Echinades, in the Honor whereof he had a great share; and his bringing
under of Granado, and breach of promise there with his enemies, when they
grumbled against the Inquisition, the same whereof went before him; but the
first thing by which he endeavored to get the favor of the Netherlanders was,
the pulling down Alva's Statue.

About this time, Middleburg, by a long Famine, which did almost afflict the
Be^iegers as besieged, and the Spanish Fleet being broken and vanquished in
many sharp Conflicts, surrendered to the Z^landers, and regained thereby her
wasted Wealth. But Lewis of Nassau, endeavoring to draw the Enemy off from
Holland, was slain near Nimmeghen, together with the Troops which he brought to
his Brother, which did happen by the folly of the Soldiers; for just as the
Enemy was upon them with drawn Swords, they began importunately to cry out to
their Captain for money. This was the end of that Captain, who, both for Valor
and Policy, might be ranked among the most prayse-worthy; as also of his
Brother Henry, and Christopher, Son of the Prince Palatine.

The same mischief, which had been the ruin of these, fell upon the
Conquerour's Army; for they likewise began to mutiny against their Officers,
and to command their pay, the wages due for their blood.

This madness fell upon Antwerp, a City of Brabant, most happy in times of
peace, in the enjoyment of a great Trade by Merchants, and the acquiring of
what naturally flows thence, Wealth, which is the whole work of Peace, while
on the contrary, where War has once given a liberty to all things, the
basest poverty cannot sometimes secure her rags; here did they insult by all
means, till by force and threats, they extorted from the Citizens there four
hundred thousand Florens: which it was thought, Don Requesens was well enough
content with, because he Commanded they should not be resisted or denied. And
in a very short time after, he granted them a general Pardon, rejoicing as it
were, that money was any way gotten, though it was not improbable he might have
had it willingly, if he had but demanded it; for while the States of those
parts refused to pay any Taxes toward the War, unless the Tenth might be
taken away by a solemn Edict, it happened, that either by the Kings obstinacy,
or the Governors, their Designs in both were frustrated. Which covetousness of
Reward, or rather indeed over-pay is greater among the Spaniard, than an^ other
Nation almost: For this, they will mutiny in a mo^^ notorious manner; and yet,
as it were by a certain Pre^dence, still stick to the King's Interest. Thus by
an underhand Confederacy of the Commanders, they fall to pla^ Robbery, which
the Soldier calls his Wages, or Hire, and the People name it Necessity:
Neither were these Sub^ties here first used; for in others Wars it had been
custom a^ with the Spaniard to use the same Trade.

This Violence and Injury, had mightily turned the Lo^ of the People to the
Prince of Aurange; and the at the next following Council among them, 1575.
made his Requests, and their Desires, to be as it were ^ one; for they began
to mention a Treaty of Peace before Aldegondius, who was a Prisoner, (but a man
of great Learning and Ingenuity, and withal very intimate and prevalent with
the Prince of Aurange) whom they would send with L^ters to that purpose,
associated with Campigny; between whom, and his Brother Granvel, there was a
Domestical Quarrel, and such an Enmity, as in like Cases uses to be between
Relations: At last, the Legates on both sides met at Br^da, whither the
Emperor sent Count Suartzburge, a Kinsman of the Prince of Aurange, to be a
Moderator between both Parties.

The Prince of Aurange, and they who were under his Authority, had given these
Instructions; That they were accounted, without desert, Rebels and irreligious
Persons, by their Enemies; for that they understood the Nature of their Duty,
both to God and their Prince; That they had never taken up Arms against Philip;
and that the only cause, that hindered the Peace, was, that they were governed
by Strangers; And that if the Spanish Soldiers might be removed away, which
was very necessary, both as to Matters of Religion, and all other things; that
they would Declare themselves satisfied, by the Judgment of all the States of
the Netherlands.

Hereto it was answered, That they had not well done, chissing rather to stand
upon their own Defense, than to submit themselves; That yet they should have
free Pardon and Impunity, so as the Disturbers of Religion, might, within a
time limited, be Banished the Country: for they conceived unjust, that so great
a King should be denied the Power to settle Religion, which to the petty
Princes of Germany was never scrupled; And as to the rest, that the King would
willingly agree, so as they would first deliver up to him the Cities and
Castles; as also all things, with their Furniture, and other Engines and
Provisions of War, which they now had in their Possession.

These Conditions were not at all pleasing, as being more rigorous than they
could enforce by Arms; whereupon they desired a Truce, that Acts of Hostility
might cease, and that for some years there might be a Toleration of Religion:
But neither could this be obtained; yet Requesens, by a few late Successes,
being more than ordinarily puffed up, prolonged the Treaty, that in the mean
time, he might the more easily get an opportunity to do them a mischief, while
they yet neglected, and thought nothing of War: For at this very time, wherein
they were Treating of Peace, the Spanish Armies had strange and strong Designs
on foot, which in some places succeeded well, by reason of unexpected Celerity;
but in other, were with admirable Valor and Resolution, broken and brought to
nothing: As particularly, in West-Frizeland, where several Companies of the
King's Soldiers making Inroads, the Country People meeting them dispersed up
and down, which happened by their ignorance of the Places and Ways, took, and
without mercy killed them: In this variety of Affairs, the Siege of Leyden,
begun before, continued a little while, making all things tremble for fear; for
the Spaniards were then in the very Heart of Holland, nor had they any Forces
to resist them, but only relied upon the Divine Help, and the
never-to-be-reconciled Hatred of the People, against this Treacherous and
Tyrannical Government; which in this troublesome time appeared so evident that
there was a Seaman, or Mariner found, who have torn a Spaniards Heart out of
his Body, bit the same in pie^ with his Teeth: Therefore, after they had quite
wearied o^ their Hope, and Famine as yet had wrought nothing up^ them, many of
them being consumed, either by the Sword Sickness, according to the Example of
Modena, the Besiege making use of Birds for Messengers, digging through the
Fortifications, opening the Banks of their Rivers, and so le^ting the Sea
overflow the Land; which happening at a Full Moon, made the Water rise much
higher, the Wind also wonderfully favoring the Design, they preserved
themselves Nay, the Ruinousness of their Walls, which to other Ci^ is a great
Evil, was an Advantage to this, thereby the No^ of a great Eruption coming to
their Enemies Ears, which both frighted and deceived them.

The Siege being thus raised from Leyden, and the Soldier taking with them one
Baldes, a Captain whom they had taken, coming to Utrecht a City of their Party,
which they h^ destined to be a Prey to them, under the pretense of a Mutiny,
they were over-master'd in their Design, and beu^ from their Assault. Then the
Spaniard attempted to bre^ into Holland, on the left side, by the Maze, and the
Leck, where having taken some Towns on the Banks thereof, among which Oudwater,
(so the Town is named) the Noble Victor showed his Cruelty: Nor could they be
repressed or beaten back, until they had harrased even to a place called
Coblente, near which there is a Village named Cry^pen.

At the same time also, Peter Melendes a Biscayan, the Conqueror of Florida;
but by a most villainous piece of Treachery, and infamous amongst his own
Contrymen, when he had with little Judgment compared the American and
Netherlandish Affairs, boasted, that he would easily bring both Brill, and
other Ports, into their subjection: And now some ships being made ready, an
Embassy was sent into England, to desire the Friendship of their Shore, and
Entertainment, ^f their Fleet should chance to be driven thither, by any
Impetousity of the Winds or Seas, But a sudden Contagious Disease scattered
their Mariners, and the Captain himself being told of the Vanity of his
promised Undertaking, dyed, as many think, for shame, but more for fear: And
the Spaniards that had been drawn together, being by the Hollanders Forces
dispersed, and their ships destroyed, that kept Guard at Antwerp, and a new
Face of Affairs presently following, made them lay aside their Seacoast Design
for many years.

After this, the Requesenians enter an Isle of Zeland, called Schouvum (of old
Scaldia) in the Confines of Holland, and is so named from the River that runs
by the left side of it, by ships partly, and partly through the Fords; but
whether with more Fortune or Courage, is more questionable: However, they, to
make the Action more famous, feigned Miracles (such as they had heard mentioned
in old Wives Tales) giving out, that the very Stars gave more Light than
ordinary, to guide them while they went abroad. Here winning by Assault, the
Port of Bommenede, which was a place kept by a small Garrison, after a valiant
Defense, they afterward get into their Power, by a Nine Months Siege, Zyrixee,
the chief Town of the Island. To this grievous Mischief, of having an Enemy in
the midst of two Provinces united by League, and they both in want of Men and
Money to repel them, was added another, as great as the former; and that was,
That they did in vain pray the Aid and Friendship of Foreign Princes; Either
for that the Example did not please them, or else because they stood in fear of
the Spanish Power: For the Queen of England, refused either to make a League
with them, or to take the Sovereignty over them, which they offered her, it
belonging to another; although they boasted, Her Alliance in Blood to the
former Princes and Rulers of Holland, and that they had but one common
Religion, and that she was s^ Lady and Mistress of the Sea. Yet all this
notwithstanding she supplied them with Money sometimes, but for what the asked
unseasonably, it might rather turn to their greater Damage.

Henry, the Brother of Charles, was then King of France, who well knowing
before the Spanish Treacheries, and intending to meet him in the like sort, was
pleased to ass^ those who endeavored to break his strength, but with a^
privacy possibly imaginable; wherein is not to be so gotten the Subtilty of
that almost Piratical Invention, by which is was agreed with the King, That the
Nassauian Treasure of War at Calais, a City of France, should sell
Commissions, or Licenses, to sail in the Neighboring Sea, to get Restitution
for the Injuries, suffered by both People; and what was so gotten, they might
freely sell there: for hitherto, whether they went with any Prey gotten from
the Hollanders, either to their Enemies, or elsewhere; yet they were brought to
Trials and Examinations, and many times were forced to run the hazard of a
Damageable Suit before strange Judges* And the Covenant of preventing Danger
(commonly called Insurance) frequent among Merchants, added a Shadow of Law;
whereby the incertainty of the Event is usually transferred to another, with
some certain Reward. And the Money growing from this one Tribute, was not much
inferior to the great Expenses of the War; unless the whole Ro^ of Seamen, a
sort of Creatures to be kept under by Laws, should return to their old Liberty,
and take their proper profit out of all Prizes: This unexpected good Fortune,
restored Vigor to their Affairs, which were almost grown desperate, when by a
sudden Disease Requesens cies; by which the Administration of the Government
did revert into the Senate of those Parts, under the King's Dominion. Joachi^
Hopper a Frison, whose Power, being then an Agent in Spain, did increase;
because Counsels by him rejected and disallowed, had ill succeeded; so that,
though a Netherlander, he had gained the Name and Repute of a Wise, in the
esteem of the Spaniards, thought that would be pleasing to the People, for the
retaining of those they already had, and for the pacifying of those that were
fallen off: But no man was ever so wise, whom Fortune at one time or other has
not deceived: For the Prince of Aurange had before this, by underhand
Policies, and insinuating Intelligence, gained the Hearts of the Brabanders,
declaring, That he desired nothing, that might singly tend to his own
particular advantage, but wholly minded the Public Good. And they again, of
their own accord, consented, while Requesens was busy abroad with his Forces,
or dissembled Lenity, with intent, to raise his Authority higher than he had
ever abated it: For the Regent himself very indiscre^tly commanded the
Countrymen to take Arms, to repress the Tumultuous Mutinies of the Soldiers;
which very thing, was the first beginning of their Liberty in those Parts: For
now the Names imposed by Alva being forgotten, the Laws, and the Rights of the
States, were cried up by the Voices of all Men: Flanders also from hence
learned Wit, a People very unquiet, and hardly able of old to endure their
Princes, when they were only Princes.

These confidently denied Tribute to Don Requesens, because there was exacted
from them, more than was necessary: But as there were in that Senate some
Spaniards; so were there also many Netherlanders, from whom the Prince of
Aurange hoped, that he might desire, that they would rather bestow those Moneys
to defend their Country, than betray it. And this Counsel, so full of sound
Care, did greatly help forward in that Case: For this War had so extremely
drained the Spanish Wealth, though very great, that the King being greatly
indebted, was fain to take by force his Possessions from the Usurers, under the
pretense of a general Discharge, by common Authority, of all Debts and Bonds
before that time, without any payment or satisfaction for the same. And by
chance, the Turks (whose Power has ever grown greater by the Christians
Discords) while Philip turns all his strength against the Netherlands, enjoying
the Kingdom of Tunis, fell violently into all the rest of Africa, both by Sea
and Land, which the Spaniards held: By means of which straits, it came to pass,
that the Spanish Soldiers in the Low Countries, had no Pay for many Months;
who thereupon according to Custom by them long received, casting off Obedience,
become Licentious, and wish for nothing more than for Pillage: Wherefore
Bruxels, the Metropolis of those Dominions, was destined for Plunder, and so
had been, if the common People, mindful of former Villainies, and almost
astonished at the greatness of the imminent Danger, had not betaken them to
Arms, and advertised the Magistrates, and those who had the Management of the
Laws thereof: These presently summoned the Senate, to whom, we told you before,
the Administration of the Government was fallen, to condemn these impudent
Soldiers, as Enemies to the Prince and Country; which being openly done, the
Sedition was believed to be privily fomented by the Counsels of a few, whose
Wealth grew from Foreign Tyranny.

But when the Confederate Regiments, turning out their Commanders, had forcibly
entered Alost, a Town in that part of Flanders, which of old stuck to the German
Empire, and was never, as the rest, subject to France, and thence had wasted
the Country round about them, there being none to take Vengeance of them; some
of the Nobles of Brabant, not by any public Advice, but struck with the Fear
and Memory of the Example of Antwerp, sent some who should keep together the
Senate, (that is, the Head of the Commonwealth) in their Court and Session.
Anon, least the Government should fail, for want of a lawful Authority, they
discriminated the Innocent from such as were Suspicious, restraining all whose
Treachery or Sluggishness would produce the effect, that no Strength should be
made ready against the insulting Envy and Malice of the Spaniards: And not
only so, but the Natives that were Soldiers, were, as much as might be,
picked out, and sent into several parts, and then joined in League with
Flanders, and other Cities, against them, as against a Common Enemy. Nor did
they only think of these new Disturbances of the Public Peace; but called
also to (...) the Oppressions in Alva's time, such as the Tenths, Inquisition,
Punishments of the Guiltless,, Robbing them of that by Force and War, which
they labored for in Times of Peace, and their frequent Slaughters and
Executions, by color of the Edicts.

And now Matters began to seem not only to take notice of such as had traduced
the Government, but of the whole Spanish Nation: Whereupon, one Rode made
himself Captain of certain Companies of Spaniards, that now went out of
Holland, never to return thither again; part of the Senate before, and which
then was gone over to the Soldiers usu^ping to themselves all Right of
Government: But now ^he whole College as it were re-uniting; The German
Soldiers too joined themselves, hoping to do what they listed; and (...) thus
joined together, they sacked Vtrecht by he Maze, ^ most noble City, and not
long after, powering themselves out of the Castle into the City of Antwerp;
where, for some days, having beaten out the Defendants, they glutted their
Wrath and Avarice with the Slaughter o^ the Townsmen, the burning of Houses,
and an exceeding great Booty. Among all which M^series, the Netherlanders durst
not rely upon the strength and valor of their new and unexperienced Soldiers
against those Weather-beaten and old ones, who had also Fortifications and
Castles: not knowing well therefore what to do, and considering, that it would
be too tedious to love other Princes to aid them, they resolved at last to
accept of the next Forces, which belonged to the Prince of Aurange, and were by
him freely offered them, being conscious to themselves, that they should be
looked upon however, as guilty of the like Crimes, and that they must either
purge themselves together by Force, or suffer together: Wherefore, resuming the
Treaty of Peace, which was broken off at Breda, as is before related, and as
Fellow-Citizens, consulting against a Common Enemy, they easily agree; and it
was provided, that for the obliterating the Memory of former Differences, no
one should be questioned concerning Religion, nor that any Judgments should be
confirmed, which were given concerning the same, but that all things
confiscated, should be restored to their Owners; or if they were sold, certain
select Apprizers should set a value both upon Possessions, and other things
wrongfully detained, and to restore to the one the thing it self, to wit, the
Possessions; to the other, the value or price thereof, that every one for the
future might use what Religion he pleased; and so as to those things, which
they of Holland and Zealand took, detained in the time of the War, which
belonged to the King; and they also agreed, That what Money the Prince of
Aurange had expended in his two Expeditions, or so much thereof as belonged to
him, the rest of the Provinces should be equally contributary to the
re-imbursing, after the Commonwealth was freed from Foreigners, according to
the Judgment of the General States of the Netherlands. In the interim, Trading
should be encouraged, both Parties should use the present Form of Jurisdiction,
and the Religions they already hold; And that it should not be lawful for the
Hollanders, or their Associates, to alter any thing in Religion, without their
own Bounds; only granting the Prince of Aurange Power of ordering the Cities
belonging to his particular Government.

Upon these Agreements, a Peace was concluded at Gaunt* between the Nassauian
Party, and the People of Brabant, Flanders, Artoys, Henault, and other
Provinces, only Lutzenburge excepted, whose Governors were privately obedient
and affectionate to the Name of Spaniard, and the People ever most firm in
their Fidelity to their Princes: But the Frisons came in, having imprisoned
their Governor Caspar Roblese a Portugeze, because he resisted them. Thus
th^owing down the Castles every where, they threw off their Yoke of Slavery:
And because Antwerp, being possessed by the Spaniards, hindered the mutual
Commerce of the Provinces, they made great Banks of Defense near the Sceld,
that under their Safeguard ships might pass safely. Afterward, this League was
entered into again at Bruxels, and the Agreement of War against the Spaniards,
1577.
confirmed by the Oath of the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons, and fully assented
to by the Senate. And this was the only time, from whence any one might with
Reason, hope well of the Low Country Affairs, if they had laid aside their
Feuds, as well as their Arms: And, to speak clearly, the Emulation and Ambition
of the Lords, was the undoubted Fountain of all their Evils; and the Fault of
the People was not much unlike this, for such was their Frantic Zeal in their
Religion, that they would never stick to any Agreements or Covenants, nor be
contented with their present Condition; and while these Vices keep their
Footing, there will never be Person; nor Instruments wanting to undermine
Liberty.

Therefore King Philip, when these Conditions were brought to him, being
informed, that they were approved by the general Consent of all, and that they
would have Foreign Aid, if he should continue to deal harshly with them,
thought it fit to yield to Necessity; and so making a Law in confirmation of
the said League and Agreements, in the mean while, underhand, he determines to
wait all Opportunities, either to break, or at least distract this Alliance,
and kept the Prince of Aurange's Son, who, according to the said League, ought
to have been set at Liberty, as an Hostage for his Fathers Actions.

Now is Don John of Austria, base Son of the Emperor Charles, sent Governor
into the Low Countries, that so, being a young man of a sharp Wit, famous for a
Sea Fight against the Turks, and high in the Pope's Favor, he might divert his
Mind from the thought of higher things: And this also he pretended he did, to
show his Intent, for the future, of maintaining the Laws, when he sent one so
near to him by Blood, to govern them: And indeed, in public, he would own
nothing, that might seem to entrench on the Peace, though privately he
commanded, to follow Rode's Counsel, who was (as we before declared) the Leader
in the Spanish Sedition: But not cunning enough, to conceal these Matters long,
for the Hatred which he had drawn upon himself, the impatiency of the Age,
together wi^h some intercepted Letters, made public the most secret of all
their Counsels and Designs: Which the Prince of Aurange conside^ing, and
earnest that Extremes might not damnitie so increasing Fortune; be counseled
the Netherlanders, that weighing how much they had offen^ed Philip, in the
Peace they had made, they should by War keep out, that manifest Officer of his
Wrath, while yet he was without strength, and upon their Borders. This was
gainsaid by many of the prime Nobility, that did not heartily love the Prince
of Aurange, either out of an old Grudge, or for some new sprung Envy; many in
this Tempest of Affairs, who were by Advice in ermingled in general Parties,
for Reverence of the Prince, continued in their Arms, under the pretense of
Necessity to defend themselves.

Thus Peace being made, in a Town of Lutzenburge, called Marsa, the Government
was granted to Don John of Austria, if he would first Disband, and send away
the Spanish, and then all other Foreign Soldiers; although the Hollanders,
and all that of their Party, did earnestly labor the contrary.

All fear was now banished, and an incredible joy surprised the hearts of all,
because the Spanish Army was by Covenant to go out of their Cities, although
carrying with it many barbarous spoils, and the Rapines of ten years; and
boasting, that within the last six months, they had killed thirty thousand
Netherlanders, of the meaner sort questionless, when they denied, that within
the same time, that they had lost above threescore; nor were they long gone, or
far, some of them being stayed at Millayne, and others nearer, till Don John
might recall them to a War prepared for them; For this Austrian being received
into the Government, with the highest Honor possible, but youthfully impatient
of all delay, suddenly besets the entrances of the Country, and in short time
breaks through them, taking Namur, and some other Towns on that Border; and
further, solicites the German Bands, which were not yet gone out of the
Netherlands, for want of their pay, to render up the Cities they were in: and
their treachery was easy enough to be wrought on; But, whether they were
either frighted with threats, or tempted with promises, the dullness of their
Spirits, or flexibleness of their Natures, quickly broke off their design.

By this means, most of Brabant was preserved, the Soldiers not only
delivering the Garrisons into the power of the States, but their Commanders
also; the Ambassadors of the Provinces at the General Council, used the name of
the States, to whom, after the Power of the Regal Senate was abolished, most
of the business of the Commonwealth was brought; And yet there was no War, but
the States did accuse Don John to the King and other Princes, that he had
publicly broken the Peace: He again casts the blame upon the Prince of
Aurange, that he would set up new Customs, contrary to the Covenants of the
League in the Cities, which subjected to his Dominion, by Contracts and
Agreements. Notwithstanding which Calumnies, he was by all the Cities of the
Netherlands, looked upon with an high esteem, as the Author of their liberty,
and of such a noble disposition, as is wont to win all men's affections. He
strengthened by complacence, that power which he would seem to diminish, so
great was his prudence and moderation; and because by diligent inquiries and
pains, and by intercepted Letters, he had demonstrated, that the Austrian
Snares were laid first for him, and his, and afterward for all the rest, by
breaking the Band of the League; he so won the favor of all the people, that
he was by the Brabanders chosen to be their Governor.

This was taken very ill by Arscot^, who at that time, was President of
Flanders, Lalayne, Champigny, and diverse others, who could not digest that the
chief management of all Affairs should rest in the Prince of Aurange, with
whom few were equal in birth, none of them like him in Wisdom and Authority.
Therefore because they see themselves never able to compass the Peoples love,
as he has done, and that they must come far short of him, they begin to fear,
that if he should come to enjoy, that Dignity, that he would bring Religion to
his own bent; and to prevent that, they seek to prevent his glory, by the
splendour of a greater name.

Rodolphus was chosen Emperor of Germany, in the stead of Maximilian his
Father who was lately dead: His Brother Matthias, they by many great promises,
entreat from the Court, not by any open consent of the Emperor, for fear of
offending the Spaniard. The'e men, because they had strong Cities and Arms in
their power, imagined they could easily bring to pass, that by their bringing
in of this young man, who must be beholding to them for that great Honor, they
should have all things in their power, and might in his name execute their own
Commands, and do what they list^ all which, the Prince of Aurange foreseeing,
he removed some of these guilty persons from, that Council, and assured them,
that they might more confidently hope for a just Government in the lawful
Dominion of the States, than the particular power of some few. And by chance
also at this time it fortuned, that Arscot, the chief Emulator of the House of
Nassau, swollen big with vain hope, offended the Commonalty of Gaunt, by some
insolent Speeches; the people of which City, being the most noble of all
Flanders, but the most averse to Nobility, threw him and all his Train into
Custody. But the Prince of Aurange, although Matthias was called in by his
Enemies, and had come contrary to his desire, and that the rest of the
Netherlanders had a greater respect toward France, yet having regard to the
moderation of his Carriage, he himself moved the States, that they would accept
the young man, eminent in his Brothers Majesty, and of Kindred to the King, to
protect their Cause; wherewith they were thus far pleased, that the Government
of the Netherlands should be in Matthias, but that the Prince of Aurange should
be Deputy Governor, which at length, though unwillingly, he accepted; by which
means, their fury, who had sought out Matthias, only with hope to have made
themselves great by his Dignity, was more enflamed. The Regency of Matthias, is
bounded and limited by Laws and Counselors: nor had he power to use any thing
suitable to his greatness, besides the State and splendour of his life.

The third Book of the Dutch Annals.
ALL matters being in this manner settled, War is proclaimed against Don John,
at which time, the Monthly Revenues arising from Provisions of Victuals,
amounting to six hundred thousand Florens, was brought into the public
Treasury; the free disposing whereof, as also of Musters and Councels relating
to the War, that they might be the freer from discovery, were by the States,
left wholly to the Senate. Then at length, the Queen of England began to think
the forces of the Netherlanders worthy of her favor, though yet she was not
without a peculiar fear of troubles in her own State, because Don John moved a
Marriage with the Queen of Scots, by which, and the help of his Arms, he hoped
to get to himself the Kingdom of Britain, and this was evident by no small
demonstrations; wherefore she promised them both men and money, for their
assistance, they giving caution for repayments; but yet still they should stick
to their pretense, that the Netherlanders Provinces would be obedient to
Philip. And so she interwove her self into that Commonwealth, that no matter
of any importance, could be done without her knowledge and approbation,
endeavoring also to strengthen these new Settlements by an universal Concord,
(though some of the Netherlanders labored earnestly, but in vain, to provoke
the Queen against the Prince of Aurange;) and persuading now one, now another,
by laying before them the greatness of the danger, least they should incline to
re-settle the old Possession of the Roman Religion, She therefore would give
them aid.

When She had effected these things, She sends Letters to the King, desiring
him therein to hearken to peace, and to moderate his Government by the Rule of
the Law; but if he would compel his Subjects to take Arms, he should not take
it ill at her hands, the French long since being intent thereto, if she
prevented the Dutch alliance with that People who were her Enemies; and in the
interim, she did with great pains strive to clear her self from affecting the
Sovereignty that belonged to another.

Henry King of France, Sebastian King of Portugal, and the Emperor himself,
were, in like manner, solicited by the States, to move Philip to moderation
toward them, the last also being s^ed to for assistance in their Cause, which
at that time was in vain; In the interim private grudgings and discords,
increased among the great Ones, so that many went thence into Castles, and
strong Holds situate in Lutzenburg, upon various pretenses; but the true cause
was, they interpreted, the Honors given to others, to be an affront and
disparagement to them. But Don John, being recruited with the coming of the
Spanish Forces, and a great many Companies of Soldiers brought to him by the
Duke of Parma, the Son of Margaret, late Governess of the Netherlands, out of
Italy, 1578.
overthrew the Dutch Army, which was daily weakened by the going away of their
Captains, and retreating into Brabant, at a place called Gemblim. Nor was the
Prey gotten by the Victory small, especially, if we consider it in the success,
because Lovayne, which laid open Brabant on that side Limburg, a famous Duchy,
and the Metropolis of the Dominion, bearing the same name, using to make
excursions even into Germany and Phillippolis, which City, the Prince of
Aurange, when formerly he was General of the Kings Army, had fortified with
new and strong Bulwarks against the French, when only foreign Wars were
fea^ed; as also many other adjacent Towns, came in and submitted.

The King having ^hus conquered them, yet thought fit to try them with the hope
of Peace, the Baron Selles carrying Conditions out of Spain, for differing from
those made at Gaunt, and for which Don John would not alter a tittle, which
then was enough to make it seem re^sonable why they should be denied; for now
the Netherlanders began first to know themselves, and several Princes did
augment their confidence, by striving who should first offer them Soldiers and
other aid: Here Francis of Valoys, Duke of Anjon, and B^other to the King of
France, both before the Peace made at Gaunt, and after, was often sued to by
the Belgic Nobles. There Casimire, who possessed the Palatinate of Germany;
both of them by reason of their younger Birth, being laid side at ho^e, and
therefore the more desirous to augment both their Fame and Wealth by foreign
Service and acquisitions Francis, who was of a disposition not to be despised,
but altogether unrestful in spirit, offered himself to be their General in the
War, which was said in France, to be for the restoring of liberty, against
the wrongs and oppressions of the Court, and for the settlement of Religion in
peace; which he did either out of hatred to his Brother, who, though weak and
barren, yet kept the Kingdom, or else he was an Instrument of his Mothers
subtilty; for averting the feuds of parties; and surely he might have gained
the love of the People very much in the supporting that Cause, and would, upon
a Peace made, have had most ample possessions. But he becoming the Minister of
another cruelty, in a short time soyled all his Renown by turning his Arms
upon his Allies.

About which (...), Margaret of Valoyes, the King of Navarres Wife, that she
might be clear of the Wars of her Husband, and her Brother, and veyling the
desire of her absence, with the pretense of going to the Waters at the Spaw, as
she passed by Cambray and Moniz, taking hold of opportunity, She highly
commended the Duke of Anjou, in those two strong places, that differed not much
either in Customs or Speech from the French, and very little in Religion; But
Casimire, who had at that time been a great support to the party of Navarre,
remitted the Agreement that privately had been made with him, thereby giving
the testimony of a just and Religious mind.

The Commonwealth, like an indigested Chaos, was now on every side in
confusion, nor was there any Symmetry in its parts, while each one catches at
the Government, as if it were void, and in the prosecuting thereof, steer a
several way; And truly, the main use of Arms by all, was against a Kingdom;
but some praised the Principality and Laws, others admired and preferred their
forces before those of the Venetian or Switzerland, without any consideration
of their inequality or disproportion; And thus under the name of Noblemen, they
distracted and tore in pieces the Government, or else because they fell short
of others in dignity; the Pl^beyan strength also approaching, stirred up the
vulgar by words, whereby becoming unruly, and not to be led, their suspicions
egged them to cruelty, so that nothing would content them but free liberty,
without any exception; within and without, abroad and at home, there was
nothing but faction and sedition: Nor by this was the War lossened, only it
was delayed, and not vehement enough for the time, because the Armies were
ordered according to several Opinions.

Amsterdam, which, as we told you, was one of the greatest Cities in Holland,
and had not stood up for liberty as the rest, was then much favored, because
it inclined to Don John: But because the Nassavians had environed, and in a
manner besieged, that City, and in reg^d there was no hope of relief in a long
time, they came to Articles, whereby all that were banished for Religion were
restored to their Country, but they should not have the exercise thereof within
the Walls: But when the men of the Roman Opinion, who wavered in the
performance of their promises, seemed sometimes as if they would become enemies
again; the Exiles driving out the Magistrates, and all those that praesided
Religion, enjoyed all in public.

The same at diverse times, and for the like causes almost happened in diverse
other Towns of Holland, as at Vtrecht and Harl^m: taking occasion by their
breach of Faith, from Magistrates instructed in this, that whatever they
approved should never be contradicted by the City; which among themselves was
very conducing to concord among them, but was offensive to the stomachs of
their fellows, who adhering to the Pope, suspected that strength would suppress
them.

John of Nassau had the Government of Gueldres, the Prince of Aurange
appointing him to that charge, that so he might stand the more strongly
guarded: But in Frizeland, whereof Rennerberge then was made Governor; the old
Dissentions of Groningen City, and the Country adjacent, began anew to flame,
for the carrying forth of their Reve^ues, though for the maintaining their
Peace; questionable, if not with the Governors Desire, that he might the more
surely Command.

The Commons of the City bound the Deputies of the adverse Party to themselves;
and the same, after both Sides bad showed their Valor, in their privnte
Darings, came off Victor: However, all Prisoners taken were set at Liberty; yet
did Animosities remain, until they came to be intermingled in the Public
Contention; although both Matthias, and the Prince of Aurange, interposed to
settle them Rennerberg also commanded some of the Senators of Frizeland to be
removed, and diligently watched, who had showed themselves well pleased at the
Spanish Victory, and substituted others in their Room; the like also he did by
the Bishop of Leuwarden: For these Merits, and good Works, he is chosen
Captain, particularly for the Ruling and subjecting Over-Issel, for the German
Soldiers, hired by Don John, held both Campen, and Daventry; both which
Cities, were soon after yielded: But the Army staying something longer at
Daventry, Casimire came to them with a fresh Recruit of Eight Thousand Foot,
and almost as many Horse; For the Queen of England, instead of the Money she
did promise, sent Soldiers, whose Number, he of his own free Will increased,
as if he had been obliged: Which the Chiefrains of the Roman Religion looked
upon as very ominous; and therefore they forthwith labored by all means, to
entreat and win Francis of Valois to be the Head of their Sect; which the
Prince of Aurange, as well as others, saw, but would seem to take no Notice
thereof, because they would not draw new Suspicions upon themselves: Wherefore
Francis, by the Decree of the States, is named, The Defender of the Belgic
Liberty: And moreover, Provision was made for Imbursement of all Charges, by
giving to him, as a Reward or Gratuity of their Alliance, whatever Towns the
Enemy held beyond the Maze.

While these things are doing, and the Inferior differ about Fancies in
Religion, and the Great Ones quarrel about Realities in Dominion, the Followers
of the Innovated Religion, obtain a Power very safe to themselves, but
hazardous to the Commonwealth; for the Right of Ruling, being in the hands of
many, there was no higher Power to restrain or keep under particular
Animosities and Feuds; They Petition Matthias, and the Prince of Aurange, who
was not ignorant thereof before; wherein they set forth, That they never having
been Servants to Tyranny, but rather Marks for the Cruelty of the Spaniards,
who had designed the Ruin of the Commonwealth, by robbing her of the best part
of her Citizens, were not more maligned by her Enemies abroad; Though they had
this most certain Pledge of their Faith, that their only hope rested in the
Public Safety: for if the old Ceremonies should return, as the rest of the
People can expect nothing but Penury and Slavery: so they are sure to have no
other pity than that of Torments, Fire, and Death; Meritedly therefore, they
desire an equal share of Liberty since nothing can be by them expected from a
Kingdom but Tyranny. They looked not after rich Benefices, and ample Revenues,
but were content others should enjoy them; only they begged they might not be
banished both from the Church and Court as profane Persons. That they never
were Apostates, either in their Piety toward God, or their Fidelity toward
their Country.

Some doubt there was a while, how to Resolve; but at last praising the
Examples of Germany and Poland, agreeing many old Customs, it was concluded by
the Counsel of those, who had put forward these things: That it was very
necessary, for the maintaining of Unity and Concord, that these just Desires
should not be rejected; for they could not have an Army of any value or
strength, but it must chiefly consist of them; and they found by Experiment,
that no Persons might be with (...) safety trusted with the care and management
of Affairs, that they.

In this Vicissitude of Affairs, it came to pass, that several of the Roman
Opinion, especially those who took to them selves the Names of Jesuits, could
not be drawn to taken Oath against Dan John; and no small part, whose hope man
depended upon the King's Success, voluntarily defend them: But many of the
Magistrates, though so instructed ^ if they had foreseen the Rising Authority
of that Side, embraced that Form of Worship, which the Nassanians helds And for
these Causes, Honors were communicative to them, and in some places, no less
than a hundred Families desired they might have, by Command, places see apart
for the^ Public Worship, on the same Condition, That the like should be
granted to those who preferred the Doctrine of the Latin Church through Holland
and Zealand, which yet was never affected. The things which followed after
this, are not to ^ passed by, without Compassion or a sad Remembrance; Such
Commotions, such Hatreds, and such Troubles, one still following another: For
as the Romanists would grant nothing at all to the other, so they not satisfied
so much now with their Impunity and privacy, upon their own private account
took by force the Administration of the Law, from the more violent and stubborn
Magistrates; and after they had therein prevailed, they began to look at
Revenge: So that they wh^ but lately wished ill to the Spaniard, now of a
sudden jo^ both their Purses and Counsels against them; Citizens now against
Citizens, standing armed in the very Cities; which being free from their
Public Enemies, they endeavored ^ drive away their private Adversaries; there
was not m^ need here of the Soldier his help, being only necessary preserve
Domestic Peace. And as they which labor of a Deadly Disease, for the most
part despise all Remedies; ^ here, they who were Lovers and Promoters of Peace
and and Concord, were on all hands hated by these strong Promoters of Sedition.
And indeed, they ought to have studied nothing but Patience, to see such
persons, by whom the common Plague of this Age was scattered into both Parties,
and the Names of all things inverted: So that a blind and perverse Obstinacy in
Discord, was called a Holy Zeal, and Modesty and meekness of Mind, Sloth; nay,
sometimes Treason.

The People of Gaunt now grown to that height of Licentiousness, that they
could not hope for Pardon or Impunity, but from the monstrous Greatness of
their Villainy, being still egged on further by that Boutefeu Imbis, who had
crept up into Power by a Thredbare Journey formerly to openly detract the
Government: They protest, they will no longer so much as see those Roman
Superstitions, that have invented so many Wickednesses and Cruelties; not that
the Authors or Fomenters of the Sedition esteemed much of any Religion, for
they would raise Tumults under the pretense of both; but only they preferred
Novelties, before things received from Antiquity, and their own Fancies, before
any Truth that could be taught them; and having by chance convicted some Monks
of detestable Sensualities, first they expelled that Order, yet groaning under
the Weight of their fresh Malice and furious Hatred, and afterward all
Priests. Then being conscious to themselves, of what they had begun, they begin
to fortify their City with strong Bulwarks and Rampires; which being of a vast
compass, equal almost to the greatest Cities, was not totally inhabited; for
having been often besieged, and fearing the like again, from the vileness of
their Action in time to come, they enclosed many Fields within their Works or
W^ll: And the more their Fortification proceeded, and came nearer the
finishing, so much less they did hearken to the Commands, either of Matthias,
or the States, or take notice of their vain objecting their Crimes against
them; seeking backward still for new Pretenses, out of those very things which
they had stirred ^ against themselves: Neither could the Prince of Aurange's
Authority any whit prevail with them, though by his Intercession the same
People of Gaunt had obtained again their Ancient Laws, which they had before
forfeited by a Rebellion against the Emperor Charles: But the Mischief rather
increased and spread into other Cities of Flanders: On the contrary, those of
Artoys and Henault, were more constant and steadfast to the Roman Religion, for
most of them were of that Judgment: And the Lords being averse to the Prince of
Aurange, with a kind of civil Objuration, refused to hear of the New Law; for
they said, that it was specified in the League, that nothing should be altered
in Religion, while the We continued.

Some did advise, that the City of Gaunt, being by this Sedition liable to
Treachery, should by War be compelled to Obedience: But neither the Prince of
Aurange, nor several other of the Nobles, would consent to that, to turn the^
Arms or Forces against Citizens, how ill deserving soever while the Spaniard,
their Enemy, with a powerful Army lay almost in the middle of their Country;
for that, indeed, were to make good that, which some of the wisest of their
Enemies had foretold of them, that their own Discord w^ destroy them. But
while it was dangerous to enforce them, they slighted all Commands, Counsels,
and Entreaties, looking upon them only as predetermined Malice. At this ti^
Bossis, whom we formerly mentioned to have been taken in the Sea of Frizeland,
when he commanded the scattered Remains of Holland under Alva, was General of
the gre^ Army of the Netherlanders, the States having taken that Honor from
Lalain; because at the unhappy Battle of Ge^ he forsook the Camp, without their
Leave or Commandment* The Viscount of Gaunt was Commander in Chief of the
Horse; Lanove, who had won great Renown in the Civil Wars of France, was
Camp-Master General.

Don John assaulted their Camp, situate not far from Mechlin, at a Village
called Rimenen, and was only Repulsed, there being, as many both believed and
said, a great Error committed, in that they did not follow them in the Rear,
as they marched off; which had they done, that only Day had scattered and
broken all the Spanish Forces. But that Year might have been spent in the
Besieging of Towns, if the Captains Prudence and Foresight had provided
Pioneers, and such other like People, as are fit to attend an Army for such
Work.

Among all these Changes of Affairs, there intervened some Discourses of Peace;
for some Foreign Princes, being desired to propose some way to make a Peace,
did persuade Don John, that in regard the Forces of the Netherlanders far
exceeded his, he might yet go off with an unblemished Reputation, and let his
hope hereafter wait for more happy opportunity; and as to the King, that he
would do much more discreetly, if he minded to win the love of so Valiant and
Warlike a People, and not rashly to cast away so large a Dominion, that he
would now accept of them, while they were willing to come to reasonable terms;
that it was necessary, for the obtaining thereof, (to wit, of Peace) that the
League made at Gaunt should be confirmed; and in that, the Clause particularly,
that Religion should be left to every Man's free Will: That it was most just,
that all Prisoners should be set at liberty, and among them chiefly, the Prince
of Aurange's Son; That whosoever intended to make a Peace with the States: must
comprehend therein all these particulars; by which means all might be
reconciled.

To these, Don John answered, That unless the Prince of Aurange might be
banished into Holland, there could be no hopes to make Peace; That he would
grant nothing as to matter of Religion, only he seemed to incline to a Truce.
The truth is, Peace is generally made, according to the pleasure and liking of
the strongest; and to the Weaker, every Delay in point of War, is very
advantageous: but when he was reinforced with Thirty Thousand Foot, and Six
Thousand Horse; so that he believed himself in a manner as strong as the
Netherlanders, especially as they had Discords among themselves, pitching his
Camp in the Mountain Bonga, which is near to Namur, he broke off the Treaty,
all thought of Pacification being laid aside in his Commanding Breast.
Casimire, in the mean time, by a stay longer than ordinary in Gelderland, being
unfurnished of Money, though very slowly, yet at last got together a great
Army: By his Conjunction, the Army of the Netherlanders consisted of Forty
Thousand Foot, and Twenty Thousand Horse; with which strength, it was resolved
to stay for the Aids of Francis of Valois, when (but too late) they intended to
besiege Don John, being full of hopes, if they could but once begin it, to
bring it to perfection: But the sins of the former Time, too much greediness
and Ambition, after Wealth, Honor, and their Licentiousness, in the abusing
both, which had before been the cause of the Netherlanders Slavery to the
Spaniards, was now again the main Obstacle and Diversion of the Liberty, which
was even in their sight, and almost come to their possession: For the
Differences of those of Henault and Artois, with them of Flanders, was come to
that height, that without any Care of the Public Good, the particular People
of each Province, would reserve and keep all Taxes and Tributes unto their
proper uses: And this Example spreading it self further, certain Bands of
Soldiers, lately grown wanton with Ease, being a little defalked or delayed in
their Pay, left the Service of the Commonwealth, by a secret complotting and
contrivance of the Captains, who thought they had not preferment suiting to, or
proportionable with, their Worth and Merits: These Soldiers therefore seizing
Mayn (a Free Town in Flanders) forage and risle all the adjoining Country.

Hitherto it was hoped, that this Storm would have been kept within their own
Bounds, when of a sudden Montigny, a Man of great Authority among the
Captains, undertook the Government, and went over to the Artoysian Faction: The
Gauntoys listed diverse Companies, to repel the Injuries offered by those: But
these Soldiers, though at Home fierce and untractable, yet unexpert in War,
were not of strength sufficient to hinder the Enemies depopulating the Country:
For they gave it out in Speech, that the Priests, which by Force and Sedition
were thrust out of Gaunt, lived in Banishment among them; and that they could
not reasonably deny nourishment to so great a Company of poor Supplyants,
either for the Sanctity of their Order, or the meanness of their present
Fortune; but also, since there was no place left for Equity and Justice, to
demand and regain by Arms those things whereof they were robbed by those
Barbarous Spoilers: Under this pretense of War, (for now these private Quarrels
were broke out into open Hostility) great Spoil was daily made, until the
Flandrians, at the instigation of Casimire, received Soldiers from him,
promising Pay out of his own Store, for then the whole Country was even brought
to Poverty: It was supposed, that he hoped for the Government, but he was
deluded therein by the Peoples Inconstancy, as well as other Events of Matters.

But in all these Vicissitudes, the Towns of Henault received Francis of
Valois, who knowing by whose means it came to pass, gratified Lalayn, the
Governor of that Province for it. He had with him, something more than Eight
Hundred Horse, and Six Thousand Foot, the Refuse and Remains of the French
Troubles and Tumults; whom, after a very hard Journey, and Plunders committed
every where as they passed, having first taken some Castles; and Autumn now
coming on apace, he brought to the Town of Bingen. This came under his
Subjection by Storm and Siege, but proved a very mean Reward for the Expense of
his time: He staid for the most part at Monts, a City in Henault, but but not
without great Indignation, that the Townsmen refused to deliver up the
appointed Towns to his Soldiers to be Garrisoned; and when he was desired to
come to the Army by the Netherlanders, he at first denied it, until Casimire
did the same; with whose progress and success at Gaunt, he was greatly
offended, so much, that being before his Friend, and afterward his Competitor,
now he hated him with so much Malice, as could not forbear to vent it self in
contumelious Speeches: Nor would he be removed from the same, although both the
Regent Matthias, the Prince of Aurange, and the Queen of England, declared
themselves unsatisfied, in the Actions both of Casimere, and the Flandrians,
but that he willingly suffers his Soldiers to run over to the Company and
Troops of Montigny.

Thus these two Captains, both promising generally Aid ^ the Netherlanders,
came both into their Dominions, rather is damnifie them: But not long after,
the Duke of Anjou departed to France, and Casimere went to England, both
leaving this Commonwealth, whereto they had no Right, to her own good or evil
Fate: But the Netherlanders, upon the departure of this great Frenchman,
(though himself, and other Princes in his behalf, had accused them of
Ingratitude) promised, That if they could compass any Peace with Philip, ^
should have Statues, Orations, and other things; in truth, but (...) Sounds,
and mere Trisles of Honor; but if he would come to other Resolutions, that he
should, before any others, have that respect which his Dignity and the
well-weighed Advantage of the Commonwealth, in that exigent of time, could
require.

This was the state of Affairs, when the Violence of Death, suddenly sn^tched
away Don John of Austria, which might be hastened the more early, in regard that
with Grief ^ Mind he repined at his Fortune: For when he endeavored to make
our, that he gained the Victory by his own Valo^ and Conduct, not the Debates
or Failings of the Enemy, t^ see his Glory impeded, and darkened by his Foes,
which i^ the Spanish Court were many, he grew Choleric, beyond either what his
Nature, or the strength of his Body would beat: And surely, in some intercepted
Letters, there appeared contumacious Desperation: And a little before, Philip
had privily commanded Scovedo to be killed, that used to take care of his
private and most secret Affairs, as being dangerously subtle, in the managing
of the Intents of that Noble and great-spirited Young Man: For being known to
have aimed at, beyond the condition and quality of his Birth, formerly the
Kingdom of Tunis, and afterward that of England, and also to have had
intercourse of Counsels with the most powerful Lorrainers in the French Court,
he was privately feared by Philip, least he should not only continue against
his Person, but seek to confirm to himself these Provinces of the Netherlands;
from whence arose a great Suspicion of Poison, though but uncertainly pressed,
who should cause it to be given; there being some Priests of the Roman
Religion, who stuck not to cast upon the Country an Imputation of endeavoring
such a thing: Others, suspected some English, who were sent from thence against
him, and were therefore called Murderers.

The Duke of Parma took the Conduct of the Army, and the Government of the
residue of the Cities and Towns; first, at the Desire of Don John himself, and
with the good liking of all the Soldiery, and afterward by the King's
Command: He was of a more reserved and close Nature, bringing out of Italy with
him, the practice of making large Promises, and the Art of Dissimulation: He
knew the ^^ue way to catch the Dutch to wit, either with great Words to fright,
or with smooth Words to seem to excuse, them: Therefore, as Spain was not so
much beholding to any man's Arms, yet he gained more by the Favor of the
People. By this man's occult and close Provocations, he mightily augmented the
Differences among the Provinces, which began to burst out more and more,
especially after there had been some punishment inflicted upon diverse Citizens;
who, to reduce to Unity a City of Artoys, durst make an Intestine Commotion:
Nor did the Prince of Aurange leave any Stone unturned, to find a Remedy for
all these Mischiefs; He becomes more sharp in punishing those whose Crimes grew
great beyond his Envy.

And now he had persuaded the Gauntors, that restoring and receiving their
Priests, they should return and submit to the Covenants and Articles of the
League, then he turned his Endeavors to Montignie's Soldiers, and the
Artoysians, for the reconciling of them.

But it appeared, that the chief men had willingly laid hold of the Causes of
this Defection, and therefore that they were implacable; which so instigated
anew the Minds of the Flandrians, that Imbis took to himself by force the chief
Magistracy of Gaunt, and after bestowed, on whom he pleased, the rest of the
Names and Titles of Honor. In the interim, the Duke of Parma gave safe Conduct
and Passage for all Casimire's Horse to go out of the Country; so that taking
himself thereby to be secure from any Enemy, he besieges Mastricht, that had
never been weakened with any Garrison, and makes Approaches to assault it.

During the Siege of this City, the Emperor, to whom the Treaty we before
mentioned, was submitted, had sent his Ambassadors to Colen: Thither came also
with the King's Commands the Spanish Duke of Terranova in America, and for the
Netherlanders Areschot, and others. But the Prince of Aurange, who ever was of
Opinion, that all Peace made with the King must be to the hazard of his Head,
in this Division of the Netherlands, he being in the midst of so many Parties,
and hated by all, did not vainly fear, least he should be delivered up a Prey,
both to his Enemies, and to Strangers.

But it would be resented grievously, and redound much to his dishonor, to
hinder the meeting and Treaty, or to impugn the German Moderators; but that it
might be covertly brought to pass, he urged the points concerning Religion, to
be firmly insisted, and several others, whereto there was no hope the King
would ever condescend: Many did believe that at that time, Conditions moderate
enough might have been obtained, but that some for their private advantage, had
broken the public Peace; And the Duke of Parma, though intent upon War, yet
never ceased to admonish all desirers of novelty, that they seek to regain the
Kings Favor and Pardon, by speedy repentance and submission.

The first of all that reconciled himself to Philip, was Lamot, which he did,
by surrendering the Town of Gravelin in Flanders, whereof he was Governor, to
the Kings Power; and having accepted Power of Covenanting with the other, he
allured over many others, manifesting himself a mighty applauder and example of
the Kings Clemency. Afterward, Montigny bringing over all his Forces (which
were eight thousand) added no small strength to that party, though his men were
very poor; and this he did as well for that reason of poverty, as for fear of
punishment, which he knew he had meritedly deserved from the Netherlanders,
Lamot being ready to fall upon them. They of Artoys and Henault for a while
were in suspense: at length, prescribing certain Conditions to the rest of the
Netherlanders, which they would should be used if they listed, they
notwithstanding came to an agreement with the Duke of Parma; the like did
Issel, Doway, and Orchan, Cities in that part of Flanders, which the French a
long time possessed, and afterward returned to the obedience of their own
Princes, but yet they retain the French Tongue; with whom this was the cause of
their private falling off from the rest of the Netherlanders, because they
could not obtain a proper voice, or suffrage in Council.

The Articles of the Peace contained these Heads, The Latin or Roman Religion,
their accustomed duty to their Prince and the approbation of the League made at
Gaunt, and that i^ might be perfect, the foreign Soldiers to be sent away
within a short time, receiving their pay out of the Kings Treasury, ^ which the
Provinces subject to the Regency, should be contributary and in all things
where any defense was required an Army of Natives might be raised; The King
would consider of a Regent, and in the mean while, all to obey the Duke of
Parma.

Thus the Walloons made a great addition of power to the Kings party: A People
taking delight in War? and who^ the Spaniard might safely make use of in all
dangers; And this was altogether the conclusion of the Netherlanders against
foreign Dominion: Certainly, that Society must needs be firm, which has the
same hopes, or more Obligations to agree than causes of dissension. There is
scarce any thing common with the Netherlanders, which the Spaniards hate not;
by which means, as enforced, they made the Peace at Gaunt, the Priests being
the chief perswaders thereunto; notwithstanding all which, anon, every one
endeavors to draw to himself as much power as he can, though by contrary and
indirect means: For the Prince of Aurange, and all those, who with him were
conscious to themselves, to have deserved the same things that the Counts of
Egmond and Horn suffered, durst nor to trust the King: Hence it was, that they
sought after all Counsel and Advise, which might establish themselves and the
Sect of their Religion, as also to attain favor with foreign Princes.

Another party there was, whose Crimes had been no causes of the beginning of
the War, who willing to preserve their Loyalty to their Prince, and their
duty and zeal to the Roman Religion, were very much in fear, least by others
violence they should be hurried from the same.

It would be an easy matter for Philip thus to break asunder these cash and
ill co-hering People. If he would remove but this one thing, from all such as
should be employed therein, to wit, the dread of the Spaniards. Where he gave
satisfaction to the desire of these, the rest would follow of course; for all
those things that for a long time continued among the Netherlanders, as bare
suspicions, were afterward converted into Hostility, nor ever after did the
several Religions increase, or ciment again together.

At last there happened, when once they came to divide into parties, a thing not
very strange, that who would not submit to Citizens, should, without any regard
of Covenants, be compelled to serve under a foreign Power. But the Prince of
Aurange did easily foresee, that while the minds of men were inclinable to
Peace, by the imprudence of some persons, the Commonwealth would be destroyed,
unless timely prevented: Wherefore using his wonted diligence, he goes to
Vtrecht in Holland, and there with most wholesome Counsel, he binds all the
States, being there called together, as well of that Province, as of
Gelderland, Holland, Zeland, and that part of Frizeland, which lies near the
River Lecke, and the other part, between the same River and the River of Eemes,
each to the other, in a more strict League and Bond of Alliance; the sum
whereof was this, That they would remain joined and inseparable, have no other
Commonwealth than as if they were one People, and that they would neither make
Peace, Truce, new Wars, pay nor raise Tributes, but by the general Command
and Consent of all; That in making Leagues and Allyances, and other matters of
Consultation, the greater number of Voices should be binding; and if any
dissentions did arise, they should be reffered to the judgment and
determination of the Council or Deputies: That all places in any danger of the
Enemy, should be fortified, and no man should refuse to give his assistance in
his Arms; and that they should every one jointly and severally endeavor, that
equality be observed in rating of Taxes, and all other things relating to the
raising of money. To the Hollanders and Zelanders, the use of their Religion
(one being common between them) was freely granted in public. To the rest of
the Provinces, Toleration either to use the same, or any other, or both, was
allowed according to their pleasure. The Governors were set forth in these
words, The Magistrates, Council of every City and the Commonalty: for by an
ancient Law, the chief of the Townsmen, whose Age made them able to bear Arms,
were went to be enrolled into certain Companies, like Bands of Soldiers; and
this in time of War, was for Garrison and defense, and in time of Peace, for a
Fortification to maintain it; when yet the art of Principality had not arrived
to the Coufidence of relying on foreign helps: This Custom and Badge of
neglected Virtue, yet remains, and the use is by these late Commotions in some
manner restored, while their faithful pains has been employed oftentimes
against the Enemy, and for the allaying Seditions.

In this manner, the Provinces which I mentioned before, took their Oath for
performance of these Covenants, agreed on at Utrecht: And that they might the
better be able to judge of their strength, they commanded all the people,
between the Ages of eighteen and threescore, to be numbered, as well of men
inhabiting in Cities and Towns, as in Villages, and in all other parts
whatsoever of the Country.

But among those Provinces, which were not present at the making this League:
what, and how great troubles and dissentions had they, while some part will
concern themselves in the care neither of the common Religion, or their
Country, and others are drawn away by the vain hope either of approaching
Peace, or the desire and love of contention?

The Romanists held Boisledue, deserted by the vain fear of the other party;
they that remained, contracted with the Duke of Parma, that he would grant them
that proper Covenant of the Peace, that they should never be garrisoned without
their free consent: It happened quite contrary at Antwerp, for the common people
of the adverse faction remained their Superior, in a threatening posture,
setting upon all such as had been employed in the Solemnities of punishments:
Not could the Prince of Aurange restrain his People, or hinder them from
throwing out the Priests by force; though his Enemies interpreted to have been
acted by his consent and will, what he could not by any means resist or
withstand: for he was not given to cruelty, but was one, who would wisely make
use of an occasion given, and for the gaining men's love to him, would lay
before them long before the advantages they should thereafter receive: But this
made many of the people, who were deprived of their way of Worship in Religion,
to wish evil, and combine against the Commonwealth, because they believed the
Servitude they underwent to the King to be more moderate; nay, some of the
Nobles from hence also took occasion to go over to the King. Among whom,
Charles, the Son of Count Egmond, was one, who when he endeavored to take
Bruxells, Matthias, as was said, not ignorant thereof, by the unlucky help of
those that followed the Roman Religion, the rest enclosed him in the
Marketplace, as if he had been there besieged; where then his own guilt, the
Image of his Fathers death, and unrevenged Ghost, were all become tormentors to
him; for there were them who objected, (and not without some admiration of the
chance,) that in the same place, that very day, eleven years before, the Father
dyed by the hand of the Executioner, through the cruelty of that people, among
whom the Son was now come as a Traitor to his Country: but at last, by the
pity of the Townsmen, he got thence away, and came safe to Nienove, who being
received by the Dutch, was after by the power of his own People, as we shall
relate, made Prisoner.

At Bruges, there was a sharp and dangerous tumult, so that Arms were taken,
and bloodshed very hardly prevented; both the parties having set forth
Soldiers that belonged to them, the Bands of the United Provinces came first,
being hastened by the Magistrates; and this was the end of the dissension: the
Tumults of other Cities were prevented by Garrisons; Ipre of its own accord,
came and joined it self to the League of Union, and the like did Gaunt; and a
little after the Prince of Aurange came into that City, by the favor and good
will of all the multitude.

So great inconstancy was there in the resolutions of the vulgar rout, and
their levity being the same both in good things and bad: there, removing such
from Authority as had by violence intruded themselves, he gave the Honor to
others: Most of the Prisoners, which we mentioned to be there detained, being
carelessly looked to, had broke out; the rest that remained, the Prince set at
liberty.

And another thing, which proved as well to augment his Honor, as revive envy
against him, was, That the Government of Flanders was put upon him,
notwithstanding his many refusalls to accept thereof: In the Embassey to Colen,
there was nothing done, but what the Spaniard was well pleased with, to wit,
that minds distracted to the hope of Peace, should never advise well concerning
the public good: The Ambassadors of both sides complaining mutually, that
their Colleagues, by private agreements, were solicited against the peace,
disturbed by new Confederacies, not minding the Repute or Esteem of the Treaty;
But the Dutch, because of the present danger, for that the Duke of Parma had
gained much upon Maestricht, a City partly belonging to Brabant, and partly to
the Jurisdiction of Liege, as being situate upon the Confines of both; and
they could not get an opportunity of relieving it, either with Soldiers or
Provision, they desired the time of the pacification might be freed from War,
and they hoped the Emperor's Ambassadors would assist them herein: But the
Duke of Terranova denied that he had received any such power.

Thus while a Truce is asked and denied, while Conditions of Peace begin to be
offered, while the Instructions of the Dutch are found fault with, as being not
free, but bound up to new Orders and Commands, the Duke of Parma had crept
under the very Walls of Maestricht: when, after a four months Siege, he took
the City by force, though the same were valiantly defended, and his own
strength not very great: But at Winter, he sent away almost all the German,
Spanish, and Italian Soldiers, retaining only the Captains, and one Wing of
Italian Cavalry, though later than was agreed by the Covenants made in Artoys;
but yet this gained to him Mechlin, with Valenciennes, and the City of Issell.

In some convenient places, he set Garrisons of Walloons; Of these, as every
one was grievously annoyed, or else of his own accord had offended his
Neighbor, so was he esteemed most safe from danger: and for this benefit, they
confirmed on the Duke of Parma the Lieutenancy; not thoroughly understanding,
that a General of an Army might, when he pleased, recall to their Assistance
any Foreign Soldiers: But the Confederate Dutch, though by the conjunction of
so many People and Cities, had lost all hopes of Peace; yet that they might
seem not so to hate it, as to despair of it, they sent the Articles of
Composition and Agreement offered by Philip, unto every Town, that they might
be considered of in public Council: Which being objected against, as unjust
and fall^cious, were these:

The Acts of Matthias were not otherwise confirmed, but as they had no Relation
to the Supreme Authority of the Prince, or the Injuries of others; That
whatever Regent Philip should appoint over the Netherlanders, to him constantly
should be delivered all Cities, Castles, Magazines, and Instruments of War;
He, together with the Senate should take Cognizance of all things, (there was
no mention of the States) That all displaced and ejected Priests should be
restored; as also, all others that had born Offices of Honor or Magistracy.

All which things seemed to tend to this; That the Laws being restored in show,
by the endeavor of them, who would enjoy the Benefit and Trust of the
Commonwealth, they should shortly be abrogated, and the People being disarmed,
reduced to slavery; for there is no fortification, for maintenance of Liberty,
so weak as that of Kingly Jurisdiction.

As to matter of Religion, the Settlement whereof w^ the matter of greatest
Difficulty and Controversy, it pleased the King to grant, that there should be
but one Religion throughout all the Netherlands, which should be confirmed by
the Authority of the Pope, unless in such places, where ^ this time other Rites
were used; and this confirmed the League made at Gaunt. Without those Bounds, a
time was limited to men of different Judgments, wherein they might settle their
Affairs; and after their departure out of the Netherlands, their Goods should
not be meddled with, so long as they would commit the Administration thereof, to
the pr^curation of such as were of the Roman Religion.

But this was looked upon, as very hard by all, and in a^ manner convenient for
the Public Peace, because it would turn upside down the present state of so
many Cities, banish and expel from their Country so many Thousand Men: Nor
should it be free for any man to believe, what his Conscience bore him Witness
was the Truth. And what Country was able to receive all that should be Exiled?
and if any could yet what safety could it hope for in such Multitudes? Where
could they, whom their own Country thought fit to expel^ hope for quiet in a
strange Land?

But the Governors and Chiefs, without the deepest Brand of Ignominy and
Villainy, could not consent to betray, for fear that Religion they were taught
to be true, in what manner soever it first brought forth.

Neither the Hollander nor Zealander think that Proviso sufficient for them,
for they had some strong Cities which dissenced from the Commonwealth, in the
use of that Religion, to be revoked to those very times: From whence they might
well doubt new Tumults, and their good will to become suspected, that their
Cause was separated from the rest. They also labored to work upon the Prince
of Aurange apart, and by himself; when, though seemingly aloof off, there was
offered to his Son, not only Liberty, but the Governments belonging to (him)
his Father, to himself, as many Goods is he had ever before possessed, so as he
would go out of the Netherlands, and spend his Old Age quie^ly in Germany. But
besides, the other cause of Diffidence, his Mind, that never was greedy after
Wealth, and, in that respect, unsullied and upright, was greatly satisfied, to
perceive, with what great Expense the Spaniard would gladly free himself from
the Dread of him.

The Treaty at Colen being ended, Areschet and some Priests fell off to the
King, from some of those Parts, whence Legates had come; for understanding,
that they must for the future else be Enemies to the King, being reconciled by
Letters, and accepting the same Articles, which they of Artoys had: But all
those Councils, either of War or Peace, which they had Registered and taken
Notice of, were scorned by the Spaniards, and by that Nation (that never likes
any Foreign Thing) made a mere May Game of. In that Treaty, it plainly
appeared, how great a Difference there is between the Aims and Intentional
Designs of the Prince and the People. Of old time, when first the Nobility here
made Insurrections, for fear of Foreign Lords and Tyrants, the Evil was not
incurable: But afterward, being more obstinately oppressed, they drew the
Commons into Parties, under pretense of Religion; and the Vulgar Rout learning,
that they were they that kept Kings in awe, or made them to be Reverenced, and
that they could be caught by nothing but Credulity, presently imagined, that
Despair of Pardon, was the fir^ Step to Liberty. Hence they did not act
indifferently, or moderately, but would only do such things as were too fool
to admit of Repentance, and going back; and by this means they arrived at that
height, that afterward they would debate the Commodities of Peace, but never
mind the Hazards of War: They go beyond the wonted Custom, with Domestic and
Intestine Arms, while thence arises and springs the unlimitable Thirst of Rule
and Revenge. This makes a kind of Pleasure even in Danger, and there is
somewhat of Honor in the Depth of Misery. But then surely, there was not one
general Army, but the War was scattered here and there by small Parties, and
every several Nation almost had his own distinct Warriers

This Fault of the Commonwealth did quickly show it self; for there not being a
Sovereign Power vested in one chief City (as there was in the Ancient States,
both of the Greek and Romans, and is at this day in most flourishing Dominions)
but an equal Power residing among many Cities, itit comes to pass, that what
should be properly the care of every one, from the Nations Industry, exercised
in the getting and keeping of Riches, under the false Name of the Public, the
Common Benefit is perverted, and carried into a wrong Channel. Thus Moneys
could very hardly be gotten, by reason whereof the Netherlands might have been
in great danger, had not the Enemy been infected with the same Disease; for
Portugal eat up all the Kings Money, as well by War, as by seeking to win the
Love of the Nobles. For Sebastian the King, being lost in the great African
Battle, and his Successor Henry being dead, the People had Elected Anthony,
who was sprung from the Royal Stock, to be King, because they were infested by
the Castilians according to the Evil Custom of Bordering Nations. But Philip
advancing the Propinquity of his Blood, among and before others, sent thither
the Duke of Alva with an Army, to conquer and bring into subjection by Force,
those that would not submit willingly; and, at last, by his Endeavors, the
Kingdom of Portugal was added to the King his Master: By whom, before he had
lost the Netherlands, so much more easy was it to win a Kingdom. Nor indeed,
could any thing have fallen out more happily for Philip, not only because all
Spain was now reduced under one Government, but because the Portugeze, who had
by long Navigations, compassed the greatest part of the World, possessed the
great Islands of the Mediterranean Sea; and, by Command, or Traffike, was
Seated and Inhabitant on try Coasts both of Aethiopia, and the Indies: By the
Event hereof, the Netherlanders, who might hope for some Ease to themselves,
while the Wars in Portugal lasted, besides the increase of their strength,
found also another greater discommodity, which was, That the Spaniards would
now hinder all the Trade thence, wherein the main Wealth of their Cities did
consist; for although hitherto the Ports of the Kingdom of Castile, had not
forbidden or denied them, as if there had been no cause of Arms or War, out of
the Bounds of the Netherlands; yet there was from the Clergy great danger, and
injurious detentions of Ships sometimes used by Kings, even toward Strangers,
dis-incouraged them, which the Portugezes had promised they would never do: Nay
more, there was Provision made, that they should be bound to appear in
Judgment, before suspected Judges, or forced to any long Suits. But after both
Kingdoms were joined in one; and yet the Necessity of the one not at all
lessened, by the enjoyment of the others Trade; both having the same King, by
various Names of Extortion and Force, the Seamen and Masters of Ships were
defrauded of the greatest part of their Gain; but yet not by a continual
Trouble, but by such Intervals and Breathings, that under hope of amendment,
and by the unconscionable Avarice of the Merchants to get all, ever some new
Booty came in afresh. In the mean time, by reason of the want of Money, there
happened many Seditions, on both Sides, in the Netherlands: But the Spaniards had
the advantage, in the more easy appeasing and suppressing those on their part;
because, in lieu of Pay, they gave them License to do what they would, and
Impunity for the same: However, the Duke of Parma got some small Towns in
Henalt, 1580.
which the Confederate Pr^virces had Garrisoned, and not long after surpised
Courtray in Flanders: Altpen delivers Breda also to him, the Castle on a
sudden, whence he easily set upon and got the rest. 1581.
Lanove, on the other hand, to whom the chief Care of the War, in those Parts,
was committed, regained from the Enemy Nienove, and other places in Flanders.
At this time it fortuned, that some eminent and brave men were taken prisoners;
as Egmond and Selley, in Towns that were taken; and contrarily, La^ himself who
was taken at an unhappy Fight, in a Siege, before a certain Castle; and was
esteemed by the Enemy of so great quality, that they would not exchange him for
(...) others.

The English who were in Pay with, and fought for, the United Provinces, took
Mechlin by Storm, whose Avarice was so profanely expressed in their Victory,
that they did not spare the very Sepulchers of the Dead, the Stones whereof
they took away, and afterward openly sold them in England. Many other Counsels
and Resolutions, of sudd^n Actions, the more powerful Enemy diverted, very few
Tokens of Victory remaining to the Dutch, by reason of the penury of them that
fought in their Defense.

At this time, the Duke of Parma's Mother came to her Son at Namar, being sent
to take the Government (wherein she had formerly been skilled); being by her
Sex more mild and gracious, and, by the use of her Age, a crafty Moderat^ for
Peace.

But he, who had cut off the Follies and Enormities of Youth, to follow after
Fame and Honor, telling her, It was no time for talk, there rather wanted Men
and Arms, and that his Industry and Care was sufficient to win and keep the
good will both of the Soldiery and People. The Lady therefore went back again,
and by that means did wipe away the impious Difference that otherwise might
have fallen out between her self and Son. But in Frizeland, and the adjacent
Regions, the Inconstancy of Renneberg, made, as it were, a particular War burst
furiously out: This Man having with great Fidelity, and an undanted Courage,
long taken the part of the Nobles, together with all the Frisons at Utrecht,
subscribed the League of Union; and, by a Siege, compelled the refusing
Groningers, whom he had made hated by those that were present, to swear to
perform the same: But after, being overborn by the Authority of his Kindred, who
had all of their Revolted to Spain; who, the better to kindle the Coals of
Dissension, suffered the Country People, who inhabited round about the Country,
to repel the Injuries offered to them by the Soldiers: Upon a Sign given, a
great Multitude of the Boors met to take their Revenge; and they were the mo^e
cruel in what they did, because now they fought in Defense of all the Remains
Fortune had left them. But Hohenlo, sent thither by the Prince of Aurange,
after some small Fights, dispersed this disordered Multitude not fit for War:
And the Frisons, suspecting their Governors Fidelity, set upon the Castles
that remained, and, in little time, made them equal with the ground: The Prince
of Aurange himself, being constrained to go with strong Guards to re-settle
Ove^-Issel, that had likewise bin solicited to Revolt, and through
Home-Discords staggered, not Resolved what to do. Then he, (to wit, Rennebergh)
laying aside any further Dissimulation, delivered Groninghen, which he then had
the possession of, into the King's Power.

Thence wasting his Forces over the Rhine, they carried in thither with them
frequent and mutual Slaughters, and a terrible misery of fifteen years
continuance.

For the regaining of this Town of Groninghen, first Bartolus Entes, formerly
the Companion of Marquis, whom, after the taking of many great Prizes, by Sea
and Land, and while his Thoughts were filled with the hopes of great Matters
out of these Troubles, Death nipped all in the Bud a this Siege. The Duke of
Parma sent Schenck to relieve it, who had formerly been a Soldier in these
Parts, to which he was now returned, when he could not obtain the desired
Rewards of his going away: But then he employed his whole Study and Endeavor
for his General; for by his Ver^^ and Judgment, the Siege was broke up, when
the great Commanders were all in despair thereof, and all Hon^'s men scattered
and slain; whom afterward, as they were reinforcing their Fortune, by some of
the dispersed Troops Rennebergh again utterly overthrew; and having thus of
comfited the Enemy, be overran many of their Fortifications, both at Passes
and Rivers: But when he strove ^ turn all the whole Fury of the War, for five
Months, upon Steenwic, a City of Over-Issel, he was Overthrown and Conquered
by the Nassauian Commanders; when considering with Regret, his Misery, with how
great Loss of his (...) and Repute, he had reduced himself from great Wealth, ^
a horrid Incertainty, he was seized by a Disease, which quickly brought him to
his End. Verdugo, a Spaniard, succeeded him, and got the better of Norris, in a
certain Fight; be it advantaged him nothing, the Fields now growing we with
Autumn's Dews and Foggs: Now were the poor Soldiers plagued both with Hunger
and Sickness.

Now there lay open to the Duke of Parma, a Possession large enough, and worthy
to be taken care of, if he had pleaded to make use of so many Victories in that
part; but while the Forces were employed elsewhere, and long scattered here and
there, they who then might have been forced to submit, had now drawn the
ambiguity of their fortune into better times. In the Interim, some tumults
there were, and they such as might almost be called a Sedition, both in
Brabant, and also in some Cities of Over-Issel, plotted in the Kings behalf, by
the design of that multitude, which followed the Rites of the Roman Church;
whereupon it came to pass, that all Images, wheresoever they remained, were
taken away from public use: nay* they were hardly suffered to meet in private,
for the exercise of their devotion, for fear of Conspiracies.

The War therefore being spread abroad on every side, the number of Soldiers
for defense, was by the States increased, as much as the Tributes were
decreased, and fell short; and which was most difficult of all, the Soldier
inclining to richer Pillage than his Pay, neither the Country could be freed
without money, nor money be raised, while the Country was thus beset; for now
the Cities began to dread their Garrisons: the Captains could neither show
their Authority, nor uphold any Discipline within their Castles, but are like
an incurable Disease, while they esteem luxury, and all other licentiousness,
as Military Gallantry. By reason of which great streights, this Government of
many became hated by the Citizens, the Prince of Aurange having ordered many
things, as well concerning Law as Tributes, and the Soldiery, which were
necessary for the present State of Affairs, then in the Council of the States,
he moved this, That because the necessities of the War were sudden, and would
not be delayed, and the ayds of the Assemblies of Deputies came in so very
slow, they would Elect and choose a Senate, that might among themselves consult
of the chief matters of State.

Affairs being thus settled, as he saw all things incline to him, by the eye of
that Religion which Philip had condemned, and that the valiantest of the
dissenters were revolted to the other part, he began to discourse to them, the
Reason why hitherto, while they had any hopes of peace, they made use of the
Kings Name; but now, since he is grown implacable toward them as to Rebels,
and that it was eviden^ (...) any man was fierce and bitter against the
Netherlanders, th^^ he was looked upon in Spain with such favor, that he gre^
famous and honorable thereby; why would they any longer suffer the people to
be led blindfold With the void Region of an old Oath? whence come all these
troubles (...) Commotions, but from thence, that our fidelity hangs ambiguous
between our Country and the Prince?

But it is not a strange thing among wise men, who will grant, that all Powers
are settled for the Peoples good, by the peoples consent, that though they are
greater then each particular, yet they are less than a Conjunct Universal, who
(...) perverted, and neglected the care of the public for t(...) private ends,
the People, that it to say, the States rightly ^^sembled, have power to judge
thereof, and to punish the same. Nor were most Kingdoms any otherwise subject
(...) their present Kings, unless that the People, tired either wi^^ the
injuries or sloth of the former, have translated them (...) other hands: How
much more then should these things prevail in the Netherlands, to whom the very
name of King is unacquainted, and their manner of obedience such, that they
never took any Oath, unless the Prince had first obliged himself according to
their desires, to maintain the Law: It is the Law of Nations, that mutual
Obligations are dissolved by the tricks and wickedness of either party.

And having laid aside Philip, they would seek them another Prince: And they
needed not to doubt those things, which would easily be maintained against the
Spanish greatness by their Wealth: There was need of a present Captain, and of
such a one, who, when mischief raged every where, would, though with the
neglect of his own safety, encourage the Netherlanders: That he had clearly
cast out of his thought all hopes from Germany. There remains then but one
thing, and that is, that Francis of Valois, be chosen to the Governments whom
they could not deny already to have given (...) certain proof: Nor was it a
little material, to their advantage, if that young Prince, who was next Heir to
the highest Fortune, should begin his growth from hence: In the Interim, he was
sure of the Brotherhood of France, and in probability, the good affections of
England would not be wanting; against whom, the Spaniard of ^a^e had prepared a
Fleet, which partly by Tempest, and partly by the Portugal War, had been
destroyed; and further, he had newly given aid and encouragement to the Rebels
in Ireland, nor had the English spared him in the new World of America, the
Wealth which they took there from the Spaniards, and brought into their own
Country, having laid the foundation of a future War.

After a long doubting, and much hesitation, the Counsel was approved, with a
greater fear of the Spaniard, than affection or confidence in Mounsieur Francis
and Philip, for violating and inf^inging the Laws, by the States of the
Provinces of the Union is thrown off from the Government, and nor that sentence
is brought forth, wherewith, if we may speak the truth, the War had now been
in labor for the space of nine years; but thenceforth was his name, and all
marks of Honors utterly left off and denied, and the words of their solemn
Oath made to him, absolutely altered; so that thereby, he who had of late been
their Prince, was now declared an Enemy. The putting in execution of this
Counsel, was, to Neighbor Nations, gilded over with the several excuses of
necessity, and the several fruitless Requests they had made to him: yet the
Spaniards did not cease highly to Brand it as infamous, it seems altogether
forgetful, that their own Predecessors had deposed a King from his Kingdom, for
his too great cruelty, and that they preferred before him a Bastard,
slip-sprung from an unlawful coition.

We will not mention old Examples of the like kind is France, nor any of
fresher memory transacted in England, nor those newest of all of the Danes and
Swedes, laying aside their Kings: But to return to the purpose, Matthias was
dismissed with much affection, and great Rewards; And this being a matter of so
great concernment, neither did the greatness of the action it self, nor the
Author, remain unknown to the Spaniard; whence perceiving that the life of one
single Person was the only obstacle to his desired greatness, therefore, though
he had fair Law against him in the field, yet he, in the first place,
proscribes him, and then by the habits of Wealth, Honnur, and impunity, as well
of all form faults, as of that, invites some body to assassinate him: Against
this new fashioned Edict, the Prince of Aurange makes his Defense in a Book on
purpose set forth, as well to the States of the Netherlands, as to other
Princes of Christendom; which Book was penned by the help of Peter Villier, a
Frenchman, who having the Study of the Laws, wherein he had been bred up, first
fell to be a teacher of the new Religion, and thence came to be admitted into
the secretest Counsels of the Prince of Aurange: The Declarations on both sides
are yet extant, full of equal bitterness, wherein after repetition of the
Crimes relating to the Cause, on the Kings part is objected to the Prince
Ingratitude and Treason; he, on the other side, retorts on the Kings Treachery
and Tyranny, and so intermixing many true, and some false Relations, at length
they directly fall to terms of scurrility, like scolding Women; for, because
the Prince of Aurange being separated from his Saxon Wife, for Causes well
approved by all her Kindred, and having married the Daughter of Montpensier,
who had been devoted for a Nun, was accused both as an Adulterer, and
Sacrilegious Person.

On the other, greater Adulteries were objected to Philip, nor was he forgotten
to be charged with the several deaths of his Wife and his Son, from the guilt
whereof not yet cleared, he had married his Niece in blood; for the then Wife
of the King, was the Emperor Maximilians Daughter, by the Kings Sister; which
Conjunction, the Pope by his Authority, (though many judged contrary to the
Divine Law) confirmed. Nor was it smothered in silence, how formerly he
attempted by his great Minister of State Granvell, to have poisoned Maximilian
himself, being his near Kinsman by the Fathers side, but then his Father in
Law. Whereupon, the States contemning both the malice and insinuations of
Philip, who laid the fault of this great defection only upon one, by public
Testimony vindicated the Prince of Auranges innocence, adding moreover, for the
safety of his Person, a Troop of Horse to the old Guard.

The Embassy of the Netherlanders, was most acceptable to Francis of Valois,
being thereby called to the Government, and very pleasing to his Mother, who
endeavored by foreign Honors, to indulge her Sons, already too ambitious by
their over-swelling hope; But the Kings Aid and Consent was requested, before
it was convenient, and so did not answer their expectation: only the King
wrote to them, that he would not have a respect to his Brothers greatness, but
would also give help and succor to himself, and all those which were under his
Dominion: which that he might more readily perform, he wished to his own
Kingdom Peace, and to his Brother all happiness and prosperity.

The present necessity forced the United Dutch to rest satisfied only with
words, and only to hope for the rest. And presently Valois, that he might the
more strongly work himself into their Affections, understanding that Cambray
besieged by Horse and Foot, and fortified in their Camps, had undergone great
hardships and extremities; He sets forward thither with an Army, for the
maintenance whereof Queen Elizabeth had supplied them with a great sum of
money, and raised the Siege, and thereupon is presently saluted, Prince of the
delivered City. Nor did he then intend further, because the greatest part of
the Army was in the hands of particular Leaders, that followed him voluntarily,
and would not long stay with him.

Cambray is situate in the Borders of the Netherlands, the proper Seat of a
Bishop, but was reckoned under the Commands of both Dominions, for the Germane
Emperors, and French Kings, had often contended for it by War: But in the last
War with France, the Emperor Charles detained it, and built therein a Castle;
the Soldiers in Garrison whereof imprisoning their Governor, joined
themselves, and became Parties in the League made at Gaunt. But Torney, a Town
in Flanders, having been some while Beleaguerd, in the absence of the Governor
the Prince of Spina, whose Wife, besieged therein, showed a singular Example of
Feminine Constancy, at last fell into the power of the Duke of Parma.

The Fourth BOOK of the Dutch ANNALS.
FRANCIS of Valois went over into England, where, that he might strengthen his
Friendship, by a future Principality, either himself, or the hopes from him of
a greater Fortune, so pleased the Queen, that notwithstanding the Difference in
Religion, there was a Treaty of Marriage, upon certain Conditions, admitted:
The Report hereof was very pleasing to the Dutch, but it proved vain, being
founded either on a Dissimulation altoge^her fraudulent, or else hindered by the
Displeasure and Wrongs done by his Brother: Or lastly, his own unhappy
Temerity, which had rather win all things by Force: Returning into the
Netherlands, 1582.
with a Solemn State and Magnificent Attendance, he undertakes the Government,
by the Name of Duke of Brabant, and Earl of Flanders.

Besides the Old Laws, there were some new ones added, for limiting the
Government, according to the League made at Bordeaux, to wit, That once every
Year, the States General of the United Provinces should be Assembled; without
whose Consent, no League might be made with the Spaniard, by any Chief
Commander in the War; and, at whose Request, all Foreign Soldiers should be
Disbanded. In the ordering Matters of Religion, and settling Foreign Garrisons,
every Province should be alike concerned: The same should nominate Three
Persons, out of whom their Governors should be chosen: And if any Difference
happened among them, the Duke should have the Hearing and Determining thereof:
That two Frenchmen should be admitted into the Senate; the rest, at the
present, to be be chosen by the States, hereafter by the Duke; But of those
nominated, as is beforesaid: And that the Netherlanders should have all chief
Offices belonging to the Court. Four and Twenty Hundred Thousand Florens a
Year, were promised every Year to the support of the War, out of the Prince's
Patrimony, and that what wanted more, was to be supplied out of the private
Treasure of the Duke, or the King his Brother.

Now there was some hope, that the Men of both Religions would continue
faithful, as well those who were of one Judgment with the Prince of Aurange, as
they who with Valois followed the Roman Opinion: And these had Toleration, to
use their own Rites at Antwerp, but no where further, until they should take
the common Oath of the Netherlanders, concerning the New Government: Nothing
was expressed in public, but signs of Joy, and he, with much discretion,
carried a sweet mildness in his Countenance, and an affable moderation in his
Speech.

Those that remained of the Nobility, were inward much vexed when constrained
to observe in the Throne ^ the Burgundian Princes, one of another Nation, and
that ha^ long been an Enemy to that Family, to wit, their change^ Lord; and
that they should intermingle among the Netherlanders, with whom they never had
any safe Peace, and between whom the Hatred and Animosity even yet continue
unto another Generation, and is still attended with dangerous and unlucky
Omens. And the lawfulness of the former Oath, and the Respect and Duty due to
their Prince (be ^^ what he would) was not easily rooted out of the Minds of
the Vulgar. But on the contrary, some there were, wh^ would object to them
their New Religion, and that they should not contaminate so pious a Cause, by
the help of such as dissented from them. The wiser sort feared Danger from this
Discord, and thence to find the French-mens Rigor: But when it appeared, that
it had been privately agreed, The Valois should have nothing but a Nominal and
Temporary Right over the Hollander and Zelander, though he had taken the
Government of the Netherlands; then the Prince of Aurange who had been the
Original of that Council, was found s^ with, as sharing in the Government, and
that he had from the first beginning of the Troubles, always reserved the
strongest and best Fortified Provinces to himself. Notwithstanding his Name was
affixed to all Laws and Public Acts; not ha^ he barely a Lieutenancy, or
Governourship, but an absolute Dominion and Authority. And the Name of Earl,
within those Provinces, by most offered to him; there wanted but a few
Suffrages, to win him to accept it when his Death hereafter, shortly to be
related, took him off, now drawing near to receive the Rewards of his long and
unwearied Labor.

But others rather troubled hereat, that they should be separately subjected to
the French Power, had rather choose to submit to the Prince of Aurange his
Authority; who, because he was unable of himself to Desend all, had therefore
not unworthily taken to himself a Partner. It really appeared, in the time of
his Infirmity, how great the Affection of the Multitude was toward him; For
when he lay very weak at Antwerp of the Wound, which the King of Spain's
Assassine had given him, the whole City powered forth with sorrow, both Prayers
and Tears in their Churches for him, That God would avert his Fury from them,
as is usual in Cases, where the Public Parent of the Country is in danger. And
at that time he did recover his Health; yet the Remainder of his life, was
always attended with Spanish Conspiracies to destroy him, there being many
times taken persons, that lay in wait for the Lives, both of Him, and of Valois.

While the Duke's Forces drew together slowly, Parma led his Army into
Flanders, where he took Oudenarde, (a City so called, from the Ancient Neraii,
who formerly Inhabited those Parts that Bordered upon the Schelde) by a Three
Months Siege, and a Storm; which he effected the more easily, because the
Townsmen refused the Garrison, which would have maintained it. Thence, after he
had encamped in all the Parts adjacent to Bruxels, endeavoring to straiten the
City, by wasting and consuming all the Fruits of the Ground, wearied out by the
sharpness of Winter, at last he withdrew, and retired from thence.

In many things how much does Expedition prevail; for thereby Valois, on a
sudden, among other Towns, won Alost from the Enemy; and Parma's Soldiery, by
Treachery of the Garrison, won Lyra: This place was of great Concernment to the
War, in regard it was so near Neighbor to Antwerp: In the mean time also, were
some small Skirmishes, with little Advantage to either side; and not a few
English turning Renegades, and being contemned by the Spaniard, were a good
Example, to teach others to be faithful to that Party under whom they first
served.

Anon Verdugo was forced to leave Lochem, a little To^ in Geldars, not far from
Zutphen, which he endeavored ^ win by starving; because while he was about it,
it was th^i relieved with fresh Provisions; but presently won Ste^ (which
before had cost so many Lives) without any danger, by the help of Night, and
the Townsmens Folly. At the time Philip, having Valois his Opposite, thought he
now wa^ed more strength and care than heretofore, and therefore sends to Parma
a Recruit of Spanish and Italian Soldiers nor durst any be so bold as to
contradict the same, notwithstanding the Artoysian Treaty and Agreements;
averring, The in that Treaty the Obedience of the whole Netherlands was
intended; of which hope he being defrauded, the Bond of the Obligation ceased,
together with the Cause. The Sum of this Army, upon Muster, was Threescore
Thousand Foot, Four Thousand of whom would make good Horsemen: and these Number
remain, or rather are increased to this very time; wh^^ Monthly Pay amounted
to, or rather was supposed to exce^ Seven Hundred Thousand Florens, and that
the other Charge of the War came to no less than half as much: That therefore
Philip sent thither every year, over and above the Tributes there raised, above
Twenty Hundred Thousand; so much was consumed by the Spaniard upon the
Netherlanders: And that no more Money should be carried over thither, they, who
feared bad Success, by the ill Carriage of Affairs there, were believed to have
hindered it. On the other side, the States, that they might win fame to their
new Commonwealth by great and noble beginnings, advanced their Yearly Pensions
and Tributes, which were at present but Four and Twenty, to Forty Hundred
Thousand; with which Money, they raised Soldiers, and then had in Arms, under
the Conduct of Francis of Valois, besides Netherlanders, French, Germans,
English, and Scots: The Forces, on both sides, were very strong, but the
greatest part of them lay in Garrisons; because there being no determined
Bounds they were, as the Fortune of War required, put into Towns, which many
times even joined one to another, but still kept their Opposition. Hitherto
Valois hoped for Succors from his Brother, for the wasting of those Riches,
against or for which, the Kings of France had for the space of Two Hundred
years contested by War, to suffering of much hardship, yes, to the loss of
their Blood, and now, by Conditions of Peace, had made their Enemy equal to
themselves. But the King himself had no mind openly to denounce War, nor
privily to send the expected Forces, although his Mother Medices had assailed
and disturbed the possession of the Portugal Sea: And the truth is, Philip had
prevented him, having purchased a means to make Debate, wherewith he might
perturb the then peaceable Estate of France: The stronger Party therefore did
openly possess the King with fear, advising withal, That he should turn his
strength against none, but the Enemies of the Roman Religion; another Party
being politickly deceitful; under pretense of more wise Counsel, denied, that
it was ^ther just or profitable for the King, who was yet not satisfied i^ his
Successor, to exhaust and consume his Treasure for the use of strangers, but
that he should rather leave both the Netherlanders, and the Duke himself too,
to their poverty, until being drawn dry, they would fall from their
Capitulations, and Contests for Government, and submit themselves to the Laws;
as for the Spaniard, though he could not be conquered by others, yet he might,
in good time, be overcome by a Neighbor Kingdom.

These were the Counsels, but indeed, the King was of his own nature averse to
his Brother, not that he was offended by him, but rather had offended him, and
mindful, that he had once committed him to hard and close Custody, more out of
suspicion, than for any Crimes.

This cast the Duke headlong upon Counsels, dangerous, and full of
desperation, and fatal, both to himself, and the Netherlanders; for when he
perceived, that they would easily set him at naught, since he could not perform
with them in the promised ayds, and that he was burdened with an (...)
profitable Principality, not forgetting that he ruled only ^ pleasure, and
that afterward that he was restrained and kept under by the Laws and
Authorities of others, (which is very grievous to them that have been bred in a
Kingdom) having diverse times desired an alteration of the same, but not
obtaining it, he resolves to erect a peculiar power by force, and to that end,
assigns the Towns of Flanders, to be possessed and held by the most trusty
Garrisons of his Captains: Anwerp he takes to himself, as the biggest City, and
that which most favored the Prince of Aurange, to whom he knew he did owe a
part of his power, by an implicit agreement, and where the Deputies of the
States were present, who were the impediments of his greatness.

1583. It is probable, the main inciters to this rashness were, not only some
secret spies, that held Intelligence with the Enemy, having their Faith
corrupted by mo^^^ who offered to the Duke an unquestionable right of Dominion
by a Spanish Marriage; but also the Frenchmen, who p^oposed to themselves the
ransacking of Cities, or gre^^ Booty, Honors, which by the Laws they were
cebarred ^ of which covetousness, there are as many Nations found guilty, as
the Netherlanders had Allies or Confederates.

The success answered the Design where the French Garrisons were prevalent, and
Veward, Dendremunde, Dixmay^ and Dunkirk, a Sea-cost Town of Flanders,
excellently seated for French Trassique, were taken. At Bruges, b^^ the old and
new Governors, were outwitted by the extraordinary, and most politic
ingenuity of the Magistrates, w^ desiring under pretense of consultation, the
Captains and Leaders to go to the Townhouse: there kept and detaine^ them,
till they had by their Letters, Commanded the Soldiers to march out from
thence; which they for fear of the Armed multitude, without grudging, did
accordingly: The danger of Antwerp was greater, though some Signs of the bloody
event burst forth, and with a dissembled suspicion of somewhat, he did as much
as he could hide the concourse of his People from the Prince of Aurange, and
the Governors of the Town, There was the Army both of French and Switzers
assembled, that the Fort of Endouen being left, and the Enemy fled, the whole
possession of Brabant might be regained.

To these, the Duke going out under the very Walls, as if to number them, with
his Customary Retinue only about him, he Commands the Watches immediately to
be killed, and the Ports to be set up and seized, that so the rest of his Army
might have the easier entrance. And now seventeen Companies of men fly about
the Streets of the City, like Conquerours, crying out, The Mass used in the
Roman Religion is holy, (for this was the Signal of the Combination) when the
Townsmen running from their Tables (for they were at dinner) take their Arms
against this sudden tumult; the first that went out meeting the Valoysians,
Body to Body, hindered their endeavor of passing further; And in a moment,
more and more gathering together, on every side (fighting in defense of their
Families and Fortunes) with notable Courage and Concord, they beat all that
entered into the City, back to the Port whereat they came in.

There was a horrible slaughter, for in that straight, they stopped out, and
hindered the living, and those that sled could not escape their pursuers: But
Valois himself, when he understood the infamous madness of his undertaking by
the Event, made with shame and terror of Conscience, and wanting all things,
with as many of his Forces as he could get together, among many hazards of his
life, and the grievous loss of what belonged to him, he sled by the marshes of
the Fields, beyond the River Dila.

This notorious and apparent injury, most vehemently incensed the minds of
many, who before were no lovers of the name of France: Nor did Parma and the
Netherlanders that were with him, omit by Letters to terrify them, laying
before them their abominable defection and Revolt, and to the oppressions of
their new Government were more grievous, than of that they shook off; saying
further, that they must bear with the dispositions of their Superiors; for a
people could be safe, that rebelled among so many Kingdoms: But if now from
this sad experience, they would return to their obedience, he offered them not
only equal as just Laws, but also the Kings mercy and Pardon. The Prince of
Aurange was sensible, that this time of appeasing this ^^chief, was too fit to
be laid hold on for the Spanish Affairs and therefore, though his Counsel had
once proved unfortunate, whereby he had lost the main part of his power, the
Peoples favor, yet being asked his Opinion, he declares the same, with many
acknowledgements of error to ave envy the more easily.

If the Commonwealth could by its own means be governed with the same
unanimity as the King: there would be ^ dispute, but that we might very well be
without the Government of a single Person, especially if he be a Foreign
Neither is it now to be enquired after, if it be lawful to desert him, who
first violated all public Rights, and Law it self: of which there was so great
care taken by Covenance and pact: but they were to mind and observe his
strength It Is truth, he has no great Army, but there were in ^ (to wit the
Dukes) Possession, several strong and well fortified Cities. And the
Netherlanders were now to advise, whether they had rather continue their
Possession to themselves or necessitate their delivery to the Enemy. That it
was much more convenient, since they were by both abused, that they should be
in the French than the Spanish power: for the Spaniards Dominion being well
knit together by age, would always find Instruments to oppress and enslave
them: where as the French, if they should endeavor such a thing, were not able
to fit themselves with properties to serve their designs. It were better
therefore, and more safe to assay and try the French, who having been once
taken tardy, will never hereafter seek such an opportunity; or if they should,
would never have impudence enough, or courage to put it into action. They ought
alternately to weigh, that in lieu of his own offense, the Duke has done them
many kindnesses, and to remember, that for the last years, his single care and
pains had both defended their Cities, and frustrated the Enemies designs. That
thus they would not only revive, but altogether such unity as their War
required, if Valois remembered his offense, and they forgot it.

This Speech was seconded by others, excusing the imprudence and rashness of
Youth, adding withal, that it may be the greatness of his mind, being sprung
of Royal Blood, and never made stoop to the humility of obedience, and
perchance too, incensed by some contumacious persons, he had taken that
unfortunate way, not with intent to kill and plunder, but as their wickedness
and mischievous Counsel informed him, only to secure his power and greatness.
And the King of France, had with his promises, and some implicit threats,
commended his Brother herein. That therefore the Duke was to be treated with,
to restore the Towns he had in his power, and to withdraw to Dunkirk, whither
the rest of his men, who compounded for the other Towns they had, should come
to him. In the Interim, after many and long delays (and while he disputes the
restitution of the Towns, and Provisions begun to sail the Netherlandish
Soldiers, that were with him) for fear of the multiude, who mindful yet of
their late danger, doubted newer and greater matters, and were scarcely
satisfied.

Biron is sent thither General of an Army of French, to stop the Duke of
Parma's Carreer, who then by the taking of some Towns, had mightily infested,
and did overrun Brabant. But yet the War did not go on as it should in his
hand, who, with much ado, was drawn to a kind of Treaty: Valois of his own
accord, finding fault, that he had only the bare name of a Prince, that the
account and disposal of moneys, and all other great affairs were concealed
from him, so that he was not able to gratify any person; And it was no wonder,
if (after the examples of so many others, who had been called in by the
Netherlanders, to assist them, and they had found sad experiments of changed
desires) they had found him, who, long continuing in suspense concerning it,
would now depend upon the beck of another; but he chiefly, and with much
regret, insisted upon this, That they denied to him only, what was allowed to
all other Princes; namely, that out of the Senate he might have a domestic
Council* The use of which Custom, John Bodin, their Master of Requests, had
praised above all others, he being a man, whose wisdom and affection was well
known by his Writing: but on the other side, the Netherlanders feared nothing
so much; also the French offered somewhat in favor of the Roman Religion.

Among all these Disputes, Valois being well nigh shut up in Dunkirk, when now
a new affliction was added to renew his old grief, multitudes dying in the Town
by sickness, he goes thence into France, either that he might refresh himself
by the change of Air, or which is most probable, that he might recover his
Brothers favor, between whom yet remained some Seeds of discontent: Certainly,
this Journey was made only for a time: And the Netherlanders, as long as he
lived, never left off sending to him Emb^ssies to entreat him to send aid to
Flanders, in a staggering condition. Earnestly beseeching the King also, that
he publicly would own his Brothers Cause; but if he could not do that, yet
that he would at least assist with men and money, and that he should stop all
the passages from France, into the Enemies Country. Which if they might
request, they did not fear to foretell to the King thereby, a future Succession
in his Kingdom, so that he should according to the Laws of France, for many
Ages, not want an Heir of his Body to govern the same: But these Communications
were shortly after quite broken off by the badness of the following times, and
the death of Francis de Valois. He over-lived his Honor and disgrace not above
seventeen months, brought to his end as some though^, by his lusts, others by
poison; but most believed he dyed with grief of mind, the common end almost of
all, who either before or after him, took a pride to aggravate the miseries of
unfortunate people: His Fune all was not attended with any Ensigns of his
Belgike Government, all his actions there with himself passing in oblivion,
while the King his Brother, avoided to incense with such toys, whom he durst
not move with realities.

As soon as Valois was departed from Dunkirk, the French Companies left there
in Garrison, accepting their pay, marched away, not daring to trust a People
whom they had so mischieved. Whereupon, the Duke of Parma, sends his inferior
Captains to besiege the Town, thus destitute both of Soldiers and Shipping,
and anon after, comes himself with an indifferent Army, to strengthen the
Siege; Biron was commanded to follow the Enemy and fight him: But the Gauntoys,
out of an old grudge they bore to Valois, and making a show of tumult, denied
him passage; alleging, that it was unjust and unreasonable, to use his Forces,
whom they neither took for their Prince, nor scarcely their friends: By the
stubbornness therefore of those men, Dunkirk came into the Spaniards power; by
which means, the Sea ever after became dangerous and troublesome; for upon
that shore, where there were no Havens or Ports, there was scarce any refuge
for small foysts: hence, as they saw it convenient, or for their profit,
observing the passage out, the Pirates were wont to set upon the Dutch Ships,
as they sailed by, either to fishing, or with Merchandise, where England being
directly opposite, does narrow and streighten the Sea, and they could easily
escape by flight, from the great Ships of War^e, either by their lightness and
swiftness on the open S^^ or else by helps of the flats and Sands, whereof that
part of the Ocean is full; yet this loss of so eminent a Town, could not
mitigate or take away their dissentions; but it was necessary, that Biron with
his Army, should be sent out of the Country, (though the Prince of Auraage most
earnestly urged the contrary) for fear least they should betray the
Commonwealth to their Enemy, now in heart, and attended with success: so much
mistrust had all of the French. Nay, the Prince himself was scandalized for
them, so that at Antwerp, they all (...) to their Arms, upon a lie that was
divulged, that the Prince had brought the French into the Castles, on purpose
to be near to, and command the City. But he to whom nothing was so unusual and
bitter, as to live feared of his Citizens, could not bear their changed
countenances, and suspicious ill boding silence, instead of joyful
acclamations; but leaving the place, having lived there six years, he went to
Zeland, and the more assured places of the Commonwealth, thereby exempt from
many eminent dangers, and free from their ingratitude. But the Duke of Parma,
having gotten spare (...) for Conquest, gained by surrender, and otherwise,
Nemp^^ situate on the same shore, but to the right hand of Dunkirk and more
inward upon the Land, Dixmuyde, Voorne, and Berghen, that are called Winow.
Thence in Flanders, the peoples hatred so increased against the War daily,
and many so highly resented the late actions, that they would even take part
with the Spaniards against the French.

About this time, there was a certain base Fellow, he was generally called Hog,
that by Discourse and Writing began to trouble Holland; who, notwithstandidg
his Mothers vileness, and his own misshapen Form, yet vainly boasted the Honor
and Greatness of his Blood, as being (from his own Relation) Son to the
Emperor Charles. Hence, fed up with a foolish hope by some Spaniard, that
Philip would acknowledge him for his Brother, he withdrew some led away with
Novelties; and others, that were not pleased with the present ordring of
Affairs, from their then Principles, to a hope of Peace and Submission to the
Austrian Family. But the Conspiracy being yet green, and but in the Bud, was,
by the punishment of its Author, quickly nipped. Now also a War did begin in
the Jurisdiction of Colen, which was offered, together with the Bishopric, to
Ernestus of Bavaria, for the Marriage of Truxiors: For being Bishop of that
place before, and being taken exceedingly with the Love of a Noble Woman, had
made have to lay aside his Vow of single Life, (for by the Rules of the Latin
Church, no Priest may marry) which in the Heat of his promiscuous Lusts was
easily connived at: Wherefore, setting Humane Decrees, in opposition to Divine
Laws, and finding himself unfit for such Charges, by Casimire, and Nienar,
Count of Nursa, both Generals for indifferent Armies, keeps the Cities, until
by his Enemies Forces, and his own Men's Treacheries, most of his Garrisons were
taken from him; and then making a League with the Dutch, he fled to the Prince
of Aurange, whence he revenged him, as well as he could, by laying wast the
Country: And this War brings on a greater, wherewith the Spaniard was well
pleased, because he might thereby the more colourably involve the Frontier
Towns of Germany, which were old Receptacles of Netherlandish Fugitives in the
same: And this every day augmented the growing Fortune of the Duke of Parma,
especially one Tasso, a Captain, winning by Surprise, the Town of Zutphen, held
by a weak and ill agreeing Garrison, and that by the help only of one common
Soldier that was his Prisoner: From hence all the Country, between the Rivers
Issel and the Rhine, were daily infested and harrased by Spanish Incursions,
nor could they at any time be hindered in their going off; and the City it self
was besieged, but in vain.

Thus did the Netherlanders, at this time, lose both their Forces, and other
Opportunities; And as a further mischief, (many of Noblemen and Chiefs, utterly
despairing any Remedy) privately sought their own Security, from the Grace and
Pardon of the King, which they knew was not to be hoped for by some heinous
Adventure. Therefore, William of Heremberge, who by Marriage of the Prince of
Aurange's Sister, was the sole Companion of his Hopes and Dangers,
inconsiderately, and without Reason, Resolved to deliver up Gelders, which he
then Governed, to the Conquerours: But his Treachery being prevented, and
Promise taken for his Fidelity, he was dismissed; yet notwithstanding, he fled
to the Enemy, conferring nothing more of strength to their Party, than that of
his Sons, whom he compelled to Revolt with him, though not entangled or sullied
with his Crimes, nor insensible of their Honors.

Now was the state of Flanders very miserable; Ipre was Besieged by Parma: The
Gauntoys had recalled Imbis, for no other Reason, than to revive old Enmities,
and conte^ with the Prince of Aurange and the French; who eft-sorts attaining
the prime Degree of Magistracy, by some pests ferous and turbulent Predicators,
did unsettle the Minds of the Vulgar. The City of Bruges, now Flanders was all
in Combustion, had chosen for their Governor Charles of Cimaca. He was the Son
of Areschot, and dive^s times had charged Parties out of Fortune; afterward
forsaking his Father, in a voluntary Exile, he professed to follow the New
Religion, and seemed most vehement therein, merely to hide his Dissimulation.
By these Subtilties, creeping into the thoughts of those that interpreted the
holy Scriptures to the People, he deluded the simplicity of such as were not
very circumspect, but well meaning men, and by them was wrought into the
affections of the vulgar.

Now this Charles held no less Correspondence, and private Intelligence with
the Romanists, than Imbis did, though openly both of them, imprison some of
them, and not let them so much as come together.

In the Interim, they had so obliged another part of the People to them, by a
feigned zeal in Religion, that whoever did but suspect, or sinistrously
interpret any of their actions, was sure to incur a general hatred: These were
the two, who undertook to betray into the enemies hand, all Flanders, a most
noble Province, and then strengthened with so many Cities: And first, that they
might take the necessity of recalling the French they began to talk of
Casimire, and Truxius, making a League with Germany, not that there did any
such hopes appear, but that by the loss of time being left remediless, there
should remain nothing to be done but to submit.

Thus these Commanders of Peace, first had only license to parley; but
afterward, they had Authority to conclude; but they had so ordered their
business, and informed the People, as if a Peace had been made, not with the
Duke of Parma and the Spaniards, but with the Netherlandish Cities which had
revolted, for that bayt was more popular, and easy to be swallowed; adding
moreover, that the King was satisfied therewith, and content with that
obedience which was due to him, would not rob God, but leave to him all things
Divine.

Now are both Books and speeches cast up and down, stuffed with bitter railings
against the French and others, who had so long consumed, as well the private as
public Wealth of the Netherlanders, in so unequal a Dispute: That now they
had no Forces, nor the hope of any alliance or aid from abroad, and the
Victorious Armies of a most potent King, had in a manner, enclosed them round.
That now it was manifest, that God was displeased to have Religion profaned
with blood, and that the use of Divine Mysteries should be maintained by force
and slaughters: That certainly, the Primitive Christians lived peaceably under
the Government of profane Princes, even in the greatest persecutions, as a
strict Command laid by God upon them, and when he thought fit to alter their
Condition: He took away their Princes, but never allowed a Sword in their Hand
to remove them; That when the power of War and Peace was once given to
Princes, there was nothing left to the Subjects, but Patience and their
Prayers: Nay, that Piety it self did rather choose to strengthen it self by
Persecution, than weaken it self by Licutiousness: Did there many suffer Death
by Law, under the Emperor Charles, and Ring Philip? How many more have
perished now by the Sword? And surely, they are most happy, who dyed not in
their sin: In the Fury of Citizens, there is no distinction, all are alike
miserable; as well they who do such things, as they who suffer them: To an
Understanding Spectator, there will not appear to be the Causes of a War, as
they are called; but the Ambition of a few, who by Domestic Dangers, have
exposed their Country to Ruin.

The Duke of Parma observing all these Occurrences, takes Time by the
Fore-lock; and besieging Ipre with strong Bulwarks and Forts, that it might
want the fewer Forces, be sends his Army under the Leading of the Viscount of
Ga^^ and Montigny, into the North part of Flanders, that he might confirm the
Minds of the Netherlandish Lords, already inclining toward him; and that they
who would not come in of their own accord, might be forced to Submission, all
hopes of Relief or Assistance being utterly taken away from them.

There is in the furthest part of Flanders, which the there undivided River
Scheld divides from Brabant, and afterward separated by a Cut or Drain of the
same from Beveland, a Southerly Isle of Zeland, and enclosed with the Bending
thereof, a place called the Waese, which then Steland Governed, of the same
Mind toward his Country with Areschots Son, Charles and Imbisius. Hither, when
the Captains of the King's Army were arrived, the Governors forthwith deliver
to them all the whole Region, together with the Towns of Hulst and Axel, and
the Castle of Rupelmund, famous in Ancient Histories of Flanders. The Original
of this Castle's Name was taken from the little River called Rupell, that
runs into the Schelde, and whence not far off, upon the other Bank, stands
Antwerp. A little more inwardly is Alost seated; to the Garrison Soldiers
whereof, a pretty Sum of Money being due for their Pay (being Foreign
Soldiers out of England) and neglected to be given to them by the Flandrians,
they were solicited, as Soldiers, by the Enemies strength, their own penury,
and the Example of their Neighbors, to surrender, which not long after was
done: But the Brabanders and Zelanders presently threw down their Banks and
Cawseyes, to let out the River Schelde, and beyond it to Repair and Fortify
Castles and Forts, to defend their side of the Banks or Shore, and to offend
their Enemies on the other side.

1584. In the mean time, the Duke of Parma's Captains, that they might the
better be able to blow up into a flame the Sedition of those two potent Cities,
pitched their Camp between Gaunt and Bruges, stopping up all Passages by Water,
to hinder Commerce: Wherefore, the Romanists on both sides, and diverse others
who adhered to the Spaniards, under the Name of Peace, either out of Design, or
Simplicity, no longer muttered, or sought private Meetings; but being backed
with great and public Authority, endeavored to draw all to their Opinion,
some by persuasions, others by fear: At last these, by the departure of the
rest, prevailed at Bruges; and the Lord of Cimace (Areschots Son) broke out at
the same time; which as soon as the Prince of Aurange had received Information
of from the Magistrates, that continued faithful, he labored, that he might be
suddenly taken by the Commander in Chief of the Forces of the Garrison: But
the Lord of Cimace took him off with Gifts, and laying hold on that present
Opportunity, by giving out to the Common People, That both himself and the
City, were to be betrayed into the Enemies hands.

He conferreth all Public Offices, and the Honors likewise which he took from
others, upon those who were with him associated in Council: And by the help of
these, be subjected the City to the Romanists, and so in them to the King's
Obedience. In the like manner, the Town of Damm^ was surrendered, and the Free
University, which of old being exempt from the Command of Bruges, and other
more Burdensome Duties of the Country, is called by the Name of Frankenland;
And in all Assemblies of State in Flanders, has an equal Voice with the best
Cities: Nor would Ipre, the Third City of Bulk in Flanders, being next of all
to Ga^^ and Bruges, any longer wait upon the Hopes of a Common Pacification,
and endure the miseries of a hard Siege. The Gauntoys themselves came to Treat
by their Deputies, offering Pledges, and desiring a Truce: But Imbisius his
undissembled Treachery preserved the City; for he would have delivered to the
Spaniard the Town of Dendremund, which Rikovius, by the Prince of Aurange's
Command, stoutly defended; and this, out of a vain hope of greater favor, he
acted so openly, that it could not be hid: And when he was hindered in so base
and nefarious a Counsel, he would have besieged the Senate House, with the
Senators therein, with a Regiment of Soldiers, which he had taken into the
Garrison, to serve his own Designs: These two heinous Faults, so utterly
alienated the Peoples Minds from him, that they considered among themselves to
punish him, being thus convicted of Treachery, with the loss of his Head: A
notable Example, of unfortunate Ambition, that he who was grown old, had been
laden with the highest Honors, and enjoyed so long the prosperous Affections
of the Common People, whom Civil Contentions had carried so far beyond Reason,
that the greatness of their Crimes had devoured their Compassion: This
Ringleader of Faction was destroyed, though the Tumults were not quite
extinct; yet, for some time, they who insisted upon the deceitfulness of the
Pacification, grew stronger.

But the Duke of Parma, having almost enclosed the City, and besieged it
strongly with Warlike Troops, was well satisfied not to assail them, otherwise
than by Hunger; and to leave their Fate to the punishment of their own
Discords. But he had a better hope, and therefore took more pains to get
Sceldt, and Antwerp, situate upon the same River, the Noblest City of all the
Netherlands, which disperses all over Brabant the Merchandises brought out of
Zeland; in regard his Troops were fresh, and that he in breaking up the Siege
at Zutphen, had much weakened the strength of the Confederate Provinces: By this
means, the one of these Cities was quickly won by force, the other gained by
fear: Setting over therefore part of his Army, he drives away those
Netherlandish Ships that lay thereabouts as Guards, and on each side of the
River plants Artillery and Soldiers. But the Antwerpers, understanding that
the Enemy did not lie upon the Coast over against Flanders, built from the
Ground, for the safeguard of their Shipping, two Castles or Forts; the one,
below the City, at the Village called Lillow; the other, upon the Coast of
Flanders; on the Backside overlooked as it were Hulst, a Town of Waes. This, in
regard it was not half finished, being assaulted, was taken; but the other was
gallantly defended, with a great slaughter of Spaniards, by Teling, the Son of
Lenove, a noble Imitator of his Fathers Virtues: But all these imminent
Dangers, were by the Prince of Aurange's Death too much hastened, and in a time
most inconvenient, if we mind the Netherlanders; because by his single Counsel
and Conduct, all their Affairs, though at the present so full of Trouble and
Vexation, would have been brought to a settled Method: But he, to have been in a
good Season, as to himself, because thereby he was taken from the growing Evils
of the Public; to the Defense whereof, he had most strictly bound himself: For
after his Death, the Commonwealth, partly with Intestine Seditions, and partly
by continual Victories of the Enemies, was brought even to the last Gasp; nor
could it recover, till by the appearance of his Son, fresh Vigor was infused
thereto, and the half-forgotten Father's Memory, revived in the Heroic Actions
(...) his Son.

He was shot with a Bullet at Delph in Holland, by o^ Balthazar Gerard a
Burgundian; who moved thereto, either with the hopes of the Reward promised in
his Proscription ^ else by the Zeal of his Party, with a wonderful Cond^^ bore
up his Spirit, as to the committing the Fact, so to ^ suffering the Torments
inflicted on him for the same; (...) did there want some, who much applauded
his Resolution* although the Duke of Parma, an Italian, being desired leave
that some public Demonstrations of Joy might be showed* because their Grand
Enemy was gone, fearing to blast (...) Fame, and cast an Odium upon the Justice
of the War, bl^shed to suffer it.

The only Expression of this dying Patriot sent, together with his last Breath
to the Almighty, was this; O Lord; be merciful to this poor People: And all
those who were more intimately acquainted with him, now growing into years were
well assured, That the many Varieties and Changes of Fortune, which, from his
Youth he had for above fifty years undergone, and chiefly the Burden of the
present Cause, attended with daily Envy, replete with many Difficulties, fought
against with the Passion and Valor of the Great Ones, murmured against by
those of an inferior Degree, and oftentimes hazarded by the rashness of the
Vulgar; as it had enabled him to bear the greatest brunt of Humane Affairs, so
it had settled his Devotion and Religion on a firm Basis. And this was the
cause, that he underwent all Businesses with a Mind so Resolute, and a Body so
indefatigable, that he was observed never to be da^ced in Adversity, nor elated
or puffed up in Prosperity. I do not hold it fit to bury in silence, as a Token
of his Abstinency, and even (as it may be called) Infelicity, that there was
nothing so much by him neglected, (excepted the Glory he gained from the Civil
War) as his own private and particular Affairs, which he freely assisted the
Commonwealth with, but left it much disturbed by the several Issues of a
fourfold Marriage. His first Wife was the Daughter of Count Egmond, by whom he
had Philip, his Son whom the Spaniards carried Prisoner into Spain, and Mary a
Daughter, afterward married to Count Hohenlo: By another of his Wives, which
was the Second, being Daughter to the Duke of Saxony, one of the Electors of
Germany, he had one Son named Maurice, and one Daughter. His Third Wife was of
the Family or Burbon, Daughter to the Duke of Mompensier, by whom he had
Children, many Daughters, but no Son: By these Daughters he obtained many great
Alliances, both in Germany and France. His Fourth and last Wife, was the
Daughter of the famous Coligny, sometime Admiral at Sea for the French, and a
Captain in his Party; and she was Mother of Henry Frederick: Never was any
Funeral followed with so great a Sorrow, even almost to Desperation, of all
sorts of People; there only remained this comfort, that by investing with the
Care of the Public his Son Maurice, who then, about 18 years of Age, followed
his Studies at Leyden, with a free Inclination to virtuous Principles, that so
by a grateful Remembrance, they might, in some sort, gratify the first Author
and Parent of their Liberty: His Father had assigned to him, in the Division of
his Inheritance, among other possessions, the Town of Flushing, by its
Situation invincible, together with Veria, Towns in Zealand, bought of those
who held the same by the Title of The Marquess of the Empire; and, by that
Name, took a principal place there in the General Assembly of the States:
Besides which, those two very Towns had gotten to themselves a Right of
Suffrage, as well as Middleburgh, Ziriezet, Tergoes, and Thol, (...) their
Abbots, who in former days were wont to have the (...) Vote, though by a Right,
whose Original was almost forgotten.

And because the chief Government of all was sought (...) from abroad, the
particular Government of Holland and Zeland was given to the young Prince of
Aurange, under (...) the Count Hohenlo, a Man famous for many Warlike
achievments, was Lieutenant or Deputy: But Frizeland ^ the greater Honor of
that Illustrious Family, whereby ^ Commonwealth had won an esteem among
Foreign Pr^^ was bestowed on William the Son of John of Nassau, (...) his
Uncle had before that sent into those Parts although (...) were some, who had
rather have the Governing of Ci^^ being exceedingly covetous of Liberty, though
not of ^ciency to manage it, which soon made them run into P^ons, while taking
to themselves the greatest charge (...) fairs: Here the Judges meeting
together, drawing ^ Example, a Custom introduced under the Burgundian
Pr^pality; there the Deputies of the States of Frizeland, (...) newly settled as
a Public Assembly, according to the P^^ of Aurange's Counsel, and their
Neighbors Example; ^ first, trust only to the strength of their Cities; the
la^e^ ^ on the Wealth of the Nobles, and all others who are O^^ of Land.

But Count William behaving himself with an indiffe^^ Moderation, hindered the
first Enterprises of those quansome Dissenters, which seemed to be most eager.
And in ^ mean time, was ready at all Assays on the Borders, where the Enemy got
nothing from him, but were rather inf^^ with his frequent Excursions, wasting
and destroying the Countries. By this means, Oppurtunity was gotten compose the
begun Differences, either by Argument or Authority; The Deputies of the States
had time to look after ^ Execution of all things commanded to, or by their
Assembly and to take care of the daily Affairs of the Commonwealth; the Judges
were ordered to examine, after all other concerning Debate, about the Bounds of
Lands, as they were wont under the Burgundian Scepter to do* and also with the
Governor, to oversee the Elections of Burgers, and Burgomasters, that they
might be such as were most free from factions, Parttakings, only Leonard, and
Franecre kept to themselves their Right of Free Choice. Those Towns, which long
since were no other than Villages, divided into three parts, Ostergoo,
Westergoo, and the Seven Woods, had among them but one voice: Now, by the War,
their Use and Authority being increased, they had gotten the Third Part of the
Authority, as well in the Sessions of the Judges, as in the New Assembly of the
States Deputies, not so much by the Repute of their Concord and Unanimity; for
sometimes there would burst out bitter ^ends among them, especially in
Arguments that related to the raising or imposing New Levies of Moneys; in
which Cases, here the consent of the Major Part was of no value, as it was
among other Nations their Neighbors: This surely was a Custom, brought with
much Prudence among them, in time of their Princes, and very dangerous to
Liberty; unless it be allowed, that Prudence, and Love of the Public, should
succeed in the place of Claim and Interest; which makes me with the more
admiration to behold, through the whole Series of the History of this War, and
especially in those Times, the Valor and Courage of the Hollanders, whom
neither the Defections of their Confederates on every side, nor the multiplied
Tributes, which, among such continual Slaughters they raised were never able to
destroy, nor the Death of their Chief Support, their Leader, bow to desire a
Peace; but rather confirmed, by the Attractive of his Name, to a strong
Aversion from any Submission: But the Duke of Parma, (as if he had hitherto
only Warred with the Prince of Aurange, whom now (he said) the Divine
Vengeance had met with, for having been the Author of their Defection, and
breaking so many Leagues) advised them of Repentance, and consequently, to
return to their old Duty and Allegiance: Which Offers, when he saw so
constantly refused, and that any further Trials, in the like sort, would be
(...) vain, intending to perfect the Siege he had began at Scol^^, he raises
Forts and strong Holds all along the Ways and Passages of Brabant, and in some
convenient places open the Banks, to make the River overflow all the Parts
ad^cent.

Afterward, departing from Lillow, which he had ^ some time in vain besieged,
on a sudden he posts away with his Army toward Deudremund, (this is that part
of Flanders, for which the Earls thereof formerly owed no Service, nor did
Homage to either Kingdom) and drawing the Water from the Walls, he compelled
them to Surrender, when leaving some of his Army in Garrison, with the rest he
passes the Scholde; with part of whom, he endeavors to ^ all Commerce between
Bruxels and Antwerp, and with the other part takes Viluorde, which lies between
that and the River Sinna: The Gauntoys too, because the Hollander Forces were
otherwhere employed, and they had no hope of Assistance, prevent the imminent
greatness of their Danger, by a sudden and forward Submission; and this, by
the Counsel of the Lord Campiny who being Prisoner in that City, and set freely
at Liberty, safely undertook the Office of a Messenger on that behalf. But the
Policy of Richardot is very memorable; for he proposing Articles of Surrender,
being about to repudiate difference of Religion, he would not seem to take any
notice thereof, until he had so brought all their Minds to the desire of
Peace, that it was not safe to go back: And this was another Devise of his; He
had left S^^ of the Citizens to the Duke of Parma's pleasure, to fulfill his
Revenge; and it was of very great moment, for the Danger being equal and alike
to all, made every one seek, by all means, to save himself: Nor did Parma omit,
as having knowledge of the former Actions, and provident to prevent the like in
time to come, to build a Castle, that might bridle and keep under the
unruliness of the City. And now all Flanders being Reduced under his Command
(save only Ostend and Scluys, two Seaport Towns) he forwards the increase of
Provisions; and, to ease the Passage of all Soldiers coming thence, or going
thither, he dug a deep Ditch to that part of the Bank, where he had pitched
his Tents: Among all these things, those who had the Care of Government in
Antwerp, implored the Aid of their Allies, set new Taxes, and raised Soldiers
daily, both in England, and the Netherlands; and certainly, the Besieged had
not like plenty of any thing; for, besides Seamen, there were Fourscore full
Companies of Foot, and Sixteen Troops of Horse, that defended Brabant. But the
Senators, Magistrates, Captains, and other Superior Military Officers, too
great a Number to Rule well, distracted the unse^led Government of the City:
And this Mischief was so much the more pernicious, in that the letting in of
the Waters, and other things necessary to be done, for the public Advantage,
were hindered and gainsaid, for fear (forsooth) of private Damage.

The Neighbors, who were not so nearly concerned in the danger of the City,
looking one upon another, let slip the Opportunity of relieving the same, while
yet the Enemy was unsettled, and not warm in his Seat: When they were at the
utmost pinch of Extremity, then too late they pleased to be prodigal, both of
Wealth and Life, when it could not advantage any one: Truly, the vain
Expectation of Foreign Aid did chiefly frustrate the Counsels of the
Netherlanders, who were now driven to such a strait, that they would have
subjected themselves to other Kingdoms, but could not be accepted.

The King of Spain's Forces were in a short time mightily increased, and if he
should recover the Netherlands, ^ should be eased of the Toil and Charge of
War, they would become Formidable to all near and about them: Neither was there
now a Prince of Aurange to support them, (...) fainting under the Burthers, or
to erect and stir up their Courages, quite tired out with Slaughters, unto a
hope ^ better Times, by his own Prudence and Constancy of Mi^^ For, in truth,
he was of so mild a Nature, and withal ^ popular, that he never seemed to be
grateful enough to and for his Liberty and Honor, nor would he hide Vices the
were fit to be spoken of: Above all things, he avoided the Suspicion of
Covetousness, for which most did esteem h^ Judiciously, many customarily, a
person admirable, and worthy the highest Honor and Respect, in regard of his
Age Stock of Nobility and Experience. He being gone, ^ Obedience vanished; so
that it could not be restored without the main Pillar of Foreign Aid to
support it: For the Common People did not only begin to contemn the Authority
of the Lords, eminent by no powerful Resulgency, and lately decayed by so many
unfortunate Actions; but the Soldiers also grew Refractory to Command, and had
lost their wonted Diligence and Duty toward their Leaders. A^^^ all which
Mischances, a ready Way was opened to the Pameneian Subtilty, to cover the
Slavery he intended, under very specious Names. Wherefore, now Affairs being as
it were utterly desperate, both the King of France, and the Queen of England,
sent to them such as should not only condole with them, for the Loss of the
Prince of Aurange, their Captain; but should likewise comfort them, concerning
the Sorrow and Mishap of their other Businesses: And this was a Noble Argument,
that the Neighbor Princes, though they would sometimes leave off to Aid the
Hollanders with their Wealth and Constancy, yet they would not utterly forfi^^
them in time of danger. But it was much disputed of their two, which they
should choose for their Defender, for the bated Rule and Dominion of the
French, was freshly remembered in Italy, and the Lordly domineering of the
English, was not forgotten in France, and Ireland tasted thereof to this day.

Among these, the People being called to Counsel, they are very sparing in
imposing and granting Subsidies, for there the Laws are of great force, and the
Monarchical Power is not unlimited: But with the French, all their Customs are
corrupted for money, and he that desires to serve his Country, must buy the
Employment at a great price: The English love hardship, and their Laws are very
pinching upon words: yet no sooner are evils taken care for, either to be
prevented or removed, but immediately, by little and little, the same is balked
by example; But the English Religion was the same with theirs, which in France,
by cruel and persidious dealings, was labored to be torn in pieces, or utterly
extinguished; yet on the contrary, there were some hopes from the Family of
Burbon, that valiantly defended that Religion which they professed; out these
were suddenly dashed, in the consideration of the ambiguity of succession
there, among the pretenders whereto was the Queen of Scots, that was wholly
devoted to Rome and Spain. Thus were present Affairs scanned, and the events of
future danger rationally deliberated: The French prepared a great Power, almost
equal to that of the Enemy, the English raised but small Forces, but they were
for Sea-service: France is preferred, but by the voluntary persuasions of the
English, who confessing themselves the weaker party, offered only necessary
aid in extremity, and received their Pledges.

Thus the necessity of the times prevailed, to the forgetting, or at least, the
laying aside those old animosities, which had lately been brought freshly into
memory by the Duke of Anjou: And hence a great Secret was publicly discovered
to the World, to wit, That the Netherlanders could be subject to a Lord, but
would not bow to the Spaniards. (...) the demands and particulars were by many
degrees more moderate and reasonable, then those whereto Francis of Val^ was
formerly obliged; and whatsoever their Legates had of private instructions,
they quickly declared for fear of offense.

There were taken away also from those things, what made their liberty seem
hated, to wit, That it might be lawful for the States to meet without the Kings
Command; That the Senate should consist all of the Netherlanders; That the
Governors and Magistrates should be chosen out of those that unnamed; and that
in conferring and bestowing of all Ho^^^ great respect should be had to those
of that Religion, which ^^ then only received in all those parts. But some of
the Province would not consent to the obliterating of those things; After many
tedious Disputes of these things, and longer Consultations than the necessity
of Affairs would bear, at present, (...) less against the Kings will than the
Netherlanders, it was agreed, that though they were not as then joined against
the Spaniard now approaching, yet they should by one another help, settle and
confirm their Affairs and States.

King Henry seemed to receive a great deal of satisfaction from the honor they
did him, and showed himself very willing and forward to accept and use the
same, but that he was hindered by intestine troubles: for Philip, fearing the
diminution of his strength, had at this time chiefly by private gifts and
Wealth, blown up into swelling hopes the Family of Lorrain, whose power had for
a long time been envyed by all France, who, having made a great Conspiracy, and
boasting the defense of the Roman Religion, the punishments of Heretics, and
dissenters there from, the easing of Taxes and Tributes, and such like things
as were taking with the common people, grew so much more insolent in their
contempt of the King (who was surprised with fear) as he was willing by large
concessions, to gratify their unreasonable demands And afterward, finding
that his want of Children, his Brothers death, that his next Kinsman Charles
Burbon, was unfit, as well in regard of his Age, as his Priesthood, and the
rest being excommunicate by the Pope, had made the Succession doubtful; at
length, they openly declared, that he, to wit, the Lorrainer was sprung from
the Royal Blood of Charlemain, whose Issue was put by, and the Kingly Seat
wrongfully possessed by the offspring of Capet for six Ages.

Henry pretending by his unwillingness to stir a hope of Peace, to the
ambitions of these men, suffers himself a great while to be urged and provoked,
until the debates and quarrels breaking into open Rebellion, he too late
learned, that presumption was not lessened, but rather made more heady, by
being yielded unto. Therefore, the King troubled by these Impediments, would
not consent to that pretense, as his Mother and the King of Havarre had
appointed, but as it were, minding only his benefit and advantage, and that by
stopping up all the passages of France, he might bring his Enemies into a mean
and low condition.

The Fifth BOOK of the Dutch ANNALS.
AFter the loss of so long time, which would have been of great advantage, and
the damage received by this delay from France, they come again to Queen
Elizabeth, being much incensed, that she should be sued to but in the second
place, which might be some cause of their late answer; for so long were the
Articles of the League there agreeing upon, that some strong Cities, for want
of timely assistance, revolted from the Commonwealth: And yet for all this
Hostility and subtle devices of the Spaniard Ships are laden from Holland and
Zeland, with Provision which, as the Wind would suffer, were carried up the
Sch^^ to the Town of Antwerp, in such plenty, that by an unreasonable frugality
of the Magistrates, while they abated the prices of necessary Commodities, it
was reported, that then was Corn enough to have sufficed for a very long time.
A^ the Duke of Parma, being weaker than the besieged, w^ not able, nor hoped to
get the Victory, but by Famine, and hindering them of this Relief; whereas the
great breadthe^ the River below the City, where it opens its mouth into the
Sea, and the ebbing and flowing of the Tide, which is called there by the
Ocean, terrified him from making any attempt thereupon, to hinder the Ships:
yet because, the seemed to be the main Reason of the Siege, he resolved ^ use
all possible diligence, and in something to rely upon his Fortune, which he
had not yet found averse to him: For while Nature was believed to be repugnant
to the design of the Siege, the Netherlanders neglected many opportunities of
breaking down Works made up against them; and this it becomes most easy, while
it is esteemed most difficult. For by making great Dams that extended from each
Bank, far into the water, the River was straightened, and the passage thereof
grew very narrow between Ordans and Callow: the middle of it was filled with
Boats, which were made fast one to another with Anchors, Cables, and the like,
and so being covered over, had the resemblance, and served by use as a Bridge:
Besides, on the Banks were raised Forts and Platforms, and for defense of the
Work, Ships of War. Above and below it in the River, were many pieces of
Timber p^oned together with stakes standing upright, that if any thing should
be offered for the breaking or spoiling the Works, it might be hindered by
those obstacles that lay in the way to the same purpose.

It is not to be doubted, but many Inventions might have been found, wherewith
this imperfect Work might very advantagiously have been dampnified, if the
endeavors of such as were Engineers, and practiced the overthrowing of such
Politic Inventions, had equalled the diligence of the Netherlanders.

But all this whole Winter, the Duke of Parma was not disturbed; and the
Spaniard intending to stir up his diligence and Obligation to him, by some
fresh benefit, delivers up to him the Castle of Placentia, which hitherto had
been held by a Garrison of Spaniards.

1585. Truly, a man at first would rather stand amazed at the stupendous Work,
than hope to remove it, or beat it down, in regard those thick and strongly
compact Damns and Engines on either Bank hindered any access: And the Ships
filled with Gunpowder and Stones, and other Experiments used too late, partly
by the incertainty of the times and significations wherewith the Besieged gave
notice to their Allies of their Condition, and partly, by the evil managery of
those employed, lost the success of what they were designed for.

Nothing more remained now that the Schelde was thus bridged, but that they
might bring Provisions over the Fields, which the River had overflowed, which
Navigation was hindered by the Caudestine Causey, which the Enemy got first, and
secured by strong Holds and Forts, which the Netherlanders ought to have done;
because it passed through (and was a little raised higher than) all the watery
Meadows and Pastures of Brabant. This place was assaulted not only by the
Antwerpers, but by those also of Zeland, and with that Courage, that now they
had won it; but while they were thus valiantly fighting, they were cut off by
the Guns, at a great distance, and so spoiled with shot, that they were glad at
last again to quit the place.

By this unhappy event, the last of their hopes were ^ end, and at length, the
City accustomed to Trading ^ plenty, when they saw all their Relief
intercepted, not ^ling to endure the straights of Famine in the want of Br^
when a little before the like necessity, and some Soul^ sent out to disturb
them, had reduced Bruxells and Mech^ surrendered it self into the Duke of
Parma's hands; wh^ case was something the harder, because by the abrogating
their Laws, the King had brought them as it were into Servitude: Therefore when
nothing now could be looked for ^ Antwerp but extremity, behold it redeemed
from that, by ^ Conquerours Clemency, who being of himself covetous to ^
Renown, and that he might by the example of mercy sh^ed here, allure other
places to more easy submissions, g^ toleration to many things, only this one
he excepted, ^ that they who for the last four years had gone astray from the
Roman Religion, should, having convenient time to sen^ their domestic Affairs,
be commanded to depart the City And soon after, the Duke of Parma, as a reward
of ^ Victory, was by the Kings Command, received into the Order of the Golden
Fleece, and then put on the Cognizance thereof upon that very Bridge, which he
had made, and was a work worthy of remembrance in after Ages; and in a little
time following, he rebuilds and fortifies the Fort or Castle, which over-looks
the City, and had formerly in the quest of Liberty been demolished.

This so renouned City, added as well much Honor as Strength to the Spaniards
in these parts; but yet not so much, as many thought, who imagined she would
carry the greatest matters of concernment with her. Which was so disproved by
the Event, that the Hollanders, who had taken extraordinary pains, and been at
great charge for relief of the City, yet could not escape free from the
slander, or at least the suspicion of having betrayed the Faith of their
confederate Alliance, as if they should get advantage, by the mischiefs which
others should receive, and suffer.

But on the contrary, they laid the fault upon the Lord of Aldegund, (for he
was Governor of the City) who returned to Zeland, whom he had suffered but the
first invasion and guards of the Assailers, yet afterward worthily esteemed,
though never employed in any part of the Commonwealth; for his disposition
being more fit for Peace than War, he withdrew his old Age within the compass
of private Solitudes, and the tranquillity of retired Studies. And the Valor of
the Soldiers, by so many evils, was quite worn out; for they, when yet there
was hope of removing the Enemy from Antwerp, having under the Leading of Count
Hohenlo, happily got Boi^ledno, yet forthwith, through fear and folly, they
^led, while they fall upon the Pray, neither minding the Enemy, nor the
receiving the Port. But the Romanists, assisted by the fortune of their party,
brought into the Conquerours hand, Nicumegen, a City of Guelderland, with the
Town of Dewsburgh: and filled all these parts round about with slaughters,
which happened either through the Captains rashness, or the Soldiers
carelessness.

In all which things, nothing more augmented the public sorrow, than those
miserable People of Brabant and Flanders, banished for Religion, or because
they durst not trust to the Articles granted, having such malicious
Interpreters thereof, and in brief, for want of Trade, or means to get a
Living, scattered over Holland and the Isles, who yet increased the Cities and
Forces exhausted by War, into a greater number, which shortly proved a great
Omen of their future good fortune.

In this interim, scarce did the longing Expectation of the League, concluded
with England, keep up their Hearts: We have already related to you, the Offer
of their Government, made to Queen Elizabeth: But that prudent Lady shifted off
the Envy of that Dominion so craftily obtained Nor would she, in that ambiguous
Estate of Affairs, entangle and wrap up both her Fame and Fortunes in a strict
Confederacy and Alliance: It was conceived more agreeable both to Wisdom and
Policy, to have some strong Holos in the Netherlands set apart for Her, wherein
to settle some indifferent strength of Men, and also to send again some Ships
to the Coasts of America, there to infest the Spaniard, all weary him, till he
should be willing to incline to Peace, and remove his Armies so long complained
of, and contested against.

But She promised them some Aid, protesting in Writing in a Public
Declaration, She did it merely out of a Sense ^ Right, by which she was put in
Mind of that Custom of Pri^ to defend the Oppressed; and remembered therein, the
An^ Contracts, and Leagues of Friendship, between the Dutch and English; with
some short Hints of Spanish Extravagance. Religion also was made mention of the
Security where commended to her Case; She had made good both in the Concerns of
France and Scotland, without any desire of what did not belong to Her: The
concluded Articles of the Peace were for the most part the same, by which the
first Alliance had been settled; and that Five Thousand Foot, and a Thousand
Horse, should be sent to fight for the Netherlanders, and be paid by the Queen;
That the Ambassador, who should be Commander in Chief of those Forces, with two
other Englishmen, should be received into the Senate, and be present in all
Councils, relating either to the War, or other public Matters of State; That
the Netherlanders should set on a Fleet of equal Number with tho Queens, and to
join with them: And that for the re-imbursing of the Charges, at the end of the
War, the Seaport Towns of the Briel and Flushing, (of whose Government nothing
was to be changed) together with the Castle of Zeburgh in Walcheren, were
divided into the Custody of English Garrisons, as Pledges; not without fear,
for the future, though their present necessity made them cast it aside.

Of this Auxiliary Army sent to the Dutch, Robert Earl of Leicester was made
General, a great Pretender to Virtue, and who hid the unhappy and hated Spirit
of the Family of the Dudleys (whereof he was a Branch) with an acceptable and
courteous Behavior. The Original of the Greatness of his Fortune, began first
in a Prison (for the Greatness of his Stock, had not exempted him from
Troubles) wherein the Lady Elizabeth was then also confined, by the Suspicions
of her Sister Queen Mary. In this place he gave great Reverence to the young
Lady, though not in regard of the condition of her Affairs at that time: From
whence, by obsequiousness, and partaking of Misfortune, a commiseration and
loving kind of pity arose; wherewith she behaved her self with such a Womanly
Indulgence, yet so that he might nor forget his more Manlike Care, that his
Mind was so elevated into a flattered Conceit of himself, as he imagined she
would choose him for her Husband, being Queen; which though he could never
obtain, by the Emulation of those who loved him not, yet was he raised even to
the highest Pitch of Honor; and though surrounded with Envy, yet amongst the
most powerful of his Enemies, he passed without Affront or Molestation. When he
first came among the Hollanders, he was followed by the Love and Affection of
the People, and courted with the Flattery of the Great Men; for there was a
certain pleasant and winning Majesty, both in his Countenance, and Speech; and
he was really looked upon, as the only Restorer of their lost and decayed
Fortune. He used an excellent Freedom and Liberality, both in his Letters and
Martial Acts; wherewith the Netherlanders were so taken, that in all have, to
this person, though a Forraigner, and among his own people, not altogether
esteemed a Virtuoso, before any trial of his disposition, the Government of
the whole Netherlands, as it was in the times of the Emperor Charles, together
with the whole Command both at Sea and Land, and the ordering and disposing of
public moneys was committed; The Senate also were so addicted to him, that
they suffered him alone to choose Assistants out of those named, and in some
manner, he alone eq^poized the notes and suffrages of them all. But his outward
zeal in matters of Religion, was the great inticement of all beginning his
Government with the settlement thereof: And the yet fresh hatred of Valois for
the contrary, made him the more beloved. And there were some, who preferred him
before the Prince of Aurange, hoping he would not exact so much, in regard the
way now to seek their right, was become shorter, in regard of their own Wealth,
and the powerful friendship of so excellent a Prince.

But these two great Honors, some judged to be bestowed on him, to satisfy
his ambition; but the more simply honest, only looked at them, as done with
intent only to oblige the Queen further to them; but it fell out otherwise, for
she urged them to excuse her, seeming as if she were afraid, that they would
unawares in the person of the Earl of Leicester, throw upon her the Government,
which she had before refused. But probably she had, as knowing his disposition,
some higher suspicion of him. Presently, that attendant evil of all power and
greatness, flatterers incroached into his Bosom, by whose insinuations, and his
own ambition, (as there is nothing more natural to a man) being envyed, when
he was desired by the States, to take the accustomed Oath in Solemn manner, and
to receive the Ensigns of the Commonwealth; he turns their favors against
them, and, as it were, going into a Province, he enters into Consultation with
diverse, but chiefly Englishmen, how, and by what means he might compass the
Sovereignty.

It is here to be understood, that there is very great difference between the
Natures and Dispositions, manners and Customs of those two Nations; for the
English, as they serve faithfully, so when they are raised to Honor, they
recompense their former humility with much insolence and pride; But the
Netherlanders obey and command in one equal degree, no Nation having men of
Eminency in greater esteem, not hating, with a more implacable malice, those
who they find contemn them. Which Leicester not considering, and not acquainted
with the Authority wherewith he was trusted, not taking notice of those who
trusted him with it, began to fling off all thoughts of resenting, and to grow
obstinate in his Opinion (such was his Confidence in the English Soldiery, and
his present Grandeur.) And this was so much the more dangerous, because he
himself knew nothing of the Intrigues of the Belgic Affairs of State, nor
would hearken to such as had some insight therein. Nay, the Netherlanders
themselves some of them took his part, but they were only either such whose
Estates at home being wasted by their own ill Husbandry, or the Wars cruelty,
whatsoever slavery they fell into, chose it rather than poverty, the greatest
mischief of all, or else, who in the Country taken from them, having been bred
in Honor, were now impatient to lead a private life, and saw no other way than
that, again to rise by; the rest merely lovers of novelty, for no reason, but
because it is new, to whom, in brief, as it always happens in like cases of
Sedition, all the loose and villainous persons joined themselves.

With such a Company was the President of the Netherlands followed; and first,
they began to cast out oblique scandalls against the States, which if they saw
received with greedy ears, then presently they fell to more open railings,
accusing all of the faults, which it may be, some few were guilty of, as if all
things had been known and understood by this over-busie multitude, that
conduced to their good.

They advised him also to a too hasty and overweening hope of the
Dictatorship, after the Example of the Prince of Aurange, and he credulous of
every thing, as having his Judgment weakened by long felicity, and not well
discening how great a difference there was in obtaining the favo^ of a Woman,
and seeking the Sovereignty over a free People But the vulgar being incited
against the States, who genera^ of their own accord, hate the Governors under
whom they suffer any thing; He undertakes the defense of the Treasury a very
popular matter, when yet in the managing thereof, ^ was as true, that the Earl
of Leicesters Servants wanted fidelity, as well as himself quickness of
understanding and fo^sight. Nor rests be here, but presently offends almost ^
the People, by an Edict, wherein he not only did forbid a Commerce and Dealing
with the conquered Belgic Princes, and the Spaniards, which had hitherto been
tolerated, ^less upon some Emergencies of Affairs and times: also it would not
suffer any Merchandises to be carried or tran^ported into France, or the
Seaport Towns of Germany, pretending, that he could conquer and distress the
Enemy, by a want of Commodities, if he should not be furnished out ^ Britain or
the Netherlands; but never at all weighing, ^ there are many kinds of
Merchandises and Commodities whereof the Enemy had no need, and yet the Holland
abounded with the same.

Wiser Heads believed, that he gave way to the covetousness of Sycophants about
him, who had already in their minds, anticipated the power that he had reserved
of selling Licenses, and swallow the gain that should arise from thence for
exportation; and their belief was very much increased, when Ringaltius,
formerly employed as Treasurer or Receiver, both under Alva and Requesens, and
after acosed for cheating the Exchequer, but then very high in the Earl of
Leicesters favor, had Authority given him by an Edict, to inquire into the
Letters and Journalls of Merchant contrary to the ancient Laws, which looked
upon this as o^ main part of their liberty, that there should be no search of,
or inspector into, any men's private Affairs.

Therefore, when other of the Provinces, that were altogether unconcerned in
the War, could not be bound from putting to Sea and Commerce with the Enemy,
this way of Gain and Livelihood being only taken away from, or debarred to the
Hollanders, by which only hitherto they had been able to carry on all their
Affairs; their greatest and best Merchants, especially considering their
number, went away from their Native to Foreign Countries and Cities. For the
English took their loss of Trade more patiently, because a Nation more given to
Depredation; and then going to Sea, under the specious pretext of War, assailed
and made Incursions and Rodes upon all Spanish Ships, and other places
whatsoever under their Obedience: Nor did they spare the very Hollanders
themselves, if some by chance at any time were set forth under feigned Owners,
and endeavored to go toward the Western Parts of the World by those Seas.
From whence it was found afterward, that although they could escape all the
wait laid for them by Pirates, in that vast and scarcely frequented Sea, they
should be brought back to the Island of Britain: Nor were Commodities at Home
only of small value; but those things which were wont to be fetched from far
Countries, by this forbidden Exportation, became of no esteem, in such sort,
that the States could find no other Remedy for this grand Mischief, than by a
public Decree to lay a Restraint upon all Corn: By which means, those who had
been the main Promoters of this hitherto unknown Necessity, and who constiued
all things in the worst Sense, began maliciously to allege, That the aim
hereof was to bring a Dearth upon England. A like Project was this: The Earl of
Leicester was of Opinion, and so determined, that the Enemies Lands, though
they paid Contribution, should be laid wast and desar^: This, besides the fear
of Revenge, was very grievous to all; who, though at present, by Force or
Treachery, driven from their Native Soil, yet, at some time or other, hoped to
return thither again. The Soldiery also began to Mutiny, because English
Captains were put in Command of Companies of Soldiers from Foreign Places:
But Hohenlo coming thither who hastened those that before lingered upon the Earl
of Leicester's words; He undertook the Cause, and would (...) suffer a mixture
of Officers, but would that each should (...) the Reward of their Arms and
Valor: And neither terrified with the Hatred, either of that People, or their
Leader; as (...) was not to be corrupted with the greatest Promises, so ^
openly took the part of the Noblemen, in a generous open heartedness, hating
Dissimulation, and in a vehency of Spirit, not caring to conceal any thing.

The Care of the War now beginning afresh to breaken did, in some measure, lay
asleep this new arising Difference For the Duke of Parma having, during the
Winter, had some small Skirmishes, and several Castles about the Rhine being
taken on both sides; and now, upon the News of the Le^^ between the English and
Hollanders, Recruited from the King both with Men and Money, that he might
perfect ^ Conquest of Brabant, besieges Grave, a Town scitune ^ the Bank, on
the left side of the Maes, and surrounded with the River both above and below;
which he often before (...) and now again experimented, to be fortunate to him
in stopping up the Passages, and hindering Dealing. But Count Hohenlo, sent with
a select Party of Soldiers, brake through the Enemies Trenches, and did them
great Damage; and a^ only so, but helped with the vernal increase of the
River, ^ relieved the Town, that he delivered the Besieged, as (...) from the
fear of Famine, as all other wants whatsoever.

But the Enemy nevertheless, with a greater Army, ob^tinately continued their
Siege and Assaults of the Town, (...) especially one general Storm was
intended; which, the Enemy being upon the point to fall on, H^merta, a
Dutch-(...) of Noble Blood (and left there Governor by Hohenlo) prevented, by
an overhasty and cowardly Surrender; when (...) new Supplies were ready just
at hand to relieve him: Solicited and won thereto, as was believed, by the
Inticements of a Harlot; for the Expiation of which Crime, the Earl of
Leicester soon after put him to death. They who were Impartial, called this
Discipline; but others imputed it to his Hatred of the Dutch in general;
because Rowland York having a hand heretofore in the mischievous Counsel of
Imbisius, and many other English, of no better Repute in any thing, at
leastwise guilty of Cowardose, not only came off safe, but were looked upon as
fit to be admitted into the greatest Trusts: Venloo, a Town nearer to
Gelderland, and situate on the other Bank, followed Grave, the Common People
betraying it, in spite of all the Soldiers Endeavors. In the interim, those
loose Bands wasted the Enemies Country, and Prince Maurice, for his first
Assay, won Axell by Assault; which going from Tornay (this strong Town the
United States held in the Coasts of Flanders) he got by Night, getting
thereinto with Ladders.

But the War, in the Bishopric of Colen, whereof something was spoken before
grew very hot, not so much by the greatness of the Forces as the expert Valor
of the Captains: For now Colonel Schenck had left the Duke of Parma's Service,
and was gone over to Truxius; this man won and got Fortresses every where, and
destroyed with Fire and Sword whatsoever was subject to the Command of the
Bishop thereof: Afterward, by the Command of the Earl of Leicester, he
Fortifies the Isle called Graveward, which lies upon the left hand of Holland,
just at the dividing of the Rhine, and now that is the best Defense of all
those Quarters under that Government: But the Count Nienarius, who was
Commander in Chief in those Parts, took by surprise, and on a sudden, Nuiss, a
Town famous for its Antiquity; for which the Duke of Parma, entreated by the
Bavarian, and ambitious to contend in Honor with the most Fortunate Captains,
did contend: For this place repressed and altered the (before that) most happy
Fortune of Charles Duke of Burgundy: But Parma more Fortunately Assaulted the
same, and obtained a glorious Victory, his Entrance into the City being
gratulated with Multitudes of Bone-fires: Anon, after this, Alpa Creveceur, and
Mursa, being taken into his Possession, he makes a stop at Bergen, defended by
Schenck beyond hope and at length was forced to march off, upon the Earl of
Leicester's Approach to Zutphen, after the taking of Dewesburg But yet it
seemed to him a piece of little less than Coward^e, to stop up the Passages,
and Fortify his Camp: No, like a Noble Enemy rather he returned, bringing with
him all his Provision, by this means giving occasion of a Battle; which, In its
Issue, proved fortunate enough to the English, had it (...) been sullied by the
Death of Sir Philip Sydney, a young Gentleman, born with the greatest Advantage
of all things ^ as who had honored the Nobility of his Birth, and greatness of
his Wealth, by the true Splendour of all Beautifying Learning, in this excelling
his Uncle the Earl of Leicester, to wh^, and his Fortune, how great soever it
might come to be in the future, he was intended Successor. Not long after
this, Leicester got a Castle over against Zutphen, on the other side the River;
which was begun by the Netherlanders; who, being forced thence by the increase
and overflowing of the River, left it to be finished by the Enemy. The Charge
of ^ his with all the Land of Welaw, was given by the Earl of Leicester to
Rowland York before-named; the Government of Dave^ry which he had before
provoked to Madness, by a Garrison ^ Irish Soldiers, st^angers both to
Humanity and Civility, upon Suspicion of Revolt, he committed to William
Stanley; and both these were done against the positive Will of the State who,
for diverse weighty Reasons, best known to themselves and, as the Event proved,
feared the Treachery of those Men.

I would not be taken here to accuse the Earl of Leicester of any
unfaithfulness; but only will note, that although he were very stern to
others, he was easy to Flatterers and Sy^phants, and would give too much
credit to pretended Friendships, without any Trial. Nor were these the only
men to be found fault with about him; there were others very intimate with him,
and privy to all his Counsels, whose Factious Designs were soon discovered.
Among whom, Ringaltius, one eminent in the Guilt of the Conspiracy, refused all
the Tribunals of Judges; until at last, as a Renegado and a Traitor, he ended
his infamous Life among the Enemies, in a miserable poor condition: Wherefore,
now innumerable Complaints, as it were all at once, were made to the General;
returning from the War, to wit, That Warro and Garrisons being not possible to
be Governed, without the Injury of the Citizens, against this, such should be
put into Command as the People were pleased with: And there was added, That the
Office and Dignity of Treasurer, or Receiver General, was given to Strangers,
by whom it was deceitfully managed; That the Price and Value of Money was
unsettled, and the Soldiers and other Charges of the Commonwealth, were not
compared with the Treasury, That the Commands of the Sea was betrayed, by the
exhausting the Navall Revenues; That Trading and all Commerce decayed; That
Honors were bestowed on those, who in no wise merited them; That the Authority
of all inferior Lieutenancies was destroyed by him; and their Right, so many
years maintained, cevoured and swallowed up in Garrisons: Nor was it passed in
silence, that the Soldiers at that time hired, did not come, (concerning
which, there was a Suspicion, that the English had been the cause thereof; as
willing rather, that their own Forces and proper strength should be brought in)
in regard the Numbers of them were small, when the Covetousness of the
Commanders or Paymasters had exhausted the Auxiliary Numbers; so much, that
they were necessitated to give way to the Enemy, not being able to withstand
his Victories.

These things were thus related, by Direction of the States then Confederate,
who, from that time, began to Assemble, and meet more frequently than formerly,
that those Things might be Transacted without the Senate, which should keep in
awe the Guilty Consciences of the English, as Hollanders; and privately
complaining of many Things, both in relation to themselves, and to Prince
Maurice, they took into their Cognizance and Care most ordinary Matters.

This the Earl of Leicester took very ill; that Men from Shops and Taverns,
should come to make a Judicatory, who could bring nothing thither with them,
but sordid and mechanic Arts, and Minds prostituted to Lucre and Gain* and
that he, a Man of that Birth and Quality, should receive Laws from the
Ignorant, and despicable Vulgar, and fight under the Banner and Command of
Strangers. Much vexed hereat, he thought it would be a Work well worth his
pains, if he could possible, to remove such Clowns from the Stern of
Government; for there is nothing more hateful to Nobility, than the Dominion of
Peasants, being generally sharp Observers of Oppressors: And this he thought
might the more easily be brought to pass, because Strangers, and the multitude
of Citizens, (which is far the greater) having no share in the Government (as
was supposed) would gladly hearken to this Equality.

But I revolving in my Mind the worthy Precepts of wise men, and ancient Forms
of Cities, do rather think, that as many as would exclude that part of the
People from Honors, for whose common Utility, the advantage of all things
chiefly redounds, do conceit Matters of that difficulty, as are better to be,
walked after in Discourse, than Practice: For, not to speak of Nations,
Bordering upon the Sea, amongst whom the Commons had the Superiority, the
Spartans Democracy as being free from Flattery, equalled almost the greatest
Kingdoms: Nor had Rome any peaceable or settled Government, until the Commons
were admitted to have a sh^re therein.

And, at this day, in many most flourishing Cities, where the Government is
Aristocratical, the Underlings of the Senators, in the Name of the Common
People, exercise all Offices: Neither is this Order forbidden in that
Commonwealth, who is indebted to the Water for all it has; and, by the Dignity
of Trades and Merchandising, grown much greater than of old, so that the whole
World has participated of her Navigations: And all the Wealth is almost in
their Hands, whereof an Account is exacted, where Honors are to be bestowed,
according to the Judgment of Ancient and severe Legislators. And surely,
Covetousness and Wealth, are no where less to be suspected, than where the
Dominion is not perpetual, and as it were limited within Bounds.

But the Earl of Leicester, prepared to alter both these, and other
long-continued Practices; not so much in a ridiculous Affectation of Novelty,
but that by separating the Nobility, and others, for Wisdom eminent, from the
rest, he might draw them into Parties. And first he took to him as Chaplains,
some Interpreters of Scripture, (for in this Age they alone carry the liars and
Affection of the Multitude) such as were eminent for their outward Profession
of Zeal, and differed from others: For, at first, in the Commonwealth, Religion
being less esteemed than was fit, was reported to be the only cause of the
Troubles; and things more earnestly longed for, because forbidden, upon pain of
punishment, became neglected, when they might be used with Impunity: Reverence
to Things Sacred, was, to all that showed it, dangerous: No Honor was given to
Priesthood; nay, there were, who would not allow any Right of Ecclesiastical
Censures, but would utterly abrogate it; and all this, when they remembered with
Cankered Hearts, and embittered Minds, the Lordlyness of Priests formerly; and
so, in a venomous Malice to Old Things, they made all Things New. But
Liecester, on the contrary, by his Example, showing to them Authority, and
other Advantages of England, which they should enjoy, first won the Applause of
his Preachers, and by them gained the Affections of the People; committing and
trusting many Affairs of the Commonwealth not to the Magistrates, but to those
who were in some way or other conversant with things Divine, or else concerned
among the Plebeians; who, though willing, yet could never attain to right use
and knowledge of things: And now many whose Counsels had been sound and
faithful to their Country, were openly put back from their Honors, because
they agreed with the Church of Rome, either in all Points, or at least in some;
little regarding, how this matter would disturb the Peace, if once it were
published abroad, That they had received such a Religion, which would admit of
no Companions in the Commonwealth, except of the same Gang. This had not long
continued, but among the Frizons, and in Utrecht, where the Inhabitants had
taken away the power from the Magistrates to themselves; and, in other Cities,
which had formerly been Tumultuous, and ruled by the too great strength of the
Multitude, the Name of the States began to be murmured at, and he c^yed up for
the only Vindicator of Religion, the only Conqueror of their Enemies, and
punisher of Intestine Ambition and Covetousness. Moreover, he placed English
Soldiers in Forts, Islands, in or near the Sea, and other Bordering Parts:
Neither had he less Confidence in Sonojus, who, for some famous Actions, having
merited the Government of West-Frizeland, under the Prince of Aurange, now
hoped to confirm the same to himself, by the Favor of Leicester, and that he
should attain the Command next under his Greatness, and so to tear this
Province, and some other Garrisons, from the greedy Dominion of Holland, and
the Charge and Care of Prince Maurice, who bridled, and hid in a Resolved
Silence, the greatness of his virtuous Disposition, when at the same time he
was solicited, to perpetrate most false Crimes, and that under the Vizor of
Friendship. Thus prepared, the Earl of Leicester having preferred many out of
his own Number, and the Plebeians every where were in doubt of Discords, the
greater part of them would follow him, he believed now he had not much to do to
possess himself of his desired Dominion; especially, if he continued in the
Queens Favor still as formerly. Wherefore, least he might by too long absence,
give Opportunity to his Enemies, as knowing the nearest Intrigues of that
Court, he goes home: The Reason whereof pretended to the States was, that he
was called thence to the Council of England, where he would not forget to help
forward the Belgic Affairs: But the Commons were otherwise informed; for to
them he pretended the Indignities offered him by the States, were the cause of
his departure, threatening never to return, unless the Face of Affairs were new
molded: And this, together with some Letters scattered among the people,
^inraged many; the matters therein contained setting forth either the
bitterness of the States, or else Leicester's Merits, and affectionate
Endeavors for the peoples good. A Rumor also being spread, that the Queen
would not refuse the Dominion and Sovereignty of the Netherlands, unless she,
frighted from it by the Experiment of the first Confederacy, and innumerable
Laws, Articles, and Covenants, whereby even the justest Government was eluded,
and came to nothing. By these means, it came to such pass, that at Vtrecht the
New Magistrates, and in Frizeland the private persons, in the name of the
Public, took the Confidence to send to the Queen Deputies, who should not so
much offer as receive from her the Conditions and Form of a Principality: But
she absolutely refused them, though the Parliament of England then sitting,
promised, If she pleased, to give some Aids of Money on that behalf: Yet for
all this, she could not escape the Suspicions of some, that she had rather have
received this Honor from the Seditions and Tumults of the Soldiers and
People, than from the free Consent wherewith it was publicly offered, and by
her refused.

The Earl of Leicester now departing, left to the Senate the care of the
Commonwealth, but not long after, a Writing was produced, wherein he had
reserved to himself the Command of all Garrisons, and other chief points
relating to the Government. Hereupon, some were sent into England, who should
complain of their lame form of dominion, and that if any sudden stirs or
commotions should happen, there was no present power to remedy the same. But
they stayed in England a long time, 1587.
in regard of some present troubles, wherein that Kingdom was involved. For the
Queen of Scotland, being driven out of her Kingdom by her Subjects, fled to the
protection of Queen Elizabeth, as a Supplyant, being related to her, by a near
consanguinity, beside the alliance of Honor, as her Sister Queen; There she
being puffed up with great flocking to her of the Romanists, and believed, or
at least imagined to have conceived a hope, not only of regaining her former
fortune, but that there was a private kind of danger that threatened the Queens
safety from her, by her laying claim to the Crown; first she i^ committed into
strong Custody; but there, the fear and danger of her yet continuing, she was
at last put to death. In this mean while, among the Hollanders, were bloody
tumults, and as either party prevailed, so were bonds and banishments
inflicted; But where William Stanley delivered Davoury, and Rowland York, the
Fort opposite to Zurphen, to Taxis a Spaniard, who accepted of the Treachery,
but disdained the persons, though both very intimate with the Earl of
Leicester; then many of the common people extolled the wisdom of the States,
and highly condemned their Treachery.

But there were some Englishmen, who to take away the Infamy of their Nation,
said it was done by the Command of their Superiors. Yet there was one Allen,
afterward a Cardinal, who though an Englishman, in a Book concerning the same
set out, would seem to defend the villainy, by the pretense of Religion; which
notwithstanding his defense, remained still as it was, a most perfidious
Treachery, and wicked Example, no less scandalous to it self, than fatal to
the Author of it. For after falling out between themselves, it was said, that
York, a Man of an undaunted boldness to do any thing, was poisoned, and that
Stanley being removed from Daventry, went into Spain, with his Company which he
carried with him, his Pay being taken away and gone. Nor did he find the
Rewards he hoped for there, no one daring, or at least willing to lay any
Confidence on him.

But the Confederate States, taking in their own behalf, the voluntary
submission of the People, as well as of the Soldiery, that the Calamity
wherein the Commonwealth was involved, though for the present great, might be
turned to good; they incited Prince Maurice to the affections of his Father,
and now in the absence of the chief Governor, they give him the whole Command
of the War: Besides, they required both the Governors of Provinces, and the
Soldiers, to take an Oath to the States, which hitherto had been neglected,
but was by the Traitors, and all other seditious persons, that they might
thereby the better conceal their crimes, and by the more ignorant, interpreted
to the Honor of the Earl of Leicester, as if it had been the Oath to the Queen.

This done, the Edict against Exportations was reviewed, and moderated; so that
to the peaceable Provinces, all things but only necessaries for War, might be
carried. And to Provinces in Hostility with them, and the places bordering
thereupon, they might export any thing, but Materials for War and Corn. And
this Law was afterward, according as the necessity of the times required,
oftentimes enlarged and contracted.

At this time, many things were done in the Netherlands, with much variety and
charge of Fortune; for the Provinces of Brabant and Flanders, by the smallness
of Trade, little converse, and the perpetual lying wast of their Fields, being
quite exhausted, suffered extreme penury; those men which of late had good
Estates, and a sufficiency of Wealth, being reduced to the meanest beggary,
ready to starve for want; yet this fear, and the Royalists Forces lying round
about them, were hardly able to restrain the People from revolting. On the
other side, you might see the Towns of Holland, enlarging themselves within
their forbidden bounds, and without; and in the Sea-Ships lie up and down on
every Coast. And really, I think this almost to be the only Nation which has
thriven by Trading and Commerce, more in the War, than it could have done in
time of Peace, and therefore to be accounted most fortunate, if the beginnings
its of greatness had not been held back, and wasted by civil discords (while
they had also a powerful Enemy within their bowels) the usual end of old
States, and decaying Fortunes.

Altapen, a Captain of the Spanish Party, after he had drawn over the Town of
Geldres, whence the whole Province of Gelderland takes its name, with the
Governor thereof, by Covenants, was slain at Boisledue, by Count Hohenlo: he
left him a Castle to take near the Town, which from that slaughter committed
there, took the name of Crevicour. But the Duke of Parma, with a violent, and
almost incredible force of Guns, and other Warlike Engines, mightily weakened
and damnified Sluys, a Town by him then besieged, in the furthest Coast of
Flanders by the Seaside, that fronts Zeland, an Isle, called Catzen, lying on
the back thereof. Which when the Earl of Leicester understood, returning
without any delay, he resolves but in vain to break into the Haven; but when
his mind was altered, going to Ostend, because of the Enemy, he pitched his
Tents, and fame increasing the number of his Army (whose bigness was not yet
known) it appeared at last, that each of them had been afraid of the others
Forces more than they needed: The Earl of Leicester marching away first,
imputed the loss of the Town, which was very ill resented by all, not to the
Enemies valor, nor the endeavors of their party, yet not well agreeing, in
regard of suspicions: for now his whole study was anew to prosecute and revive
the long covered, and almost forgotten dissentions, and to lay the fault upon
the States.

To this purpose, he gives out, that when he went about to repel and drive
away the Enemy, that both Soldiers, Money, and all things else were afforded
him with evil will; and what at last they sent, was hardly enough for
Garrisons and Forts, not proportionable in any respect for an Army: And if
their poverty was such they could afford no more, why did they still involve
the Commonwealth in such a desperate Case, to the mischiefs of an unhappy and
lingering War? for now the Spaniard began to use his accustomed Policies after
Victory, and the Queen her self seemed to incline to Peace: although a Fleet
sent out under the Conduct of Captain Drake, by wasting and spoiling the Coasts
of Spain declared to the World, how weak that Kingdom was at home, that was
feared so much abroad, and another Fleet under Cavendish, had roved over
another Coast of America, and fallen upon the Molucca Islands, bringing away
great advantage: But many things now frighted her, being a Woman, and growing
into years, as, the frequent Rebellions of the Irish, who had now in the
Belgic Wars become well skilled in Military Discipline; That Scotland was
suspected as a private foe, while the Spaniard declared himself a public
Enemy; That France had no kindness for her, and not a few in England were
desirous of novelty. But the States, knowing how much it had otherwise
prejudiced their Affairs, throwing off, as much as they could, any mention of a
Treaty: if the Treasury could be faithfully managed, they denied the annual pay
of thirty Florens (for that was properly the Wages of all the Forces, except
the English Auxiliaries, and Soldiers for Sea-Service) to be despised as such
an inconsiderable allowance, when the Prince of Aurange had oftentimes brought
greater matters to pass, with less charge and fewer men; adding further, That
wise and considerate (...) knew how to make the best use of a little, whereas
when men ca^^ lightly and easily by money, yet they are never satisfied, though
they have too much.

Afterward, some Letters of the Earl of Leicesters, to his Friends, being
found, wherein they were accused, that they had forgot their duty, and unjustly
busied themselves in matters of importance, not belonging to them; they, to
wit, the States, do by an Edict set forth and declare, that of old, the Peoples
Right was in them, and of late, the Princes Right was translated over to them,
that they still kept both, notwithstanding the delated Lieutenancy, and diverse
other things they spoke of, relating to the honor of their Convention, and
whereby they might clear themselves from the objected crime of ambition. But
Leicesters hopes were now grows higher, than to stand upon delaying niceties
and policies that were understood; wherefore scorning, that the People should
any longer have a voice among the Magistrates, with an hasty overruling
Confidence, he prepares by faction and Garrisons, to bring under his Yoke, the
Cities that stood more inward upon the Land, and thence to throw a sudden
terror upon the rest, not taking warning by the example of Valois, whom such
an endeavored violence thrust out of the Government, though settled therein by
Contract and Agreement. But before the danger, the whole Plot laid by the
Inhabitant strangers of Leyden was discovered, many of whom, suffered death as
a worthy punishment, for seeking to induce novelty in a State, where they were
strangers. And although perchance some of these might be offenders, rather out
of ignorance than malice, yet was that severity toward them very necessary,
and broke the whole design of all, either begun or intended, commotions; Thus
at last being openly discovered guilty of an unworthy and unlawful ambition, he
went away into England. And there the Queen, after she had sent the Lord
Buckhurst, no great Friend of his, to inquire into the Affairs of the
Low Countries, that the less notice might be taken thereof in the Council,
protected him by her Royal Power, yet made him to abjure all Authority over
the Netherlands. But while he yet supported his old Partakers with Letters, and
was after laid aside from Military Affairs by England, he lived not out a full
year, uncertain whether taken off by his Wives Treachery, who, as it were,
confessed her Adultery in his Life, by her unequal Marriage after his death, or
by any other means unnatural, or the common Fate. However it was, his death was
not so much lamented by the Queen, as it was rejoiced at by the Low Country
men, who were thereby once more freed from a Danger, than which, a greater, in
all their Affairs, never hung over them.

In the interim of these Affairs, Colonel Schenck took by Surprise Bonne, a
City of Germany, situate on this side the Rhine, and then possessed by the
Bavarian. Now was there (as one may say) a Cessation of Arms throughout the
Netherlands; for the Duke of Parma did not, as he was wont, with so much
intention break in by War upon those Discording Provinces. A great Design
against England had taken his Thoughts and Endeavors, it being accounted a
more noble, and less difficult Enterprise.

Most of the great Soldiers, who had fought for the King of Spain, looked upon
that Island as the amends of their Merits, and the Reward of their Labors; and
as it was near to France and Germany upon occasion of War, so the Counsel was,
That being a Transmarine Kingdom, it should be gotten by War: But these
Counselors, every one by his own Fortune, or by Death hindered, at this time,
as it were by the Justice of Revenge, after a League concluded, and Aid sent
openly to the Rebels in Ireland: A great Fleet was prepared in Spain against
the next Summer; The Duke of Parma prepared all his Garrisons against that time
to man it; and so far did his hopeful Imaginations carry him, that he concluded
this English Expedition would be a worthy Catastrophe of his Ten Years
Victories, and make his Name equal in the Register of Honor, with those of the
most famous Emperors. But the Spaniard endeavored to stifle the Rumor of
this imminent Danger, with the Noise of a pretended Peace; For the composing
whereof, the Dane, as a Mediator, came to propound Mediums; and Cains Ransovius
sent to the Duke of Parma, whom the Soldiers of Holland intercepted by the
way, as he passed with a Warlike Train, and not distinguishable among those
that fought: But the King adjudging that they wittingly had, contrary to the
Laws of Nations, violated his Ambassador; and chiefly, because his Letters were
broke open, took so sharp a Revenge, that he laid an Arrest ^ Restraint upon
seven hundred ships, that were passing backward and forward in Trade for Corn;
by which means, ^ the people then living in these parts, were wonderfully
terrified with the fear of Famine, having never before, by any like Example,
been disturbed. But this Scarcity was helped by necessary Counsel, that French
and English Vessels coming from the same Seas, should go to the Ports and
Markers of Holland. Thus was that Danger escaped, only with the Expense of
some Money, forced from them by the Danes; which notwithstanding, and for that
the King would not vouchsafe to give Audience to the Ambassadors. sent to him,
stuck highly in the Stomachs of many, who thought it very hard, that the Lesser
Dominions should still be obnoxious to Damage, at the will and pleasure of the
greater. While these things were doing there, there was likewise a kind of
Tre^y with the English in King Philip's Name, because the Queen was looked upon
as the only Support of all the Low Country Affairs, to this purpose. That all
Jealousies and Fears should be thrown away in the laying down of Arms, if the
Provinces which had Rebelled would return to their pristine Obedience; The as
she took off all things concerning Religion in England, so in the Netherlands
Religion should be ordered according to the Mind of the Spaniard, though there
had been taught a pernicious Doctrine, that Matters relating to Religion, were
to be determined by other Judges than Princes. This proposed Pacification was
listened to by Queen Elizabeth, with no less Subtilty than it, was offered,
chiefly aiming, that by this Pretext of Compounding Business, she might spin
away, and divert the time of danger, for she now had Intelligence of the Fleet.
And dissembling her Fear, she only pretended a pious desire of Peace and
Commerce among, and with the Provinces; and, to that end, sending some so
instructed out of England, to command the Hollanders, that they should, without
any murmuring, hearken thereto, and that they would draw upon themselves so
great Envy, as to be esteemed by their cruel Obstinacy, the Authors of
perpetual War and Bloodshed. But they revolved with themselves, and a fresh
remembered all the Treachery Blandishments of the Spaniard; for what Event had
the Treaty with Requesens, but that all the Forts being taken, the more
considerable Cities might the easilyer be besieged? At the Pacification at
Colen, how was the hopes of a real Peace blasted, by soliciting so many
Provinces to Revolt; and so was Flanders, by the like kind of Colloquies,
betrayed: And at last, the Enemy got so much Recruit of strength, while he
fallaciously promised Tolleration of Religion, that now he dares absolutely
deny it. Now to speak of Peace, when there were such Civil Discords among the
Citizens, were just to strike their Arms out of their Hands, that others might,
as they saw convenient, submit to what they pleased; but let heed be taken,
that they used not more have than good speed. And though things might be
composed upon equal Terms, yet neither the League made at Gaunt, nor Don John's
Treachery could be forgotten. That to Kings, whom the Bishops of Rome would
dispense with, or absolves from the Sacred Tie of an Oath, every Covenant made
with Subjects, would be reckoned all one as a Victory.

And there would never be wanting men, that would seek, to raise themselves and
their Fortunes, by the slavery of their Country: And in these things, every one
openly, as doubtful, spent the time, because they saw she persuaded to Peace
that might compel. And as often as the Queen persuaded them not to delay, they
beseeched her, That she would not cast off that Cause of God and Men, and leave
Threescore Cities and a People, ready, if their present Treasure were not
enough, to increase the Public Stock with their private Wealth, a Prey to the
Malice and Avarice of the Treacherous Spaniard. Hereupon the Cities unanimously
agreed, (for this Consultation was related to every particular City) That no
Ambassador, should be sent to the Enemy: Only the Queen, Winter growing on
apace, sent into Flanders, to make, if she could, a Peace, though not suitable
to her Wishes. Here, while they discourse of the place of the meeing, and of
their Commissions, the English asking a Truce, the Duke of Parma defiying,
Three Months are elapsed: Queen Elizabeth demanded for the Netherlanders
Pardon, their Ancient Laws and Governments of their Cities; for her Self, the
continuance of the Old Leagues, the Re-imbursement of all her Charges, and
Security for the same, the Soldiers on both sides being disbanded: But as to
Religion, and the Form of Worship, she moved so faintly, as if she would seem
not to meddle therewith. For now she was come to this, That she only desired
two years for the performance of her Demands: As to the Towns, which the
English held, either by Covenant, or other Occasions, she refused not to
deliver them, upon the Receipt of her Ch^rges.

The Spaniards, while they utterly deny any Tolleration of Religion, and will
have all Affairs of the Netherlands left to King Philip's pleasure; objecting,
instead of payment of the English Disbursements, That thereby the English had
been the cause to them of greater Expense; and as they extenuate that, they
amplifying other Things, did now appear plainly to the World, that though they
sought a Treaty, yet they never intended a Peace: And Arguments of their
Hostile D^signs, and Warlike Preparations, every day broke out clearer and
clearer; until at last, the so long feared Fl^et, set an end to the one sides
hope, 1588.
and the other sides dissimulation. But Dissension and Factions, with By-names,
went not out of Holland with the Earl of Leicester; but under this pretense,
the Garrison Soldiers, both of Cities and Castles, made Disturbances, robbing
and pilling every where; especially they, that, by ill-ordering of the
Treasury, were behind in their Pay, for fear of Peace, hasted by Rapine to
repay their Labor in the War. At which time, some were pleased, that the third
part of Pay should be offered, which by the Custom of the Netherlands is always
in Bank, and never used to be disbursed, but upon very good occasions: Which,
because it could not speedily be obtained, in regard it was the Remains of many
Years, and to be demanded of many, they forthwith every one took to himself,
what Liberty or Licentiousness he pleased, being defended a while by some
English the Queen had sent; As if the Name of English, would have made these
Crimes pass more current: The Soldiery of Geertruydenburg, upon the receiving
a great Sum of Money, seemed cotented; but into what an un^^ly Baseness and
T^eachery, they afterward back on I w^li^m its proper place relate. Sonoi, in
the City of Medem like, ^cituate on the Western Shore of the Frizian Gulf, by
the Rebellion of his Soldiers against him, suffered the punishment of denying
Obedience to Superiors; Prince Maurice by Siege, reduced these to the
Obedience of himself and the States. ^^ssel also, Governor of the Garrison in
Flushing, hoping to command in Chief all the Soldiers in Zeland, and drawing
to his Party Veren and Armuyden, Towns in the sle of W^lcheren, with an
Ambition of Rule, was at length, (...) Queen's Commands, who understood he^^^
things a (...) Renunciation of the Earl of Leicester, which now (...) heard of,
forced to desist. In other places, the Seditions were appeased with less
danger, but every where with great Expense of Money. These things, though not
bursting out till the following year, I have mentioned in this place, because
they are coherent with the matter. But before I settle my self, to proceed in
my impartial Relation, of the following Troubles, I think it will be a
digression, both satisfactory and pleasant to the Reader, if I take a short
View chiefly, of such Domestic Affairs of our own, as is necessary for other
Nations to come to the knowledge; such as was that War, when a few People, and
they living in a narrow compass of Land, and shaken with many grievous
Slaughters, should yet raise it self to such a Greatness, against so mighty a
Power as that of Spain. Therefore, I will compare what Bounds, what Form of
Commonwealth, what Number of Forces, and what Natural Dispositions, and
Inclinations, were in this middle Time most usual, with both these People.

After the Liberty confirmed by the League at Gaunt, Don John of Austria had
Conquered Namur, Lutzenburg, and Limburge; The Duke of Parma gained by
particular Agreements Artois and Henault; by Treachery he obtained Flanders;
and Brabant and Mechlin he subdued by Famine, excepting that in Flanders the
Town of Ostend; in Brabant Berge^op-Zoom and Williamstedt, (so called from the
Prince of Aurange) together with some Castles, all lying upon the Seacoast, or
by the sides of Rivers. Frizeland and Over-Issell, were in the power of the
United States, only the Spaniard had Groningen: The rest, Steanwic and
Daventry excepted, with as many other Fortresses, were divided with the Enemy;
And they wanted not many Towns in Gelderland, besides Arnheim, Geldres,
Ni^umegen, Zutphen, principal Cities, and some less Carrisons held by the
Spaniard. Prince Maurice did wholly govern and Zeland; after the rest, there
came under his Command, beyond the Frizons, the Dominion of the Sea, and all
other places, which continued faithful to the States in the Enemies Country.
They took away every where the great President, of having proper and peculiar
Governors in Cities, suffering none such, but in the very uttermost Borders:
Nor must I omit to say something of their Neighbors. Beyond the River Eomes, is
the County of East-Frizeland, commonly called Embden-Land; By the Maes and
Rhine, the Bishoprics of Colen and Liege, the Governor whereof a Bavarian, a
Kinsman of King Philips, who encompassing almost all the Belgike Provinces, by
diverse Names of Ecclesiastical Dignities, possesses most large Territories;
and although the Court of the Prince of Cleves and Juilliers, had not yet been
claimed by War; yet either by infused Dread, together with the pretense of the
Burgundian Alliances, it seems to incline toward the Spaniard; and then if any
of those Cities should fall to the like Religion as the Hollanders, they had an
Enemy close by them, that would be no less implacable than theirs. But Cambray,
which, after the Defection of the Neighbor Cities, being clogged and annoyed
with its own Garrison, Valois had, by his last Directions, commended to the
Kingdom of France his Protection; Baligny, who was appointed Governor thereof,
by the King's Mother, Catharine, kept after both their Deaths; and he now
joining himself to the Guisian Faction, while the Duke of Parma rejoiced at the
prolonging of the War, thereby to recover satisfaction for the wasting of the
Country; and King Henry, driven out of his own Cities, had no peace nor vacant
time to mind these beginnings, took to himself an Authority, though he knew it
could be of no long continuance: These were their Bounds and Limits. Now let us
consider their Polity; the United States, among whom the Prince of Aurange, for
a long time, had the chief Authority in the King's Name, and then in his own;
afterward, both his, and the States Power, sliding into the Earl of
Leicester's Dominion, were taught by Experience, that the strength of the
Empire, divided into many Hands, though it may suit better with Liberty, yet is
it more subject to discord, if the fear of the public Enemy be but abated; but
the Government it self lost nothing, for what was subtracted by any means from
its power, was doubly regained in the benevolence and affection of the People,
for Honors and Licenses were wholly granted by it, whereas Impositions of
Taxes and Subsidies, and other burdens were laid upon the People by another
hand. And besides, such is the nature of the common People, that they will
generally lay the fault of all miscarriages upon those who are most active in
the Commonwealth, and yet for Victories they will only acknowledge one.

The Nobles and more potent men, were wont by an ancient Custom, according to
the hereditary right of their Possessions, to govern the Country, and the
Inhabitants therein, but Towns were left to be ruled by selected and choice
Citizens; and the Reason was, because the People employing themselves in
multiplicity of Affairs, did not desire to be called together, and assembled
upon every occasion of electing Officers, or making Laws; but out of them
forty, or sometimes fewer were picked, who afterward meeting together, did
consult and deliberate of all things that concerned the Commonwealth, and these
were called, The wise and sober men. And if death or banishment, took any one
or more of them away, others are forthwith chosen into the vacant places, who
are eminent for their Prudence and Riches; and the Laws and Ordinances made by
this Assembly or Common Council, are, by the Consent of the whole City,
obliging to all, so that it is hardly found in an Age, that any People gainsay
them, but are ready rather to fight in defense of the Authority of their
Governors.

These every year nominate several, out of whom are chosen Praefects, (this
Power formerly belonged to the Prince) who are to maintain and defend the
public Peace, and are called by the People, Masters, and these at most were
four. There are seven others, that are called by the name of Eschevins, do
pass Judgment in all differences of private concernment, as likewise in
criminal matters: These Offices are undertaken and performed as a duty
incumbent upon them in behalf of their Country, with little or no Reward or
Salary: And to these men's Power, and the Counsel of some that are their
Assistants, who must be well read in the Civil Law, all the business of Towns
and Cities is referred, and by them dispatched, with this additional Power
allowed to them, of making Laws, and raising moderate Sums of money within the
verge of their own Jurisdiction; from hence the whole Empire, as it were,
assembling these Chiefs together in one Body, they who before singly governed
the Parts, thus associated and conjunct, do praeside and rule the whole Nation.
For three or four times in the year, or oftener, as the Emergencies of Affairs
require, there is a Council summoned out of both degrees of the People, which
is called the Convention of the States: But the Nobility, because they cannot
easily meet from their several Remote Habitations, have conferred their Power
and Authority upon some few, whose Riches and Honor is greater than the rest,
and they meet in that Great Council in the behalf of all.

To these, in respect of their Quality, is only given the priority of suffrage;
for every one of the meaner Ranks have a Vote equal to them: When therefore
the Common Council of any Town has deliberated at home, concerning matters
there proposed, the Magistrates, and some of the Assistants, are sent to the
great Convention, to give them account of what they have so done, and thereupon
to obtain their permission: all other things that may happen, either by
accident or convenience, are left to their Prudence and Fidelity. Wherefore in
this great Assembly, as all things are discussed, which formerly the Princes
used to take care and Cognizance of, so they assess what Taxes, Assesments, or
other Customs, are necessary every year, for the bearing and carrying on the
Burden and Charge of the War, which is proportionably rated upon every
Province according (...) their Forces. But because this Great Convention is ag^
quickly dissolved, the Nobility and chief Magistrates of great Cities, may
choose fit men out of themselves, that they sitting at the Helm of Government,
may put in execution the Ed^, and Decrees of the States, and oversee all other
quotid^ business, and in sudden Cases to provide remedy; and ^ any thing
happen, that requires a greater care, they may by a Proclamation in Writing,
summon the Great Assembly of the States: This Honor does generally continue
but for time limited; But the Dignity of Advocate of Holland, is perpetual.

He in the times of the Princes was the only assertor of the Public Liberty,
and as then is dangers, so now, the form of the Commonwealth being changed, he
is in the Convertion of the States, and in the meetings of the Deputies, he
demands their Advice and Judgment, he by persuasive Speeches draws points to a
head, and composeth any difference like to fall out among them: This Office was
executed very prayse-worthily, from the beginning of the War, by Paul Busius:
and after him John Olden Barnevelt had the same, and much honored the same by
his proper virtues, whereof he gave a most excellent Testimony against the Earl
of Leicesters Threats and Policies, manifesting himself both a faithful
Counselor, and a person of an invincible Spirit. This is in effect, the Form
of the Government in Holland, from whence the Customs of other of the
Provinces, are not much different. Every place has its proper Overseers of all
penalties and forfeitures belonging to the public Treasury, and Judges, who
are men well skilled in the Laws, to whom Appeals might be made from the
inferior Courts of the Town. These are they who obtain all lasting and
continual Dignities, out of whose number, a Prefect is chosen, and these are
always nominated by the States only. But now, the Senate takes Cognizance of
all things relating to the confederated Union, and provides all-things
necessary for the War; and all that are admitted into it, do swear, That
without any respect of them from whom they are sent, they shall advise what
shall be most advantageous to the Public good. Now it is to be observed, that
hither are sent from every Province some, particularly from Holland three, from
Zeland two, from Frizeland the like; and from every one of the rest, one.
Hithet, when there is any more grave and serious matter to be debated, the
Governors of Provinces are sent for and admitted: But because matters of the
greatest concornment, were from all Antiquity, never dispatched, without the
consent of every several Province, and that was found, by reason of the
infinite multitude of business, and the hazard of long delays, to be
inconvenient; therefore it was agreed, that Deputies should be sent with free
Commission, who should always attend the chief business of State; and if any
thing happened there, that required more deliberate Consultation, and merited
maturer judgment, that forthwith every one should consult the States of his
own Province. Every Province, which now according to the League, sends out of
their chief Cities some, has an equal right of suffrage; And by turns, they
successively come to be Presidents. And at that time, these were the Provinces,
Guelderland, Holland, Zeland, Vtreche, Frizeland, within the Vlye and the
Lecke, and Over-Issel.

This Deputation has by little and little assumed to it self the nature of a
perpetual Assembly, resembling the Confederate or United States, and does
frequently use that name. And the Power here included, and vested in the
Deputies for a prelimited time, is not prolonged, unless by the pleasure and
Authority of their Superiors, by whom they were entrusted.

In like manner, others of an inferior Rank, are chosen for Seaports, and
other Towns lying on the Seacoast, who are by their Judgments and Counsels, to
order and settle all Navall matters.

This in brief, is the Method and Form of that Commonwealth; nor is it
congruous, only to mind the meaner sort which means, as the Government grows
famous, being ^ bounded among a few Families, so neither is altogether popular,
as to be made up out of the multitude. The Authority of the Nobles being left
to themselves, and all our power residing in the chief Citizens of the more
Noble Cities. Hence as it were, by certain steps were they elected who were to
govern the Provinces, and to look after all other public business, not as in a
mere Democratical form, by promiscuous and accidental choice, but by having a
rega^ to their descent and Progenitors, the acquisition of their Wealth, and
their other laudable dispositions, and virtuous qualities: Nor was the
Provision for securing liberty herein* any whit mistaken, while things of
greatest difficulty and concernment, were ordered by the judgment of many, and
the chiefest Authority passes from hand to hand, which ^s the cause, that many
without the hope of continuing their greatness, have made it their study, to
learn and put in practice the true manner of well governing. I have found it an
experimented truth, even when Wars were maintained against the Romans, that the
People both of France, Germany, and Britain, were wont to examine and discuss
their more weighty matters, by the Peers of the Land, and such choyces made by
the Cities, and that some remainders thereof appear, even where Kingdoms have
been since long settled. But if we may dive into Records of greater Antiquity in
Greece, we shall find the like settlement among them, under the name of
Amphyctiones, by whose unanimity, the almost incredible power of the Median
Monarch, was both resisted and conquered. And so in Achaja, whose strength at
first, though inconsiderable, yet by an harmonious Agreement waxed formidable.

But to proceed, though every Province has a Metropolitical City of its own;
yet now the chief and common Seat of Empire, is among the Hollanders, who as
they far out vye the rest of their Confederates in Wealth, so they do not a
little go beyond them in Authority. The Hague is a Village, and the Seat of
Prince Maurice, exceedingly and choycely pleasant, with delightful Woods and
Groves, and its neighboring Bank.

The State of the Commonwealth, in the Provinces under the Kings Command,
differs not much from the other, but that the great Assembly of the States,
for those parts, are seldom called together, except it be for settling of Taxes,
and raising Money; some few are selected to manage the private Affairs of every
Province: but the Senate with the Regent, and the rest assistant thereunto, as
the Judges of Law and Treasury, have the whole Government of all things; and
whoever is admitted into any Office, he continues therein without alteration or
change.

The Revenues of the United Provinces, what they were, is before declared:
afterward when they had shaken off all fear of Tyranny, they began to settle
Tributes for their own Commonwealth, and when their Trading and Merchandising
increased by the decay of Brabant, their Spirits were augmented as their
Riches, and their undertakings were attended with success; their confidence
boldly venturing upon the greatest attempts, enlarged their charges and
expenses: their Fields, Houses, Victuals, Clothes, nay their very Heads were
not free, but made liable for payments of Money. They had the Sea open to bring
them most certain Customs, which not liable to the hazard of War, as other
things, though it was the endeavor of those in Power, not to hinder Trassique,
if possible, least Commodities of great value might by incertainty and hazards
be carried elsewhere.

But the Wealth of the Spanish Provinces, though consisted much of Taxes, very
hardly, and with an ill will gotten, ^ by the accession of great Sums of Money
from the King, of exceed very far the other; but that the multitude of ^ who
were interested in the receiving and payment of the same, and the easiness of
fraudulent dealing therein, intercepted and devoured the greatest part thereof,
before it ca^^ to the uses for which it was designed, while some of the^ would
keep it as their own, and others as profusely and prodigally wast it.

The Soldiery of the Hollanders, consisting of Citizens, Allies and strangers,
besides the Auxiliary English Forces* did not at this time exceed eighteen
thousand Foot, with a indifferent Cavallery, the greatest part of whom, lay in
Ga^risons, and were far short of their Enemies in multitude, before France had
made him divide his strength: But the Earl of Leicester's neglect, and their
other many Seditions, had taught them, that it was better and more safe for
them, to defend themselves with small Armies, than by exceeding their Treasure
under the name of Soldiers, to raise themselves enemies. And now every day
they brought their Discipline to be more strict, that those Citizens and
neighboring Provinces, and others that redeemed their Lands, lying partly in
the Enemies Country, from spoil and pillage, by paying money for Composition,
might not be injuriously ve^ed; and when the Soldiers were drawn into Winter
Quarters, they were not to take any money underhand, while they were there, but
the Commonwealth did defray all charges during their stay; by this equality a
wonderful thing was brought to pass, that every house was glad and willing to
entertain them. All the Infantry was divided into Regiments, (for so we will
call them,) every Regiment containing ten Ensigns, and seldom more. Under every
Ensign, were to march an hundred men; it is true, some Companies were at first
greater; but, if you will look upon them generally, what with Death, and
running away, and what with the Captains false Musters, they hardly arose to
that Number. Every Troop likewise was to contain so many Horsemen, and three of
these Troops, as it were a Wing, had but one common Commander.

And that all these might with the more ease be paid, every Province took to
themselves certain Companies of Foot, and Troops of Horse, to whom out of their
proper Treasure, they constantly gave their Pay: And as every Province thus
answered his proportion, so they began a new Custom, which was, That they would
in Vacancies, name the Captains, and other inferior Officers under their Pay.
The Captains themselves managed the meaner Services; but they who governed the
Commonwealth, either for their Virtue, or out of Favor, would appear in such
as were more eminent. The Forces of the Enemy were much more numerous than the
other, whereby they kept in awe, what, or whosoever they suspected, and guarded
their Borders, though of a very great Extent. The Common Soldiers Pay was
alike on both sides; but they had greater and more extraordinary Advantages
with the Spaniard, with whom also there were a great number of persons who had
double Pay; yet were they not less burdensome, either to Towns or Countries,
whether in the Camp or in Garrison, so that they were more than doubly
destructive to the Treasury: And their Military Discipline was much neglected
by their private Emulations.

On the contrary, Prince Maurice, upon whom, chiefly, the whole Care and Weight
of the War lay, pretermitted none of those things which had been used by
Antiquity in the Art Military, or that were grown Customary by Modern Practice
and Experience: He diligently encouraged his Soldiers, to attend all the
Enemies Motions; and though he sat in the Highest Seat of Power, yet he would
not suffer the meanest things to pass without his Care: So that it was
admirable, to see this great and Warlike Instructor, who had never had any
Master, by discreet Considerations, establish all things for the War, that
Guards might be diligently kept, and Cities well Fortified; he causes sound men
to instruct the Soldiers, how readily to pitch their Camp, and to use all
sorts of Engines and Instruments for Assaults; and in regard they were yet
unexperienced in Battles, Sieges, and Fortifications, he has them caught to
manage Horses, to observe their Ranks, to carry Provision, and to raise Works,
not according to the Method of this Age. At first, these Endeavors were
laughed at, by the Ignorance of those who are ashamed to learn what they
understand not; but after the Success of some Experiments, they were admired;
because hereby they that had turned their Backs in many Fights, now durst stand
and look the Enemy in the Face, and reduce by strength Towns that they had
lost: So that now all did plainly confess, That as no man excelled his Father,
in gaining the love of the People, and laying the Foundation of a Commonwealth;
so by the great Blessing of Heaven, the Son was as famous, for the increasing
and defending the same. But how much the manner of the War was altered from the
first use, will easily be understood in the Context of the following Work. A
considerable Number of Ships are sent to infest the Enemies Towns that lay by
the Seaside, and to guard the Passages of Rivers: Some go out, as a safe
Convoy for Merchants, and to secure the Fishing Trade: Others sail up and down,
to scour the Sea of Pirates: Without all doubt, in this, the Enemy was
inferior, who had very few Ports, and they incommodious, and not many Ships,
which only waited upon Towns. The Nobility on both side, either contented
themselves in an unprofitable carelessness, or the peaceable enjoyment of their
Honors, with a kind of Neutrality for Envy, of the Commons on one side, and of
the Spaniards on the other; or else out of an inveterate Stupidity, because
some cunning Princes, changing the Execution of their Military Offices, into
Hereditary Possessions, had taken all from them, and given them as a Favor to
the other. Some few there were, that either out of Love and Thirst of Renown,
or their particular Discontents, did take up Arms, and do Service suitable to
their Births and Qualities. Among the Commons, the young men, and such as only
knew the Evil of the present Times, because they had never seen Peace, were
content with any condition of Affairs, not being sensible of the War, otherwise
than by Rumors, and paying Taxes; and many, because the Religion publicly
received was not affected by them, for no other cause, followed the Cry. But
the Laws of Holland, though many of them not very harsh in their Sanction, did
sorbid to the Catholics, even the use of their Religion in private,
notwithstanding the like Orders had been the cause of so many former Tumults:
The same also, by a kind of implicit manner, put them from the chief Honors:
But the States allowed some mean Allowance to Priests and Nuns, so long as they
lived quietly, because in many places their Possessions were laid wast; but it
pleased, by connivance, to suffer the Meetings of other Sects. The Ministers of
the Public Religion, were admitted on neither side into the Council; nay, the
whole Throng of Ecclesiastical Persons were beyond the Inspection of the
Magistrates. Finally, if the nearest Troubles had been appeased, there would
have been no sudden fear of new ones.

On the other side, There was another Party of Netherlanders, whose long
Experience, and continual Converse among Troubles, had made them now not
gainsay the Causes thereof. There was only a Shadow of those Laws in use
before the War, nor was the Duke of Parma's Modesty alike constant to all: Some
Cities were kept under by Garrisons, but all were cu^hed by the Authority of
Governors. And although the Bishops enjoyed the Seats, the Lady Regent
formerly, being the Duke of Parma's Mother, and Alva had settled them in, and
many other Things were done for the Jesuits sake; yet the Inquisition, and all
punishments inflicted thereby, were either suspended or moderated, in regard of
the War, and respect to the Enemy; because the greatest part having fled, that
were Disseuters, the rest had learned to obey, rather out of fear than
punishment. On both sides, Traffike and Merchandising, together with the
increase of Work-mens Wages, did readily supply the dearne's of Victuals, and
other Things necessary for Man's Life; and also, the Prices set upon greater
Commodities, and the Fruits of the Field, which were somewhat scarce. Among the
Hollanders, the Merchants Trade flourished, which is the Nurse of all Inferior
Manufactures; Amsterdam alone equallizing the greatest Mart-Towns, either of
this present, or of former Ages. In the mean while, as the Benefits of Peace
were received, notwithstanding the War, so the Evils thereof were not quite
vanished; for Men's Minds were not so much naturalized to Cruelty by the use of
Arms, as to run into contrary Extremes; For all such as fled hither for safety,
and had secured themselves from a necessitated Banishment, by a competent
Provision, by the Company and Society of Foreigners, and imitating the better
sort of them, no Check of the Laws being able to restrain them, would run into
a supers^^ous Excess and Vanity of Clothes and Diet, until they had by this
means drawn in others to the same, to avoid the shame of Poverty, though they
were in no way able to bear the same And therefore, then that old and constant
simplicity of the Hollanders, and their uncorrupted Frugality, was changed into
Luxury and Profuseness, which though it might advantage the Treasure, yet was
(I am sure) very pernicious and destructive to all good Manners; because as
Avarice, as old overgrown Evil, grows into Confidence, it will not let Nations
Conquered think so as long as they can live at such height. But the Vices of
the Enemy, made these seem Virtues, whose more wastful and abominable
Prodigality, was (...) to be curbed even by Poverty it self.

The End of the Annals of the Netherlands.
THE HISTORY OF THE Low-Countrey's Affairs; WRITTEN By HUGO GROTIUS.
The First BOOK.
I Shall here begin to Declare that more settled Course of Affairs, wherein
Prince Maurice, having attained the Chief Command of the Army, drew up himself
the whole Managery of all Businesses. The Commonwealth had still the same Face,
Religion was controverted with like Animosity, the War sharply maintained with
equal Obstinacy, and all hopes of Peace utterly laid aside; so that now the
Series of Things was indeed, in respect of its Actions, various, but in it
self, not at all intricate: England was assaulted by Spanish Forces, and France
greedily thirsted after, not with a covetous Eye, or vain Wish only, but by
the sad Threats of a Malicious War. It cannot be denied, but that his Treasury
is exceeding great, yet not sufficient to maintain so many Wars at once; from
hence becoming sensible, of all the Evils of Poverty. During this time, both
the Minds and Forces of the Low-Countrymen, had some ease and respite, Leagues
and Alliances were begun with several Kingdom, and in part again broken off:
There the Praefects and Governors often changed, and at last the Regent
himself; Confidence not resting assured in the meanness of her Guard, and
Treacheries most ignoble abounding every where: Whereas here, by the Vigilance
and Ingenuity of one Captain, not only Danger was escaped, but Arms
advantaged; the Navall and Maritime Power increased infinitely, and at once in
Strength against the Enemy, and in Reputation amongst others: so that now it
might credibly be believed, that in the Equality of both Parties, the War would
now grow doubtful; for this time made it appear, that the smallest things might
be waited on with humane hope, and that it was never too late to be helped by a
Miracle. I am about to publish, according to the Method of History, what things
have certainly been seen and heard; nor am I ignorant, how odious it is afresh
to being in mind these things among them, whose Hatred is yet raging; where by
the positive and impartial Assertions of Truth, you may happily by the Enemy be
accused of Flattery, and to your own Side not seem altogether free from
untruths: But the Judgment and Reward of my Fidelity will proceed from
Posterity; And if God have, in Mercy, appointed any End to this grievous and
bloody War, it may chance there will be some, who drawing Arguments from hence,
may give an Account thereof with greater Security, and more Eloquence. In the
interim, let it be for the benefit of such, as being far remote from the
knowledge of our Troubles, may know the value of their own Peace, from the
Evils suffered by others, and may hence learn Documents of War, whereof, though
not in Civil Discords, they may the more fortunately make use of against a
Barbarous Enemy. But it is very difficult to set down Things as they were
really done, because the absent, many times, are quite forgot, and the present
too much praised: As that most offends the Reader, so this makes the Writer
more blameworthy. Besides, the following Age does many times, either out of
forgetfulness, or the potency of the Conqueror, leave out, or at least fall
short of, the exact Discovery of their Knowledge: But if it be necessary for
those Things to be publicly mentioned, it will be advantageous to the Writer,
that he lived among those, who may well be ashamed, if they allow not to him
that Liberty, which they promised to all. Add also, that many of the Events
happened hereabouts; and he has the greater advantage and reason to admire the
mean beginnings of this increasing Commonwealth.

1588.
THE Great Year, according to the Account of Christendom, One Thousand Five
Hundred Eighty and Eight, and which Astrologers had sore-told to be the last of
the World, was now come: Certainly, either that Art is vain, and it must be
reckoned among the Follies of our rash Credulities, that we suppose our selves
able to comprehend Futurity, or else it is an Error of such, who do not
rightly understand the many vast Intriques of Destiny: As a part of the
Caelestiall Threats, the Spanish Great Fleet was looked upon, which, while he
had Peace with the Turk, and saw France embroiled in a Civil War at Home, he
made great have to set out: For it was not enough, that they who had been
Conquerors of so many Kingdoms, and subjected the New World so long, should win
a little Nation to their Empire by mutual Conflicts, unless with Scandalous
Language, they abused the Government thereof by a Woman. But the Englishmens
Confidence, encouraged the Low Country men, and the Bulwark of the Sea made the
Englishmen confident to repel Force by Force; for they had not yet forgotten
the Names of Saxons, Danes, and Normans; nor were insensible, that whoever
entered an Island, seldom failed to win the possession thereof: For the Kings of
England, because they had been troubled with Civil Wars, to prevent future
danger in time to come, upon like occasions, dismantling all Garrisons, Forts,
and Castles, had laid the Kingdom open to Foreign Invasion; Then besides, what
signified their weak Bodies, and Minds made effeminate by a long Peace and
Luxury, being without Leaders, without Cavalry, against the well-disciplin'd
Power of the Spaniard; and those that under the Duke of Parma's Conduct, had
for so many years been Victorious? Thus did they threaten Revenge to such as
should not assist them, but the rest some Respite should be given to. Now, as
it is the Custom of greedily ambitious and covetous men, promising their Hopes
a larger and more extended progress, they destined to themselves the
interdicted and excommunicated Kingdom of Scotland and Denmark, intending
afterward to make use of English Force^, and withal of their Natural Hatred
against France, at such time as that Kingdom should be embrewed and even lie
wallowing in her own Blood: As for the rest of Europe, divided among so many
Petty Princes, and never like to be united or cemented, by any good
Correspondence or Harmony, it would of course become a Prey to their Conquering
Swords. But men of more serious and modest Judgments could not believe they
were so vain, as to promise themselves so great Success, though but in
Imagination; but rather supposed they might endeavor to try their Fortune at
Sea against all Nations on the Coasts thereof, and to spread abroad among all
People, a great, though not a certain Terror of them; or else, for a time, to
compel all Pirates to keep within their lurking Places, and themselves to bear
away all commerce. And the Pope (whose name at this time was Sixtus the 5th)
had encouraged and set on the Spaniard by his Bulls to Conquer England, which
the Simplicity of some of her former Kings had made Tributary (as was said) to
his Triple-Crown. He therefore following the Examples of many Popes his
Predecessors, who first, by the Discords of Princes, had usurped a Right over
Kingdoms, and then over Kings themselves, exposed England to the Conquest of
whoever would undertake it; as if Queen Elizabeth had taken the Government
thereof without any Right, and detained the same by the Slaughter of the
Nobles, and the slavish fear of the People; urging moreover, besides the Crime
of her Heresy, the stain of Bastardy, as being born in Adultery, which had
been endeavored to be concealed with the Veil of a Divorce. These, and many
other things were mentioned in the Ball, inviting all men to be assistant to
such an Expedition, and absolving from all Ties her Subjects, whether of Oath,
or othe^wise; That they should seize and take her alive, if possible; but if
that could not be, then to kill her. And, as a Reward, to encourage the
perpetrating so nefarious an Act, Impunity was granted for the same on Earth,
and Pardon from God, and other such like Enormous Fooleries, which now are
only imposed upon the Ignorant, as a Shadow of Power; and indeed, are no
otherwise looked upon by them. However, this may surely be believed, that there
were many principal men in England, who were much troubled at the present state
of Affairs there, whose Affection to the Spaniard, Bernardinus Mendosa, who,
under the Name of an Ambassador, had lain there for many years, as a Spy in
the Court, by his vain Boastings had discovered: But whatever his Thoughts
were, it appeared true afterward, that however the English Catholics might
differ in Religion, yet there was none of them so imprudent, as to trust their
Lives and Fortunes to the undistinguishing Sword of a Foreign Conqueror. In
all the Parts and Coasts of Spain, and in Italy where the Spaniard had Command,
there were raised and armed Twenty Thousand Men, and One Hundred and Forty
Ships, part of them of an almost incredible Bulk and Burden, which afterward
proved the main cause of their Destruction. Among these, there were many
Galeons, and Galeasses, which built high, with many Turrets and Cabines, like
Cities or Castles rather than Ships, were Rowed with Three Hundred Oars,
covered over Head against the Shot, and casting of Darts, or other like things,
and their Belly and Sides made very strong, the better to be able to bear the
Violence of the Waves: Mariners were hired almost from all Nations to put into
them, and they were Victualled with full Provisions for Six Months, besides a
very great Mass of Coin, provided for a War at Land, was in them, and Cannon,
and other great Guns for the Land-Service, to the Number of Five and Twenty
Hundred. And all this Preparation, the Work of so many Years, was published in
Print, to their own Glory, and the Terror of others, that it might evidently
appear a sufficient Demonstration of the Spaniard's Wealth and Greatness.

Now though there were some that would have had War proclaimed with a Herald,
yet others thought the Right of Claim from the Pope's Sentence, would make out
but a lame Title. But so great was their Confidence, that the wholesome Counsel
both of the Duke of Parma, and the Marquess of Santa Cruz, was disapproved;
which was, That the first Care should be to get some Part belonging to the
Hollanders, because all Flanders could not yield one safe Harbor for a Fleet,
against the Hazards both of War, and the Sea: But most advised, That the
surest Victory would be gotten by Delay, unless the Army were presently landed
at the Thames, to assault the City of London.

The Charge and Command of this whole Fleet was committed to Don Alphonso Perez
Gusman. Duke of Medina Sidonia, a Person meriting that Honor, as well by the
Nobility of his Blood, as any other thing whatsoever; and, under him, many
Gentlemen of the noblest Families in Spain, and infinite others of inferior
Gentry, had entered themselves as Soldiers, but at their own charges, induced
as was supposed, not so much by the covetousness, as the assurance of getting
very great booties. It was constantly reported, that they divided among
themselves, as the reward of their pains in the War, beforehand, as well
Honors, as Lands and Houses. There were taken among the spoils of their Ships,
many Ropes, Halters, and other Instruments of death and slavery, which they, as
not doubting the Event, had prepared for such as they should conquer.

The Spring growing now very forward, they met at Lisbone, whence driven into a
Haven in Gallicia, they wanted three Ships, which by a cruel Tempest, together
with Slaves that rowed them, getting their liberty, were thrown upon the Coast
of France; In the mean while, the Duke of Parma, upon whom depended the
principal part of the Expedition, with above thirty thousand Horse and Foot,
lay in Flanders, having cut great Ditches, for the easier carriage of all his
Forces to the Sea-Towns. He had brought thither eight and twenty Vessels,
serving to aid other Ships of Burden, and to hold his men, besides near four
hundred Flat-bottomed Boats, that might without hindrance come close to the
Shore, part of them being bought, and the rest built by incessant Labor and
working night and day; He had ready also, Bridges for the better and more safe
transporting Horses and Men on a sudden, as soon as the Spanish Fleet had
entered the Sea; But neither the English or Hollander made any provision to
prevent the danger of so great a War approaching, thinking they had been driven
back by the Wind, or else vainly imagining, that Ships of such Bulk and
Burden, would never venture, or run the hazard of their narrow Seas. Finally,
some did not stick to affirm, that this was only a Convoy for the Indian Fleets
return, although the King of France, upon very good Intelligence, publicly
declared, both the strength and intent of the Fleet.

Thus did they flatter themselves with Reports and Conjectures, not sensible of
the greatness of the danger they were in, till it was afterward avoided. The
Hollanders, notwithstanding, mustred all their Ships and Seamen, as well
private as public, and fitted them for War, and when they had so done, they in
a manner besieged all the Ports of Flanders, that they might stop the Duke of
Parma from coming forth; of the rest they had no great doubt: At last, and
almost too late, the Queen, who had hitherto been lulled into security by a
Treaty of Peace, now claps all that were suspected to wish innovation in
Religion, either into Islands, or Marshlands, and fills the Thames Banks on
both sides, wherever it was thought the Enemy might land, with Horse and Foot
on a sudden gotten together; She comes also and views, yea by words, encourages
the multitude, that made indeed a goodly appearance, but had been much
inferior in the use of their Arms, to the Duke of Parma's Soldiers, if he
could have come: However, to animate all, there were some who compared all the
Queens actions, with those of the most famous Women, however fabulous; n^y,
they did not stick to equal her to Tomyris her self, or the Queens of the
Amazons, or that notable piece of Feminine Valor in the same Island of old,
Queen Boadicia. Her Fleet, whereinto also she had taken all private Ships fit
for Service, She thus disposed.

The Lord Seymor, had the Command and Conduct of the lesser Vessels, in the
Downs, and at the Thames mouth; the greater being in number one hundred Ships,
and which for the most part traded up and down in the Spanish Seas, were in
Harbor at Plymouth, from whence, when occasion should be, they could with ease
come out to meet and fight the Enemy, over whom, the chief Command, as
Admiral, was given to the Lord Charles Howard, Earl of (...). The Vice
Admiral was Francis Drake, (afterward Knighted,) a Man eminently famous for
his Victories at Sea, the fame whereof, he carried with him in the compassing
of the World, and most worthy in this great danger, to be called by his Country
to her assistance. The Enemies Fleet was not far off from England, when the
Queen, who herein had been deceived by false Rumors on purpose invented and
sent out of Spain, Commands by her Letter, the Lord Admiral Howard, that in
regard She was informed, that the Fleet was not coming, or at least would be a
long time before they came, that he should unarm and discharge the best of her
Ships. He had scarcely performed her Command, before the Spanish Fleet
appeared, when it was no small care and pains to the Admiral, to recall his
Soldiers, who had without order or fear, taken liberty to be absent from their
Quarters and duty, as supposing they had leave to do so. And no less was the
Spaniard over-seen, in that he did not immediately fall on, when he might have
taken them so unprovided, and at unawares. But the Commanders that were
afterward taken Prison is, though they blamed themselves for that oversight
and folly, yet were heard to excuse the same, by the strictness of the orders
laid upon them, and the nicities they were to observe in all points prescribed,
then which nothing has caused the loss of more fair opportunities. For Philip
would not have his Fleet run any hazard, until the Duke of Parma, by putting
likewise to Sea, had doubled the terror of their approach. But the Lord
Seymor, and the Hollanders Ships joining together, kept him close in Dunkirk,
that he durst not venture to break through with his smaller Vessels; nor could
the Spanish Fleet, though by that means it had escaped the following disasters,
come so near the shore, being full of shelves and Quicksands, as to drive away
the Enemies Ships, that were much more light and nimble: And that was a thing
of great consequence at that time, that no men did so much as suspect, that the
Spaniards (possessed as it were with a fatal and stupid blindness to their own
ruin) had neglected to furnish their Ships with many things which were
necessary for them, out of hopes to have them from the Duke of Parma.

Now it is to be noted, that his Ships, or the greatest part of them, had few
or no Seamen, and the Reason thereof might be, besides the avarice of their
Prefects and Governors, that there were very few Seamen, either bred in, or
belonging to any of those Netherlandish Cities under his Dominion. And the
Baltic Cities were not able to supply the number he wanted; and especially,
for that all who were forced aboard by the Spaniards, took the first
opportunity they could find to run away.

In this Interim, the English Fleet was gotten together again, and with very
much difficulty, and hard Labor, by reason of a cross Wind, at last got out
from Plymouth, that they might at a distance annoy the Enemy. In which kind of
fight, it easily appeared, whether was more advantageous, the Ships of great
and heavy Burden, or Vessels more nimble and expeditions to turn and wind at
all Assayes, for few of the English Ships were equal in bigness, to those of
the Spaniard, but being more nimble, and apt to sail, they could at any time
get the wind of the Enemy, and either go forward or backward at pleasure; and
if the Wind changing, drove them as it were upon the Enemy, by fetching a
compass, they eluded their expectation. And now there being a calm, so that the
Enemy could easily come forward by the help of their Oars, they did not shoot
common round Bullets, but chained shot, wherewith expanding themselves, they
not only tore their Sails and Tackle, but broke their Oars: by which means the
Spaniards could not come forward, or if they could, yet they kept back, not
having a mind to fight. Their Ships were drawn into a long Rank, with extended
horns, which as it made their Progress very slow, so also it made them more
liable to the English Cannon to be spoiled; And then if any Guns more sharply
annoyed them, they drew in their Mooned and crescent Squadrons into the Body of
the Fleet, and that one might not go before another, bore less Sail, neither
could this be done altogether with safety, as was experimentally found by them,
their Ships often falling foul upon one another, in their making such Trials.
And this happened to Valdez, a great Spanish Captain, and of the same Family with
that Valdez who is memorable for the Siege of Leyden. For a Ship of Sevill,
carrying eight hundred men, under his Commadd, fell foul upon another with such
impetuosity, that the Fleet was necessitated to leave it, having lost her Mast,
that she alone might not hinder the course of the rest.

This being encompassed and assailed on every side, yielded it self to Sir
Francis Drake, and the Men in her, saved by his mercy, contended in praise of
their Conqueror, even to flattery. At the same time, the best Ship of Biscay,
whereof Michael Oquendo was Captain, took fire. Some report, that the Man being
a Netherlander, and that either mindful of his Country, or angry that he saw
himself suspected, together with those that begun the fire, upon the
approaching of the flame, leaped into the Sea. Few of the Men were saved, but
the lower parts of it, being untouched by the fire, became a booty to the
English. Presently after, they missed a Ship of Venice, and several other
smaller Vessels.

During this, the English Fleet augmented with Recruits, and the flocking
thither of the Nobility, who did strive by their forwardness to manifest their
affection to the Queen, was in many divisions spread over the Sea, so that
which way soever the Enemy steered his course, he was still surrounded, and in
every place torn with continual shooting; wherewith so much Gunpowder had been
spent, that the^e began to be a great scarcity thereof; and with that want,
they were ever after, during the whole Conflict, oppressed; till at length,
some was gotten from Holland: without which the Kingdom of England at that time
could not have bee^ defended.

Now had the fight continued without ceasing, at a distance, for the space of
eight days (for the English Soldiers being fewer, and not able to cope with
the Spaniard, had shunned, by all means, a close fight) and on the eighth of
the Ides of August, Au. 6.
they were come to the Streights of the narrow Sea, between England and France;
Here the English Fleet, which you may remember, I told you before, was divided,
met altogether, containing of Seamen and Soldiers, together eleven thousand,
and having left the Halanders to guard the Coast of Flanders: The Spaniards
casting Anchor, waited for the Duke of Parma, and with him some lighter Ships,
near to Calais, when he in the mean while, void of all hope, and not knowing
what to do, makes procession about the Churches, attended with many vows; In
this perplexity of mind, whether he aimed at the Lieutenancy of Britain, or any
higher Title, since it happened otherwise, and is variously reported, I will
leave it to every man's opinion: But now the Spaniards sent from their Fleet
into Flanders, several Noblemen, among whom, was the Prince of Asculum, (whose
Mother careless of her own Credit, had made the King suspicious of his being
true born) to consult of the common affair, whose passage being hindered, that
they could not return, by that means they escaped that general ruin, wherein
so many were afterward involved; for by the Queens Command, who now began to be
in no doubt, but the Enemy, as soon as the Moon left shining, choosing a duskish
night, would if possible, join their Forces, in this manner brought a great
confusion into the Spanish Fleet, that had set up their rest another night in
that narrow Sea.

Eight English Ships filled with Engines, containing Stones and Gunpowder, and
other combustible matter were, being fust fired, sent among the Enemy, the Sea
and Wind both favoring the Design: But the Spaniards, being mightily amazed
with the glistering of the Flame (for they perceived it came toward them, and
gave a great Light over all the Sea) cut their Cables, and get out to Sea: In
which Surprise, and violent Fear, one of the greatest Ships, commanded by Hugh
Moncada, entangled with another Ships Cables and forced thereby to a Disorder,
was by the Violence of the Sea, and Force of the Wind, driven aground on the
French Coast, and there the Seamen and Soldiers, of whom there were in her,
besides those that Rowed with Oars, Four Hundred, hoping for some Relief from
the Continent, held the English, now invading and assaulting them with Ladders,
in a long Fight, till Moncada, and many others, being killed, the Ship was
taken, and by the space of three whole hours spoiled.

But the Governor of Calais would not suffer it to be burned, that he might
preserve the Shadow of a Friendship, the King of Spain not having yet publicly
professed himself an Enemy to France, though it was believed, he had at this
time a Design upon that very Town. The King lost there in ready Money Fifty
Thousand Ducats, and Three Hundred Slaves were set at liberty. A few of the
Ship-men escaped out by swimming, and were the first that brought into Spain
the News of the Miscarriage of the whole Voyage.

The Fleet, thus scattered with a Panick Fear, is Rallyed again near Gravelin,
the next Town of Flanders; and though very much galled and battered with the
Guns, and other Military Engines of the English, yet they could not be forced
to break their Orders any more: In this Conflict chiefly, the Spanish Design
was ruined, and brought to nothing; for diverse of their Ships being shot
through with great Bullets, for that they could neither plug up the Holes or
Breaches, nor free them from Water by their Pumps, were swallowed up in the
devouring and merciless Waves; Particularly, one Biscayan Ship, that was very
fiercely assaulted, while the Captains within it, between Valor and Necessity,
dissent in Counsel even to their Extremity, was immerged in the Sea. Two
Portugeze Vessels, being brought into the Mouth of the Vly^, (for the Wind had
driven them thither, they in vain striving to get out to Sea) fell upon the
Coasts of Zealand, as if it had been the Design of Providence, that they who
were equally engaged in the Danger, should likewise between them divide the
spoil.

The one of these Ships was called the Philip; the other, was named the
Matthew. Didaco Piementel commanded this, and Francisco de Toledo the other,
both of them Colonels* that, the chief men in it being gotten away in the
Ship-Boat, the Flushingers had; but Piementel scorning to fly, and refusing the
Boat sent to him for that purpose, after he had, with the loss of many of his
Men, endured great Extremity from their Guns, delivered himself Prisoner to the
Power and Protection of Peter Douse, who being Commander in Chief of the
Holland Ships in these Parts, hung up in the Church at Leyden an Ensign taken
from the Spaniards, of an unusual Bigness, as a Trophy for the Peoples
Insultation. Both these Ships, all things being taken out of them that were fit
for use, were left to the Submersion of the Ocean. And now the Hollanders and
Frizelanders were informed, that the whole Fleet of the Enemy was passing along
by their Coasts, whereupon they fearing, that they intended to get into the
Mouth of the Eemes, hasted to take away all Landmarks, by the sight whereof,
Men sailing at Sea, avoided the Shallows of those Places.

The Spanish Commanders, thus worsted in so many Encounters, and all throwing
the blame from themselves, upon the Duke of Parma, began to consult about their
Departure; although they plainly saw, that the danger thereof must be overcome
with many other Hazards: For back again, all the Narrow Seas were beset; so
that there remained but one help, which was to compass all the Northern Parts
of Britain, where the Rugged Ocean, not broken by the Land, is not only
boisterous, but very seldom passed without the danger of Shipwreck. And if they
had then been hindered, so great a Fear, both of the Sea, and their Enemies, had
seized upon them, that it was reported, the Duke of Medina-Sidonia began to
advise, whether he should yield up the Fleet, and make Propositions for saving
their Lives. But the English, only watching what course they took, least they
should fall upon Scotland, or enter the Danish Seas, as soon as they perceived
them leave all that Coast, would not, by following them, ran into the same
danger with them, since they only sought a way for their flight through that
great Ocean, resting very well content with the Honor of driving away the
Fleet, and saving their Country. For when they would eagerly have pursued them,
they were (as I told you before) hindered, for want of Gunpowder. But they sent
the Lord Seymor back in good time, that he, joining with the Hollanders Fleet,
should repel all the Duke of Parma's Endeavors; the rest, having for a while
been tossed with a Tempest, at length got safe into England, though not without
danger.

The Glory of the Greeks and Romans, who, of Old, made good all their greatest
Affairs by Navall Victories, was, without doubt, at this time, equalled by the
Fortune and Valor of the English, though the Conquest was slowly and safely
gotten, without the joining in a close and intermingled Battle. And, in the
event of this Contest, it is very remarkable, that in all the time they fought
with the Spaniards, there was not one considerable Ship lost, nor above one
hundred killed or destroyed, either by the Sea, or the War; when all this
while, the Spaniards underwent all kinds of miseries; for having lost near five
Thousand Men, and their best Ships, many of those that remained, being either
sick or wounded, and wanting all things, they were at length glad to throw
themselves, for safety, into the merciless Fury of a most impetuous and stormy
Sea, where they threw overboard their Horses, Cattle, and much other Goods, to
lighten their Ships against the insulting Waves. Then the Duke of Medina
Sidonia gave Order to such as came up to him, that they should steer their
Course between the Orcades, and some other Islands in that Sea, to the Ports of
Biscay. Himself with some few Ships that were in better case than the rest,
makes his way to the Great Sea, the rest went not far off from Ireland; some of
whom, by various stress of Weather, brought back again, were cast, some upon
the Coast of England, some of France: Many driven into Norway, were then dashed
in pieces against the Rocks; and another part thereof, by a boisterous and
raging Storm, was whi^led into the furthest part of the North, and the yet
unknown World. The King of Scotland performed the Laws of Peace and Hospitality
to all that were cast upon his Dominions; Two and Thirty were cast away upon
the Irish Flatts, and the adjacent Sea, and the men laboring to save
themselves, we^ slain by the Inhabitants, because they were more in number,
than consisted with their safety to show mercy to; the rest were followed even
into their Country, by the implacable. Fury of Revengeful Fate, where two of
them were burnt i^ the very Port or Harbor; and others, by like Mischances,
destroyed; only Thirty remained, that carried Provisions, and of Ships of War,
out one of all that late so great Fleer, bringing home the Commander in Chief.
Many of the Nobles, and not a few of the common sort, died soon after their
Return, either by the Diseases they contracted in so troublesome and
unfortunate a Voyage, or else out of grief of Mind, that while they looked upon
themselves as Conquerours, they should be subdued by the peevishness of
Fortune. The greatness of their Loss appeared in this, that the King was forced
to shorten the time of Mourning by Edict, that he might hide from the public
view the Misfortune thereof, that had filled so many Noble Families, with
Funeral Obsequies.

Some of the Prisoners, both in England and Holland, were Ransomed; others had
their Liberty given them freely. Many times men learn Piety from Fear, and the
Event of a Thing hanging in doubtful suspense, makes them run to their Prayers:
But here Public Thanksgivings were Ordered to be given to God for this
Victory: and the Queen her Self, being carried in Triumph, according to the
ancient manner, made a Speech to the People; wherein she showed, That a greater
benefit could never be received from the Divine and Eternal Providence of God,
whereby to make out, how weak and vain all Humane Strength is, against the
Power of Heaven. And the Hollanders reaped another Benefit from this common
Danger, because, after this, they had the more Friendly Society of the English,
who hitherto were wont to boast, that they had supported those Allies only out
of mere Humanity.

But the Duke of Parma, while the Remainders of the Shipwrackt Fleet were
getting home to Spain, being cast from his accustomed Felicity, into a Gulf of
Misery, and thrown from the height of Confidence, to the bottom of Despair,
rather by the impulse of others, than his own Advice, because he began to be
hated, is drawn to besiege Ber^^op. Zome; The Brabanters urged him, That he
should not suffer one Town, whence daily Inroads were made by their Troops of
Horse into their Country, and laid wast their Fields, to infest them, and put a
stop to all his Victories. Although he was not well pleased to remove the Army,
now burthensom to exhausted Flanders, to any other place, least out of Shame or
Fear, if it should refuse, it should seem there was no relying upon their
Assistance: But if Fortune would once more become favorable, and the Design
should succeed, thereby a way would be made into the Isles of Zeland, and so to
carry the War into Holland, the next way, as he thought, to revive those hope,
which he had too confidently before relied on, and lost. For that Town being
rarely situated on the Borders of Brabant, at a little distance overlooks
Zeland; not far thence is the River Schelde, into which the Zome (from whence
the Town is so named) falls, whereby the Town has a long, but somewhat
inversed, or winding, Haven. It was in a very flourishing condition, by
continual Commerce, under the Command of a Noble Family, bearing its Surname,
until by the Neighborhood of Antwerp, and the Mischiefs of War, it decayed;
having been taught woeful Experience, both by the Enemy, and those who remained
there in Garrison. But when it came to be annexed to the United States, though
sometimes endangered by Treachery, yet now was ^ first ^et upon by Force and a
Siege. Thol, an Isle and Town of Zeland, is divided from the Territory of
Berghen, by an Arm or Branch of the Scheld; which being convenient, for the
passage of the Forces, least, if it should be left to the Hollanders, it might
hinder the Siege, Montig^y and Octavius, of Kindred to the Count Mansfeldt,
were sent before to possess it; who, coming upon a sudden, together with
flying Reports given out, as if the War were intended against Hosden, they lead
Eight Hundred Soldiers over the Fords, hoping to have privily surprised the
Coast or Border of Zeland; but the time of the Waters slowing being not well
observed, (for then it flowed) a few men easily worsted all those Defendants,
endeavoring with staggering Footsteps, by reason of the Mud, to go forward:
In the mean time, the M^sketiers they had left in Brabant, de^ended themselves
under the Defense and Shield of the Bank (for so the place proved to them) But
presently, by the care of George Eb^rard, Count Solmes, that was Governor of
the Island, and the noising abroad of the danger, the multitude of his men
increasing put the Enemy to flight, and drove them into the Whirlpools, where,
without possibility of help, they perished; the Captains themselves hardly
escaped by swimming. The natural Marishness of the place, being very Watery, and
somewhat deep, destroyed, as some report, Four Hundred Men; and if any part of
their Bodies, being yet alive, appeared above Water, presently with Darts, or
other Things cast at them, they were killed; in all this Encounter, there being
of the adverse Side but one man killed, which is almost miraculous to relate;
and from thenceforth the Island was strengthened with Castles, Guards, and other
Military Engines of Defense. Hereupon, the Duke of Parma taking another
Resolution, that by shutting up their Haven, he might straighten the Townsmen
of Provision, with his great Army he besieged their Works, placing Guards in
all places near about them; and where his Men were by any means separated, he
made Bridges, to unite the passages to each other. With all which, the Citizens
of Berghen were nothing terrified, nor were as if they had been besieged,
because both Soldiers and Aid, with all other things necessary for Defense,
were plentifully brought to them out of Zeland, and the Neighboring Cities of
Holland, they fought either with Horse or Foot, as if it had been two Camps one
against another, many light Skirmishes, but never without drawing blood from
the Enemy: Nor was the Soldiers Valor only exemplary, but the Townsmens
Labor, spent in fortifying the place, was notable; but most laudable of all,
was the Concord between the Captains and the Magistrates, whereby they raised
Money without grumbling by extraordinary Taxes. But a difference beginning
among the English Commanders (who had a great strength in that Garrison) and
every thing else, besides that of Trouble, was publicly settled by Prince
Maurice, and the Deputies of the States, brought thither by a strong and safe
Convoy. Between the Town and the River Scheld were two Castles; on the one side
sufficiently defended by Bulwarks; on the other, by the Estuary of the Sea; and
for the Battery on that of the North side, the Duke of Parma did, though in
vain, endeavor by his great Guns to divide it from the Town, to hinder all
passage and Trade by Sea; and he was induced to that Care and Charge by the
hope of Treachery, which the Italian Policy is often eluded by: Two Spanish
Captives solicited a Cook or Victualler, at whose house they were kept, and an
English Soldier that used to frequent the house, (his name was Grimston) to
betray the Castle; which passage, because it is worthy to be known, I will
relate. They, although they could well enough in their own Natures digest any
kind of Lucre, yet so they resolved, that if they could get any thing, they
would rather cozen their Enemies than their Friends; and with this conclusion,
they come to the Governor, tell him of the Design, and desire his
Instructions, which he gives them in this manner, That both of them should take
opportunity to go to the Duke of Parma, that he might not flight their
Endeavors; or rather, which happened, that he might under the Vizor of
Observance be circumvented. The Duke binds them to him by Oath, and for their
present Fortune, loads them both with Gifts and Promises; and when yet he durst
hardly trust them, unless themselves in the Plot incurred some personal danger,
it was agreed, that they should be bound between two Armed Soldiers, with
naked Daggers in their Hands, that should go to the Fort, but kill them before,
if they perceived any Intention of Deceit.

Thus imagining there had been caution enough used, and that having slighted
their own, they would not decline the Aid and Protection of Strangers: Upon
this Confidence therefore Three Thousand Men, and among them many of great
quality, were drawn out to undertake the seizing of the Castle; The Gate was
open, till fifty were entered, and thus far the Event made good their Promises:
But then presently a Port-Cullis, the Ropes that held it being cut, was let
down, and all that were come in, were killed or taken; nor did the Spanish
Keepers mind the killing of the two bound Traitors, being amazed with sudden
fear, and dreading the Fury of present Revenge. But the excluded Multitude,
seeing they could not make any way back, though they pressed and thronged with
all their might, turning Despair into Valor, they scaled the Bulwark, running
through the Trench which was now empty, by reason of the Ebb, and were now
past the first Palisadoes, through the Breast-work within, whence driven with
Fireballs, Hand-Granadoes, and their Fireworks, prepared by those within,
forewarned of the Design, and flying whither they could, fell into
Ambuscadoes, and other Traps laid for them, and so were destroyed; a great part
of them were slain, and they that escaped slaughter, the Tide now coming in,
and by their ignorance of the place were smothered in the Mud: The Duke of
Parma finding himself thus deceived, and that the Cruelty of the Weather wore
out his men by Diseases and Death, when now, in the latter part of Autumn, the
Plains were, by frequent Rains, turned into Pools, and the Rampires ready to
fall, by reason of the Mire, first he left his Works, then deserted his Camp,
and a long time afflicted with the scarcity of many things, but at last with
the want of all, but especially of fresh Water, he was forced, by little and
little, to break up his Siege, which he had for six Weeks vainly continued: but
least it should seem that he had done nothing, he left some few places
fortifyed against Excursions. But the Townsmen of Berghen, nothing hindered
thereby, after that very much enriched themselves, by frequent Booties taken
from the Enemy, and began again to re-flourish, being under the peculiar
Obedience of Prince Maurico; for the States gave him this, and other places,
which had followed the Enemies part, in lieu of those paternal Inheritances of
his own, which the Spaniard held from him. The Duke of Parma all this Winter,
quartered his men in the Village of Brabant, by means whereof that Country was
wasted, though not so soon as Flanders.

At the beginning of the Spring, the Lord of Cimace (the Duke Areschots Son)
was sent by the Prince of Parma, with a Selected Band of Soldiers, to besiege
Bonne, where Schenck not having men enough to defend it, but sending to the
Princes of Germany for Aid, laying before them the danger of that famous City,
when they returned neither to himself, not to Truxius, any Forces to resist the
Enemy, it being their Interest, that under the pretense of War in the
Netherlands, the Spanish Power should not invade all that was near them, and by
that means, by little and little, incroach upon their Right; for powerful
Empires are wont to take first one thing, then another, till at length they
seize the whole; their being now no Remedy to help themselves, but by sending
him present Supplies, and out of the common fear to associate and join their
Powers; concluding thus, That if they would defend and protect him, he would
preserve and keep Bonne for them: But this Rhetorical Demand; was answered with
a Souldier-like Resolution, in the Name of the Germans, ^ such Terms as he
little expected. [ But We, say they shall not embroyl our selves in other men's
Quarrels for your sake, having been better instructed by the many improspering
Aids so often into France: The Differences of the Provinces are ambiguous among
themselves, but would prove certainly very dangerous to any Foreigners that
should interlope. Some of our Number have never meddled with the Netherlands,
the benefit whereof they are well satisfied in, not willing to be rewarded as
the King of France was, for sending his Brother thither; and Katharine of
Medices, for aiding Antonio. And now, when the same Spaniards seek Amity and a
League, shall we go to incense Philip? who himself being a part of us, by his
great Possessions in Germany, restored to their Seats the German Bishops: Nay,
rather it behooves us to submit to his Potency, with the desire of Peace, than
exasperate his Fury to the Trial of a War.]

Thus being frustrate of his hope, while both the English and Hollanders being
otherwise taken up, denied relief to greater necessities, as well as to him: he
exhorts the Soldiers left in the Garrison, to keep off the Enemy, which they
might with safety, and valiantly to endure the Siege; which accordingly they
did, and killing Baptista Taxis, an eminent Spanish Commander, and coming off
Victors in many Sallies, after the Enemy with six months toil and hazard, had
in a manner beaten down all the Fortifications, and the besieged suffered great
hunger, he delivered the City upon honorable Conditions, into the Power of the
Bishop, a Bavarian, for that name was used, though Spanish Soldiers entered
into, and held the City. Hence Count Mansfeldt is commanded, who in the
beginning of Autumn, had carried a Recruit to the Lord Cimace's Forces, the
Siege being now ended, to attaque with part of the same Wacttendonc, a Town
that lies in the upper part of Gelderland, near the little River Nersa; The
Garrison consisted of some Companies of Shenckes men, and the situation of the
place being very marshy, and the depth of Winter made the coming to an assault
very difficult. But the ground being raised by the Besiegers, unto the height
of a little Hill, from whence they should look down upon the Houses, and the
Bullets shot from that place at some times, and at other times fire cast thence
into the Town, so infested the Townsmen, whom another fear had likewise
possessed, least the coming of a great Frost should make all those moist and
wet places, by Ice, passeable for the Enemy, that they persuaded the Soldiers
not to stand out, hopeless of any second Relief, (because the Forces of their
Allies were small, and a great way off) and hazard all their lives and
fortunes. However, the Town was defended till the very end of the year, the
continuing of the Siege till which time, what with the extremity of the
weather, and what with want of necessaries, cost many thousand of the Besiegers
lives, though at last they compassed their intentions, by the getting of the
Town.

At this time, by reason of the great expense, charge, damage, and loss of the
Spanish Fleet, which had wonderfully exhausted the Kings Treasure, the Army had
been a long time without any pay, by reason whereof, there were frequent
Seditions; and the hopes of great plunder allured many to revolt to the Enemy,
so that the Hollanders, safe within their Rivers, a little enlarging their
bounds, did without danger or detriment, make incursions into the Enemies
Country. But the States of these parts, while they shunned new, fell into their
old, pressures: for some who had been in Arms under the Archduke Matthias, and
the Duke of Anjon, Francis de Valois, and boldly usurping the name of Princes
strangers, by public Authority, seized all the Dutch Ships that were in or
about Scotland: But an Embasse being sent to the Princes, informed them of
their error, as ^ understanding the Customs of Holland; for the Hollanders
though they assisted diverse Cities with their Forces, yet they never made
themselves liable to any debts by them contracted, for they were only subject
to the Authority of the Prince of Aurange. Neither did they now rightly demand
from the confederate States, what those Provinces did owe, which had receded
from the League.

This I thought fit to insert, because by such Speeches, (...) did refell those
prejudicial exactions, and occasion there was given, of covenanting with the
Commanders that remained, with an Oath, concerning their old debts to be paid
by certain portions, to the great ease of the Commonwealth.

Among these things, partly by a common fear, and partly by the Prisoners of
Utrecht, who thought to remedy their folly by pertinacy, the differences begun
by the Earl of Leicester burst out fresh. 1589.
But the Carrison Soldiers of Gertruydenburg, consisting of one thousand five
hundred Foot, and three hundred Horse, because they had usurped a greater
License from the occasion of the discords, than they supposed could be
pardoned, and fearing an Infamy among their fellow Soldiers, would not be
reduced to order, but remained arrogant by the Neighborhood of the Enemy. At
the beginning of their Sedition, though they turned out their present Officers,
and elected whom they pleased, yet they would not hearken either to the Duke of
Parma's Letters or Messengers: Afterward some Agents for the Enemy, being
mingled amongst them, their ignorance not minding them, and those Agents sent
to the Hollanders to treat with them, upon their return, setting forth the
threats they had heard, to the worst, with the fear of punishment, they not
only became enemies themselves, but provoked others to be so; so that contempt
made them outrageous, after Willoughby, the Colonel of the English Auxiliarias,
under pretense of appeasing the Soldiery, had in truth made his Kinsman
Wingfield the head of the Sedition, according to the Advice of the Town, and
bestowed the pay sent by the States so as he might oblige, or make sure, such
as were suspected, not by any certain Rule, but as he hoped to have them upon
occasion, whereupon the Soldiers mocked at them, as being deceived by them,
and abused what they had, as if it had been booty. And as soon as the Captains,
and the Soldiers, by their example, had spent this money in riot and excess,
they sent forth parties of Horse every way, to plunder and bring in booty from
the Country. Nay, they retained all Ships that came within their reach, without
any distinction of friend or foe; nor did they spare the Provinces that were
absolutely at peace.

Thus passing the Winter, they were solicited to treache-which would procure an
easy Pardon for all their crimes, by Odourdo Lanzavecchia, the Governor of
Breda: for (as he said true,) the manner of their offending was dangerous, and
that might be urged for an excuse to the Duke of Parma, which neither the
English, or Hollander, would ever admit of. This Counsel, they, being now ready
to receive any impression of evil, hearkened to, and according to the Custom
of Sedition, were enraged with all that persuaded otherwise: And forthwith all
of them, as it were possessed with a sudden Frenzy, seize all the Townsmens
Arms, some few in that mad multitude not daring to speak for fear. The name of
Englishmen is pre ended for all this uproar, as well by the Captain^, and most
others of that Nation, as by the D^ Soldiers themselves. And the more insolent
they grow, (...) more is impunity offered to them by Letters from the States,
who began to fear the worst, desiring them to return to their Colors,
forgetting all those discords which public erro^ and the malice of fate had
thrown amongst them, and that they would do an acceptable piece of Service to
the Commonwealth, if they would put an end to those disturbances, although they
did not begin them. But their Consciences acc^sing them of all their evil
deeds, made them afraid to give credit to this Invitation. Hereupon, it was put
to the question on, if an Army should be prepared against these Rebels, who so
arrogantly slighted the Commands and Authority both of the States, and of
Prince Maurice. Some would not have the Soldier to be further incensed with
danger, alleging, time and opportunity would better cure such distempers,
whose violence cannot long continue.

On the other side, it was affirmed, that they made a mockery at patience and
lenity, and should they stay till the enemy, with whom even then they privately
treated, was admitted openly into the Town? if Pardon were offered to them,
with terror attending it, as it would encourage the good, so would it compel
the rest to repent: Thus of late, Mede^leks was restored by the penitence of
the Soldiery, after the Enemy had long hoped for it, with a fruitless
expectation; It matters not, said others, which course is taken to save the
place, for men resolved to be treacherous, would still continue in the same
mind, whether you leave them to themselves, or seek to win them by persuasions.
Wherefore, it the beginning of the Spring, Prince Maurice gathered together, as
many Forces as he could, both by Sea and Land, though not sufficient for a
Siege, and with them marches thitherward: At the first approach, a battery was
made against the Town with Cannon, which was answered with the like by the
Rebels, little being then done, but that among the rest, Justus Villiers was
killed, who was a great Soldier, formerly Governor of Vtrecht, and now
Camp-master, and the Person that had instructed the Princes youth in Military
Discipline, and all Warlike Affairs. And when they perceived the Prince
intended to storm the place forthwith, having now beaten down the Bulwark, and
laid open the Town, they diverted that eminent danger, and turned it aside
under the cloak of a Treaty, and the day following, what with the overflowing
of the Rivers, and what with the Rayn, the intended agreement was never
perfected: Besides, there was news, that Lanzavecchia, with a select number of
Soldiers, was approaching at the instigation of Wingfield; nor did that
Englishman want words to persuade the accomplishment of the Treason. But
calling the people together, speaks to them to this effect, [Yon see them here
(says he) whose Bullets and fire never were thrown with like fury against the
Walls of an Enemy, and therefore have been so much more dangerous to as, and
now they threaten as presently with the Sword, and we all as enemies, by their
unanimous consent, are designed either to slaughter or punishment, But yonder
are they who come to preserve us, from whom we many merit both favor and
reward: It is no^ is your hand fellow Soldiers, whether to run the hazard of
yielding to the one, or to give and receive a benefit from the others.]

This Oration was applauded generally, they who were near with their words, and
the rest with a kind of soft and whispering noise, signifying their consent.

Prince Maurice being not prepared for a long Siege, resolved to depart, and
the rather, because he would not seem to necessitate that treacherous yielding
of the Town to the Enemy, which he could not prevent or hinder. But yet he sent
Letters to them, to try if either respect of honesty, or fear of Infamy, could
yet prevail on any of them.

But that mercinary People received them with scorn, especially for that the
Duke of Parma, had, besides payment of their so long elapsed Wages, bestowed
among them also a Donative. It is reported, that then he began to clear up his
countenance, which had been long clouded with grief, wh^ from a high Tower in
the taken City, he could see Dort, and those other places of his hope, at the
beginning of the Wa^ It pleased him to look upon, and Command the first of all
the Holland Cities, after 12. years reduced into his power. And such was the
over-hastiness of his exaltation, that the^ being yet none of his Soldiers
entered the Town, he trusted his person to them, whom of all other, being
admitted; ^ ought for that very cause, to have suspected, and some w^ in very
great fear, lest taking hold of so great an opportunity, they should again have
proved treacherous to him: Be there was no time to mention such a thing, and
therefore (...) have been dangerous to be spoken of; They delivered the Town to
him, not to his party, least they should deceive both. Few of the men either
returned to England, or their old obedience, though some did; but the rest,
according to their number, as the Duke of Parma had separated them; did very
great service in the Wars, never assuming to themselves any but in Victory;
for being prescribed as Traitors, and Renegadoes, they had forfeited all their
privileges of Soldiers by their crimes. Nay, their villainy was condemned by
those who re^ped the benefit of their Treason, by whom they were long after
yeered with the name of Merchants, scarce any of them coming to a natural and
timely death; and if so, yet not without Infamy. Many were afterward taken in
other Cities, and according to Martial Law executed.

The Soldiery to whom the Duke of Parma delivered the possession of the City,
made many valiant excursions, and several times in a short space fought very
fortunately, surprising three Troops of Prince Maurices Horse, as they were
negligently scattered up and down near Boisledue. From hence it appeared very
necessary to take in all the adjacent places, and accordingly, the care thereof
was committed to the inferior Commanders. Besides Gertruydenburg, there are
two other Towns belonging to the jurisdiction of Holland, and lie now beyond
the Maes. But Hesdin, formerly was contained in the Maes^ before the waters
were conveyed away by a new Channel, reputed a part of the ancient County of
Teisterbant, under the Allegiance and Patronage of the Princes of Cl^ve, who
afterward transferred their might to the Hollander. But the Town of
Settenberg, of old part of Stride^land, it is separated by a River, and
therefore, as to the matters of Religion, it is under the care of the Bishop of
Liege, nor of the Bishop of Vtrecht, as the rest of Holland is; It had proper
Princes of its own, yet so, as they were to do homage to the Princes of
Holland, and several Villages above Gertruydenburgh have very anciently been
subject to them; is having been the Custom of valiant Nations, when they
conquer, to pass the next River, and make the further Banks thereof the bounds
of their Empire; notwithstanding all which, the Br^banters have a long time,
but to no purpose, challenged both Gertruydenburgh and Hesdin, to belong to
them: But now Count Aremberg with ease prevailed over Settenberg, being very
meanly fortifyed, and so the more ready to be spoiled by any Armies; but he
could not keep it, because the Hollanders were in possession of Nordam, and the
other adjacent places.

Charles Mansfelt being sent against Hesdin, attempted also Bommel, the head of
the adjoining Isle, and encompassed with double branches of the Maes and Wael,
there meeting, by the guilt and treacheries of some of the Townsmen: But the
Treason being discovered and punished, he straightly besieged it as he had
begun, resolutely keeping his first designed Station near to Hemerte Castle,
though the River breaking over his bounds, had, by its excessive increase,
over-flowed all the Fields: And now Hesdin whs not so much afraid of Fo^^ as
Famine, it being defended against the Enemy, who had encompassed it about at a
great distance by Famarsh, who was a man of undanted Resolution, and would not
doubt to undergo the greatest Extremities: But Prince Ma^ia prevented it, who
gathering a sufficient Number of Men from the next Garrisons, brake through
where the Enemy was thinnest, bringing in all things, whose want was feared.
These things thus done; Mansfeldt with Ships, Guns, and other Warlike Engines,
set upon, having carried thither some part of his Army, the Castle Holow, in
the Isle of Bommel. In this place there was Endeavor, strength, and
sufficiency of Defense; but Sidenborg, by a too hasty yielding, took away all
occasions both of Hope and Fear; He seemed to lay (...) fault thereof upon the
Soldiers, and that with the great Confidence, because many of them had been
killed; the Spaniard, as they marched out, cruelly butchering them, without the
Knowledge or Consent of their Captains, with the Garrison of this place, and of
Creveceur over against it; which being destroyed by Count Hohenlo, the King's
Officers had re-builded, entering the Island at the meeting of the River Maes,
and a little Rivulet called Dise; they wasted the open Fields, and all other
indefensible places, both of Forts and Castles, not well knowing which way they
should evade; the Rivers being swelled with Showers; tearing down the
Fortifications begun, at the very ending of the Island, over against Gorrichou.
Afterward, by other Directions, invading diverse places beyond the Wael; now
they come to Gelderland, anon they trouble Vtrecht, and last of all the Island
Vo^rne, not far from Bommel; and two years before strengthened by the Nassauians
with a Castle, where hearing this Count Hohenlo, with a selected Party of Horse
and Fod^ drew nigh, with an intent to fight them, Mansfeldt afraid of the
Report, in regard there was no possibility of his stays after he had consumed
the Spring and the Summer in vain; ^at the best, but Trivial Matters; wherefore
re-passing the Maes, by the sudden madness and fury of a Spanish Regiment, for
want of their Pay, which he endeavored to appease, was like to have been
slain. Saurius Laeva was their Colonel, and beloved as well by the Soldiers
as by Mansfeldt himself, though they had lately had some difference in words:
Nay, there were some that did believe the Prince of Asculus, and Duke of
Pastrana, had underhand, in hatred to the Duke of Parma, encouraged the
Sedition. Without doubt, the Parmian Prince, excelling all the Spanish
Commanders in Glory, and the Greatness of his Atchievments, had contracted upon
himself great Envy; and the rather, because he openly showed a greater Respect
to, and put a stronger Confidence in the Italians; from whence it came to pass,
that some would no less find fault with his Virtues, than Miscarriages which
were but accidental; openly affirming, that he betrayed the Spanish Fleet; that
all his Endeavors against the Netherlanders were nothing worth; and many other
such like Things.

But his Conquering so many of the Provinces, being the greatest part of the
Netherlands, and the unwearied and strenuous Labor taken by that People
against him, were clandestinely represented to the King, as much as might be,
to his disadvantage, though under the show of praise and admiration: Nor had
their fear of him been vain, if his Life had been prolonged, to the detriment
of the Spanish Empire, least being famous for War, and his Clemency in
Governing, for which even his Enemies loved him, he should (as many then
Reported) alter and change his present Possession for Portugal, belonging of
Right to his Son. Certainly, either Philip, as it is the Nature of Kings, being
apt to be timorous and suspectful, himself frustrated his Fortune, while he
overcharged him with Honor, or else necessitated by real Poverty, did
restrain his excessive Charges: However it was, the Prince of Parma, on the one
side, by Care to provide against all those Evils that Penury uses to bring
forth, and on the other, over-toiled with the Weight of present Affairs, fell
sick, which caused him to go into Germany, to the Span Waters: And after this
time, he was never perfectly in Health, nor was fortunate in his Undertakings,
as before. For which cause the Italians, a Nation infinitely jealous, and
taking for Truth, whatever they imagine, reported that the Spaniards had
poisoned the Duke; and the Bruic thereof, seeming to be made out by their other
Cruelties prevailed; but chiefly, because every one is willing to believe any
Evil of a Spaniard: But this was not without some show of Reason; (...) Prince
Maurice having intercepted diverse Letters, among the rest had those, wherein
Parma was grievously accused ^ King Philip, which the Prince sent to him. But
he, as it were, not minding this Kindness of his Enemy, nor returning (...)
Thanks, invited the Inditer of those Letters, one John M^^ to a Feast, which he
did not long over-live, which gave new matter for Discourse. (This More was he,
that with great Cunning, Policy, and many Largesses and Bribes, had promoted
the Spanish Affairs in France) and this manner of Talk was the more frequent,
because he, who was believed the Minister of Revenge, had not any Reward, but
rather was cast out of Favor. Upon this occasion, the Duke sent ^^chardot into
Spain, to clear him of those Aspersions cast upon him, because he did not aid
the Spanish Fleet; The King publicly heard him, and the Duke of Medina-Sidonia
that was likewise accused, and seemed to pardon both the Dukes.

The Tumult of the Soldiers, a little before mentioned, being appeased, with
the punishment of a few, and the Regiment disbanded, though it had been long in
the War, M^^feldt was commanded, with seventy complete Ensigns, to^ directly
thence to take Berck on a sudden. That City belonging to the Bishop of Colen,
had now been strongly fortifies three years, from the time the Duke of Parma
depart^ thence: Truxius and Nienarius, having lately gotten it, That having
referred his cause, This his Quarrel, to the United States, had delivered the
disputed Possession thereof to them, as indifferent Judges and Moderators
between them. But at the beginning of this Year, the Hollanders being stronger
than they in Horse, made a Bridge over the Rhine, and furnished it with
Soldiers and Provisions: For this cause, at the Request of the Bishop (who
came in person to the Duke of Parma) Varembonius, the Governor of Gelderland
for the King, was sent with part of the Army, to see if he could reduce it,
either by force of starving. In their Journey thither, he fell upon, but not
without loss, the Castle of Blybeke, (this place Colonel Schenck, not minding
propriety, challenged to himself, as his own by Conquest) for the Garrison,
consisting of old and well-disciplin'd Soldiers, a whole Month endured the
Thunder of their Cannon and other Guns, valiantly returning them the like, had
made a more than equal Slaughter, until a greater loss happening upon some few,
and by the Death of their Captains, being at variance, (after they had turned
out the rest) and their Ammunition beginning to fail, they let the En^my have
the place. One Remarkable Thing was observed in this Victory, to wit, a Woman
found among the dead Bodies, that had, in Man's Habit, and with a Masculine
Courage, followed the War: The like to this was frequently observed at the
beginning of the Troubles; nor did any Age formerly produce so many such
Examples: For as the Minds of People were stirred up to the War, by the
frequent naming of God, the Country, and the Prince, so even the distinction of
the Sexes was laid aside, that the practice of Hatred and Revenge, might with
more freedom be made use of: But Schenck's Nature always inclined to Cruelty,
with the Conjunction of his Loss and Shame together, was now more enraged: This
pl^ace, taking away his Goods, he set on fire; but chafed without measure
because he had not Soldiers enough to relieve the Besieged in Berck, however
drawing together all both Horse and Foot that he could make, he fortified a
place upon the Bank of the Rhine, not far from the Town called Reux, in spite
of all Varembonius his Endeavors to the contrary, from whence he conveyed into
the Town of Berck all the Forces he had received. Afterward, receiving
Intelligence, that Verdugo was coming with more Forces, by speedy Matches be
came upon them at unawares, at the River Lup, in the Fields of Westfalia, with
a furious slaughter; so that they fled, and left to him the Money that they
were carrying into Frizeland to pay the Soldiers. Not content herewith, but
grows more confident by his Success, he threatened to storm and sack Nieumegen
by Night, (for he bore a spleen to the Town;) and, to that purpose, in a Dark
chosen for that end, sending his Cavallery before, and some few Ferry-Boats,
which the Soldiers carried, and passing the Wael, he came to that part of the
City, which was only strong by the Rivers Curr^^ that way: commanding his
nimblest men to break down the Fences of one of the Houses that stood backward
upon the Bank, that entering there, they might disperse themselves through the
City in Troops, and so set upon and win the Gates: But by chance, in the House
where this Stratag^^ was executed, (for it was not the same House which Schenck
had before marked, the mistake being easily made by the darkness of the Night)
there was a Wedding; so that immediately a great Outery being made there, the
Townsmen were Alarmed, and beset the House, driving back such as came out
thence with Arms, and shooting at them with Guns: The Multitude got new Courage
with the approach of Day; but Schenck's Men being few, in the narrow passages
were shut, and not knowing which way to go for fear, cruelly slain: Their
Colonel himself standing upon the Bank, was not able to withstand their
flight; sometimes encouraging all; another time, some particular persons by
Name, That they would go through with their Noble Undertakings, and by a
valiant Assault, open the way for others to follow them. But all would not make
them stop their flight: And to perfect their Ruin, there happened another fatal
Mischance to them; for the Boats which they had brought with them from their
Garrison, were by the force of the stream of the Water, carried before it was
Day below the City, so that such as fled Could not come at them.

This overborn with the strength and Weapons of their Enemies, and the few
Boats that were left, not able to contain all with the Weight and Tumult of
those that crowded into them, sunk, and many of them were drowned in the River,
among whom their Colonel, heavily laden with Arms, was one. This was the end
of Colonel Schencke, a man, exceeding most of his time in noble and generous
Courage; his Family and Descent was not mean, but yet the Glory of it was much
enlarged under the Prince of Parma. Afterward the Earl of Leicester made him a
Knight, and bestowed on him many other Military Honors; for Wisdom and Valor
he merited high esteem, but yet would subject himself neither to Laws nor
Customs; for which, the Soldiers of Fortune honored him, but the Magistrates
and Common People hated his Name; his Disposition, though it had been fierce
and untract^ble in his Youth, yet now, in his latter time, it began to grow
more mild and flexible: His Body, when found by the Victors, because he had
left them, and gone over to the States, was exposed to public shame and
laughter. But the Revenge of the Soldiery, forced them to alter the Scene, for
they severely punished all Captives that came to their hands, belonging to
Nieumegen: Yet for all that two years it lay unburied, until by the taking of
the Town by Prince Maurice, it had a decent Interment. Nienarius also, about
the same time, was killed by chance, while he was carelessly viewing some
Instruments or Engines of War: A Man certainly, of an unblameable Conversation,
though at last coming into the War. Truxius thus deprived of both his Chief
Commanders, by whose Valor and Conduct, the good Fortune of his Party had
hitherto been upheld, at length left off the War, but especially because the
Enemy had won Berck, where a long Siege, spun out until the following year,
with the loss of much Blood, at last got the Victory for the Spaniards: But
Schemk's Soldiers, though they had received heir Arrears, and were entertained
into Pay anew among the rest, yet mad with grief for the loss of their
Colonel, in earned a Sedition; because that Island being in their hands, would
easily procure them a Chapman within the Bounds of the Rhine. Nothwithstanding
this, the Hollanders took great Care afterward to relieve Berck, though with
no other hope, than to make the Enemy lose time, since they could not hinder
his taking the City: Count Falcosteine being sent with Two Thousand Men,
besides some choice Horse, according to this Advice, was followed by
Varen^nius, as soon as in his Journey, having taken the Castle
beforementioned, he had passed the River, yet with no intent to fight, though
he were much the stronger, but only designing to fall upon their Rear as they
marched; and finding (...) Opportunity for the same, was at the first received
by (...) Francis Vere, commanding then two English Companies newly raised, with
which he sustained the Brunt and Heat of the Charge, until the Horse came in,
and shortly after all the Foot Colors. Here was a great slaughter, considering
the Number of Combatants; and the choicest the best men of the Enemies being
slain, there were taken a great number of Horse, with one Cornet, and Ten Foot
Colors: Some few fled, and escaped with their Captain. Vere having given this
famous Testimony of his Valor and Judgment, was shortly after preferred to the
highest Dignity, to his great Renown.

Varembunius laid the blame upon Charles Mansfield, (for he was present also)
for the greatest part of this loss, though he had brought to him, at the time
of this Fight, some Companies out of the Isle of Bommell; because lately, both
of them suing for the same Command, wherein Charles being denied and the other
preferred, it was said, he now deserted him, a emulous of his Glory. But by
this means, the Conquerour-afterwards brought in safely to the Besieged all
their Carriages, both with Provision and Men; they also having near the same
time made a lucky Sally into the next Quarter of the Enemies Leaguer; and this
done, returning through byways, they escaped any danger intended to them by the
Enemy. And now the Besieged were in so good condition, that they slighted the
Enemies Forces, though of late much recruited, until the Spaniard had by force
taken a Castle near to Rees, that was their only hopes of Succor, and supply
of Provisions: Three Months after this, in the next year, the Winter continued,
when the Hollanders, considering seriously with themselves, that they had not
Forces enough to relieve a place so far distant from them, as occasion would
require, came at length to this last Result; That the Town should be surrendered
upon Honorable Conditions: And thus the Duke of Parma obtained Berck, and not
so contented, he clandestinely sought to get Bonne and Nuisse, Cities belonging
to the Duchy of Cleves; and this he did with the more Confidence, in regard of
the Prince's Age and Infirmity, having also won many of the Nobles to be his
Pensioners. Thus he got Possession of Arnhem, not far from the Rhine; Not was
Aquisgrave, a free City of the German Empire, let alone at peace, among so many
broils; for Philip claiming the Custody of that City, as anciently belonging to
the Princes of Brabant, (for he endeavored to hide his Ambition of being Lord,
under the Title of Guardian thereof) by his Edict banished many of the
Inhabitants, who had forsaken the Roman Religion: But their stay being bought
off, with a Sum of Money given to the King's Commanders, content only to have
wasted and forrag'd the Fields, left the City, until many years after, the Fury
of several Parties falling upon, Germany, this City, among the rest, was
seized, under the pretense of Right.

While the Armies thus range about the Maes and the Rhine, and meeting Parties
skirmish and fight every where, the Mauricians got exceeding much Booty: for
the Hope wasted all the Enemies Country with Fire and Sword, carrying away all
manner of Provisions, having either killed or driven away all those that
defended it. But notwithstanding all this, the most cruel Battails were at Sea,
because the Hollanders being stronger there, had absolutely taken away all
things that were wont to be Chaffer between Equals in Power, by which means,
the Spaniard had lost all benefit of Exchange. After this, if any Enemies could
prevail so much in strength, as to infest all that Traded at Sea by Robbery,
they were called Pirates. Hence it came, that the Fl^drians, provoked by their
frequent Losses, and such as fled out of the Hollanders Ships, conscious to
themselves of any great Crime, (as such men generally are fierce) out of a
desire both of Revenge and Prey, put to Sea, and not only seized unarmed
Trading Ships, but many times endangered the more able: Many times it fell out,
(and it is not to be forgotten, because it equaled the greatest Adventures of
Antiquity) that when any one part had, by Boarding the others Vessel,
intermingled their Companies, they in danger, rather than be taken, would, with
Gunpowder, blow up both themselves and the Enemy; so much do they care, who
despair of Life, not to dye unrevenged.

The Kingdom of Spain, which hither^o had been undisturbed, in the midst of all
her Neighbor's Troubles, now first began to be sensible of a War brought Home
to her; for the English, accompanied with the Hollander's Ships and Soldiers,
adven^urously Forage all the Seacoasts of Gallicia; afterward they re-settle
Don Antonio in his Kingdom, pitching their Camp about Lisbone: The Queen sent
out six of her Ships on this Design; the rest being One Hundred and Twenty, Sir
Francis Drake Commanded: General Norris had the Conduct of the Foot Soldiers;
the Prey taken, to be divided between them: And so great was their good Success
at the beginning, that Albertus of Austria, who was Governor of the City, in
the Name of King Philip, had prepared himself for flight: But by the Advice of
some private persons, in regard of the doubtfulness of the Portugezes
Allegiance, the small Provision they had of things necessary, and that several
Diseases raged among them, springing chiefly from intemperate Drinking, they
went away, and left all things unsettled; whether because King Antonio was not
able to perform the vain Promises he made of the Peoples Affection to, and the
Moors Assistance of him; or that their too sudden Departure spoiled the
Design, is yet in doubt.

But sure it is, the Hollanders were not hearkened to, who had both offered and
showed themselves ready, to defend and keep all the Castles and Forts on the
Seacoast, as well as the Entrance into the Kingdom.

As soon as ever the Siege was broke up, presently all who had at this time
been observed by the Spaniard, to wish for a Change, were very severely
punished. But the English did nothing more, unless that they made appear the
weakness of the Spanish Grandezza, in that they were never hindered by them,
either at their Landing, or during their stay; nor ever resisted them in the
Demand or taking of their Forts or Castles; and a Fleet of Germans coming from
the Baltic Cities, being met and taken as Prize, gave occasion to those
People, by Legates, and Writing to contest among themselves, whether
Provisions, wherewith People being at Peace with them, do help the Enemy, may
rightfully be taken as Prize, and disposed of accordingly.

And now France, divided into parties, was engaged in ^ like quarrel, after the
King had caused to be slain the Duke of Guise, the head of that public
defection, nor did the King long survive Guise, being soon after assassined by
a Monk; he was the last of the name and Family of Valois, in whose revenge, as
also of the Duke of Guise, the whole Kingdom was divided into Arms. Without
doubt, by the Customs of France, the right of Succession belonged to the Family
of Bour^^, But Henry the head thereof, Prince of Bearne, who was called by the
name of King of Navarre, though hardly enjoying any thing besides the name, for
that the Spaniard had violently wrested it away, he, I say, professing the
Religion which they call Reformed, though he promised equal Justice to both,
had drawn to him all the Nobility, but the Cities and Towns would not receive
or own him; But when he declared himself a Catholic, the face of Affairs were
on a sudden very much changed, for the fault of the defection from, and
aversion to, the Kings Name and Title, was wholly call on the other; yet was
not Philip terrified by this example, but that he now assisted the Duke of
Guise his Brother (who made use of a double pretense of Piety) not in private,
but in the view of the whole World, not that he so loved him, but that he might
keep involved in discords that Kingdom, which lying between him and the
Low Countries, had formerly been very dangerous and troublesome to him; and if
his designs were crowned with success, he would commit the same to some one of
his own Alliance, with a fiduciary Power: And the Reason by him pretended for
this, was, because he married Isabella, the Daughter of Henry the Second, King
of France, by whom he had a Daughter, a Person most fit to govern that Kingdom,
either in regard to her Fathers Merits, or her Mothers Blood; and so much the
rather, because the Dukedom of Bretaigne, as several other Principalities of
France were known to have been fortunately ruled by a Woman's hand.

On the other side, the Duke of Savoy, the Spaniard's Son in Law, enlarged his
Borders to the very opening of the Alps; The Queen of England being informed by
a particular Envoy, that the Duke of Parma had sent Lamot into France, with an
Army both of Horse and Foot, forthwith ordered a supply of money to the King of
France, together, with four thousand English Soldiers. Neither were the States
of the United Provinces backwards in granting him Assistance; for first they
sent Ships with Provisions, and all other necessary Munitions for War, then
adding thereto money far more liberally than the present exigencies of their
Affairs would permit, and this only in hope of a future benefit: It was
certainly, a noble and an honorable act, and that raised an emulation toward
their moderated Liberty, that they having so newly erected themselves into a
Commonwealth, should yet by their Riches, support and help a Kingdom; the
success thereof proving no less advantageous to the French, than distructive to
their Enemies, while the Walloons Country, to whom formerly they committed
their cause, lying open, and exposed to the mischief of War, was equally
damnifyed, whether assaulted by the French, or their own Soldiers: Afterward,
the Spanish Forces, France putting a stop to their victorious times, lay open
to the Hollander, who for eight years together, increased their Treasury,
enlarged their bounds, and augmented their Armies, until the Bourbonian, by
his own virtue and valor, waded through all the threatening billows raised
against him by his obstinate adversaries, and himself at last becoming a
Catholic, brought under his subjection all parties, rather laying aside his
Arms, than the memory of that Pristine League.

It seems here very convenient, now we are relating the French Affairs, to
search, as far as humane Reason can direct us, how the Belgic troubles having
the like beginnings, should yet have so different a Progress. For a Peace being
settled formerly between King Philip and the King of France, these two Princes
seemed to be of one mind, having concluded a mutual League to extirpate all
Religions which had begun or increased, either by impunity or War. But the
French Peers, hating the Guisian Potency, that they might not become
contemptible, as the Netherlanders to the Spaniards, took occasion to draw the
multitude, now contending about Religion, into Tumults and Arms; but the Events
were most unlike: for there the Subjects obedience was preserved entire, and
consequently, the Roman Catholic Religion carried the day, but so only as to
keep under, not oppress the other. But here the old Form of Government is
altered, the differing Rites grow insociable, neither allowing the other, and
so between Servitude and liberty become divided. The cause whereof I suppose
may be, that the Guises or Lorraines being by themselves in private but weak,
did afterward receive from abroad such small help, as might indeed follow, but
not force their Fortune. So that the main of their strength either consisted
under the pretense of the Kings name, or the affections of the vulgar, which
are mean supports, and of no duration, where there is any experiment of utility
on the other side. And the Kings of France have within themselves, the whole
strength of that one People; so that they diminish their own Authority by
tyrannizing, and wholly loose what is spent in revenge. And the very Commons,
though highly offended with the differences in Religion, yet when once they
became sensible of the miseries of War, were not so desirous of revenge as
Peace.

Hence proceeded those Edicts of Peace so often hastened, so often withstood by
the now divided affections of the People, who might rather be said to lay aside
War, than to make and observe a Peace; for being weary of a long War, they were
driven to force and treachery, by the impulse of others, not their own
obstinacy, and being always accustomed to a Kingly Government, they might have
been composed before, if the one King, famously knowing in the Arts both of War
and Peace, had tempered himself and his Laws, according to the strength and
prevalence of parties. They who were newly gotten into power, being ignorant
how to use the time, nourished discords by variety of evil deeds, while they
of a more active Spirit, or such whose Riot incapacitated them, either got or
lost all, and this was the only hindrance of Peace. But on the other side, the
Spaniards having a King that wished the same things in hatred to the Belgic
liberty, and who was now grown old in the enjoyment of his Territories, by the
keeping abroad so great Forces, never feared the Netherlandish Solitudes,
especially having Presidents, both in Italy and America, that where they could
not subject into Provinces, they should settle Colonies. But the French were
highly offended with the pride, avarice, and cruelty of this foreign Nation,
the very Catholics themselves, who had never faltered in point of Religion,
disliking their Customs, some of whom having been before circumvented and
deluded with the hope of better things, becoming an example to the rest, that
they would with all violence exercise their malice, as mistrusting the breach
of Peace, under that notion, to hide their revenge.

Thus a War, no less cruel than civil Wars use to be, continued, but still
looked as foreign. But Count William in Frizeland, straightened the City of
Groaning, not able to resist the greatness of his endeavors, by scarcity and
death, having wasted all their Provision about the Country; he got also Reide,
a Peninsula of a very convenient Situation between the River E^mes and the Bay
of Dullart. The City being suspected for this mischief, cast it upon Verdugo,
because he had refused a Garrison: from thence being both recruited, this with
a new addition of Foot, and Nassau with more Horse, sometimes with mutual fear,
sometimes taking opportunities of daring one another, they spent the remainder
of the Year.

The Second BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
1590.
THE whole burden of the War was ready to have been thrown upon Frizeland, if
the taking of Breda had not diverted the Army. ^ is a Town of Brabant, and has
ever been so esteemed though situate in a fertile Soil, upon the Confines of
Holland, and commanding over seventeen Villages. The River Aa, now having
changed his name into Merca, and being of a reasonable breadth, washes the
Walls thereof, and shortly after, passing by the Town of Sevenberg, falls into
an Arm of the Sea; The Family of Pole, bought it with the Title of Baron
thereof, from whom it descended to the House of Nassau, by the Marriage of
Engelbert, whose Nephews Son, named Henry, added to it a strong rampire and
ditches, together with a most noble Castle, serving as well for beauty as
strength. And since that the continual practices of War in those latter times,
has not only annexed thereto strong Bulwarks, and other defenses for keeping
out, or repelling of an Enemy, but also the glory of resistance of a most
violent storm given to it; A Mariner taught the way how to take it by Policy
or Stratagem, in manner following.

By the Command of Philip of Nassau (he was the Son of John, who coming into
this National War, had the Command of some Soldiers, and the government of a
few Towns at the Maes) one Heraugier, a Captain of Cambray, began first to
consult of this Enterprise, adopting into Society, for performance of this
Noble Exploit, one Lambert Charly, a valiant and painful Soldier: The Vessel
used for the Plot, was that which was wont, upon the Public Account, to pass
backward and forward between both Parties, to carry Fuel to Breda; which Fuel
was no other, than the muddy Oze growing in the Marshes of Holland, hardened by
the Sun, and cut out into Turf, and so served in stead of Wood; for the He^t
being enclosed in the E^rth makes one like Nature and Disposition in Bitumen
and Sulphur; which, as in other places, has caused Mountains to burn and
flame, so here sometimes they have made a very lightsome Fire, unless by chance
some old Wood, beaten down with the force of the Sea and Tempests, and lying
long covered with Earth, and grown rotten, only changing his Form, yet retains
its Nature: In this Boat, being of an indifferent length, were placed some
young men, selected out of several Companies, and such as feared no danger
whatsoever, to the number of Seventy, that were to be covered with a slight
quantity of Tutfs, so as nothing else might be discerned: A long time it was,
ere Fortune would favor this bold and dangerous Attempt, so that their
Endeavors were contradicted and hindered, even by such things as they had no
doubt of: The crosness of the Wind, and bitterness of the Cold, though at the
very end of Winter; and, last of all, want of Victuals, which their stay had
consumed, spoiled their first Assay: And certainly, among all these Delays, it
was a very hard matter, to conceal such a Design as appeared by certain Rumors
written out of England, that it was accomplished. However, at length, after
they had refreshed themselves, and Herangier had comforted and encouraged them
with good words, sending a Messenger to Prince Maurice, to request him, to
convey secretly some Soldiers into the next Island, not far from Breda, they
once more set forward: Being brought within a Lock of the River or Scluse, near
the Castle, from whence there was no possibility of going back, they were beset
with a new Calamity; for either by the extraordinary Ebb of the River, or else
by the grating force of the Ice, the bottom of the Boat was so cracked, that it
began to take Water very fast: Th^^ did the hidden Soldiers tremble for fear,
cursing the Bo^^ unfortunate Ribs, that could no better secure them, and all in
Water up to the Knees; but at length, the Vessel eased by the Tides coming in,
without any humane help, ceased to Leak. And now the Governors and Commanders
of the Garrison, as it were out of an overcurious Care, more from the Use and
Custom of Discipline, than any Necessity they thought of, had relieved the
Guards, and appointed every inferior Officer to his Post. Thus the Duty of
searching the Boat, by the Negligence of many, was wholly thrown upon the
Corporal, who likewise being careless, according to the Example of his
Superior Officers, viewing the same very slightly, made no more ado: And by
good chance it fortuned, that the Cold had not forced any one to Cough, which
at another time they could hardly have refrained. The Speech of one of the
Soldiers, upon that occasion, deserves never to be forgotten; who fearing,
least by his violent Noise in Coughing* (though he did repress it) he should,
together with himself, betray his Companions: Kill me (says be)
Fellow Soldiers, least we be all killed. But to proceed, after the search, the
very Soldiers of the Garrison, drew the Boat into the Castle, that it might
have Water, in regard the Ice was too thick abroad; by which means, they came
into another great Hazard, because the Danger so near and imminent, had put
them all into a fear; so that they were ready to complain of Herangier, as one
who, desperate of his own Life, had brought them to the slaughter. Part of them
being at the very Brink of Despair, would not stay for their hopes of safety,
till the darkness of the Night, but since they must die, they would take the
Day, that they might see the Enemy they were to encounter, least they should be
found in that Prison, where they were penned up, and from thence be dragged to
punishment and Death. Others were utterly astonished; and certainly, it was
rather Desperation made them accomplish their Undertaking, than any
Exho^tations of their Captain to Valor and Glory: Part of the Turf being
unloaded, and to prevent any further lightning of the Boat, least he should
discover the Design, by laying open the Soldiers within, the Boat-man
cunningly dissembled himself weary; and to that purpose, he put on a Garb and
Tone, both of Voice and Countenance, even to Admiration: And now it was near
Midnight, but with some glimmering of the Moon, when the Captain thought fit to
bring forth the Soldiers; first, admonishing them to behave themselves
valiantly, which would not only be for their everlasting Honor, but
Enrichment: But if any of them should now leave him in his adventurous Attempt,
he would be so far from enjoying an honorable Life, that he merited an
ignominious Death. By the working of the Pump, the Enemies Ears were stopped,
so that they all went out, and not one of them discerned by the Sentinels,
which was almost miraculous. Part of these Soldiers passing by the Armory,
first killed those of the Watch they met with, and afterward slew in their
very Guard, those that kept the Gate which led into the Town, only an Ensign
endeavoring violently to break through, and aiming with his Sword dangerously
to have wounded Herangier, fell down, and was killed valiantly fighting: But
Charly, to whom was given the Command of the other part of the Soldiers, drove
the Enemies Garrison into the innermost part of the Castle, which was
encompassed round with Water.

These were kept in hope, to the very utmost, by Paulo Antonio Lanzavecchia,
who was Deputy Governor of Breda, under his Father, a young Man, and utterly
ignorant in Stratagems of War. Odoardo Lanzavecchia the Father, Prince Maurice
had caused to stay at Geertruydenburg, three miles distant from Breda, seeming
as if he would draw thither his Fortes, and Carriages; and, to that purpose,
some were sent under the notion of Spies, who by spreading a false Rumor,
should make them insensible of the Truth: And surely, the Duke of Parma was
very much over-seen, who had committed two Towns to one Man's keeping, when one
Man is hardly able to defend one Town, and let other Rewards, without Danger,
be for such as deserve well therein.

But Paulo Lanzavecchia, to try if, by chance, he could force this small
Company out by Battle, passing out over the Bridge, sallyes upon the Enemy,
with a Company of Men crowded together, (they were about Thirty and Six). But
they were soon vanquished by them, who could not at that time be overcome, and
himself sorely wounded, most of his men being killed, he fled back the same way
he came. By this time, they heard a Noise of People, fighting within the City,
and the Townsmen came to break open the Castle Gates that Heraugier's Soldiers
might not drive away with their Shot out of the Gallery above the People, and
clear the adjoining Parts. At last the sign being given, that the Design had
taken, Count Hohenlo presently marched up with a part of Prince Maurice his
Army, who were not far off upon the Espy^l; being come to the Gate, and
perceiving the (...) made them lose time, they passed over the Lock or Damn,
beyond the Palizadoes; nor did Paulo Lanzavecchia de^e^ to Covenant for his own
Safety, by the Surrender of what he held in the Castle.

The Prince himself immediately followed Hohenlo, with another greater part of
the Army, consisting both of Horse and Foot, who, coming to the Gates,
threatened to force them open: Then the City trembling, and deprived of the
Garrison that should have defended it, redeemed their Pillage with two Months
Pay to the Soldiers; for the Italians, (...) whom the Guard and Defense of the
Town was committed (being six Companies of Foot, and one Troop of Hor^) whose
Duty it had been to have broken the Bridge, be^ the Town and the Castle, or at
least to have kept the Gate from being seized by the Enemy, being struck into
an amaze, at the noise and clattering of Arms in the Castle; and withal, not
well agreeing among themselves, were easily wrought to fly, and leave all to
the Enemy; and which, possibly, might be another Reason to the same purpose,
being the more afraid of the Enemy, by how much they were generally hated by
their Hosts who had quartered them; for that while they enjoyed the Town, they
abstained from no sort of Villainy, but raged in all kinds of Lusts.

Therefore, when the Duke of Parma set himself to Revenge this popular Error
and Crime of the Soldiers, to take the shame from himself, all that were
designed for punishment, as Fugitives and Renegadoes, though late, suffered the
punishment inflicted on them for their Fault, excepting only one Intemelio,
for whom his Youth and Nobility obtained a Pardon; and Odardo Lanzavecchia, as
it were in punishment of himself, left off, and surrendered the Governorship of
Geriruydenburg.

Prince Maurice now entering the City, took into Command and Tuition, those his
Ancient, Paternal, and Hereditary Possessions, and all the Citizens living
therein; his Youthful Modesty rather grieving at, than accusing the City,
charged with the Payment of the Soldiers Wages, (and many many more of them
had their Names in the List, than were present in the Service) for the Prince
would not seem to mind those private things, although the Sum amounted to a
Hundred Thousand Florens, when Antwerp paid to the Duke of Parma but Four
Hundred.

These things thus done, the Government of the Town was bestowed upon
Heraugier, and the rest were all of them afterward both rewarded, and
preferred to Honorable Commands. The States Decreed Public Feasting, and
other Testimonies of Rejoicing, and that there should be Prices of Money
Coined, which should be as a General Record to Posterity of this first Victory
obtained by their Prince, without the effusion of his Soldiers Blood; which
afterward was drawn into Example by Custom, as often as any great and prosperous
Success crowned their Actions. And there were not wanting some Wits, who
Celebrated the Prince's Auspitious Beginnings, and magnified the Gallantry of
the Design; averring, That the entering of Troy by Grecian Lords, in a Wooden
Horse, was a Stratagem very like this, or, it may be, was an Eminent Ship so
called. They compared the Fortune of the Place, which nine years before, by the
Absence of the Garrison, the Treachery of the Watch, and Slaughter of the
Citizens, Altapen (Count Berlaymont's Son) surprised and took: Thus every Man's
Fancy was in Agitation, but we must not dwell here.

The Companies being left in the Town, which were to defend it, and some Troops
of Horse, on purpose to make Incursions into the Villages of Brabant, the Army
marched away: And the Provisions carried in, by provident Care of those, whom
the Prince knew had been privy to the Design, served the place a long time: But
as soon as a Messenger brought News thereof into Germany, to the Prince of
Parma; who, now weary of the Toil of War, it may be, by Advice, had desisted
from Hostility, until he received Letters from Spain, least he should suffer,
without taking Revenge, the Country to be spoiled, he commanded Charles
Mansfeldt, who had Reduced Berck, to go thence with some part of his Forces,
and to shut up all the Passages to Breda, in order to ^ Siege; being moved
thereto by a false hope, that there was only a few Days Provision in the Town;
and besides, imagining that the Townsmen would not be yet contentedly settled
under their New Lords. On the one side therefore, Gertruydenberg straightened it;
the rest Mansfeldt surrounded with strong Guards, yet they feared Relief would
be brought thither from behind; for the River Merck runs into the Maes, and
makes hard by many little Islands, which Prince^ Maurice had filled with
Soldiers: And the River it self where it runs by Breda, he had enclosed with a
Bridge, and a strong Castle, at a place called Terheiden. From hence the
Soldiers, highly enraged, match out to Sevenberg, a Town situate in the
further part of that Continent, and force it, together with a weak Castle
belonging to it; their greatest labor was spent about Nordam, which is a
Castle situate in a very moist ground, and in former times, has been often
girt about with ditches, whereinto the Sea flows, especially on the North
part, and there is also a Redout, and the whole, by cutting away a part of the
Bank, is washed by the Estuary of the Maes, like an Island; It was at this time
defended by Matthias Hellye, one of the famous Adventurers in the taking of
Breda, who had as many Soldiers as he thought fit, out of the next Islands:
After the Parmensians had spent some days in battering the place to no
purpose, they prepared Bridges, and other Engines, and materials, for an
assault, and therewithal, a Ship was set into the water, and Armed men stood
round about in the Station, at the top of the Mast, that were, by the continual
casting of Darts, to drive away the Defendants; The besieged, as soon as they
saw it approaching, sent out in opposition to it, Boats set on fire; but the
Wind averted that danger, and drove it (the Enemies Ship) to the Banck: And as
it drew near, the strong eddy or Whirlepoole of the River, turning it round,
brought it into the Trench; some set upon it, as it lay upon the Shallowes, o
her^ cast flaming firebrarnds into it, and the Soldiers from the top of the
Mast, are thrown down, lying open to all wounds, being obvious to the Enemy, on
the contrary side was intended; and so this stratagem wrought not its effect.

Mansfeldt observing the great slaughter of his men, and the resolute fidelity
of the Garrison, as also that he was no less worsted in the adjacent little
Islands, began to doubt and despair as well of the Siege of Breda, as of its
being betrayed: And in the mean time, while he lingers in vain about the Town,
the Horse that were therein, wearied him out with daily Sallies and Skirmishes.
But Prince Maurice, recollecting his Soldiers, and though he had but a small
Army (about four thousand Foot, and very few Horse) marched into Gelderland, as
if he had had a design upon Nimmeghen.

But the Engine prepared to the sudden assault, by the use whereof against the
walls they would have fallen down, missed of its hoped success; this Engine was
found among some French materials, it was in the form of a Hat, wherein were
included Gunpowder, Bullets, and square pieces of Iron; thenceforth knowing the
weakness of his Forces, and finding himself not fit for a Siege, because from
the adjacent places, both Arms and Provision were daily brought into the City,
he resolved to draw off, yet for a time he continued there, and wearied them at
a distance, to try, if by that means he could possibly withdraw the Enemy from
Breda? which happened according to his expectation; for after both of them had
thus vainly spent their time in Sieges, Mansfeldt, with his increased forces,
striving to help the neighboring parts, because the City, in regard of the
Soldiers known effeminacy, scorned his most able defenses, pitched between the
Maes and the Wael. But Prince Maurice kept his Army within the Isle of Helland,
and to prevent the Enemies passing over the River, he sent Ships into the Wael,
and fortified the whole Bank of the River with Forts and Guards, from the
division of the Rh^ne, unto the place where the Maes falls into it, in which
place Count Sob^ (who commanded some Select Companies given to him by Prince
Maurice) was ordered to entrench himself in the Isle of Voorne, as if he had
been about to incamp. And a large cut was made from the Wa^l into the Rhine,
whereby, without danger from Nimmeghen, any Forces or Provisions might be
brought from, or carried into Germany, and several great Banks erected to
restrain the overflowings of the Rivers chiefly at the charge, and by the pains
of the Hollanders, (...) were greatly benefitted thereby, as well in point of
Security as Trade; and Prince Maurice, at the same time, getting this safe
defense, over against Nimmeghen, built a continuing Station for his Camp. The
Soldiers gave it the name of Kn^dsenburg; from thence into the City, which
pleasantly arises as it were out of the Bank, and from the City against the
Workmen, there was a vast, nay almost an infinite exchange of Bullets. But they
that wrought in the building of the Castle, did either work in the night, or
were fain to set up blindes to preserve them from the Shot: But the greatest
mischief afflicting the Townsmen, was the falling down of Towers, Steeples, and
other eminent Structures, upon their heads, and ready with their falls to
destroy them: So that now there was no safe Habitation in all the Town, and the
River was quite taken from them; by which inconveniences, being a People not
used to War, and desirous of Commerce and Trade, by little and little, they
were drawn to change their Masters.

Thus was the Summer spent at Nimmeghen, when the Duke of Parma, having been
again to drink the Spaw waters, and the success of his Affairs more luckily
suiting his desires, began a little to recover his health; For Ricardot, a
constant participater with the Duke, of all his Counsels, had brought back out
of Spain to him very gracious and well-pleasing Letters, wherein, after his
confirmation in his old Government, he received Orders concerning the French
War; for the King was of opinion, that that being near, he would not refuse it,
and that the difficulty of the undertaking would make him forget his present
cares; But the Duke of Parma was of another mind, which was, to leave the
French to the division of their own quarrel, until the Netherlands were wholly
reduced or quieted. But well knowing, that Princes humors must be born by one
that is engaged, he made a virtue of necessity, imagining Honor offered him,
which by himself must be made glorious by dangerous enterprises. Wherefore
going into Henalt, that by his vicinity, he might take care the more easily,
Messengers followed him thither, with the news of Egmonds overthrowes, w^ the
slaughter of his Auxiliaries at Eureux, and that the Conquerours Army pressed
hard upon the Parisians. And not l^ after, the Duke of Guise's Brother and
Successor coming on him, to associate Counsels, he did publicly testify that
ill fortune of their parties: At last, after several debates, and private
Consultations with the chief Commanders, concerning the managery of the War,
the Duke of Parma, toward the end of Summer, lead all the choice and picked
Soldiers of the Kings Army into France. And new Levies followed out of
Germany, and those other Spanish Mutinee^s from Courtray and Menin, but before
their departure, they compelled the Townsmen to give them part of their pay,
and the rest they had from the King, and then was that president instituted for
perpetuity, that a Scu^e in payment to the Soldier, should be current for ten
Royals. The whole number of Foot was twelve thousand, and of Cavalry there were
three thousand.

The chief care of all Affairs in the Netherlands, was left to Peter Ernest,
Count Mansfeldt, as Deputy Regent, the rest of the Soldiers left behind were
committed to his S^ Charles, with order to put them into Garrisons, left any of
them, by the want of their appointed strength, should inc^r any danger: As soon
as Prince Maurice thoroughly understood these things, he sent some, even as far
as Germany, to take possession of the places they had left. All those
Fornifications were taken, wherewith the Spaniard had beset the Banks, and
passages of Journies, and the Works they had erected in that peaceable Country,
by the Rhine and the Maes, were all defaced and overthrown: Another part of the
Army made inrodes into Brabant and Flanders, being near to them, and brought
thence booty, even out of the middle of the Country, and not only the Dorps and
Villages, but the weaker Towns were assaulted, wo^, and wasted* Thus in Autumn,
he easily recovered what ever had been conquered by, or yielded to, Mansfoldt,
the former year, by the side of the Maes, or about Breda, and utterly subverted
all that was unnecessary: Besides these, he annexed his paternal Town of
Steeneberg, famous of old for a Harbor; for it lies just upon a turning of the
Merowe.

Now the French War raged destructively, both at Sea and Land; the Governors
of the Norman Coasts, having fought luckily against the King of France's
Enemies in a Sea Fight; nor was any Policy omitted to facilitate the Victory.
The Prince of Orange his men assaulted Dunkirk, both with Ships from Sea, and
scaling Ladders at Land, and the Spaniards invaded Lochem by treachery, but
both, by foreknowledge, prevented their fate.

There was a great rumor this year, of the Germans preparing for a War, to
vindicate and revenge their Borders, violated by the incroaching of their
Neighbors; Now they, who began to meet in parties to take to either side,
interpreted all things to applause or contempt, every one as his Conscience, or
hatred to the Enemy, led him: For the Spaniards having gotten the furthest part
of Frizeland, wasted both Villages, and the whole Country beyond the Rhine; Nor
were the Garrison Soldiers of Gelderland, which lay about the Dukedoms of
Cleues and Juilliers, any moderater, but robbing that Country lying beyond
them, they brought all the prey they got, into the Castles and Cities, where
they were not questionable for the same. Then the Hollanders Horsemen, imit^ted
the same licentiousness, when ever, having worsted the Enemy, they followed the
pursuit: Thus being circumvented, now with hope of Peace, anon with the cruelty
of War, they summoned a Diet; where, after tedious delays, (as it is indeed the
custom of that Nation) by protracting Counsels, sometimes even with threats,
they rather delayed the remedies, than removed the evils.

At last, an Embassy was agreed upon, and Decreed; (...) to expostulate the
Wrongs, and then to command them ^ desist from War, and all Acts of Hostility,
unless within the Borders of the particular Adversaries. And, to this purpose
they very carefully and judiciously debated the Point with the Duke of Parma,
at the time he was going upon the French Expedition. Whereto he answered very
sharply, being accustomed otherwise to shift off all Complaints of that na^ to
wit, either by rejecting them absolutely, or answering them ambiguously: But
this was the effect of his present Reply,

That there had been many ancient Differences continued among the Provinces, by
reason of former Losses upon their Borders, and that now it was not in the
General's power to set a form of War; but as they endured casual Fires,
Innundations of Waters, and other Evils either of Nature, or Fate; so they had
better ^ bear with the present necessities of the Times, than to begin a
Quarrel with the impatient undergoing thereof: But if former Enemies would
depart thence, with all Strangers, then he also would restore what property
belonged to the Germans; always provided, that the Money which was expended in
the War of Colen, a secured to the King: In the interim, they should consider,
that there were a necessity that they must suffer, certainly the old Religion
best merited their Patience, for whose only sake he was s^ for into Germany.
What, is the Example grown dubious, by increased Liberty, whom to regard best?
Of old, these Warlike People have been wont to observe all the Motions of their
Neighbors, and to have a care of their own strength, that they might cast down
any Neighbor Paince that were weaker, much more now when they dare so much
against a Powerful King. You ought rather to pray to God, that whoever is in
the fault of the War may being either overcome in Battle, or conquered with
Repentance, be forced to return to their first Obedience and Duty; and that the
would not be long a doing, if by the denial, and cutting off all Trading and
Provision, they were couped up within their own narrow Limits.

With this Answer being dispatched, they go to the Confederate Provinces with
greater Confidence, and more malapert Demands: For first, they required the
delivery of the Island of Gravewaerdt, together with all other things which
they possessed on their Borders: And after, that the Passages of the Rhine be
free, and without Guards and Forts; and neither the Rhine, nor the Ems, being
both German Rivers, to be thereafter encombred with the Terror of Fleets, nor
the Payment of Tributes.

To this, the States answered, That they hoped they should make their
Endeavors appear more just, and should truly lay the blame of disturbing the
Peace upon the Enemy, which they, without Reason, aspersed them withal: And so
beginning with the Causes arising from the Inquisition, and the grievous
punishment inflicted by it, they proceeded with their throwing off Bishops, and
at large demonstrated the Murder of the Nobles, the Oppressions of the
Commons, and the other Miseries of Slavery. By these Injuries (say they) being
necessitated to take Arms, we seek no other thing, by this so tedious and
dangerous War, but to free our Blood and Relations, o^ Wives and Daughters
Bodies, from Barbarous Cruelty, and Bestiall Abuse and Muckery. This only is
the hope, this the end, of all our Fighting; and we hope our Poverty will be no
more spighted or envyed, than the strong Commonwealth of Switzerland, which is
terrible to its Neighbors. It is more reason to fear, and more just to resist,
those great Robbers of the whole World, whom neither the vast Solitudes of
America, the Slaughters of People, both in Granata, and the Netherlands, nor
the Servitude of Portugal, and a great part of Italy, is able to satisfy: And
as both among Beasts and Fishes, the greater and more ravenous sort live upon
Prey, so inferior States are always obnoxious to the Hatred and Fury of
greater Empires. Is it a thing unknown, by whose Design chiefly the English
were solicited to Sedition? Who made Ireland Rebel, and caused the French
oppose their lawful King? It behaves you therefore to be wary; for even among
you the Spaniard has such, as, hired by him, are ready (...) advise or act
what suits best to his Advantage: Nay, they (...) has their sight, are yet,
out of fear, compelled to obey them, ^ may be observed among the Indians, who
reverence them as they do Evil Spirits, that they may not hurt them. He, (to
wit, Pa^a) without blame undermines by Treachery the Cities of Cle^^ Others are
voluntarily delivered as a Pledge of Friendship, by him whose due they were, as
the Revenue of his Ecclesiastical Pro^tions, as is said, which now are really
become trusty Recep^cles of Villainy, and so many Dens for Robbery. Nay, the
most opulent and wealthy Prince, when his Soldiers want Money p^^ts out you
for their Pay Masters, and whole Regiments of Soldiers, as well as others, are
made fat with German Tributes. We, at this time, only strive for this that we
may not suffer an unlike Fortune, in a like Cause: We, certainly, if ever ^
People, labor to keep our Soldiery unblameable, and peaceable toward all our
Neighbors, by our constant Pay to them: Our Subjects bear us Witness, and the
Legal Punishments inflicted on ^ that are guilty, that as far as War is to be
Governed, we strive^ preserve the Peace of all that do not disturb us: Only
herein, ^ hope, you will pardon us, if sometimes the Soldier takes may upon
him, than the Officers or Magistrates. We have hitherto maintained the ancient
Estimation of Holland, even in the Mischiefs of War, among the most remote
Nations; much less shall we, the ancient Companions and Followers of the Roman
Prowess, and so near allied in Blood to the Germans, by any Perfidy violate
that Great Parent, which always furnished us with Captains, instructed us in
Virtue, and showed us the Example of Liberty. As for Gravewaerdt, the chief
Government of it long before the War, and Charges of a Disputed Right, belonged
to Gelderland, as standing in that Jurisdiction; We hold it not to injure
others, but to defend our Selvss, and our Borders; And for the rest of the
Towns and Castles, although being taken from the Enemy, they lost their
Privilege of Peace, yet we shall willingly yield them; that as Force first
began from the Spaniard, so with us Right shall be both a beginning and
Example. The Burden laid upon Trade, that passes our Borders, is nothing so
heavy to our Neighboring Nations, as to our own People; they have necessitated
by War, though they be no other than such as are frequently demanded and taken
by most Potent Princes; And to remove our Guards of Shipping, when the Enemy
lies all about the Rivers, is not consistent in Policy with Safety; but they
are rather Safeguards to all such as pass that way, and likewise defend you, as
well as our Selves.

About this time, there came also an Embassy both from Colen and Liege,
Bojoarus was Bishop of both places: Wherefore the States, not meddling with the
cause of Truxius his Quarrel, they complained of many things against the
Bishop, whose unasatiable Avarice took Confidence only from the Spanish
Greatness assisting him: However, they assured to Colonian's Safety and Peace,
if (as standing in the middle) they would only converse with Parties, as
Neuters: But the Condition of them of Liege was far different, having both done
and suffered, by connivence, many Acts of Hostility: Against them also was
objected, the punishment of such as were innocent, under color of vindicating
Religion; and afterward, when the rest of the Netherlands were possessed by
the Spaniards intermixedly, they so openly set out for them Winter Quarters,
and raised Summer Provisions, that, if we may not plainly say, it was a
Voluntary Act; yet we may well say, it was not Compulsory: And therefore, to
hope for Peace, where they had so deserved; and in the interim, upon Order, to
send away their Prisoners, there was little Reason.

It would not be amiss, or any ways absurd, to dive further into these Matters;
that both the Reason of War, against the adjoining Cities, and what Peace they
may expect, may be understood: And indeed, after this, there was Freedom taken
both for Rapine and Injuries, as every Province inclined hither or thither, out
of fear of Danger, or sometimes out of Design. They hardly ever took a Voyage
free from Arms and Force, while both endeavoring to get away, by that very
means drew on the Enemy. Thus, in several renewed Embassies, there was nothing
but the same over again heard at spoken: But the Hollander yielded up several
strong Holds, as desired; but, in truth, because they were so far distant, that
they could not easily be maintained, or defended; and that they might thereby
heap upon the Spaniard Envy, if not bring upon him a War, because he would
perform none of those things, which before he had agreed to: And there were
some in the German Diet, who would have nothing but Force and Arms used against
them, for neglect of performing their Promise.

But the other Princes and Bishops, who continued all in one Society of the
Catholic Religion, or were otherwise obliged to one another, broke the
strength of that Design to use Force, by procrastinating Consultations, and the
hope of a Pacification with the Netherlands. And now some were sent from the
Confederate States to complain, that they were betrayed by the Treachery of
their Enemies, and the careless Sloth and Neglect of their Friends; They having
given away from themselves the Rewards of their Pains and Charge in the War,
(for as yet Truxius did not appear) while Philip, yet unquestioned, kept
possession of all the Cities near the Rhine: Nor could they obtain of the
Emperor any whit the less every year, to forbear to assist the Spaniard with
Arms, though he saw them averse to the desired Peace. At the end of the year,
the Duke of Parma returning from France, was afflicted and vexed with many
things, though he brought with him the Honor of having freed Paris from a
cruel Siege, and bringing his Army Home safe, from among so many dangerous and
mortal Enemies: For both himself, and his Army were hated by the French
Commons, and the Cities would not receive Garrisons of his Men, for fear of
Foreign Servitude; so that here all Philip's hopes were blasted, and he found
there was no relying on such uncertain Friendship.

Another of his Vexations, was, That by the Enemies Excursions, most of the
Fortifications, through the whole Netherlands, had been Reduced; That Verdugo
in Frizeland* only taking the small Castle of Ementell, had in all other
Ma^ters of War been unfortunate, and the Soldiers at that present were ready
to Mutiny: And the Townsmen of Ven^e (a place in Gelderland, near the Maes)
startled him; for they being perplexed with the tedious Evils of a double
Garrison; first, by the help of the German Soldiers, drove out the Italians,
and afterward taking more courage, became too strong for them, and turned them
out. Besides another Sedition grew more violent among the selected men, hastened
through Germany by Mansfeldt, to hinder Prince Maurice his Progress, because he
had provided for the new raised men, part of their wages, and debarred the rest
from any: This Mansfeldt was an old Commander in the War, and that made them
rage against him more furiously. Thus being about Herentals, and other adjacent
Towns of Brabant, as if they had been Enemies, they spoiled all that part of
the Country, which is called Kempenlandt, yet pretended themselves the Kings
Soldiers; and if any resistance was made against them, neither Rapes,
Murders, or any other villainy, was by them accounted unlawful.

Thus while they harassed the Fields, though the pay decreased, yet their
number that demanded it, was increased. But the Duke of Parma said, that he
suspected, the Soldiery ought to have been dispersed into several fortifyed
Cities, and there mixed with the new raised men; Indeed, it was time to shut
the Stable-door; when the Horse was stolen; And this Counsel coming too late,
served to little purpose otherwise, for surely, the only removing of the
mischief to another place, was but miserable comfort to a public ^lamity. But
this Advise brought not to them so much (...) but instead thereof, more
seditious Soldiers daily came together, who being wearied with a hard and
pinching J^ quickly laid hold of that opportunity, to ease themselves and
forcibly to seize those rewards which their Command^ had formerly denied them;
But the Duke of Parma had ^ some Companies in France, with the chief Commander
of the Guisian Faction, to whom the Prince of Ascoli was commanded to conduct
some more, according to their desire.

1591. The Enemies Forces being in this manner divided and the Soldiery
remaining at home, disobedient and ^fractory, or else but lately raised: the
confederate Pro^ces, fleshed with the last years success, now took heart, and
they who before could scarce defend their own bounds without great fear and
hazard, now resolve to invade others.

Some persuaded them to forbear, till the Duke of Part was gone into France;
but others thought it best to lay (...) of all opportunities; and if they did
nothing else, yet it (...) well worth their time and labor, to hinder the Duke
of Parma's Journey into France. Neither did they continue long ^ suspense, from
what part to begin their business; for although the Frizo^s desired their aid,
yet it was of great concernment to them, to free Issell from Garrisons of
Spaniards, to whom all Gelderland, as well the Betuwe, as the Velume, and the
others that were near, for fear of the Hollanders incu^^ons were tributary, the
which, grievously enslaved, ever since the Prince of Aurange his time, they had
omitted, hindered either by their own weakness, or the Enemies power. As soon
therefore as the time of going abroad to forage was come, and the Soldiers
numbers completed, and their pay ordered among them, Sir Francis Vere, (whom
the Queen had made her General of the English) first went toward De^burg. Some
few of his men in the habit of Country-women with Baskets, running as if they
fled from a following Enemy, got into the Fort that lies over against Zutphen,
only separated by the River, whereinto they were no sooner entered, but quickly
laying hands on their Weapons, which were hid under their Clothes, partly with
the^, and partly with Weapons taken there, they killed the first Sentinels, ere
they were aware, and afterward, the rest surprised with amaze and fear, were
easily either killed or taken.

Vere, had not held the Fort above one day, when Prince Maurice came thither
with all his Army of eight thousand Foot, and two Wings of Horse, making two
thousand; they brought with them, all things necessary for the assault of a
Town: And for the more ease of the Prince, there attended a Selected Counsel of
the Senate, to the Companions of his Cares.

But fame hereof coming to the Enemy, it was believed, the Army was bent
against the Cities of Brabant* or el^e to take Gertruydenberg, because a few
days before, the S^u^^iers had in those parts taken Forts and Castles: And ^he
Prince forwarded in them this error, at first, by a doub^full march; as if he
intended to go to the Maes; but on a sudden, at the winding of the Rhine,
turning into Issell, there met him Count William, and two thousand Frizons,
drawn out of the Garrisons. Here Intelligence was received, both from Sir
Francis Vere, and some Prisoners, that the Banck was to be possessed. Here the
Enemy was secure, in other places he was afraid; and therefore, that the City
was neither well fortifyed, nor victualled but for a few days; That the
besieged, before any Relief or Provisions could be brought to them, might be
taken by fo^ce, there no being in the Town above six hundred Armed men, and
nothing considerable of force, could be raised by the Citizens, most of them
having formerly left the place, to avoid the Soldiers insultations. At the
very first Skirmish, Count Falcosteyne, the chiefest of all Truxius his
Commanders was slain, while he too furiously pursued the beaten Enemy flying
into the Town, but his body was fetched off, and rescued from villainous usage.
Upon the River were placed Ships, fixed with Anchors, in form of ^ Bridge,
which reaching orderly from Banck to Banck, joyn^ the Soldiers Quarters
together with a safe passage; (...) from thence, others were commanded to
dismantle all (...) Guards upon the ways; and another part were ordered (...)
draw oblike and crooked Trenches up to the Castle, that (...) the casting up of
the Earth, they might come, safe from the Enemies Darts or Shot, up to
undermine the very Walls and to this work, the night was designed.

The Seamen and Mariners, whose readiness and co^ in Maritime Affairs, was
here of very great use, for the brought thirty great Guns, with more celerity,
than Horse part into a little Island in the River, and part against the main
Buildings of the City, that they might with the continual Thunder thereof,
shake and, overthrow that part of the Works which was weakest, in regard the
River was of it (...) a strong defense. But in the City, though struck with a
s^den fear, yet they ran up and down every where, to prev^^ the Enemies
endeavors, they increased the Rampi^es at the Gate, shut up by the foe, and
within began new Works, by which time, a certain number of Cannon being shot
off, according to Military Custom, Messengers were sent by the Prince, with
threats of the greatest extremity, unless they would submit and render the
Town: They pray a time to consult, but that would not be granted; whereupon,
conscious to themselves, of the want of many things, and how f^ they were to
defend the large circuit of the Walls, they ^ rendered upon Articles, that the
Soldiers should march away safe and undisturbed, and the Townsmen, if they
ple^ed, might stay, being ordered and governed according to the Laws and
Customs of the confederate Cities. According to which conclusion, many Sieges
afterward being ended we shall not so often repeat the same.

The Spaniards found fault with the too hasty rendition of the Town, and
therefore the Governor of it, as long as the Duke of Parma lived, was never
suffered to come to Court. The fifth day, after the beginning of the Siege, was
Zutphen delivered: it stands in an excellent Situation, the River Bark^ runs
through it, Issell passes by it, as it comes from ^phalia, and not far off
falling into the Rhine, by the labor of Drasus, as it is believed. This with
her Neighbor-towns and Country was of old subject to the Princes thereof, who
were called Earls; and there remains a distinct (...) of Jurisdiction, though
it be now united to the body of G^lderland, not so much, by reason of its
situation beyond the Rhine, as by the intermarriages of Princes: Upon the same
Banck stands Deventer, formerly a free City of the Aus^ike League, and the
Metropolis of Over-Issell, under the Bishops power: Hither when the Army came
with a swift march, at the very sight thereof, they were at a nonplus, not
knowing what to do. But the strong Fortifications of the City, and the
greatness of the Garrison, whereof the Army had Intelligence, being one hundred
Horse, and fourteen Ensigns of Foot, made the Prince at a stand. Herman, Count
Her^nberg, was Governor thereof, both an instructor, and an example of virtue
and fidelity, he was nearly allied by blo^d to Prince Maurice himself, as being
born of his Aunt, and therefore so much the more envying the glory and splendour
of his Kinsman: Above all, the Duke of Parma was feared, least he should draw
together Forces, and come and disturb them in their Siege, which if it should
happen, there would be a necessity for them, either shamefully to fly, or
doubtfully run the hazard of a battle.

And the taking of Zutphen, as it was a great encouragement to all that hoped
well, so was it a warning to others, that they should not endanger their gotten
Honor, but rather preserve it for more certain advantages: On the other side,
some that fled out of the City, brought Intelligence, that the Soldiers were
ready to mutiny, that there was not Victuals to serve against a long Siege;
nay, that they had not Gunpowder enough in any proportion for their Guns: which
being understood, the middle course was resolved on, to wit, that they should
with all speed, fortisie their Camp, stop ^ all passages both by Land and
Water, that no Messenge^ might be able to get to them with news of Relief: But
if the Enemy should hold out, it would be sufficient, that all the Bancks being
guarded, they might for the future; easily pass to the other side, and force
them, and this was the sum of the Counsel, before the expedition was undertaken.

Prince Maurice making a continual battery against the Town, upon the ninth
day, to try the minds of the besieged, drew up his Army before the Walls; then
commands some Ships to be forthwith carried into the Channel, where the River
passing by the City, is somewhat stopped, and to place them near the shore:
These, in regard they could not be rowed, because of the narrowness of the
River, some Seam^ drew under the very Walls with their hands, in spite of all the Enemies Shot; an undertaking certainly of such a nature, as many courageous
men, would have shrunk at: The Boats being placed in the very trench, and a
Bridge made over them, every one was ready to take upon him the sho^ and
assault, to merit the Princes praise, who called it an honorable piece of
Service, though it was not a work for ordinary Valor; Thus while they made so
much have, they hindered the Engineers, and the Bridge it self being a little
too short, did not reach over to the other Bancks; The Wall is this place,
together with an adjoining Tower, was partly beaten down by the force of the
battery, part of it yet being supported by Arches (for it was an ancient
Structure) and heaps of Earth thrown into the hollow places thereof; The choice
men that were to give the onset, and if they entered, to make good the place,
were many of them drowned, some few only attaining the shore by leaping.

I cannot in this place, pass by the glorious emulation of two Ensigns, the
one of whom being killed upon the top of the Walls the other brought off both
his own Colors, and those of his slaughtered Companion; But all this time, the
Cannon did the greatest harm to the Enemy, yet could not force them from the
Walls; for being full of Wine, they made rather a desperate than a valiant
defense; Here in the first place, Count Herman fought with more than necessary
Valor (in regard he was the Governor of the Town) but he did it to make good
his Honor and fidelity. (For some Spaniards had not stuck to report, that it
was an agreed design between the two Kinsmen.) Nor did he go away before the
showers of Bullets yet continuing thick, he was in the darkness wounded. All
night, the Princes men were fain to defend the Bridge from being burned, for
the Enemy continually cast fire at it.

As soon as the Day again appeared, and the Enemy now grown sober, saw plainly
the Prince's Army before them in Battle Array, and the Bridge whole, the sight
being also ready to begin again; then they considered their danger, especially
upon the Return of some that had been sent as Spies; who reporting the Prince's
strength, with the greatest Advantage, made their disgrace (in case they
surrendered) to seem the less: Count Herman alone would not consent to
surrender, but he being very ill with his Wounds (though he might suffer the
Rendition, yet) could not hinder it: For the Townsmen now called to the
Soldiers that guarded the Bridge, that they might have liberty to Treat;
whereof the Prince being informed, and receiving from him safe Conduct, they
went out: The Townsmen were left to the Conquerours Mercy, and that thereafter
they should have Magistrates appointed, not according to their own Laws and
Customs, but as should be thought convenient by the United States of the
Reformed Religion: And it appeared, that as Zutphen, so also Deventer, did not
reckon the Spaniards should dwell amongst them for ever; for that before the
Siege they burnt their Huts, although they had not long before Wood enough:
Before their departure, all the Captains and Officers were delivered bound, in
vain lamenting the own Necessities, and the Civil Discords: But Count H^ would
not believe, that the States were able to raise such numerous Forces; yet he,
having been Governor, durst not go into the Spanish Quarters, fearing bitter
and invete^ Accusers, and prepossessed Judges. Fit Garrisons being (...) placed
in the Cities lately taken, the Frizons beseeched (...) That now at last he
would think of them, whose Peace was di^^ bed by the pertinacious Obstinacy of
one single City; and that (...) remained now but a few Towns and Castles, which
if they were taken, the whole Country, between the Rivers Issel and Ems, would
be free from the Enemies Encumbrances, and be entirely in the States Power: So
much was their hope advanced, by these first Successes, that they, who till
this time hardly durst undertake any thing, now on a sudden, did not boggle at
the most adventurous Enterprises. With great speed therefore, an Expedition
into Frizeland was begun; and least, in the absence of the Army, the Enemy
should make any Im^ons, the Regiments lately raised in Holland, were ordered to
keep good and strong Guards upon the Wael. The Provisions of War, and all other
Things that might impede their Journey, being put aboard some Ships, were
carried out of the Issel into the Zuyderzee, and so through the Ocean to the
River Ems.

The Soldiery, by this means, free from Porsage, only in passing over the
Marshes, they carried, besides their Daily Provision, Faggots, were led into
that part of Over-Issels which is called Drent, where the People had enclosed
their Marshy Grounds, with a great many young Shoots of Places growing
together; for the Enemy stopped the better way, being possessed of Coevorden,
which some did advise the Army to take as they went, least from thence the
Enemy should p^e them in the Rear; averring, that Verdugo, who kept that
Castle, might easily be beaten thence, either by some Stratagems, public
Force, or want of Victuals: But this C^^el was not approved, by reason of the
difficult bringing either of great Carriages for Battery in a Land-March; and
also, because there was less necessity of fighting at Groe^^g.

Among many other inconveniences, the Army met with, in their March thither,
one was a Meor, containing in (...) Three Thousand five hundred Paces: And
though the upper Crustiness of the Turf was so hardened, notwithstanding Natural
Moisture underneath, that it would endure a few to go over it; yet such as
followed in the Third or Fourth Rank, sunk so deep into the yielding Mud, that
they could hardly be drawn out, though sometimes their Captains came, and gave
their helping hand to them, that so the Toil might not seem so grievous to the
Soldier; and in a few hours the whole Army had passed it, which all the
Inhabitants thereabouts had thought impossible to be done: But the Soldiers
could not be restrained, by any Authority, to forbear Injuring to the Country
as they marched, according to the Evil Custom of Armies, their pilfering,
stealing, and wasting of what would have served for many days, had almost
caused want of Provision; and that would have bred a Sedition, but that the
Ships came in season, loaded with Provision, to prevent the same. Now were all
the Tents pitched about Groening, where the Prince conceived a good hope of
Success, from the variable and unconstant behavior of the Vulgar, against
those in Authority, as also from the Discords within the City: But indeed, too
confident in their words, by Relations above Truth, had for their own advantage
drawn the Army thither: It Is true, there were some within, who remembered the
League of Union, but they were over-powred by the adverse Faction. Moreover,
Verdugo, upon the Report of the Armies coming into those Parts, had strengthened
both Steo^wic, and Coevorden, with Garrisons; and with the Remainder of his
Forces was come to Groening before Prince Maurice; yet was not for all that
admitt^ within the Gates, (for the City when it first submitted, excepted that
one particular) but kept his proper Guards in the Suburbs, as well to the
Terror, as the Aid of the City. The Prince not staying above six days there;
for fear the City should, as out of Necessity, admit that Garrison within their
Walls, and so, for the future, all their hopes be utterly lost; an likewise
because he heard the Duke of Parma was preparing an Army to raise the Siege, on
a sudden falls upon all the circumjacent Forts, whereby all the Ways and
Passages of Rivers were stopped: And which had in the Series of this long War,
been often subverted by the Frizons, and as often rebuilt.

Great was the Fear and Dread of the Soldiers, as having been more accustomed
to Theft and Depopulations, than Fighting; few of them en^uring more than the
very sight of the Ca^on and the weak places they left without any Siege at
all: The greatest Castle of all named Delfeziel, and famous for a H^ven, where
Fivel falls into the Ems, was held by Soldiers of Groening; the convenience of
the place, had, of old, w^ough upon all, that desired the Dominion of the City,
to get or keep i^; which the Duke of Alva attempted, but was hindered by the
Times. The States now having gotten this place, enlarged the Old, and
strengthened it with new Works making the Tributes of the places near thereto,
bear the Charge; dividing the Sea-Bank from the Rampire, and building Houses
therein, threa^ning Groening; That unless they repented, they would not leave
it any Inhabitants. And at the same time, a great w^ of all Things shrewdly
tempted the enclosed to alter their Faith, and consequently their Lords: But
after the Prince had drawn away his Army, Verdugo making his way by force,
through the weakest Fort, opened a Passage to the City, out of Westfalia, by
Bourtange: But the Duke of Parma coming too late, to help either Zut^^, or
Deventer and imagining the Enemy durst not have ^^^uted so far, for that many
of the Spaniards, by reason of their ill pay, would not be commanded, doubtful
whither he should lead his Forces, being now met together about the Maes and
the Rhine, either to distract the Enemy in his Design or to match after him
voluntarily, which would be the more noble, and so to help Groening, as he was
desired: he was deterred from the latter, by the excessive greatness of the
Journey; and besides, all the Country lying between, was wasted and spoiled,
either by the Frizon Soldiers, or his own. Wherefore, at last, he resolved to
answer the desire of Nimmeghen; whither being come, he commanded the River to
be passed over, and the Fort, which Prince Maurice had the former year begun,
to be besieged; himself would do all that was necessary in the City: Count
Barlaymont lay upon that side of Knodsenburg, which looks Eastward: Another was
Beleague^'d by Octavius, Count Mansfeldt, who was shortly after shot by the
Besieged, and dyed of the Wound: He was a Noble Person, and although but young,
yet ambitious of Honor, and for the winning thereof, would shun no danger. The
backside of the Fort was enclosed by the Horse, and some other Regiments.
Lamotte brought thither the Artillery with ease, by the help of the Rising
Bank; He afterward finding the Bulwark too strong for the Cannon, though a
great part of the Ravelin was beaten down, and seeing the Enemy were not
terrified, at the sight of the Army drawn up in Battle Array against them,
filled the Trench with Oziers, and other Boughs, and after that sends some
privately to undermine the Bulwark; they, in the mean time, who were to fill
the Ditch, helping the Work forward, with many of their dead Bodies. But the
Defendants, that were Six Hundred, under the Command of Gerard Junius, a Man of
great Courage, were ready in all places, to answer the Force or Policy of the
Enemy with Shot, and otherwise; many times, by successful Sarlies, disturbing
their enterp^sed beginnings.

At this time Prince Maurice had left Groening, and was going against
Steenewie, when heating of the Siege of K^senburg, he left Count William to
defend the Frizons, and himself, with a flying Army, coming to Arnheynie, an
I^e of Holland, by Signs, encouraged the Besieged; and likewise from thence
sent Messengers, that got through the adverse Army, unespy'd by Night in a
Boat: But the Nassania^ Commanders differed in Opinion, whether they should
(...) the Enemy in the Field, and fight him; or, passing the River Wael, should
fortify themselves, and hinder their Adversaries of Provision, and make them
leave the Works and Guns, they had settled upon the side of the Hill by
Ni^^ghen: There was difficulty and danger in both these Attempts; for, without
all doubt, the Enemy was stronger in Horse, whose Force and Valor they had
often tried, both in Fight and Forraging. At length Fortune determined their
Doubt, which many times is as profitable as Prudence; for the Prince, with
Count Solms, and Sir Francis Vere, being brought near the Enemies Camp, hid
part of the forwardest Regiments, with some Troops, among the Thickets
adjoining to the way: Other part of the Horse were commanded to march a good
way forward, to draw on the Enemy, upon whose approach, they were to seem to
fly, as if they were overpowered, (for most of the Italians in Ten Troops,
among whom was the Duke of Parma's own Lifeguard were come out to pursue them)
and they were not to face about, till they had drawn the Pursuers beyond the
River, and a narrow Bridge that went over it; which being brought to pass,
according to expectation, suddenly they that fled, turned again; and the
others that lay in Ambush coming in, they were enclosed, and every valiant man
among them dyed in the place he stood; the rest were scatteringly slain, as
they were met with, only some few, while the Conquerours took the Ensigns, and
some prisoners alive, and the Horses, escaped and fled to the Camp: With the
grief whereof, and the loss of so many noble and valiant men, not thinking it
safe any longer to stay in the Enemies quarters, he gave over his vain Siege;
but pretending, that he was commanded to march once more into France, and that
the great Affairs of the^ Kingdom were not to be neglected, in striving to win
a few Forts or Castles in Holland: Wherefore, sending the Carriages before, he
Transported his Army, having only built some slight Works upon the River, to
keep the Nassauians in play, least they should fall upon his Rear; and as soon
as his Army was all over the Water, he commanded them to make a stand, that
they might secure the ships coming after them: But the City was highly
displeased at his departure; some few spoke of him favorably; most smothered
their Anger in a threatening silence; but the baser sort of people covered
nothing of their Madness, but showed their Fury in their Speeches; as if they
could by them draw back an Old General, that fled at the sight of a stripling
Enemy.

Undoubtedly, Parma's Mind, having always been accustomed to win Honor, was
grievously afflicted with this Disgrace; so that his former Disease, now again
increasing, be, together with his Son Ranutio (who lately came out of Italy,
augmented his Fathers Vexation, that he should be a Witness of his Misfortune)
went to the Spaw; there, among the variety of his present Discontent, and
former Fortune, to drink of the Waters. From thence he sent to the Mutinous
Spaniards at Die; for pacifying whom, he gave a very prejudicial Example, to
wit, That Emanuel Vega a Captain, who was more severe, than the Villainy of the
Soldiers would bear, should be displaced, and another put into his room.

The Citizens of Nimmeghen did many of them begin to look after Liberty,
especially after Desperation had multiplied those Evils, which before they had
scarcely undergone, with the Promises and Expectation of better Things: For six
years before, following the Duke of Parma's good Fortune; (...) by a general
Consent, but the Faction of a small Party, when the Government of the United
States, after a long time, and by much care, came to be settled, (without whose
Consent, whatever Duty or Obedience they showed, was without any Affection) yet
they chose Safety and Profit: And from that time, there began a mutual Commerce
between them and the Hollanders, who suffered the Ships of Nimmeghen to go
through the Wael; because then the Channel of the R^ wanted Depth of Water to
bear them. But in the Garrison were Three Companies, one of Foreigners, two of
men ^ised within the Town, (for they positively refused to admit of more) and
as any one offended more heinously the parties of the great Ones, they would,
by virtue of their received Power, threatningly restrain or punish the
Offenders. There wanted now only a close Siege, least the Enemies Forces
should lie at lurch about the Maes; and that was only delayed by the excessive
increase of Water in the Wael, so that there could not be had any use of a
Bridge: However, the Soldier rested not long quiet in his Winter Quarters,
though they were purposely at a great distance, the more to increase the
Conquering Enemies Security: For Prince Maurice, prosecuting his good Fortune,
draws out of his Garrisons part of the Regiments, and with them marches over
the Scheldt into the Land of Wase; and at the same time, the Horse made an
Intoad into Brabant: And the fifth day after, having taken all the Forts
thereabouts, Hulst, a Town in that Province, was delivered to him: The
suddainness of the Action amazed the Garrison Soldiers, (for the Governor, by
chance, was gone out of Town before the Siege, upon private occasions of his
own) and also, because the Prince had dug through the Bank, to make the
River overflow all the adjacent places, and by that means stopped the Enemy
from assisting them.

The whole Land of Wase was given to the Soldiers, to spoil and pillage, until
they promised Tribute, and sent Hostages to the States, for payment of the
same: But the Neighbors of the Hollanders, seeing all the best of their
Fruits, and other Provisions, possessed by the Enemy, Prince Maurice's Army
being gone, as fearing to have bin met with unawares in the Enemies Country by
the Duke of Parma, cause Mondrag^io, the Governor of the Castle at Antwerp, to
take Arms; who, accordingly, with the next Soldiers he could get, and such as
lived about the Maes, goes over the Scheldt, but not daring to look upon any
Town, (for Count Solms defended them, and Repaired the Works) he recovered the
Forts and Sconces in the Country, and Erected some n^w ones, for the straitning
or cutting off Excursions.

Hereupon, the Inhabitants of the Country denied their promised Tribute,
supposing, and not without Reason, that the Clemency of the Enemy would not
break its wonted bounds, and revenge the injury upon the innocent pledges. All
things succeeding thus, even beyond his wishes, the Prince once again drawing
his Soldiers out of their winter quarters, goes into Gelderland, which the
Enemy had quitted; In this hasty Progress, some of his Ships, falling upon the
shelves, he was constrained to burn; shortly after, recruited with the Forces
of Count William (being twelve Ensigns) he entered the Wael, and united the
Island, and the main Land, together with a Bridge. The Camp on both sides, was
sortified against any Enemy that should come on their backs: The upper part of
the Town, where the Walls were not lined with banks, he thought fit to batter,
and because it seemed a great way to draw the Artillery, and incommodious
withal, they were carried before the Town in the night, and by that means,
the Defendants in Nimmeghen, for that in the dark they could not discern the
quick motion of the Ships, spent all their Shot and Darts in vain.

At the same time, beyond the River, on the other Bank, there were other
Military Engines to shoot into the Town At first, they resolved courageously to
defend the Town, and being not yet quite enclosed round, they sent to Verdugo,
desiring him not to forsake them in that their extreme danger; for at this
time, he was commanded to defend Gelderland, (...) had no forces, so that he
might not immeritedly complain^ have only forsaken places under his charge.
After this, because they feared their Fortifications might be defective, al
hand, of all Sexes and Ages, were employed to make a (...) Work more inwards.
There is a Castle in this place, (...) not so much because it is impregnable by
the Military ^iscipline of this Age, as for its being a Monument of ant^
greatness and prowess: The Townsmen attribute the glory of the Work to Julius
Caesar, warring in these parts against Gaul. They tell us also, that the Catti
built the City, who when of old they left their own Country, possessed this
Island of the Rhine, and all the Neighboring parts of Belgia. But it is
evident to me in my search of old Authors, that here uppeared no kind of City,
either in the days of Caesar, or of Trajan, in whose Reign, Tacitus wrote in
the Roman I^rary, written by Antoninus; this Nimmeghen began first to peep up
her Head at the Wael, and that Charlemayne built a Palace therein, the French
Chronicles declare, assuring us withal, that by the Normans, it was utterly
consumed with fire; but the Germans not long after growing prevalent, it became
a free City, and was a great while the Selected Seat of those Emperors. Until
by the Articles of the Pope, it was torn from the German Empire, in the
divisions thereof, when William Earl of Holland got his share, and want of
money still produced new occasions, it was pawned to Oth^, ^h^n Earl of
Gelderland, from which time, being by reason of its so near vicinity to the
Province of Geldres annexed thereto, it has increased in power, growing rich
by the long enjoyment of peace, and having brought forth many ingenious man;
But to return to the Siege. As soon as the Cannon and Gra^^e^, and other
private Stratagems, by Mines and the like, had now made the danger alike in
every place, being once more summoned, they were divided into factions. The G^
^n^s, and men in Power, boasted of the Kings Power, and that an Army was coming
to their relief, both out of Frizeland and Flanders, there being no Reason, why
Renegadoes should have their revenge; But the common People gathering together
with a sudden fury, broke into the Court, where after a long murmur, and
humming noise, at length, ^ burst forth into words to this effect, first
setting forth their misery in the stopping up of the River, their wasted lands,
their ruined Houses, and the approach of Famine. [Neither, says he, is this
the first time, that we have by a Siege been forced to yield to our fortune; It
is now a Year and upwards, (...) we have here lived in a wretched condition
among these dangers, glad to sock any corner to hide our selves in for safety;
and the continued Series of our miseries is thus much more increased, for that
we have unworthily and treacherously violated all Covenant: But we unworthy of
any help, and neglected by our Lords, of whom we have merited better things
have received a very Signal favor from the Enemy unless perhaps now, us if
bound to suffer the extremity, we still wait for relief from them, who refused
to help us while they might; or which is as vain, that we should think with our
own strength, and three little Bands of Soldiers, to overthrow those
mountainous Fortifications, and raise a Siege which is so strongly settled and
maintained. We shall be left as Zu^phen and Deventer; We have against all
Reason, protracted the time beyond Hulste, and what hope have we? what Reward
shall we receive of our obstinacy? Alas, wretches! nothing but to be conquered:
Let us now at length shake off the Chains of a based and ungrateful Kingdom,
while we receive him who now is reputed our Adversary, not as a powerful foe,
but a merciful Conqueror. There is a sort of People, who always wage War,
that they may not be enslaved by others, yet never have any hope of settling a
Government among themselves; To these all Rivers ^ Seas are open, they sail to
all places for Commerce; their (...) flourish as in the undisturbed enjoyment
of a continual Peace; (...) are not impoverished either by their Governors
and Magist^^ avarice or the rude licentiousness of Soldiers: while we pay ^
less Tributes for the upholding our slavery, than for the (...) of our Laws and
Customs: Let us become free among Fr^ and in enjoying that happy Name of a
Commonwealth, instead of being conquered we shall be equal Conquerours, and
have ^qual share both in Command and Government.]

This Speech being ended, many of the People did threaningly murmur the same
things, so that they who at the beginning were averse, now went away, as
consenting either out of fear, or for that they believed what was spoken was
(...) truth; And the Soldiery durst not resist, being well contented, in
regard of their inability, to have their lives saved; The City desired they
might be permitted the use of the Roman Catholic Religion, but it would not be
granted: As so^n as it was delivered, Prince Maurice sent in a Garrison, and
appointed a new Magistrate, and this privilege he took ^ himself, during the
War, abrogating the power of incorrupted Fraternities, as the only nurse of
Sedition, for (...) the Neighboring Towns were ruled by a Senate, unless the
for the dispatch of more weighty Affairs, some were by chance elected from
among the People: Thus enjoying the greatest part of Gelderland, he restored
the ancient splendour of his Family, for that formerly, the Princes of the Name
and Blood of Nassau had governed that Province.

The Siege of Steenwic was thought fit to be deferred, because the Winter was
now come, very hurtful, by the Frost and Ice, to marches and obnoxious to
carriages, nor would it have been any thing better, if it should either rain or
snow, because the natural moisture and marishness of the ground would be
exceedingly increased; wherefore the Prince returning Victor into Holland,
laden with honorable fame, even among foreign Nations, he was received by
the (...), even with an excess of joy.

The people of old were wont to rejoice at their Princes good fortune, as from
Command, not obliged by duty. They had known the former Prince of Aurang only
in disguise, under the Cloud of adverse fortune. And in the Earl of Leicester's
time, they were perplexed between private discords, and public murders: Now
only they saw their bounds enlarged by Arms, and their Government settled by
Rivers, and strengthened with fortifyed Towns, and yet their Leader requiring no
other satisfaction for all his pains and labor, than the glory thereof, the
benefit of the success being wholly left to the Country; which looked not only
with hope. ^ut ad^^tion at his youth, as if it had been on purpose, set apart
by the divine Providence, for such weighty undertakings.

And then again, casting their unsatisfied eyes upon his countenance, they
gratefully reverenced that tender Age, and (...) Blood, which had so often
thrown it self upon dangers for their defense. And without all doubt, the
Princes good fortune was much forwarded by celerity; besides, he had learned
the exquisite Arts of Fortification, both as to the of sensive and defensive
part, the besieging or defending Towns, and as far as the present Age was able
to instruct him, was well practiced in the encamping of an Army.

The Enemies were nothing so industrious, their confidence (as it is generally
observed) breeding carelessness and sloth, and sometimes overweening Temeri^y.
They who are weakest in power, are for the most part strongest in Counsel, as
aiming to supply by prudent Resolutions and Industry, what is deficient in
strength. Fame also is a great assistant, where the first happy events are
multiplied to the great supportation of liberty. But the mayn of all, was the
strength of Shipping among so many Rivers, without which the rest would have
profited but little.

According to Custom, the Soldiers wintered in Garrisons, from whence many
times, small parties going out wi^h various success, brought in booty, or were
circumvented by the Enemy. During which times also, stratagems were frequently
used for getting of Towns; such were they, whereby here Gertruydenburg,
Maestrict, and Scluys, were offered at; and in another part, Breda was
endeavored to be taken but the Ambushy being discovered, the Armies marched
back, frustrate of their designs. Now was the Sea scowned from Pirates, and the
Duke of Parma being for France, received joyfully an Embassy sent from the
Emperor, to m^ and mediate a Peace: But the United Provinces, suspected it,
1592.
as they had reason; but chiefly, because they had intercepted Letters from the
King of Spain, written concerning it: wherefore they shut their e^ against
those old deceits, warned by the fresh example of the Arragonians, who, while
they unwarily discoursed of liberty, were surprised by craft, and drawn into
slavery and ruin.

These People of Spain, of old called Tarraconia, now ^^garly Arragon, first
getting possession of that part of the Country by Arms, which barbarous
Nations, from the other side of the Sea, had invaded, by the Counsel of such as
we^ esteemed wise among them, erected a Commonwealth; At the beginning, Kings
(that name and honor being given to a limited power) were chosen here by the
suffrages of the people, afterward by the Custom of several Nations, their
Heirs were admitted by Succession to the Government, yet obliging them to the
observance of the Law, whereby they who were then eminent, as foreseeing the
inconveniences of a Kingdom, conveyed some power to the people whose Authority
was to be used in public Counsels, and gave a privilege of Supreme
Magistracy, even over the Kings themselves, and these boundaries were well
observed, as long as the Princes were careful to do Right and Justice, and made
use of no Forces to defend Crimes. But afterward there happening a Conjunction
of Kingdoms, and all Spain, by that means, becoming subject to King Philip, all
men's patience was tried by the severity of the Inquisition, and every thing by
new forms of Judgment was disposed, and they rather fitted to the pleasure of
the Court and Courtiers, then squared by the Rule of the ancient Law, or
Prescript order of Justice. The Case of Anthony Perez was greatly commiserated
by the People, who having been employed by King Philip, about E^o^vedo's death,
was yet by him falsely accused of but an ordinary fault, for which deprived of
all Authority, and flying from Castile, he was yet prosecuted by the Kings
rage, into this Region, for the King hated him, because he had been active as a
procurer in matters of Love. And when he Instruments of wrath, impudently
opposed the Laws, and would by no means suffer Justice, they were resisted by
force, and the first commotions being provoked by force, were afterward
nourished by gentle endeavors and dissimulation; And as the Tumults begun
under a malevolent constellation, so the City was persuaded under pretense of
the French War, to suffer the Kings Army to come through its Borders, and to
march through Sarragosa, the Metropolis of that Region, and so to go over the
Pyrenean Mountains: But instead thereof, the Nobles were murdered, and every
one, that either with Tongue or hand, had been forward to advance liberty was
by revenge marked and for the future, nothing remained, but a prospect of
Tyranny and slavery.

Although these things are not suitable to my purpose, yet I have not neglected
to insert them here, at such times as they happened, that Posterity may compare
their fortune, and the Netherlanders together, that as well the faults of
Princes may be known, as the People may be instructed, that many times the
cause is no less to be minded, than the Forces of a King.

While these Transactions were a foot otherwhere, the King of France being
recruited with German Soldiers, and English Auxiliaries, besieged Roan, Queen
Elizabeth desiring that he would enclose the Enemy between the River Seine, and
the British Ocean: this made the French Confederates with Parma, take his long
stay the worse, who being slow in making ready his Warlike preparations, or
else consulting of some higher design, how to augment the dangers, at last,
though late in the year, having first received the Town of Fer in pledge, he
drew near to the Borders of Normandy; There were in his Army several new raised
men, and those Regiments which had lately fallen into a mutiny, but now were
restored to their Colors, being full of booty, and having also received their
pay, which the Duke of Parma very hardly extorted by the increase of Tributes,
and selling the right of Commerce to the Enemies, the Netherlanders not without
cause complaining, that their Borders were left naked, and their money and
strongest men carried away to help strangers.

Pope Gregory sent also Assistance to the French Rebels, ^ thing not used by
his Predecessors, terrifying also their foes with cursings and threats, such as
might have frighted a former Age; but such as either feared damage, or loved
profit, forbore to meddle; and such as really intended help, were soon taken
off by old age. It is manifest, that Sixtus, withholden by envy to the
Spaniard, and rather than he would augment his Wealth, inclined to the French
King, and this many suspected to be a cause of hastening his death.

Against the plague of this concuring War, the United States rigged a Fleet,
and sent to the King for a Guard, of the very ^lower of all their Regiments,
ten Ensigns of Scott, and the like number of Netherlanders, under the Command
of Philip Nassau: But when the Duke of Parma (for now he mustered his Army)
long delayed his March. King Henry dismissed for the Winter, most of the
Nobility that were faithful to him, and the only support of his necessitated
War, that he might have them the more ready another time; They were scarce
departed, when the King hearing of the Enemies approach to assault him, was
compelled to draw his Forces together, and by that means, the Siege was raised.
But when the entrance of the Spring had brought him a Recruit of Horse he
pressed upon the Enemy, and forcing him beyond the River, pinched him with
Famine, for he was impatient of any longer delay, and ready to decide the cause
by Battle, if the Duke of Parma silently repassing the River, had not marched
toward Paris. Wherefore the King leaving Ro^n, and taking some other Ports on
that Coast into his power, and fortifying them where they wanted, he brought to
pass, that thereafter he could not be hindered of any assistance coming to him
by Sea. In this Interim, there were some light skirmishes, famous only in this,
that in one the King was wounded, and in another, the Duke of Parma, which
wound troubled him mo^e than his old Disease, for cure whereof, he had gone to
the Spaw: And now wearied with France, about the latter end of Summer, he
brings his ragged Regiments through Vermandois, the nearest way to the
Netherlands.

At this time, the English, while the Spaniards passed backwards and forwards
in America and other places, very much annoyed them, both the Wind and the Sea
conspiring against them, to deliver them up as a public Enemy. And whils they
have spoiled one another, the tempestuous Sea spared neither.

And now also, that anniversary plague of mutinous parties returned into the
Netherlands, and that with the more violence, because the Mutineers not only
wanted their pay, but were pinched with the miseries of Winter. Some that were
quartered about the Cities of Colen grew very outrageous, as looking upon
Germany, as able to yield them booty enough; But such as remained about Liege,
and the Country near thereto, after they had by a long stay wasted all the
Country about, part ran away to other parts, but most of them perished either
by poverty or Diseases; and if any yet continued healthy, they were so
accustomed to discord, that they would range far and wide to wast and destroy;
and by this means, more was to be maintained, yet there were fewer to defend
it. But the Land, under the United States, was more restrained, having for
defense in most places, Rivers running round about it, and the Sea securing
another part. Besides the valor and virtue of the Citizens was well known,
that they who were raised in the inner part of the Country, would help to
defend the furthest parts thereof, and be faithful Supplies to the Regiments
abroad. Hence it was, that there was a desire to go out with some part of the
present Forces, while the Duke of Parma was not yet returned; and if they had
made have, without doubt, many of his men wearied with Travel, and worn out
with Battles, and then also coming from a strange Country in the Winter, would
not have been able to have encountered half the number of their Enemies. But
laying aside talk, they began to think of action. Holland insisted upon the
Siege of Gertruydenburg. But the Frizons were preferred before all, that the
prosperous beginnings of the last year might be perfected in this, themselves
also offering their own Soldiers, of whom they never need to fear a scarcity,
if there be a War continued for any time: And indeed, these were the main
strength of the Union, as long as the other Regiments attended the War in
France.

About this time, some Letters written by the Groningers, to Count Mansfeldt,
were intercepted, which declared the necessity of their condition, and how want
of all things grew upon them: Moreover, they sent some selected Deputies to the
Emperor, to tell him, they had not fled to the greatness of the House of
Austria, when they were free, that now they should be left undefended to the
Government of Deputies, and laid open to the injuries of their Enemies: should
they never be so happy, as to see their General and his Army, at least for
example sake, that no people might seem to have followed the fortune of that
great House, without Reason, or unadvisedly? Which complaints being sent into
Spain, produced yet no other effect, than Exhortations to fidelity, and great
promises, that an Army should come, and cut open their passages with the Sword.
One Regiment was added for defense of those places held beyond the Rhine. And
while Verdugo endeavors by all means to increase his Forces, Herman Count
Heremberg, daring nothing further, infested only the lesser Fortifications
about Issell, from whence the Inhabitants took an occasion to contract, that
they would undergo the sudden brunt of both sides, and that they should enjoy
by the levelling of the Castles, a common possession of their Lands, until
both Armies had decided their quarrel by a pitched Battle in the Field. At this
time, as it were on purpose to hinder Prince Maurice his March, the news of
the Vtrecht Factions came to his Ears, for that unquiet City had not yet
forgotten those differences in Religion, which were begun in the Earl of
Leicesters time: And Zeland lying far from the reach or defense of his Sword,
began to deny the payment of their Taxes and Assesments; but these being all by
him easily and with speed composed, in that same Spring he marched out, not
with any new raised Bands, but for his supply and recruit, he had sent Orders
to several Captains: And thus he did muster of Hollanders and Frizons, eight
thousand Foot very near, and five hundred Horse, and of Artillery, greater and
less, fifty.

As soon as they were come to the utmost Border of Over-Issell, which looks
toward Frizeland, the Walls of Steenwic were in sight, the greatness of whose
strength and Fortification, as well as the fame of the Town, took up all their
thoughts: And some of the States being of late terrified therewith, as also
diverse foreign Princes, judged it a very rash undertaking; for they remembered,
that this was the place from whence they had driven Renneberg, after a Siege of
three months, nor had he then a less Army, nor wanted any defenses, that were
found necessary, either by custom or fear; for the Spaniard after he had taken
it by stratagem, supposing that Frizeland would thereby be as it were shut up,
and that the Zuydare might be sufficiently molested with Ships, added to the
modern fortification, what ever might be advantageous against all those
violences, whereof the Wars of former Ages w^ ignorant. On that side which
looks toward the Sea, was only a low marshy ground, scarcely bearing any to
wa^ thereon, much less fit for the drawing of Carriages with great Guns, or
serviceable to raise Batteries: wherefore this ground being lightly thrown up,
did rather enclose, this strengthen the Town on that side.

Another part was encompassed with a Rampire made of a stiff Clay, intermingled
and made strong with Timber-logs, piled one upon another, so that it was
consolidated without any possibility, almost of divulsion. There were two great
Forts, and between these two little ones, excellently raised by Art, so that on
every part they flanked the Assaylants; and besides the^e there was a Gallery
for the Defendants, and at the bottom of the Fortifications, to stop all that
should come to scale, there was a continued rank of Palisadoes: from hence the
Trench began, a hundred foot in breadth, whereinto water was drawn to fill it
with a Mill, from a small River, which comes out of Drente, and being a little
shallower than the Trench, passes thence to the Blocksile Port, it falls into
the Zuyderzee.

Beyond the Trench, there is another Work, or Countermure, kept by continual
Guards day and night, and is fit to make Sallies, being moderately hollow and
bending; for the other Bulwarks that lay further off, and divided from the
Town, they were taken without any difficuly. The Besieged were sufficiently
supplied with two things, to wit, number of men, and obstinacy, for the Town
(which is not very large) had in it, a thousand well Armed Foot, and six
hundred Horse, who all resolved to suffer the greatest extremities imaginable,
rather than render the Garrison: He who was Governor, named Anthonio C^quelle,
had bound them all by Oath, that they should thereafter, never fear for any
necessity that should follow: Neither were they more confirmed by their own
strength, and the hope of timely Relief, tha^ by their Enemies small number;
And some of them, out of their own proper sense of their crimes, committed at
Gertruydenberg, by the desperation of life, contemned death.

The difficulty of the Enterprise, very much incited Prince William, as well
with the hope of Honor and praise, at the present, as of terror and dread for
the future: The Leaguer was well fortified, wherein there was not only an
abundance of Victuals, but the same was very cheap: Then the passage was cut
off by many turnings, by which means, the Soldier went as it were, under
coverture, and defended against the Shot of the Town; Sometimes the Besieged
made Sallies, and not altogether without success, while for the most part, they
found the Besiegers either drunk, unarmed, or half asleep; but this did not
happen very often, because the infinite damage of the besieged Soldiers, and
the State of Affairs in the Town, could not be learned by any fear or threats,
no not from such as were taken Captive. Daily did the Besieged calumniate and
rail against both the Prince and his Army, although on both sides the Cannon,
with perpetual Thunder, spoke even sufficient hatred, and a new Bulwark, whose
hilly rising twenty foot high, and more, threatened some great danger to the
Town, this new Work, at the very top of it, contained in length, threescore
foot, and in breadth, fifty foot, from whence they could shoot into the very
innermost parts of the Town: yet for all this, and the loss of so many of their
men, they were nothing moved, among whom was slain Lewis, Brother to Count
Herembergh. At this time, the Besiegers erected a great Tower of Wood, after
the manner of Antiquity, to drive away the Defendants from their Stations, and
to overlook their Works, this the Besieged, finding ^he could not reach the
height thereof with their other Engines, endeavored to break it with their
great Bullets: The Prince, when he perceived the terrible noise of his Shot to
be a vain, though with great cost and labor, and that the Besieges were rather
encouraged to see their Town thus vainly attempted, least the intervenient
places should be possessed, he falls to other devises, as where the Land was
more solid, and would endure Mining, he commands thither Pioneers, with
Matrocks and other Instruments for digging, and orders them to undermine the
place. And so the outward Work being pierced (though the Cannon could not hurt
it) they were now come to the Trench, which they filled up with Faggots and
Bavins: the Besieged all this while, mocking at the Princes Soldiers that
would submit to such terrible labors.

Then what could not privily be wrought further, the great Guns, brought
through the Mines and Galleries, easily laid flat. And now the very Rampires
that encompassed the Town came to be Mined, when a sudden Infection dissolved
all the Defendants Courages, and involved them in such a Pannick Terror, that
they knew not what to shun, nor what to defend. They were chiefly disanimated
by the want of Gunpowder, of which having by Letters before complained to Count
Mansfeldt, they had not received any Answer, for that he himself daily expected
Forces, and they looked for Money, and that was not to be had till the Duke of
Parma's Return: Hereupon a Treaty is desired, and accordingly Commissioners
admitted and heard. The Prince required all Renegado's to be delivered to him,
that they might be punished according to their deserts, and that the rest
should take an Oath, that for six Months they would not take up Arms beyond
the Rhine. And this was to them an Example o^ Testimony of his power. But the
Commissioners, looking upon themselves as yet in a Conquerour's power, whereby
they should be forced to submit to such hard Laws, go away full of Contumacy
and Malice; as if they had resolved, since they could not freely live, that
they would fairly die: But some believed, that this Treaty was set a foot
without any necessity, that the Besieged might not be aware of the approaching
Relief, which Verdugo the next Night following sent to them, to the number of
Three Hundred Men, two hundred having a little before gotten to them over the
Marshes: But Prince Maurice, having pre-instructed his Men in what he designed
to do privately, shows his Army in Battel-Array, as if about to storm, they had
been brought to the place; appointed for them; and that he might draw the
Besieged into an ambiguous fear to their Ruin, he had hidden in two places the
famousest Engine of War now used, of whose use, the Ancients were utterly
ignorant; but our Age, abounding more with Malice and Cunning, have found it
out. It is thus made: Coals mixed with Sulphur and Saltpeter, very much dried,
if you put fire thereto, will swell exceedingly, and cannot be enclosed, but
will force its way through all Obstacles, Guns, and other Military Instruments
filled herewith, by the force thereof throw Gads and pieces of Iron and Bullets
to a very great distance; and if it be laid into the Ground, and covered with
Earth, it will throw far and wide abroad all that lies upon or near it. We call
it commonly Gunpowder: Several great Vessels filled herewith were placed in
the Mines; which Vessels being bound about with Match of a great length, upon
the Enemies approach to the Mine, being lighted with like powder, carries the
fire to all the rest, which in the bursting, makes a dreadful Noise, carrying
up into the Air, in a thick Cloud of Smoke, intermingled with Fire, all about
it, and upon a sudden, overthrowing all the Works, with the certain Ruin of
all persons st^nding in defense of the same: But many of the Enemy, fearing
such a danger, in time stood off; yet at the springing of that Mine, Bodies of
Men might have been seen hovering piecemeal in the Air, the torn and divided
Members, yet retaining their decaying vigor and mode^, and, instead of Darts,
proved Instruments of Death to other.

But the other Mine, having cast down a part of the R^pire, and the Mouth not
being well closed, or else for that the old Foundation of the Work reverberated
the Force, the main operative strength of the Powder flew backward, whereby
diverse of them that went before the Banners, were either by the fall, or flying
of the Earth, thrown up into the Air, or buried in an untimely Grave; Some also
not escaping the very fire: And now the Army began to prepare to scale the
Walls; and another Company thereof endeavored to break the Bars and Fastnings
of the Gates, when Prince Maurice coming a little too near to take a view, was
wounded by; Bullet shot from the Town, which News presently ran from hand to
hand, yet he nothing changed therewith, staid and maintained his Commands, and
gave Orders to his Captains as he was wont at other times: But in the hinder
part of the Army, the Report thereof was made much worse, insomuch that the
Army began to be amazed at it, every one feigning to himself as present, the
Evil which he most feared: Wherefore the Assault being for a while forbidden,
least the danger falsely believed, might open an occasion to further damage
really; and because also, many of the Soldiers were wounded, and the inner
parts of the Town were not sufficiently discovered, though the Wooden Tower
beforementioned, were gotten very near: But the Rage of the Soldiery scarcely
began to be appeased, when upon another view of the Town the difficulty of the
Assault appeared: However, the Besiegers possessed all the ruinous places,
which the Mines had made, and turned into heaps, placing thereon their Ensigns;
but the Remainders of the Bulwarks were yet defended, which Prince Maurice
labored also to undermine, and thereupon to give an Assault: In this interim,
the Besieged had drawn a Trench about the Marketplace, not that they hoped
thereby to save the place, but only by such delays to work for themselves an
opportunity to obtain Articles. They saw Artillery brought thither, and knew
there was little help or safety in that Entrenchment, but that the same would
rather be a Defense to their Enemies, and that if they should join in Fight,
they being the fewer in number, must needs perish. Thus being subdued in all
ways, before their Resolutions stooped, they obtained Articles that were
neither hard nor dishonorable: Particular care being taken for one Samarin^
his safety, who was a Noble Person among the Jesuits; and for the granting of
these Articles, the Authors thereof were they of the Senate, that were present
with Prince Maurice, and of his Council; who considering the necessity of the
time, for they understood that Mondragonio was mustering the Spanish Army,
rather chose, that the Soldiers Minds should be inflamed with a gotten
Victory, then held any longer in suspense; and whoever offered injury to the
Soldiers, as they marched out, was severely punished. There went six hundred
entire, beside two hundred sick and wounded; so that by various kinds of death,
near five hundred perished. Above twenty days were spent in repairing the Works
about Steenewi^, and various Debates in Council, while the Hollanders, and such
as lived at distance from the War, adjudged they had won honor enough, and
would not have the now wearied Army go to stir up, or meet any fresh Dangers:
But indeed, being privately afraid, least the Frizons, together with their
Fear, should also cast off their Obligations, and refuse to bear a share in the
Burden of the War.

At this time, there fell out another Impediment unexpected; for Queen
Elizabeth recalled all her Soldiers, to drive the Spaniards from the Coasts of
Bretaign in France, not without upbraiding the States, concerning those
Auxiliaries they sent the French King, without her Knowledge or Counsel.
Notwithstanding all which hindrances, yet all they that lived beyond the Rhine,
as also the desire of continuing their Honor, moved them to attaque Coevorden,
a Town and Castle seated so, as not easily to be approached, and for that
famous for many Ages. In the Wars of our Ancestors, and even in this among our
selves, every one as he possessed the Country, beyond or more inward, either
lessned or increased the Works: At last, the Spaniards fortified thoroughly; to
be as a Defensive Bulwark, both to Drente and Groe^ngen, and likewise to secure
a Passage into Germany; Five great For^ stood out beyond the Rampires, and
there were little Mo^^es raised for advancing the Cannon; the Trench was an
hundred Foot wide, and fenced before with Pallisado's; and that which added
strength to all these was, the nature of the place it self; for upon the two
sides thereof, to wit, between the Zuyderzee, and the Bay of Dullart, in which
space is comprehended Frizeland, Drente, the Territory of Gro^gen, and part of
Over-Issel; the one among the Marshes, and lies between that and a little Bay,
whereby the Country people used to send over their Oxen and Cows into B^theime,
a little County in Germany; and from thence, at first, was the Original of
Coevorden. This therefore being taken, both Groening might be quite closed up,
there being no other coming thither, than what was Artificial, and also the
whole County of Frizeland might be freed from the Incursions of the Enemy.

The whole Face of the Country is very plain and exceeding Moory, and full of
Mud, which is never hard or dry enough to bear any Weight by the greatest heat
of Summer, or violentest burning of the Dog Star: For the securing of
Provisions, because the Bounds of the United Provinces were as yet far distant,
and there was no River, but only a little Rivulet which runs by Coevorden like
a Trench, it pleased the Prince to Garrison Otmarsen. This Town lies in the
extremest part of the Country of the Tubantes; whither the Prince being come
with part of his Army, while the Camp and Leaguer were Fortifying, he drove
away the Spaniards with his Guns, whose Horse, rather than they would be
Besieged there, broke through the middle of the Enemies. Here was killed by the
Enemies shot Charles Levinus Famarsh, who having, for a long time, taken the
part of the Confederate Nobility, at this time was General of the Ordnance, a
Man excellently skilled, as well in the understanding and management of
doubtful and difficult Affairs, as the most prosperous.

Now was a very handsome Sally made out of Coevorden, wherein many were slain,
whose Bodies the Besieged desiring, that they might have Christian Burial, they
were delivered to them: Frederick Count Heremberg, with six hundred Soldiers,
part of whom were sent to him through the Marshes, defended the Castle, but he
burned the Town, least it should defend the Enemy, in their Battery and
breaking down of the Walls, or else should be burdensome to him to keep: yet he
seemed to maintain the Ground-plat thereof, though only out of design to
protract time; until the Prince by digging entered it, and beat out those who
stayed to fight in defense thereof, and then raising a Mount, he planted his
Cannon for battery.

The Works which were without the Trench round about the Castle, being
overhasty deserted, the Besieged themselves, voluntarily set on fire the
Bridge: And now as soon as they were gotten to the Trench, the Prince received
Intelligence, what plenty of all things the Besieged had, only they had but
one Well of water to drink off, so that in the night, they were forced to come
to the Trench for water, the same environing the Castle with a very great
deepness: This he found might be dried up with Engines, and likewise the
Springs of the Well be stopped, or at least intercepted. But at the beginning
of the work, it appeared, that there was an increase of Water under the ground,
through continual bubling Springs, which according to the nature of that
Element, will follow, whithersoever the Workman can design to draw it; Not was
it long, before diverse falling shoures yielded comfort to the Thirsty Besieged,
and put a stop to (...) But the French, which was fed by certain little C^
brought from the Marshes, was drawn dry and filled; and (...) more safe
passage, had placed thereon Devices, made of ^ber and Hurdles, so that the
Soldiers might come safely (...) the very Walls; the Flanks and Fronts of the
Builders (...) secured, either by the darkness of the Night, or a Line (...)
beyond them: Between which Coverts, great Posts (...) indifferent distance
being fixed, were covered with Pl^ and Earth cast thereupon, to prevent the
Enemies shot, (...) preserve them against fire: Being thus conveyed, they
^dermined the Rampire at the very Bottom; but the Cannon, from more convenient
places, had beaten down all the Curtain, and driven away the Defendants.

While these things were doing here, Mondragonia, in the mean while, furnished
diverse little Castles and Forts in the Country of Brabant; by the taking and
forcing of which, the Hollanders, for some years past, had fetched thence, a^
well great Booty, as exacted Tributes: This was his (...) Care, while the main
strength of the Government beyond the Rhine, was by the hands of Assailants and
Defendants eve^ almost destroyed. But as soon as the Duke of Parma returned
from France, Verdugo was very earnest with him, to carry his Army that way: But
the Soldier was over-^ryed with Travail, and besides required, before he would
stir any more, the Pay that was due and in Arrear: Yet nevertheless he
obtained, that Ten Thousand Foot, should be drawn together from sundry parts,
and 7 Cornets of Horse should be delivered to him, to undertake that Journey,
and if he saw convenient to fight the Enemy; besides, he was to be Recruited
with Three Thousand more out of the Garrisons beyond the Rhine.

Prince Maurice receiving Intelligence of these preparations, in regard the
compass of the Leaguer was greater than he could safely make good against the
Besieged, and withal defend himself from an External Force that might come at
his ^ack; he therefore began new Works more inward, leaving and dismantling the
former: There came also to him out (...) the Regiment of Colonel Stolberg, as
a Supply for these Soldiers, which the prosperous, though not unbloudy S^ of
S^nic, had consumed and wearied: The English Regiments also returned, and the
Hollander's Auxiliaries which had been in the French Service; Count Philip of
Nassau being ordered to bestow the wearied men into Garrisons, (...) to draw
out in their stead such as were fresh, with which he should defend Gravewaert,
the Watch Tower for the V^r, and turn toward the Enemy, if by chance he should
ch^fe the Isle of Holland, or either of the Coasts adjoining, or near thereto,
for the Seat of the War, and to follow him whithersoever he went: Also,
Frederick Count Heremberg, either from Intelligence, or Conjecture, had
conceived to him aforehand, the hope of Relief that would suddenly come to
him; and therefore being required to deliver up the Castle, he answered, That
they must stay yet some Months first. A few ^ts before, the English Regiments,
and the other Forces under Count Philip of Nassau, did arrive at the Camp or
League^; Verdugo having got past the Rhine, by taking a long Circuit as far as
Berck, had pitched not far from Prince Maurice, at a place called Emlichem,
prying with all diligence into the site and manner of the Prince's Camp; and
not only with his Eyes, but by the Treachery of a Noble Person, with whom the
Prince, at that time, was very familiar; whose fault also the Prince afterward
pardoned, though it were manifestly proved: The Enemy had conceived a hope of
straitning the Prince's Army of Victuals, but when they knew there were two
ways to supply him, and that the Marshes lay between them; and because his
Forces were not enough numerous to be divided, he resolved to try the strength
of his Weapons and Men in an entire Body.

Now were Fires seen frequently, whereby he admonished, the Besieged, that they
should not be wanting to his Design, being altogether ignorant, that they could
not sally, because their Bridge was broken down: But Night drawing on apace,
the Spaniards, notwithstanding the delay in their passage from the Bridge, over
the River Vecht, assault the ou^e^ Camp, where the Prince had placed Stolberg
with his Regiment, and a strong party of Horse, in a place very convenient, for
as well in regard of the Trees as the Waters. The Enemy had chosen to assault
this place, because they guessed the Horse-Guards would not be over-diligent in
their Watch* and the new Regiment was hoped to be unskilled in all things
belonging to War; and thereupon they began to creep o^ the Trenches in every
part, to attempt to scale the Rampire, and successively climbed up one in the
Footsteps of another.

But the Nassauians, although they suspected that Night, as if with the light
security returned to them went to sleep, till they were suddenly awaked with
the noise of their Enemies Voices, at a distance, threatening ^errour, and
crying out, that the Camp was taken: Nor could the Battle be discovered, either
by hastening thither, or the place: They who were unready, or half asleep,
catching up presently such Weapons as came next to hand, by chance made a stand
at the doors of their little Huts, while the Horse fought with the Enemies
Foot: Certainly, this danger was averted, chiefly by the Valor of the
Commanders, who gathered together from the innermost Tents, the most courageous
Soldiers, to make strong Defense; Above the rest, Coun. William of Nassau* who
was the more careful in this regard, for that he contrary to the Opinions of
many, had persuaded the beginning of this Siege, bringing out beyond the Camp,
as many Horse as he could get together, fell in upon the Enemies Flank: Al^
they that entered the Camp were slain; and they that follow* them were stopped
and driven back; and by this time, the clear Day light appearing, turned the
Invention of their distinguishable Mark against themselves; for being thereby
certainly known, they were as certainly slain: But they who were without, stood
round about the Camp in a Ring, as if they were yet ready, or resolved to take
the same, puffed up indeed with a vain Confidence, because they had been used to
Conquer, and for fifteen years together had only seen the Backs of their
Adversaries, or their places of abode. But now the whole Army of the United
States being together in Arms, easily beat off the rash Assailants, sometimes
in one place, sometimes in another; yet for all their Repulse, they retreated
in good order, not betaking themselves to flight, though they were most cruelly
galled by the Cannon, which was a great means of their future safety, after
such a bloody B^cketing: And Prince Maurice, contenting himself prudently to
have won the Victory, commanded his men not to pursue the Spaniards in their
Retreat. In the Camp, (a strange and incredible thing to be foretold) only
two or three were killed, but many were wounded, among whom was Count William
the Governor of Frizeland; Many days afterward, the Spaniard vauntingly
drawing his men into Battalia, challeng^ as it were into the field, the other
Army, who were not overhasty to run into danger, as being ruled by more sound
Advice. And now was the hope of the Besieged turned into fear, when they saw
their Companions beaten off from those Works, where they had at first gained;
and the rather too, because the Top of the Fortress, that was to be seen above
the Rampire, was overthrown, and another which the Besiegers had substituted,
was endangered by the Pioneers. Hereupon, the other Officers and Soldiers also
earnestly persuaded Frederick to surrender, who was very unwilling thereto,
blaming him further, as not understanding the danger they were in: They
desired, that they might have leave to consult with Verdugo, but that would not
be granted.

But the Princes granted the rest of their Desires the more readily, because
the moist Temperature of the Heaven, and inclination of the Air to Rain, would
cause a difficulty, in bringing Provisions to himself, and his own Army. Thus
was Coevorden surrendered, and committed by the Prince to the keeping of the
Prizons, though they of Over-Issel denied their consent to the same;
maintaining, that as well the Castle, as the whole Region belonged to them, and
they of Dre^te affirming to be part of their Jurisdiction, and never to have
belonged by any Antiquity to them of Over-Issel, unless that they might not
transmit their Enemy through their Borders.

The Armies were not yet departed from one another, but lay idle, out of a
mutual fear; the States gave theirs to the King of France, for that the Burden
of the War lay more heavy upon him: Shortly after, when Autumn had made an end
of all those that were ill before, by choking them up with Rheums and
Catarrhs, the Duke of Parma, though much indisposed as to bodily health, yet
undertakes a new Journey into France, that he being present with an Army, might
moderate and sway the Parliaments of that Kingdom, which the Companions and
Allies of the Spaniards had summoned to meet the next Year: But his strength
failed him, not being able to undergo so great Toil, in the Borders of Artois;
where, either by the increasing of his Disease, or (as some supposed) by
poison, he ended his Life: For some who pleased themselves with the worst of
Rumor, stuck not to believe so.

This time of his death, agreed with the coming of Fu^ain to King Philip; who,
hearing by accident of the Duke of Parma's Infirmity, had commanded him, that
is, Fontayn, to oversee the Netherlandish Affairs, that he might settle any
neglect, caused by the Duke's sickness, and compose any Troubles arising by his
Death. This Person was a man of a very harsh Nature, and privately hated by the
Duke of Parma; And there were some, who, not long before, did foretell either
the Duke's Death, or Restraint. The truth is, many Things began to be
discovered, that manifested the King to be suspicious of, if not highly
displeased with him: For he alone was looked upon, to have hindered his Kinsman
Farneze, from being Elected Pope; And of late had commanded, That the Duke
should not take up any Money at Interest, unless by the Counsel and Consent of
those, who were set up rather as Spies or Guardians, than Counselors. His
Physicians said his Disease proceeded from the hard swelling of the Spleen, and
Hydropical Humor, between the Skin and the Flesh; of the growing of which
Disease, it appears he was sensible, for that be abstained from Wine, and
accustomed himself to drink Water: and for avoiding the Gout, and other pains
of the Joints, he drank little of that too, or else it may be he was suspicious
of Poison: Most believe, that he had Poison given him more than once: But
herein Authors very much differ.

Thus dyed Alexander Farneze, even in the most flourishing time of his Age,
being but seven and forty years old, of which he had spent fourteen in the
managery of this War: his last five years had much decayed his Reputation, nor
indeed did he use the like diligence then as formerly* whether that after the
business of Antwerp, as being glutted with Honor, he gave himself over to
pleasures, or that being advised of Philips jealousy, he sought by sloth and
stupidness, to procure a Remedy to allay the greatness of his fame; He was
descended from a Family, as potent as ancient, drawing his Original and
greatness from Pope Paul the third; At first, being a young man, under his
Mothers tuition, he spent his time in the Low Countries, without any honorable
Employment, and was so contemned, that he was said to be of a heavy Spirit.
There is scarce any man that can say, his public and open Judgments were ever
dissembled; The first Warlike Honor he achieved, was at the winning Navarre,
when he fought for the Spaniard, under the Binner of his Uncle Don John of
Austria, against the Turk; Being made Commander in the Belgike War, he showed
how great he could be; In the quest of Honor, he was indefatigible, ease and
courteous in his access, merciful toward his Enemies and for as much as could
ever be discerned by his outward appearance, faithful to the King, and not to
be corrupted against his own Honor, and the Peoples affection. He was very
conformable to Counsel, but was tied up more strictly than ordinary, to an
Opinion once affirmed, and would not endure such as dissented. And then from
the success of Affairs, he took too much to himself; and that very thing raised
him many Enemies, and caused much of His contrary fortune, which indeed he took
gently, though, which is (...) more difficult, he bore his good fortune with a
great Spirit. Some do observe, that for a long time he followed the advice and
Instructions of Caspar Robless, a most ingenious and wise man. And that after
his death, no one being prev^k^ with him, among variety of Counselors,
differing in opinion he became unconstant, and wavering in his Resolutions, a^
that from thence his Fortune reculed from him. His ma^er of speech was
Majestic, but withal, amiably pleasant. H^ Stature and other parts of his
Body, but of a middle size, his Eye sharp and penetrating, the true Emblem of a
watch^ disposition. The rest of his, was not his own naturally, (...) may be
rather called the faults of the Court and the Age. The detractors of his fame,
among whom Campigny was one, commanded lately by him to a recess in Burgundy,
attributed i^ to the power of the Kings Forces, or the wants and disco^ of the
Enemy: Both whose Conditions being changed, (...) also was the fortune of the
War: On the other side; so^ wisely considering both, affirmed that there was no
small difficulty, to govern with an equal hand, and keep in order^ many
several Nations in one Army, some whereof, were a^ most insociable, repressing
therein all Animosities, which nevertheless, broke out soon after his death,
and so from time to time more bitterly. Even in the greatest extremities, he
carried security in his presence, so that most of the Seditions of his time
were begun in his absence. It Is true, many Towns were lost, but it was, when he
was employed other-where, and as Fortune was pleased to wait on the Armies: But
how great a part of them did he conquer? and certainly he could not resist the
same Enemy afterward, with any other Design, nor with naked Forces. Without
doubt, all Discipline perished with him. His Funerals were celebrated even with
the Tears of the Netherlanders, who wished such as would not grieve for him,
the Reward of the Severity of former Governors.

The Third BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
1593.
BY the Duke of Parma's Death, the Expedition into France was broken off, and
the Regiments staying upon the Borders, took some French Castles lying near
them; and not long after, the Town of Nayon, the 16th day after it had been
besieged, the French being first filled up, and the Works that were interposed,
begun to be undermined. But the King of Spain was willing now to make a Peace,
that he might the better employ his whole Endeavors against the
Low-Countrey-mens present good Fortune; and for the winning their good will, he
confers greater Honors on those Noblemen, who, by their continued Obedience,
were known faithful to him: Bestowing upon them the Command of several
Provinces, and while one could be pitched upon for the chief Regency, Peter
Count Mansfeld^ obtained the Name of Governor, a man, as well in Age, as
Experience* before others, being now in the Eightieth Year of his A^* The Chief
in the Council were Peter Herrique Count F^tayn, and Stephen Ibarra, both
Spaniards. This, in the Ag^ment of Artois, formerly had consented, That the
Public Government should be in the Citizens: But discovering the Fra^ he
prevailed for the Institution of a Council of War, that might by degrees,
though not directly, draw all Things under the Care and Cognizance: That
Council consisted for the (...) part of Spaniards; to whom, at this time, were
added Fontayn and Ibarra; who had Order, by Command, to moder^ the public
Charges, and to overlook the Treasury, which it was rumored in Spain that he
had performed with fidelity: The cause of believing this might be, as it then
happened, the unexpected Charges of the War, though oftentimes under that
pretense, are hidden all manner of Deceit and Polling; and the Mind being never
thoroughly purged, but the stain still increasing, so that at last it becomes
past all hope of Remedy. They said, who cast an Eye backward to those Things,
that the States did more with Two Hundred Thousand ^rens a Month, than was
done on the King's behalf with nine hundred thousand, while Interest,
superstuous Sallaries, and private Defraudations, scarce left the third part of
the Receipts, for the true intended purposes; That King Philip's Forces were
sufficient both to Conquer the Netherlands, and to assist the French, if they
were rightly looked after, because his Father Charles the Fifth, with far less
Wealth, had oftentimes maintained many great Armies, in several parts of the
World. Therefore, that there might be settled in the new acquired Empire of the
Provinces a greater Authority, or because the Regent should not be in fear,
there were added several Regiments, and Money sent thither in abundance; and
this was no more than necessary, because the Seamen, that were continually to
Guard Antwerp, unless they had present satisfaction, would be ready to mutiny
for their Pay, and threaten to behave themselves as Enemies. And the Garrisons
of (...) and Berck were no less audacious than they: But the Spaniards who were
newly come, as they were ignorant of many things, so they endeavored all they
could, to repair what they saw amiss, that so they might creep into grace and
favor. And, upon a certain day, Fontayn coming into the Senate, was the Author
of a cruel Sentence; and calling that them, which was enforced by Necessity, he
began to abolish all the Customs of War; for he said, That the Dispute had his
been thus long maintained by the Wealth or Valor of the Hollanders; But that
mean and inconsiderable people, and if they were looked upon with the Eye of
Reason far unequal to the whole Netherlandes, did thrive and increase, not
only by the Spaniard's Treasure, but by their very Forces and Vices: That
their own negligence and ignorance was the great hinderance of their own
fortune, and that they fearfully wrought any Evil against a public Enemy: That
the vast compass of Ground, among the Cities, under the King's power, do yield
Tribute to the Enemy without danger; as if it were an easier matter to do an
injury by Arms, than to repel it. Rather then so, let all the Inhabitants be
forced to take up Arms and so by doing, and suffering all Acts of Hostility
become liable to the same batred with the Soldiery, that they alone among all
hazards, may not go free distributing their Affections at their pleasure, but
should behold the fortune of both Parties in one another blood: But if the
Enemy could not be withstood in all places, yet certainly it were better, that
the whole Country should lie wast, and be altogether uninhabited, than as it is
now to lie open to the Enemies Invasion, and yield them Contribution, and other
means of Treachery, to know all is done: That now all the Regiments were
weakened and corrupted, as it were by a Contract of Sluggishness, while every
one laying aside Arms, seeks by Obligation of others to confirm his own safety.
Hence it proceeds, that they are ready to flee at the thought of a Battle, and
choose rather the Trade of a City, than to endure the first shock of their
Enemy. The Romans, who were the perfect Exemplars of Military Disciplines,
always took care, that no Soldier should have (...) Employment than that of
his Arms: How often it has been (...) that even the stoutest Minds have been
worn out of Courage ^ the hope of Safety, when on the other side, the most time
^dants, have, by Desperation, become Valiant: The Soldier, ^der his Colors,
should be taught, that there is no third thing ^tween Death and Victory, to be
admitted among them: (...) Peace mixed with War, is nothing else but a
hindrance of p^ Peace, and a means to yield daily nourishment to War.] W^ words
being delivered in a fierce Tone, drew many to (...) with him by his Authority,
and the pretense of his well-b^ Counsel: On the other side, some few who had
Experie^ of those things, and did mind the Duke of Alva's Seve^ how it was
repressed; averred, That all things were not c^venient at all times; that the
Customs of this Age were far (...) for such a Discipline especially now when no
man will take (...) Oath, unless he be allured thereto by Reward, and the easy
^s;e^vice of the War; That such Rigor is not the way to Peac^ Concord; nor is
the War with the Bordering Neighbors so ^tal, that it must needs be managed
with the utter Reine of (...) and Depopulation of the Country; but as in the
frequent Differences of Neighbors and Companions, all hope of Reconciliation
(...) to be thrown away; so in civil Discords, there is a moderation be used as
being all under the pleasure of Fortune. Nor (...) the Rule both of Commanders
and Soldiers be wanting, if (...) Dispute may be argued by Examples, who would
never execute^ Severity of War upon any, but in the heat of Battle; And the
^ring of Corn, releasing Captives without Ransom has for a^ Ages made their
Clemency add a Luster to their Fame a^ Prosperity.

Discourses thus bandied pro and con, at last it happened be^ as it does too
often in many Businesses, that the majo^ carried from the better. And
therefore, Count Man made it a Law, That all Prisoners taken in War, should be
condemned to some corporal punishment, and so should all that assisted the
Enemy, by payment of Contribution.

The United States, as they were necessitated, set forth an Edict to the same
purpose, That within a certain time, this Cruelty of the Spaniards, with bitter
Invectives, might be resented. And now the Villages and Fields were Forraged
with wandering Incursions; the Soldiers, so soon as taken, were hanged, and
many Examples of strange Fortune were showed upon all.

First of all, the Priests and Nobility, entreat the Removal of this miserable
Destruction from their Possessions, in regard they could not always be
provided, to resist a sudden violence upon their Fields, lying open to be
invaded. But the Soldiery decreased, and such as remained, fearfully
endeavored by all means, to shun any meeting with the Enemy, if they could but
hear one another Voices at a distance. Beside, they cried out, That they sold
their Lives but for a little Money* and yet could never have that when it was
due; but whether they had or no, they were sure to be drawn out to fight, and
must venture all manner of Wounds, and the Victory it self yielded them little
advantage.

If at any time, by the Averseness of Fortune, a Soldier sell into the Enemies
hands, while he was suffering death by the Executioner's hand, he was laughed
at, because he had not fled in time.

The Captains and Tribunes, trembled in silence to think, that the more
fortunate they had been, the greater was their hazard.

These things made them admire Antiquity, in the Obedience of the present
Times, and at last made them return to their old Custom, to redeem their Lands
with Tribute, to make Exchange of Prisoners; and that he who Ransomed himself,
should, for the same, give a Months Pay.

Which for the future was punctually observed, and if (...) one violated these
privileges, the same severity was (...) to him by the Enemy. Thus with an
equal terror, and punishments of some innocent persons, the Laws of (...)
were re-established.

In the Winter, some Horse, and a few Foot, under the Command of Philip of
Nassau, were sent out to constrain ^zenburg, and the outside skirts of the
Netherlands to (...) Tribute, and they wanted but a little of winning the To^
of St. Vit, the fault of missing it, being wholly in the Sco^ who brought word,
that on that side which they intended (...) fall upon, they had only two Gates
to hinder them* when as they found a third after the two other were beaten
down. After they had continued abroad full fourteen days a ^raging, the
Enemies Garrisons all the while as occasion o^fered, picquering with them, when
either taking away, (...) burning whatever came in their way, they returned
safe (...) their Quarters, and laden with spoil. The Condition o^ the Borders
at this time, was most miserable, for a select ^ty of Count Mansfeldts men,
wasted and took away whatever the Nassavians had left; the noise of the French
W^ being also at the same time rumoured, which by trivial di^cords, threw both
Lorrain and Strasburg into a vast abys^ of mischiefs. Hence arose innumerable
Complaints* but the^ got very little remedy or redress.

As soon as the convenience of the season permitted, the Hollanders being the
chief of the Union, turned their mind from foreign business, to domestic
cares. They concluded that without doubt, it was very necessary to take
Gertruyde^burg, for that one Town being torn from their Body, (...) much
torment Holland: Therefore while it was yet Winter they hastened to prepare all
things fit to that future intend least either the Enemy should prevent them, or
the Friz^ should draw their Forces that way. But now the Fortifications, not so
well proved of late in the former frustrated Siege of the place, were defended
by a stout number of Soldiers, to wit, fifteen Ensigns of Walloons and
Germans, and the continued care of their Officers. And the Winterly Waters, and
frequent shoures, had more than ordinary augmented the continual moisture of
the Fields: Against all which, there ^as only hope in celerity, while the
flower of the Enemies Army was yet detained upon the Borders of France: The ^se
out of Brabant, were commanded to environ the Town, and that their store might
be diminished to stop all provisions going to them for succor. And forthwith
the Prince, having prepared all things for for War, carried thither in Ships
all his Foot-forces, which in truth, could not be called many, (for the Frizons
had their own men, and Prince Maurice in vain desired Count William to come
thither to him with aid.) A great Lake lies before the Town, and washes indeed
the greater part of it, spreading it self backward from the mouth of the Maes,
since the year one thousand four hundred twenty and one, at which time, the Sea
in a most impetuous manner, broke through all its boundaries, and drowned
seventy and two Villages.

This (they call it Merow, by one common name with the Channel of the Wael, and
it is probable, that it first received that name from some of the ancient Kings
of France) is washed on the right side by the River Dungen, springing out of
the fields thereabout adjacent. The Land on the other side of the Bank, is in
the Jurisdiction of Holland, although for that it is doubtful, the Brabander
lay a claim to it. It is part of the possessions of Nassau, by right of pledge.
The Prince of Aurange, after the Peace made at Gaunt, fortified it as an entry
or inlet into Brabant. There were famous Pools that abounded with Fish, but now
the Fish is almost all gone, being driven thence, either by Fords and shallow
Sands continually increasing, or else by the voice and thunder of War about
them, and the daily mischiefs done them by men. In the Bank, which contains the
water (for the rest only hiding the water with a thin film of Earth, cannot be
wrought to any thing) are many turnings and coverts which lead to the Works of
the Town, lying beyond the Trench. But the Northerly blasts of the Spring, by
tempest upon the Lake, had broken down that part of the Bank, it being weakened
before by digging: And again, the same way (for there remained no other) the
Darts and Shot out, of the Castle, which the Enemy yet held on the neighboring
Bank of Dungen, infested all that attempted it; This was difficult in the
access, but a kind of hurdles being made, and covered with Loam, were put
there, that they might cover, and be as a Trench for such as should assault the
place. And out of the Isle of Dungen, which is hard by, were made many Shot,
and at the same time Count Hohenlo, least fresh men should be sent out of the
Town to supply the Castle, invades the narrow and strait passage (a happy
adventure) whereupon it was surrendered.

In these labors, and fortifying the Camp, almost a month was spent before
Mansfeldt approached. He sent part of his Troops before to Turnehout, but
Prince Maurice his Horse, voluntarily made an incursion upon them, while yet
they were but coming together into a Body; for they being of no use among the
Marshes, the Prince had quartered them in Town, so as they could well infest
the Enemies march. And Count Mansfeldts Son Charles, being safe returned from
the Enemy, was in danger among his own men; for being called out of France, by
hasty Messengers, where he had first taken Noyon, as is before mentioned, and
afterward Vallery, as he required a Centurion of a Spanish Band (being then in
the Borders of Artoys) who had been found guilty of a Rape, to be brought forth
to punishment, he scarcely escaped the fury and madness of the rest, himself
being struck at with the Soldiers Weapons under his Command, they also casting
off their Knapsacks, as if they had been going to fight: These tumultuary
licentiousnesses, were customary in foreign places with them, in regard there
was wages due to them for a ^s;e^ months. Mansfeldt being a German, and having
a regard to his own Honor, and his Fathers greatness (which be perceived
envyed,) was much vexed, wherefore leaving them in the Town of St. Paul, which
they had set upon and gotten, himself, with some trusty Regiments slipping
away, castle to the Army and augmented its number, which the Commande^s marched
with^ll but very slowly, its own multitude hindering its speed. For having
12000 Foot, and about 3000 Horse, their Confidence was such, that they believed
immediately to overrun their Enemy, who was not all so strong as they, for
Prince Maurice had not much above 5000. Wherefore from this action, Honor was
to be gained to the new Governor, and they hoped from hence, is to purchase
glory to the one, so to strike terror into the other. Neither did any suspect
the immense largeness of the Fields, in regard there were such uncertain bogs,
and so many Moors scattered up and down among them, and they were so enclosed,
that as the place yielded not room for the Armies to fight, so the Fords and
shallowes afforded no place for stratagems or Ambuscadoes. Wherefore observing,
I suppose, the face of the Siege, and in what manner the War was managed, he
thought fit only to venture with a few, because the other part of the Camp did
not merit the like fame, either in the danger or event; and truly this first
example of his, was given with a very true consideration, in praising the
policy of the Ancients, who ever made use of all things to the purpose, rather
than for ostentation.

The Prince had pitched his two Camps in several Fields that had easy ascents,
that he himself might defend the left side of the River and other places near
to the City toward the West, the other part toward the East, Hohenlo had the
charge of; the whole Leaguer, every Regiment having his proper Station and
Tents, between which were the Ways and Markets, was like a City, and was on
every side fortified with a strong incurvated Rampire, whe^eon were planted
many Cannon: This could not be much weakened at a distance, and the Enemy could
not come near to fight, without great hazard and damage. Near the Trench that
ran before it, wherein there was a double Row of Palizadoes, headed with Iron,
least the falling off of the Water should leave them bare; or, on the other
side, by a too great increase, should overflow the Works: There were Seluces
and Engines fitted on purpose, to let out the Water. Dungen being also fitted
with two Bridges, by which means there was a very near way to the Camp, and a
Cross-way being made over the Marishy places with Cawseys, where they were
covered before with the Hurdles and Baskets, stuffed and covered with Mud and
Loam; all that passed that way, were secured on one side: And then whatsoever
part of the Fields had been more wet than was convenient, it soon became firm,
by the throwing in of Faggots, Bavins, and other like Stuff; and, if any where
they were hindered by Estuaries, and the force of the Waters, were like either
to throw down, or carry away the great Heaps cast therein, immediately the
Border of the Bank was fastened with great Stakes headed with Iron: So that the
places were no more like themselves, but quite changed; the Marshes were made
solid, and where the Enemy formerly was afraid to fall into a Quagmire, there
were now firm Fields. All the Ground lying between the Camps, was encompassed
round with a large Rampire and Trench, hardly to be walked in three hours: Here
and there scatteringly were some Watch-Towers set up, and in the more open
places Forts, that frighted any from approaching them with Guns, and Darts
thrown by the Soldiers: yet for all these things, the outwarder parts were
never the more carelessly strowed with Calthraps, and dug full of Pits, which
every where yielded nothing but danger, though from causes to them unknown; but
the Horse especially, were on all hands afraid thereof: The Fords and
Enclosures promised easier Entrance on any part. Part of the Ships with long
extended Horns, menaced the City, being tied fast one to another, with strong
Cables and Anchors: by which means, not only Relief, but any Messengers, were
kept out of the Town: Some Vessels also were thrust forth into the Quag-Mires,
which, according to the Ebb or Flood, either swo^, or ^ock fast, hiding other
Boats, that served to carry Provision, and other things necessary for the War,
to both Camps, in fit and convenient Creeks; and the Mariners being commanded
to come a shore to assist Hohenlo, without murmuring, were very serviceable.
Most of the Works boasted the Industry of the Soldiers, as being built by
their hands, a great Novelty in that time, whose pains was a great saving to
the greater charge of Day-Labourers; besides the Excuse of the Country People,
whose Mul^itude being forced from their common business in the Fields (as is
usual with the Enemy) rather procures an Envy in them to Liberty* or else being
slothful in time of danger, are by their unskilful Crowd rather burthensom,
than helpful to an Army. But by the diligent Care of a strict Discipline, so
far were the present Customs of the Country People different from those of
former Ages, that here the Camp was both to themselves, and their Cattle, a
place of Refuge. The Soldiers placed and secured them, they sold their
Provisions, and received ready Money for the same, in whose Fields, if the
Spanish Commanders had pitched, all the Money they could ever have raised,
would hardly have been sufficient to have redeemed them from spoil and injury.
Whereas here, under the Fortifications of the Camp, they Manured their Fields,
and sowed them with Seed, as being assured of Security, not only for the
present, but the future time. And it was found by practice* that they who are
L^vers of Justice and Honor, shall voluntarily receive those advantages, which
others shall hardly ex^^et by Cruelty, and other thwarring Endeavors: It is
scarcely credible, how much this Continent abated the price of Victuals, when
they that forcibly commanded the same, were afflicted with all kind of Penury.

Mansfeldt having viewed all these strong Fortifications, grew much troubled;
and, as it is the Custom of an exceeding great fear, resolved on nothing; and,
among the rest, that which at first seemed to please him best of all, was now
most disliked: however, he fortified himself, not far from Prince Maurice, with
so great a quantity of Artillery, and other Engines, as if he had rather been
going to assault a City, than a Camp: When he had staid there ten days, and the
Horse coming out from Breda had straightened him in Provisions, boping that all
things might more readily be brought from Boisledue, he removed toward Count
Hohenlo's Camp, preparing immediately to drain the overflowing Lake, into the
Channel of the Maes: But supposing that too great a Ta^k, anon he thought to
drive away thence the Enemies Ships, or to break off the remainder of the Horse
left there, that so be might the more freely enjoy, and have the benefit of
Fotage.

At length he gathers together Faggots, Bavins, and other Brush-wood, as if he
intended to break over the shallow Fordable places of the Marshes into the
Town; not so much out of any certain hope, as that least he should seem to have
no hope at all: Which while he vainly attempts, and that he ought not to try
his Fortune in diverse places, the sight of the Town, and the last hopes of the
Besieged Soldiers forbad: By this Idleness, and lying still of the Enemy,
Prince Maurice's Works were mightily forwarded; but the small number of his
Soldiers was the greatest Trouble he had, for that they were almost spent with
continual Labor and Watching: And the Frizons being again desired. That they
having been helped before, would not now leave their Companions wanting Aid:
Having for some time delayed, at last send four Ensigns, but not before Verdugo
was come with Three Thousand Men to Slochteren. While these things were doing,
there were several light Skirmishes about the Fields, Count Hohenlo being more
ready thereto, than was necessary: Nothing more was done, because Prince
Maurice being wary, beyond the Nature of Youth, would not hazard a danger in
the open Field; and Mansfeldt was utterly out of hope of prevailing upon the
Prince's Camp by Assault. But the Town however, was continually battered with
the great Artillery, whose greater number being with Prince Maurice, had broken
and spoiled the Houses, and made unserviceable most of the Cannon in the Town:
So that now the Galleries plainly appeared, advanced as far as the main
Bulwark, which stood before the Rampire: And on the South part unto the Fort,
which was least of all feared, not for the joining thereof to the Town, but
because it was encompassed with a great Trench, a Bridge was made over in the
Nigh^, the Contexture where of was great Bull-Rushes. The Keepers hereof we^e
easily surpised, as they lay scattered here and there, and negligent by the
industrious Soldiers; (for they that took upon them the confidence of being
Spies, and looking in thither, brought back such Intelligence) a few of that
negligent Guard escaping into the Town, filled the same with great fear.

Before this time, there was no Obedience given to Command; for, it seems, he
that properly was the Governor of the Town, was then absent, being gone out a
little before the beginning of the Siege, and there was none other in the place
fit for that Employment: From whence it came to pass, that Works were often
erected, and as often thrown down, according to the wavering Counsels of the
several Commanders; of whom, two, to whom the Government of the Town had been
committed during the Siege, dyed before; and now the Third, while he runs to
meet the Noise of Terror beforementioned, being killed with the stroke of a
Stone, clearly made an end of his Government. Thus there was no fear of any
thing but the Enemy, which Prince Maurice did greatly augment in them; when
having interposed Mansfeldt's Letters to them, which he might have detained, he
yet sent them to them: For now Mansfeldt, having taken counsel to draw away,
admonished the Besieged, That they should not therefore abate or diminish their
Courage giving them (though falsely) an assurance, that he would, by some other
means, divert the Enemy. But the Besieged staying no longer, Article for their
Lives only: They delivered to Prince Maurice fifteen Ensigns, there were six
hundred that went out sound men, free either from Wounds or Diseases, who left
behind them great store both of Provision and Ammunition. But they that had had
any hand in the former betraying of the Town, were excepted out of the
Articles; both the Prince and Army being all new ex^sperated, by the memory of
the Treachery, from the sight of the Town, and their former and present Labor
and Toil in the regaining it. And so, the same day, the Prince took
Gertruydenberg from the Buyers; he made the Sellers expiate their Crime with
their Lives.

Count Mansfeldt understanding how matters went, knowing that his old Age would
be blamed, and much worse Counsels prevail after the Event, and that the
Reports of these things would be tossed to and from in the Ears of the People,
was much afflicted; suspecting moreover, the Fidelity of the Town of B^isleden,
least that the People thereof, being of a busy and crabbed Disposition, and
having no Garrison to awe it, should fly from them, in a tottering and decaying
condition, to their Enemies, crowned with the growing Successes of smiling
Fortune: For Prince Maurice's Soldiers, who then held the Castle of Creviceur,
by making a Dam overthwart the River Dies, which, at that City, runs into the
Maes, had made it overflow all the adjacent places: from thence, Corn-Fruit,
and Pasture for Cattle, being lost, by the damage of private persons, they
molested the public Peace: Wherefore it was thought fit to appease them with
Benefits and Kindness, whom they were not able to restrain by Fear or Force:
And the Prince finding that Mansfeldt made have to besiege that Castle,
prevented him, by sending before some Horse, which should hinder and stop the
Enemy, at the Passage over the Maes, and keep them out of the Isle of Bommel;
and presently after, himself with his whole Army, coming by Water, places
himself in the middle, between the Castle and Mansfeldt; and having fetched a
convenient number of Cannons and Engines from the next Towns, there being no
Rampire or Bulwark yet about the Castle, (for which cause be suspected the
sudden surrender thereof) he compelled them, leaving their Tents behind, to
take little less than a shameful flight into the Fields about ^uyck-Anons
placing a Bridge upon the Maes, as if he would fall upon Boisledue: by that
false fear, he put a stop to any n^w Endeavors of the Enemy. At last the
Commanders departing, with part of the Forces toward Frizeland, began to make
that the Seat of War.

Since the taking of Ste^nwic and Coevorden, situate more inwards upon the
Issel, and the other Frizon Cities and Castles, had cut off from Groaning, both
the benefit of the Sea, and of Rivers; there remained only one Passage out
into Germany, and that was the Bourtang: The cross-way whereof is not very
broad, and begins at the Bay of Dullart, not far from thence, running through
great Marshes, environing the whole Country of Drent, with a long
Circumference. The violent coldness of the Winter, troubled also with cross
Winds at the beginning of the Year, had hindered Count William of Nassau, who
was contriving by what means he might frustrate the Enemies last hope; but now
the Spring being toward, he put to Sea, where, as he sailed, he spyed Verdugo,
stirred up thereto by Messengers, to have possessed all the streights of the
passages; and being forbidden to fight by Command, and considering, that it was
an unadvised Act to proceed further than they were sure of Provisions, he
landed in the next place; from whence, by opening the Schises, he might drown
the Fields with Water; or shutting them ^ might, at his pleasure, hinder them,
when overflowed, to be drained; and thus, to retard the Enemies March. But when
Verdugo had sent part of his Soldiers, to wast the Country of Frizeland, Count
William not willing to suffer or pass by that Damage, least he should give
matter of Complaint to that Faction of the Frizons, who did not love him (for
there were some private Feuds broken out) he himself went thitherward, and,
where he could, fortified the Border against the like Incursions for the
future: Here the Enemy being deceived with vain Rumors of other Attempts, the
Count supplies Coevorden with all manner of Necessaries, which before was in
great want of many Things.

Thus the Summer being spent, and the Enemy turning his Forces toward
Gertruydenberg, after they were gone, Count William removes the Forces he had
received, marching by Land, and taking into his power all the Castles between
Coevorden and the Bourtang: Upon the very Bourtang it self, where there is a
narrow passage between the Country of Weden, and the Lands belonging to
Munster, the Marshes that are next being disjoined, (for the Summer and Labor
together had made this place more passable) by a kind of Sandy Cliff, he
commanded five Companies of Soldiers, to erect some Huts against the Weather,
and to raise a strong Fort: Himself, with the other part of the Forces,
(because he had Intelligence of Recruits coming to the Enemy) went behind
Greening, being induced thereto by an early conceived hope, that the City would
Revolt to him, as soon as Verdugo was gone, who as yet lying in the Suburbs,
waited for more help.

In this mean time, Frederick Count Heremberg was sent by Count Mansfeldt with
a strong party of Soldiers, (because either the Enemies Garrisons, or the
Nature of the place had precluded all other ways) to the Town of Otmarsen, and
the Castles, which we told you before were delivered to Count William; and
these he took with great Force, but not without the loss of some Blood: From
thence puffed up with that success, he went with Verdugo, to destroy the
Fortifications, raised upon the Bourtang: But the greatness of the work, in so
short a time, the inaccessibility of the Marshes frighted them from their
Design; and Count William, being daily informed by his Scouts, that they were
coming against him, augmented and strengthened the Fortifications of his Camp;
wherein remaining safe, he slighted their Power abiding in the Fields: Nor did
he march with any Colou^s, wisely considering, there was no necessity thereof
for him, and that every thing would infest the Enemy. With this kind of delay,
and some light Skirmishes, the Enemy even wearied out, make toward Coevorden,
through moist and troublesome ways; but finding there was firm Ground
underneath, they dried up the upper moisture with great heaps of Bavins. And
when the place made them know, that Stratagems and sudden Heats, would be to
little purpose, with them who were ready to receive them, Verdugo goes away to
the Castles, hoping the Soldiers enclosed therein would quickly want Victuals.
But herein his Intelligence failed him; for they had been twice of late
furnished with all Things possible: Then they tempted the Fidelity of Caspar
Ensem the Governor, both by Rewards and Terror, but he was resolved against
both.

But now the Year wasting very fast, the Spanish Forces between Mud and Showers
of Rain, were ready to sink to nothing, besides there grew among them a
scarcity of Victuals, and they had scarce received in 8 Months, so much Pay as
was due for two, and they pillaged and wasted all the adjacent places, running
out even into Germany. Afterward, the Cold that followed, added to their
misery of Want, and both of them bred a sad Disease among them, with a great
Flix.

Some part of the Soldiers fled both from their miseries, and the Siege
together, and not as of old did they run away by single men, now one, and then
one; but by whole Companies at once. And Count William did encourage them
thereto, promising them rewards, who ever would come over to him. From hence
the Besieged, began to gather both Courage and Confidence, to make Sallies.
Shortly after the Winter made them quiet, while both sides prepare Provisions
and other aid for their friends: But the Friz^ns had Commanded Count William,
to besiege the Castles that had been lost about Groiuingen: but now the
lateness of the year, and the bitterness of the Weather, rather than their
Officers Commands, hindered any further motion. Only a part of the Regiment
raised for Verdugo in Germany, being ignorant in the use of Arms, was met by
some of Prince Maurice's Soldiers, and slain; But in several other accidental
meetings, they fought variously, they being generally, either killed, or taken,
that were laden with Provision or Knapsacks. And Count Solmes harassed all the
Land of Wase, that refused to pay Tribute, with the taking away of their
Cattle, and some Prisoners: The Castles which he took in his passage, were
after his return recovered by the Enemy, and Philip of Nassa^ making a Road out
of the City of Limburg, depopulated all the Country lying round about. But the
ambushes laid by the Prince himself, to surprise Bruges, deceived him, at which
time, passing by the Sea and diverse Rivers, with the dewes and cold, he was
thrown in^o a Disease, by means whereof, the ^eturn of the Ships being
hastened, one was cast away. The faul o^ both these miscarriages, was in the
Officers, who undertook the Conduct of them in the night.

But in the King^ Army, where money began again to grow scant, the Soldiers
fell ^o mutiny, the very Spaniards themselves beginning the first Sedition: and
so little Reverence did they show to Charles Mansfeldt who commanded them, that
they intercepted and kept the Provisions that were sent to (...) whose
wickedness the Soldiers of other Nations, a great while detested, but soon
after, observing that the Mutinous received their pay, they refused any longer
to be quiet, but inclined to the same courses, and turning out their Captain,
which they believed to dislike such tumultuous proceedings, they set up the
most abject among them, by the consent and choice of the whole Bands: This
Fellow was thus made a Lord over life and death, terrifies all, and fears all,
but now will; no longer acknowledge his Authority from another will; but
taking courage, he may now with equal danger, either take or refuse the
Command: However, being full of discord and cruelty, while they impose upon
themselves, both Counsel and Laws, and there is no pardon admitted to any
offense among them, they confess the necessity of a Law, themselves being
witnesses of that good, which they chiefly violate.

There was another thing that added fuel to the fire of the Soldiers rage, and
that was, the sudden and too great parsimony of those Spaniards, who managed
and ordered the Treasury, in the revoking all augmentations of Wages, which the
Duke of Parma had granted to any for their more worthy Service, or out of
favor. And this mad mutinying frenzy was not only in the consines of France,
but among all the Garrisons of Germany, maintaining it self by Rapines and
Tributes: At which time, the City of Nuisse, while part of the Soldiers there
resident, were gone abroad to fetch in booty, turned out the rest: And this
Rule was followed by as many as could, and served to the Soldiers for a
Lesson, that either they should moderate their avarice, or increase their
strength; In Berck, that was kept by seven Companies of Soldiers, who had cast
off all their obedience, there the Mutineers would have no Captain, as the rest
of the Soldiers, but chose out of themselves a Senate of one and twenty: nor
was that Honor perpetual, but changed acco^ding to the times. They exacted
Tribute of the Country, lying round about them, but with a better Discipline,
than of late was done under the Command of their Prefect.

This Revenue, which within fourteen months, had come to near an hundred
thousand Florens, was divided among them as part of their pay. And the rest was
afterward given them together with indemnity: Upon such terms did Herm^n,
Count Herenberg, make an Agreement with them: Many accused the Bishop Bojarus
his negligence, that might have recovered his Town with a little charge, and
chiefly, because the Duke of Parma only had kept it: But now being forced to
stay in expectation of the coming of the new Regent Ernestus, in whose favor
he was confirmed, he was for a while quiet. But the Hollanders, though they
were free from all the before mentioned mischiefs, yet were afflicted by the
angry countenance of the Heavens; for in the end of the year, a very grievous
Tempest falling upon the Ulye, sunk in the angry Ocean, a Fleet of Ships lying
there at Anchor, to the number of fifty Sail, that were ready to go into Italy,
among the Islands and Shelves filling all the adjoining shores with Shipwracks
and Lamentations.

1594. Ernestus Duke of Austria, sent at the beginning of this year, came into
the Netherlands, and undertook the Government thereof, which proved fatal to
himself, and very unfortunate and lamentable to the Spaniard. For the Frizons
were absolutely taken from him; France withdrew it self: his Arms proved
unsuccesful: the treacheries of his peace were infamous: the Enemies Affairs
were famously happy and flourished, but the Spaniards under him, were poor and
mutinous. All which evils prevailed, either to make life irksom, or death to
be necessitated. There were many causes that had procrastinated his coming, as
the Turkish Affairs, want of money, and the Gout, a Disease familiar and
customary with him. But when he came, there were many solemn acts done by the
Netherlanders, in Honor of the Regent, and with great shows of joy, such as
they had hardly used in former times to their Princes, even in the best of
times; for now being almost tired beyond all patience, they interpreted the
diminutions of evil for great happiness. Neither had they now a Count
Mansfelda, who under the vain show of Authority, was equally ridiculous, both
to his own Soldiers, and his Enemies: they had changed an old feeble man, for
a person of great Nobility; and therefore they gloried at once, of that Honor,
and their restored Laws, that according to the ancient Custom, one was sent to
govern them that was of Royal Blood, and by Kindred allied to the King: They
remembered, that Alva and Requescuse had stirred up the War by their foreign
Authority: And the Duke of Parma, (though otherwise we I enough liked) was
maligned for his Country sake; That Don John, who had attained Royal Blood, by
all ways, both of Birth and Virtue, wanted rather the moderation, than the
affection of the Nobles and People. But that now there was truly come, the
offspring of Emperors, with a German uprightness, neither infected with
hatred or malice, and consequently, more prone to concord: He had governed in
behalf of his Brother, the Emperor, both the Pan^^nia's, or Hungary, beloved
by the Subjects for his mildness, in the taking care of them, and the
blandishments of his leisure time, not much provoking the Enemy, nor himself by
them often provoked: Not averse from fighting, when the Barbarians urged him,
by disturbing his peace, and it may seem, that he was the rather chosen, as one
who might compose the Netherlandish Affairs, the Citizens being even tired with
War, and the King well knowing, that it would be in the Conquerours power, to
make what Laws he pleased for the settlement of peace.

This Duke Ernestus, was of such gravity in Conversation, that the
Netherlanders interpreted it to pride. But which is proper to his Countrymen,
being not Superior in his Affairs, he was easily ruled, either by Counsel or
Command: With this mediocrity of disposition, he had so pleased Philip, that he
intended to have married him to his Daughter, and strongly argued in the French
Counsel by Ambassadors, (...) confer upon him the Kingdom of France: fearing
perchance, that if he should marry her to any Frenchman, and at any time after
his Issue male should fail, that Spain, by access^^^ to the Crown of France,
would become a Province there^^. But Providence provided otherwise in that
affair, (...) brought Henry of Burbon, through diverse variety of Fortune and
settled him in the Kingdom: for he being grieved ^ himself, that being born to a
Kingdom, he should only ^ depelled for the oretext of Religion.

Many of the Princes protesting, they resisted him for (...) other causes, and
by that means alone, could not submit their Fortunes to him; seeing his Forces
almost consumed, and (...) other things that were the main supports of his
hope: He ^^gan to grow unsettled in his mind, between some of his Friends,
applauding his noble constancy, and others persuading for most advantage.

At length, either that he believed nothing more, sacred* than the Peace of a
Kingdom, or that he had embraced his former kind of living, more out of Form
than Judgment, he was Reconciled to the Church of Rome: which thing, was not
of so much disadvantage to the Spaniard, but that for many years after, be
continued his hatted and War against him, neither till of late, by the strong
endeavors of Anmarle, were the Cities of Picardy, adjoining to the Borders of
the Netherlands, reduced unto his obedience. Nay, at Rome, a great while he
incensed Pope Clement, and the most powerful in the conclave, by threats and
force, least they should open, or propose a way for the Kings Repentance, and
Reconciliation, calling him a Renegado from Religion, and a dissembler of novel
Piety.

But at the first being had in suspicion by both Parties, as well that he
departed from, as that he came over to, afterward by a sweet and
well-constituted moderation, by giving to these the chiefest Power; to those,
Safety, in the Exercise of their Religion, and some Honor, he exceeded both
their (...), and made a Harmony between them, among whom before, there was
nothing but Discord: So that now all were pleased, except a few, ignorant how
great a benefit they had received, whom no Felicity could ever please, no
Revenge sa^.

In short, Trade and Commerce beginning, in this Cessation of Arms, and the
People well pleased with this Quiet, it came to pass, that the strongest and
most potent Cities, with the Metropolis of them all, Paris, and the chief Heads
of the Faction and Revolt, submitted to him, caused either by private ^^scords
among themselves, or the fear of a Foreign Authority.

The Spaniard hereupon, when the Duke de Mayn came to ^^xels, were of opinion
to restrain him, as one that was averse to their Design; but the Regent
Ernestus, having more regard to his Fame, hindered it; although it were known,
he was the chief Instigator of the chief Leader of the Faction, to go in to the
King, and merit thereby his Pardon: yet there were some, who detained by their
own Covetousness, or the Spaniard's Policy did all they could to hinder Peace,
delaying by the same the performance of their Expectations. Picardy chiefly,
and the parts thereabouts near Henalt and Artots, were molested and perturbed
by the Spanish Forces. And the first Spring Charles Mansfeldt, who made War in
those parts, had forced Capelle, a free City there, having assaulted the
Rampires, when the Trench was dry, to surrender, before King Henry could send
thither any Succors. Shortly after, the King himself being conducted with some
Troops to Laudune, staying upon those Confines: Toward the end of Summer,
Mansfeldt being driven away, who had endeavored to raise the Siege, the Town
came again into the King's Power. The Confederate States, about this time, had
given a Sum of Money to King Henry, upon condition, That he should turn his
Force upon the Netherlands: But that Queen Elizabeth would not hear of; who
foresaw that, together with the War, all use of him, and respect to him, would
cease. This Defection of the King from the New-Religion, was variously reported
both in England and Holland; so as hardly any thing had bin further examined
and discoursed, with more variety of Language, and freeness of Judgment: Others
looked upon it with Hatred and Detestation. The Catholics hereby conceived a
hope, that in time, that other differing Religion Rites, though at present
received in public, might at last reunite; and that as France had followed the
Rule of German so the rest would follow the Pattern of France.

But all Leagues and Alliances with Neighbors, were by the King inviolably
observed: And now the States being (...) by what private Policies the Enemy
gained upon them, ordered very diligent Care to be taken, That no sort of
Writing that might prove dangerous to the Public, might be foisted (...) the
People; And that Masters which instructed Youth in Leaning should not instill
into their Minds evil Opinions. Which done they turned all their Counsel to
the carrying on of the war, while the Enemy would seem to seek after a peace:
And because Ernestus having recruited the Army, was reported to have enhanced
the Fame and Terror of his new Regency, be sent out some with Commissions,
both into England, and into Germany, to raise Four Thousand Foot, and some few
Horse: These Soldiers supposed to be met by the Enemy at the Rhine, though in
vain, marched safely and unknown to the Enemy: But, on the contray, Ernestus
his Musters were impeded by want of Money, and other Casualties; for the
Regiment of Francis Saxon Lawrenburg assembling by little and little within the
Territory of Munster, part of them being slain by the Hollanders, the rest
melted away to nothing, and Count Oldenburg denied passage to those that
remained together of them, through the Land.

The Lord of Cimace also gathered Soldiers, consisting of Flandrians and
Waloons, being partly promised, that he should be put into Garrison. But they
that were Listed by Verdugo, a great part of them ran away; the rest were
consumed either by Poverty or Diseases. Another Regiment belonging to
(...)tzenburg, were killed, partly by the Enemy, and partly by the Boors, about
Carpen and Aquisgrave. Others went a^^y into Hungary to those Wars: So that the
new raised men being either dispersed, or voluntarily departed, and the old
Soldiers disobedient and refractory, all their hopes were (...) frustrated;
and their boasting, That they would divide (...) Army of Thirty Thousand Men
into two parts, and there^^th at once make War on both sides the Rhine, came to
nothing. Whereby Ernestus himself, by how much he had raised men's Expectations
of him, by so much he fell into present Contempt; especially when Leisure and
Pleasure, Idleness and Lust, began to be seen as public stains upon him: So
that he was lashed at by eminent and most bitter Invectives. Besides, he
overcharged his Fame among the Netherlanders, in that he would have imposed
Spanish Garrisons, upon several of their Cities: And was with great Contumacy
refused, both by them of Namur and Lisle.

At the first beginning of the Spring, marching into the Field, Ambushes were
laid, but in vain, for the surprise of two Ci^ies which would have been of
great advantage; Boisledue was the one, which very seldom gave opportunity to
such undertakings, and now preserved by fortune; for the Guards had no other
notice of the Enemies approach, than the falling down of a Stone: Maestricht
was the other, and there also was a miscarriage by the fear of the Captains
which the Prince had sent before in a Ship, and because there were some
Soldiers, who unskilled in such Expeditions, knew better to pillage than
fight, unless by chance sometimes, we have no more power to command our
Courage, than Success, when a fatal Cowardice, and a sudden fear shall
weaken, and infatuate the Counsel and Courage of those, who at another time,
are Sons of Valor, and start back at no danger.

From hence Prince Maurice went beyond the Rhine, resolving to set an end to
all those great Enterprises formerly begun in Frizeland, to which purpose, not
only Count William's strength, but several new Companies were drawn into a
Body; leaving behind only Count Hohenlo, with two Regiments to guard the
Borders of Holland: Not long before this, Verdugoe's Soldiers, while yet the
Waters were all covered with Ice, assaulted Delphzile, a Castle situate (...)
the River Ecnus, they came on at first in a deep silence, (...) on a sudden,
made hideous outcries, on purpose to re^^^ the Defendants, and they rushed on
so unadvisedly, that (...) the Maritime Bank, which by the unskilfulness of the
Builders, being carried beyond the Trench, reached the Bulwark, there was a
sudden tumult, and long dubious Fight, until a Neighboring Ship coming in
with Darts and Guns, and the valor of the Defendants beat off the assaylants
with great slaughter.

Then the Groeningers sent to Ernestus Gifts, with humble Supplications, that
he would not defer forthwith to send the General, and all the Strength of the
Army so often promised, to avert and prevent the common ruin and destruction
of the City.

But the Prince, knowing that he was feared in Brabant, and therefore that part
of the Enemies Forces stayed there, and that another part was engaged in the
French War, sending before him Pioneers and Engineers, as well to secure him in
his march, as in a Battle, if need should be, steers his course toward
Coevorden. He had ten thousand Foot divided into seven Bodies, every of whose
Flanks and Rere, were guarded with Horse. It was a new divised Policy, that the
Soldiers armed with Lances and Pikes, and a few Engines, or Guns in the Front,
should break the Enemies Troops, (for Verdugo put the greatest confidence in
that part of his Forces) and then the Cavallery being wearied, would easily be
routed. Upon the left side, were placed the Carriages and Wagons that brought
Provisions to the Besieged, with some of the best and stoutest Regiments. At
the right side they were ^nclosed with Artillery, and the River Vidre; Verdugo
also had drawn up his men in Battel-Array before the Works, as if he had
desired to see the Strength and Courage of the Enemy, knowing he could easily
retire into the Coverts of his defenses upon occasion. Here the Prince took
Counsel, whether he should break through the Fortified Marshes, to the
Besieged, or seek a more secure way to get to the Castle. But (...) Spaniard,
under the silence and covert of the night, draws of his Regiments cruelly
shattred with long penury, and ^^y to mutiny at the eminent danger, together
with the Duke of Parma's old Soldiers, marching with them toward Oldenzeel:
there he pitched his Tents, and suffered the Soldiers to glut themselves with
prey, instead of pay, wasting the Fields of Germany, robbing and stealing with
so much more greediness, for that they believed they should not stay long
there, for fear of the Enemy.

Some of these Soldiers were sent beyond the Eems to Lugen, a Town under the
King's Command. Others were dispatched away to Groening, that the common
people, who are naturally unstable, might be kept in awe by them, and any
danger, arising from sudden fear, be prevented: After the appearance of day had
discovered the nocturnal slight, and that the Castle was open: and the
deliverers and Besieged, had with joy among themselves, and extraordinary
thinks to the Prince, saluted one another: the next thing in design was, what
had hitherto been aimed at, to set upon Groening by force, which in the former
years, they had so sorely te^tified. Although it was very strongly fortified
both with Walls and Bulwarks, neither wanted any thing, either as to Victuals,
or other Warlike preparations for defense: And not a few of the chief Frizons,
had rather the City should have continued in the Enemies power, than come into
their own, as believing it would draw the Trade from all parts thither.
However, the Horse being sent away, that they might stop all passages against
the Enemy, as well at Steenwic as at Coevorden, and the Bourtange, leaving only
the Zu^phen Regiment, to trouble and restrain the Enemy, if need should be, the
great Guns were carried by Sea.

The Prince at his first setting out, came into those Fields, that formerly had
been unfortunate in the great slaughter of many of his party: for he was
descended originally by the Mothers side, from the Saxons, who dyed in the
Siege of this place, or else his l^bour long in vain, compelled him to omit
that unhappy possession* nor had it been of mean advantage to his Uncles, that
the Civil War had invited them thither. The ancientest Inhabitants thereabout,
and such as had survived the many years of the troubles, showed the very place,
wherein Adolphus of Nassau dying, stained with his Noble Blood, the spo^l^
taken from Count Aremberg, by him slain, and the first success in this quarrel:
They could point out also the Castles, by whose Sieges, the Count Lewis of
Nassau, in vain, hoped the defection of the Cities, and the peoples reciprocal
endeavors for liberty. Then not far from thence, Lemmingere, and the Coast
hard by, fatal for the slaughter of seven thousand men.

But the Prince and Count William (for they both commanded alike, without
either discord or emulation) as if having survived the glory of their
Ancestors, they would remove the unlucky Omen from those places, they take up
their Quarters round about the Town, the Prince himself lying on that side,
where Groening turning away, as it were from the Frizons, looks full upon
Germany, but not any thing stronger in that part with Towers, Forts, or
Rampires annexed to the Bulwarks, or with any out-lying Fortifications. But
before I declare the Siege of this famous City, it will be worth our time, to
show the situation of the place, and the several sorts of Nations, that
frequently meet there on several occasions, and the rather, for that we have
nothing any where else to this purpose.

The Nations beyond the Rhine, included within the River Eems, without all
peradventure, are of famous Antiquity: the greatness of whose Age, as is common
with other people, was made fabulously uncertain, before the Roman Empire
propagated the fresh memory of things by their Armies: then was the Valor and
Fidelity of the Frizons highly renowned: The name of the Frankes was of a later
Edition, part of whom lived, as is believed, by the River Salium, which the
Ancients named Sala, and we by adding a syllable to the word, call it Isala, or
Issell. And from this River Sala, were the Salike Laws denominated. I cannot
set forth the Founders and Original of them, more then of all Germany, the
Ancients maintaining with a constant Opinion that they who lived there, were
Aborigines, that is, at what time the Generations of mankind increased, or
ambition forced them to hazard, the Sea in quest of new Habitations, they were
such as first possessed this utmost shore, or boundary of the Ocean: But in the
mean time, I may not deny, that part of the Normans and Saxons, and what other
Nations frequent those Maritine Coasts with their Fleets, being left in those
places, grew up together into one Government, and used the same Customs; And
afterward, they by the same example, poured out the superabundance of their
increased Generations, at further distance into the next, and also into remoter
places: But chiefly it is to be observed, in two Kingdoms, to wit, of the
French in Gaul, and of the Angles, or English in Britain, whose beginnings must
be drawn from these and other bordering Nations: But I cannot asser^ their
manner of living, of what manner of Government they had in those ruder Ages,
with any certainty, unless I should suppose they had always bad Kings: but
then that was not a name of arbitrary and unlimited power, but as it still is
in Germany, where the chief managery of all great affairs, is as well residing
in the people as the Princes. But afterward, the Empires of Germany and
France, being united (though quickly disjoined) the middle people ran one way
after liberty, the Princes drew another way, to subject them, by which means,
all things became unsettled, and nothing stable. And then Christian Religion not
being alike received by all Nations, as it disjoynted the Government, so it
disaffected men's minds one toward another, while others assuming the vizor of
Sanctity, made themselves Imperious Priests. The wiser sort, rather choose
themselves a Captain, and seek foreign Wars against Barbarians, incroaching
upon them by Sea and Land; from hence they fell to War among themselves, and
though they agreed in Religion, yet there wanted not quarrels, which under the
pretense of Piety, were at last disputed with fire and Sword Thus the Bishops
and Counts, dividing the Hollanders among themselves, seized likewise at once,
all the bordering Nations they could gripe within their reach; for in the first
place, Zutphen beyond Issell, was added to Gelderland: Hence, all that Region,
which is properly called Over-Issell, and under that name the people of Twente,
Zalland^, and Drente, were all subjected to the Bishops of Vtrecht. But that
part of Frizaland which lies within the Ulye, after a long contest and
Rebellion, submitted to the Jurisdiction and Customs of Holland. That part
which lies beyond the Lake, and divided by it from the rest, was cruelly
afflicted with War, and mortal Battles, being oftener beaten than subdued:
because the Princes of Holland, scorned to rule at the pleasure of others. And
the Frizons esteemed their liberties, both descending to them from their
Ancestors, and also confirmed by several Decrees of Emperors: Wherefore taking
Counsel among themselves concerning a moderation, out of their own number, they
chose one to be a Moderator in their chief Affairs, giving him the name of a
Podestate. But Groeningen, a most strong City, from all Antiquity, and the
chief of Frizeland, was much advantaged by the convenience of the River Eemes,
and the Neighborhood of Germany. From thence of old, besides the fierceness
of their nature, this City had nourished a certain hope, that as it was the
Metropolis of that Region, so in time it should command over all the Country of
Over-Issell. Which being denied by the Fortune of War, remaining yet great in
its contracted Jurisdiction, extended its bounds to the Rivers Leck and Eemes,
and forbidding any Merchandises to be exported into other places, unless they
were first brought, and offered to be sold in the City.

A Fortress of this Potency, after it had once gained Renown by Covenants, and
the use of right sometimes chose foreign Princes, and as often changed, and cast
them off, to whom they paid Tribute in Honor, as their defenders, but ever
with a Salvo for preservation of their Laws; and this was well enough at
present, while they endeavor to get favor; but when these Tributes were
afterward consumed in envy and prodigality, the mischief of the example
appeared, it being natural to Princes, by any means to keep what they have
gotten, and to increase by force, their beginning Wealth, if they be not
absolutely obeyed; wherefore the City growing stubborn, and not contented with
the liberty it enjoyed at present, but impatient of servitude, though at the
same time shaken with many intestine discords, yet from the hatred of the
present Lords, it still chose other, being ignorant of that good, for which
Arms are taken away from the people.

Thus first experimenting the Bishop of Utrecht, it fled from them, for fear of
the Saxons, to the protection of some living beyond the Ems, then to Gelders,
and lately devolved to the House of Austria; yet the Groeningers kept to
themselves a power of choosing all Magistrates, one only excepted, who was the
Prince's Legate or Deputy, who sat as Chief in the Supreme Assembly of the
Judges, that had Cognizance of the Rights of possession in Lands. In this
War, wherein all things have been unrivetted, being vexed with most horrible
Seditions, at last it consented to the Spanish Dominion, under the pretense of
Liberty: This was not, as other Cities, tormented with Disterences in Religion;
for when the Laws aged most furiously against all the Professors of the New
Religion, those that fled from all other places, found here a Refuge and
shelter: But because there arose great Discords between them and the Citizens,
the Confederate Lords, either out of a Love to Turth, or in favor of the
Nobility, gave Sentence against the Citizens: But the Spaniard being more
crafty, favored the City, and there upon it submitted to his Government; being
persuaded by this one thing, they rejected Religion, and all Leagues, to follow
Renneberg, (so prevalent in all men is Thirst of Hatred and Revenge.)

It is to be remembered, as we before declared, that the Groeningers had refused
a Garrison; for so they had agreed with the King, who also to gratify them,
indulged them with the freedom from many Burdens: But of the common for of
Spaniards, they hired Three Thousand: The Foreign Soldiers, to the number of
Nine Hundred, kept the Suburbs: There was hardly any where to be found so great
a quantity of Provisions, Guns, Gunpowder, and other Military Engines, as was
here: The Camp was placed a great distance from the City, that the great
Artillery might do the less harm to the Houses, but was most strongly
fortified, both against Invaders from within and without: A firm and wholesome
Plain extended it self between the Rivers Horn and Scuy^diep; which Rivers
beginning in the Marshes of Drente, (...) through the Trenches of Groeningen
and intermingle with the Sea at a place called Reidiep. And because all the
Army was not sufficient to incompass the City, therefore on this side they
thought fit to make their Assaults and Approaches, being here also able to
receive the Enemy if he came, that so they might, by opening the Rivers,
overflow all the circumjacent parts: And it was found by Experiment, that the
adjoining Waters were no less advantageous to the Tows, for keeping away the
Enemy, than it was prejudicial to the enclosed Succors. And the Prince also
carried the Rivers so, that he might easily bring his great Guns over the
Fields, against the scattering Forts: some whereof, being deserted, were easily
won. But the best and noblest of them all named Adoardysel, when the Governor
had defended it with more Resolution than the present necessity required, the
Bridges and Ladders being taken, it was assaulted by the Soldiers with so
great fury, mad to revenge the slaughter of their Companions, made in the same
place the Year before; that neither the too late delivery was accepted, nor the
word of Command, how, and when to give the Onset was staid for: Thus they made
a great slaughter, which was also increased by an accidental fire then happening:
This Fort being taken, provisions were more easily brought out of Frizeland
into the Camp, the people of Embden sending in no small quantity, until Verdugo
terrified them with Threats, bidding them take heed, they betrayed not their
Affection: Some successful Sallies were made, both out of the Town and Suburbs,
the Keepers of the New Works being tired out with continual show^s; for those
Works, out of a Military Ambition, were more hastily, than warily promoted.

The next and greatest Care was, by little and little, to undermine on both
sides the Port; the one whereof was defended by the Bulwark adjoining to the
Trench; the other, by an outlying Fo^t. The great Guns, on both sides, played
very furiously; and however the Rampires, and other Works made of Earth,
resisted the Force of the Attempt, yet the Bridges, Gates, Towers, and other
Buildings, were utterly overthrown: And some Letters being taken, that were
sent to Verdugo, it appeared by them, that their store of Gunpowder, what
between a prodigal Expense thereof, and other Accidents, was well near
consumed. They were advised therefore, least being left by their Associates,
some of whom were in France, and other continued mutinous and full of Sedition,
that they would not, being thus shut up by the Army, rashly, and without
reason, seek their own ruin.

To this it was answered, but not as if it came from the Besieged, but such as
were proud with the Memory of their older and more novel Affairs, That they
should not be provoked by the greatest of their Commanders, without danger,
although they were not all of one mind, but had many causes of difference among
them. The Assemblies of the Commons, whose Authority was greater in the public
Affairs, than was necessary, had delivered all their power to the Magistrates;
and a little before the Siege they had sent Messengers, to get them some
Succors: But the Netherlandish Cities, took no Thought of their so great
danger, all their Labors and Endeavors being busied about the New Regent,
they knew so profusely to wast their Money, as if they had not known, that by
the want thereof many times, the greatest Affairs are hazarded, and
Opportunities lost: Therefore, there were some who proposed, that the City
should be delivered to the Duke of Brunswick; Hohenlo was a main stickler in
that Advice, because, if it succeeded, he promised to himself, that he should
be his Deputy Governor. But the Siege utterly blew away all those
Imaginitions, which being once begun, there followed frequent Treaties between
the Besiegers, and Besieged; sometimes, that they might bury their Dead; other
times, that they might exchange Prisoners, and upon many the like occasions:
Sometimes also, they made short Truces, which, at l^st, the Townsmen desire one
to be continued, until they could send to Bruxels, for a more certain Reply,
but it was meritedly refused.

Jorgius, who was the principal person among all the Magistrates, before that
the Co^sul, and now a Colonel, withstanding Peace, and confirmed therein by
the encouragement of the Jesuits, had drawn unto himself the Rout of the poorer
sort of People, who had neither any hope or fear in the continuance or change
of the Weal-publike: These threatened death to all Messengers that should come
from the Enemy; and likewise to every one else, who but spoke well of Peace;
not abstaining, in the interim, from committing Murders and Rapines: But now
the Ravelins, and other nearer places, began to preach Ruin; among which
Evils, it was far the most miserible Spectacle, when the Darkness of the Night
was turned into Light, by the burning of Houses, fired by the Enemy throwing
and shooting Fireworks into the Town: And, as the People gathered together in
Heaps and Multitudes, to save their Houses and Estates, either were themselves
burned in the Houses, or else maimed and mangled with the Besiegers Bullets. At
last, what should they now, being between Hope and Despair, avoid? or what
should they defend? since all places were equally filled with Horror and
Lamentations: But, for all this, the Priests, and such as the Spaniard had
obliged to him by Pension, attribute to this obstinate stubbornness of their
peculiar Faction, the name of Constansy: Nay more, at this time, some out of
the Garrison, that lay in the Suburbs, passing the Trench in little Boats, took
the confidence to enter the City: These, on the one side, calling them in:
those, on the other, forbidding them: from whence there arose a most violent
Sedition, wherein, at the beginning, there was some blood spilled, but soon
after it abated, for fear of the Enemy abroad.

The Prince, that by the prosecution of the War vigorously, he might, at some
time, force to thoughts of Peace, began to undermine the greatest of all their
Forts within the Trench, wherein there remained some marks of the Fort or
Castle, raised there by the Duke of Alva; and that he might the better conceal
the Policy, by some other more apparent Design, he seems to threaten the taking
by storm of the Bulwarks already battered and shaken. But when the Assailants
saw the vast concourse of the Townsmen to the place, as if afraid to come on,
they retired; at which instant, the Gunpowder that was hid in the Mine, being
set on fire, the torn up Ground threw the dispersed Multitude into the adjacent
Ditches and Trenches, and cast some, at a greater distance, into the very Camp
or Leaguer: Others of them were swallowed alive into the gaping Chasma of the
disbowel'd Earth. Then might have been seen some Soldiers ( Scots by Nation)
whose Have and Valor carried them toward the City, together with such as
fled, but hindered from entering it, because the Planks that made the Bridge
passable were broken; however, they maintained the place, opposing great Bags,
filled with Sand, against all Shot and Darts thrown at them: And now all the
whole Army burned with a desire of doing somewhat more, earnestly requiring the
Slaughter and Ruin of the City, which they said must be won by force: That
this was the City, by whose wickedness all places beyond the Rhine, for 14
Years together, had either been exhausted by War, or at least spoiled:
Wherefo^e, now they ought to require in the punishment thereof, satisfaction
for the Ruin of so many Castles, the laying wast of so many Fields, and the
Blood shed in so many cruel Battles: That this might be an Example unto the
rest, that they should resist until they were subdued; and malapertly, with
insulting Answers, scorn Messages, and Offers of Peace: For what could be more
glorious for a General, than to take the benefit of his Victory upon a
Rebellious City, Triumphing in the S^aughter and Spoils of all that relate to
him? But if he should prefer the public good, before the Injuries offered to
his Blood, or the Revenge of his Ancestors, yet this City was not to be
preserved, having always been injurious to the Neighbors, untractable against
the Laws, and perfidious to Liberty; against which, having for some time
opposed, it had almost brought Ruin; and, at last, if it should be subjected,
would yet be infamous.

These Things were publicly urged, as every one had beforehand, in his
Imagination, divided the Spoil of this most opulent City: But the Prince, and
the Senators, who were present with him, thought it more convenient, for
carrying on the Remainder of the War, that the Soldier should be restrained
from his licentiousness and cruelty against the Citizens: Thus Embassies and
Prayers prevailed; within the Agreement were included several Degrees of
Things; nay, the very Priests, who had departed out of the City, and all that
belonged to them, consented to the League; and that they, together with their
Companions, would, by an equal Right, be admitted within those Articles.

Thus they accepted a Garrison, while they were accustomed to this New
Government, and Count William of Nassau was made their Governor, being before
the Governor of Frizeland: Both the Foreign Soldiers, and those that
belonged to the City, marched out safe the Seventh of the Calends of August,
(that is, July the 26.) The Prince entering the City, restored the Protestant
Religion, casting out all Images, and, as he had concluded, appointed
MAgistrates, especially choosing them out of those who bad before been banished
for their Religion, the Laws, for the future, being in force: Concerning the
Discords of the Natives, which formerly being disputed by Arms and Fighting,
were not yet appeased; there was a Settlement made by the States of the
Confederate Union.

And, in the interim, Otho Hartius, and Hierome Comannus, came from Bruxels to
the Hague, as if they had been sent upon private Business to the Lord of
Cimace's Wife, who flying from the Severity of her Husband, lived here, as it
were, in Banishment among the Hollanders.

They did not Treat of Peace, as a Business of so high a Nature did deserve;
but only cursorily seemed to bring Letters from Ernestus, wherein were
discovered the Charges and Burdens of War, and the great Commodities of Ancient
Commerce and Obedience: That there were never any Discords had continued
perpetually, but some few had been decided by War, but the greater part thereof
settled by Peace: Wherefore, If they had hitherto been terrified by any
Treacherous Dealings, yet he hoped they would not blame the well-known
Reputation of the House of Austria, or have him in suspicion,(...) desiring to
be the Author of Peace: Nay, that he left his own Country and his Brother's
House, with to other hope, than that he might restore a true and sincere
Harmony and Concord among Christian Nations: That it would be seem the States,
interchangeably on their part, not to hazard the prosperous estate thereof,
their Affairs, and the ambignous condition of their Adversaries, upon the
Danger and Fortune of an uncertain War, but rather take advantage from the
present Times, wherein they may rather prescribe, than receive the Terms of a
Peace.

Hereunto the States, being now more firmly settled, answered, as to their
Cause, magnificently,

That it was for Religion and the Laws, which in the time of the Emperor
Maximilian, the Archduke Matthias, the Brother of Ernestus, had by the Sword
protected; That since that, by the implacable Malice of the Spaniards; having
been forced to Arms, they have not been ignorant of the various Chances of
War, but God had appeared for them, even gasping under the Burden of
Oppression.

And now being raised by qreat Alliances, and their own Valor, they had rather
choose that ( to wit, War) to be a Judge of the Event, than an Enemy so often
found persidious.

And as the Spaniard could not lay aside Arms, without the Consent of the Kings
his Allies; so also the same Impediment lay upon them by several Leagues. And
here they showed several Examples, when Peace had either vainly or falsely been
pretended to be sought; and they had no more Reason, at this time, to hope for
better, of more safe proceedings: For Philip was so far from remitting old
Offenses, for advancement of the Peace of Christendom, that he would rather
suffer the Barbarians to enjoy all Europe, than he himself would leave off, to
infest and trouble other Kingdoms by Arms and Treachery.

That it was most evident, from Letters of the same Philip, written to William
Clementius, wherein he was commanded to delude Caesar with fair Words and
Promises: adding, That the Turkish Power would easily be diverted from the
Spanish Empire by Gifts and Presents: Nor did the States forbear to signify,
That the power of concluding a Peace was Deputed unto the Praefects, but the
Right and Power of preserving it was in the Lords.

In short, what hope could they have, while the Netherlands were oppressed with
Foreign Soldiers, and the Spaniards, who still sit at the Helm, would by
their nefarious and cruel Counsels, would absolutely reverse all the good which
Ernestus intended.

The Opinion of many among the Romanists, in hatred of Pease, was too commonly
cast abroad, That no Faith is to be held with such as differ from them:
Meritedly sure was the Mischief of that Invention turned upon their own Heads,
while they, by an endeavor of setting Men together by the Ears, break off and
spoill all Commerce.

To all those that practice Equity and Honesty, they never alter their Evil
Habit; and least they should enjoy their Perfidy too long, themselves became an
Example against themselves: Nay, the very Common People, who, for the most
part, are first weary of War, being enraged with the Memory of the late
Villainies of the Enemy, would not by any means hearken or incline to any
Thoughts of Peace.

And now the Spaniards fearing Prince Maurice's youth, grown famous by so many
Victories, and the league of two Kingdoms, from the greatness of their terror
they so far contemned infamy, that they hired murderers by particular stabs to
bring that to pass, which they were not able to compass with all their Armies:
And without doubt, there was no time so detestible for such horrid wickedness,
insomuch, that from hence, no one could expect from them any true peace, who by
giving place to hatred and revenge, would even violate the Laws of Arms. For in
this very year, wherein they desired a Treaty, first a Priest of Namar,
afterward another Renegado Soldier, were hired to become assassine^, but
prevented barely by suspicions, gathered from the extravagancies of their
looks; but the designs of so great Treaso^s being once, though with difficulty,
and but darkly, discerned, were soon after, for fear of the wrack, laid open,
and the whole contexture of the horrid villainy discovered; wherein first the
Prince himself, then his Brother, Henry Frederick, and after them, several
other persons, eminent in the Commonwealth, were designed to be slain: and
every one for a particular cause; as Leominus, because he had revoked from the
Kings party; Ald^gu^d, because he had excited the Duke of Parma to disloyal
mistrusts of the King; Olden bar^evelt, because he was looked upon to be averse
to peace.

The Traitors names were Michel Renichon, and Peter Furius: but let us see the
Authors, who being persons in eminent place, and capable of Honor, yet had
bound themselves to the perpetrating this infamous act. And they were as
fellows. First Fontayne and Ibarra, two Spaniards, Stanley the betrayer of
Deventer, and of the Netherlanders; La-(...) and Barlaymont, the heyr of an
inveterate hatred to the House of Nassau, and also Assonvile, of old suspected,
for the murder of the former Prince of Aurange: Of all these, the Traitors
gave particular accounts and demonstration, partly by force; but chiefly, by a
voluntary confession, after they were condemned to die, and could not hope for
any reward or favor, for casting aspersions upon others.

Nay more, the Promises and Exhortations of Ernestus himself were related, to
Renichon, by assuring a large Pension for his Reward: but to Furius in these
very words. [ If thou performest, what thou promisest me, and do kill that
Tyrant, thou shall surely go the ready way to Paradise:] yet there wanted not
some, who from hence would interpret, that the countenance of peace, which the
Regent would seem to have put on, was but dissembled; averring, that he only
counterfeited a face of modesty, the more neatly to hide the cruelty of his
heart: However it was, it is certain, that Comannus and Hartius, who were in
Holland, when this Treason of Re^ich^n was discovered, denied Ernestus to be in
any manner culpable therein: adding also, that Barlaymont would be ready, if
they would give him a safe conduct to come and send pledges for his safe
return, to appear and refute the before mentioned scandalls; but in regard he
could be admitted no otherwise, than to be punished, if he were convict, the
conditions were refused.

About the same time, Lodowick Lopez, a Portuguese, but of Jewish extract,
being a Physician in England, was apprehended, who was convict by proofs and
Letters, to have undertaken to poison Queen Elizabeth, for fifty thousand
Ducats promised to him by the Spaniard, for the same, for which he was, as he
well deserved, put to death.

The Authors of the Treason, were said to be Christopher More, Fontayne and
Stephen Ibarra, then residing at B^uxells, whom Queen Elizabeth contented her
self, to have sharply reprehended in certain Letters to that purpose, sent to
Ernestus: wherein she gave the name of Jesuits, to the inciters of such
villainies, and desired that they might be delivered to her, to be made a
public example: this she urged, not that she imagined to obtain her Request,
but that she might thereby cast the greater ignominy on the Spaniard's
Reputation. There were several other Attempts of the like so^ broke out not
long after, from a sort of men, wonderful by their vast increase, their Lenity
being as ready to promise the perpetrating of a Crime, as to discover it.

Toward the end of the Year, the Order of Jesuits began to be infinitely hated
through all France, by means of o^ John Castle, a young man bred up and tutored
among them, and persuaded by his Masters, that no Kingly Rights or Privileges
belonged to him that was separated from the Roman Church: This Fellow, when
the King returned out of Picardy to Paris, endeavored to have stabbed the King
into the Neck; but the blow, by the bending of his Body, hit him upon the
Tooth: The Parliament of Paris so abhorred the monstrous Fact, that they were
not content with the punishment of the single Offender, but pulled down the
House that nourished such a Viper, with all its Superstructures; they raised a
Pillar to preserve the abominable Memory of so horrid a Fact, and from
thenceforth banished the Jesuits. For to these, chiefly, both the English,
Hollanders, and French, did impute the fostring of such Doctrines, on purpose
breeding Youth, whom, under the Notions of Piety and Magnanimity, they inflame,
and encouraging them with Old and Ne^ Examples, how often Tyrants, who are
Enemies to the Public, have been destroyed by the Fortunate Darings of private
Hands. Concerning this Order, because Opportunity presents it self, and others
have spoken little concerning them, I intend succinctly to Discourse.

The first Founder of that Order was Ignatius Loyala, who being much weakened by
a Wound received in the Ward Navarre at Pumpeiopolis withdrew his Mind, being
yet Warlike, and full of Courage, unto Businesses of a more peaceable Concern.
Among the rest, he grew ambitious of Erecting a New Order: To which, in hope of
its future Greatness, he would not, according to Custom, give it the Name from
some more famous Man or Woman, but even from JESUS himself. Being Assembled by
Authority of them who can License such Novelties, they reverenced with
incredible study two Things chiefly, to wit, the Pope's Power, and the
Spaniard's Wealth: And at their beginning, they were main and eminent Props to
the decaying Cause; inducing in defense thereof, what had hitherto been
neglected, Manners unblameable, and sound Learning; they exercised themselves
in frequent Disputes against diverse Religions, which in those times had
insulted over the Roman Name. They augmented their Glory both in America, and
the Indus, where, among Barbarous Nations, by the Teaching of Christianity,
they add mightily to Philip's Empire: yea, and many famous Miracles have been
done by them, as is believed with great facility from confident Asseverations;
for that the Longinquity of places excludes further Trials: however, they are
in abundance, whether in real Truth, or but pretended. They are the persons, in
whom thou may require fidelity and modesty; Their Authority with the Vulgar
is very great, by reason of their Sanctity of Life; and because they instruct
Youth in Learning, and the Precepts of Wisdom, without taking any Reward for
their pains: They have their Provincials in every City and Nation, and there is
one Superior over all the rest throughout the World, who is for the most part
a Spaniard: They command with great Wisdom, and obey with equal Fidelity: They
follow not the common Custom of other Orders to live all together: It seemed
too poor to include within Walls their growing Society; They Baptize and
solemnize Matrimony; and the first thing they are taught, is, To lay aside all
Humane Affections, and to cast away the fear of Death: They chiefly take into
their Society none but such as are very eminent, either for Ingenuity, Blood,
or Riches; and they reap a great benefit from all those things: For, first,
they distinguish Ingenuity no less prudently, than they choose it, pitching
always upon such whom they hope will grow famous, either for Eloquence, or
digesting pious Meditations into Writing.

By their Nobility, they are admitted into the greatest Councils, being of an
incomparable Sagacity, in making Searches and Experiments; and because there is
no Engine so strong as Religion, for the laying open of Secrets. And their
Wealth fits them for Embassies, and all other public Employments: By which
Policies, though they are the youngest of all other Orders, yet they have far
surpassed all the rest in a short time, both in Reputation and Wealth; and
therefore are hated by them, and their manner of Life upbraided, as contrary to
Rule: But they being above the Envy of their Emulators, even rule Prince's
Houses, by a laudable moderation; for they observe a mean between sordid
submission and severe arrogant, neither totally eschewing, nor following other
men's Vices. These are the main Wheel, whereon the Spanish Greatness and Empire
moves, by which they maintain Peace at Home, and sow Trouble and Sedition
abroad. For those Catholics have received a portion of these men's Spirit,
which through France and England, yea and Holland it self, do in the former
maintain the Rights of a Kingdom, and in the last dispute against it. And
although they are banished all those places, upon pain of Death, yet is that
Danger no Obstacle to them, nor does impede either their Confidence or Policy.
But the Emperor did not forbear again to motion the making of Peace, although
before refused, and stained with such monstrous Actions, as we before related,
upon the common pretense of Germany, viz. the Care of his Brother's Honor: Not
did he seem only to admonish them to it, but calling a Diet at Ratisbone, of
the Princes and Cities of the Empire, he had caused it to be concluded, That
they should be compelled ther^ by Arms, for that they dampnified both
themselves and the^ Neighbors, by the perpetual miseries of War. But these
things, as they made only a Noise, never proceeding further than Words and
Threats, so they were accordingly taken notice of; for the Turk then chiefly,
being ready to fall upon the Cities of Hungary, as well the Care as the Forces
of Germany, was taken up, and could not have leisure to mind the Affairs of
such as belonged not to them.

This year also, the States of the United Provinces, received a very great and
most honorable Signal of Affection from James King of Scotland, as well as the
Kings of France, England, and Denmark, who were invited to the Baptizing of his
Eldest Son, born by his Wife, who was the King of Denmark's Daughter. And their
Liberality was correspondent to the Honor done to them, as witnessed their
most rich Presents given to the Princely Infant, who was named Henry Frederick.
They renewed their ancient Amity with the Scots, and restored all the Rights of
Trade and Commerce, and all other matters formerly concluded with the Princes
of the Netherlands, and particularly with the last Charles: But a Partnership
in Arms was in vain wished for by the Scot, and the Dane; and that the Princes
of Germany should be engaged to the same Affinity; for their Peace was safe and
unmolested, and there was no reason why they should go to thrust themselves
into other Folks Troubles: It Is thought there was some hope gathered from
Scotland, not without cause, offended with the Spaniard, who had for many years
disturbed the Peace of that Kingdom by Factions: From hence proceeded many of
those sharp and severe Laws against Catholics; and hence, by increasing
hatred, came those who would transfer the most just Hope and Title of James to
the Kingdom of England upon the Spaniard's D^ughter, but surely by most absurd
and incongruous Arguments; but nevertheless, such as discovered a mind ready to
do him any injury. But as well the Scot, as the rest of the Princes, cast off
from one to another the beginning to thwart a Power so formidable to all. The
Ambassadors that had been sent into Scotland, returning by England, the chief
whereof Waldgrave Br^derode, whose Noble Birth advanced the Honor and Worth of
the Commonwealth, together with James Count Valquin, consul^ed of certain
Matters, relating to the League: Then began to appear, how much those Presents
were envyed, which had been bestowed, to gain the King of Scots Affection; the
Queen of England objecting to them, Their unseasonable Magnificence, while yet
themselves wanted Foreign Aid. Nor did it proceed so much from the Humor of
her Regal Disposition, that would endure none to vye with her, as that she
being a wise and subtle Woman, and who would keep the Succession uncertain, as
one of the main strengths of her Kingdom, she would not, that a Prince, though
next to her, both in Kingdom and Blood, should be appointed her Heir by the
Option of her Neighbors: Therefore, according to the Custom of angry persons,
she required a part of her old Debt, and if they gave her not satisfaction, she
threatened War: Whereto a modest Excuse being made, they were at quiet for some
time. And, in the mean time, that they might make amends for their Offense,
upon her Request, They obey and grant, That they will add some Money and Ships
to her Fleet, for driving away the Spaniard from Bretaign in France: For the
Enemy being settled in some strong Ports, lay at lurk upon both Shores, to get
the possession of that Sea, which passes by both France and Spain: From whence
proceeded the English-mens fear; nor could the Hollanders sail to the Westward
with any safety: But now the English and Dutch Fleets being joined, they drove
the Enemy from most of the strong Holds situate on the Seacoast.

But the War, after the taking of Groening, continued in the Countries beyond
the Rhine, although there were other Things, which promised their Hope a Reward
of their Labors.

But at the instance of Mounsieur Buzanual, King Henry's Ambassador, it seemed
more just, since their own Affairs had so well thriven, to look toward their
Allies, because then there was sharp War upon the Borders, between the
Netherlands and France: Some there were that would not have sent Soldiers to
the King, but Money, which Buzanuall withstood, affirming, That the King his
Master had better learned to order Soldiers, than Money: And so far did his
Reasons prevail, that he had not only very great hopes, but the Charge
likewise already begun, would forthwith be laid aside for a New Expedition
thither.

The Spanish Soldiers, who had hitherto made War upon the French Borders,
after they had received their Money, and taken the benefit of what
Licentiousness they pleased, being excluded from all Cities, lest they might
grow more insolent by Idleness, under the Conduct of the Lord of Cimace,
besieged Cambray: For that City, as is before set forth, was delivered in the
Name of the Kingdom of France, to Balagny, to be kept for King Philip; but he,
on the contrary, usurped it to himself, from thence the Neighboring Country
was wasted: Nor had the Spaniards long continued the Siege, but they wanted all
Things necessary, not excepting Provisions: However, lest that they might seem
to do nothing, they surrounded the City at a distance, but with very careless
Gua^; for being in their Friends Country, they supposed themselves terrible
enough to the Enemy, being in no manner changed from what they were before; but
only in this, that now being under Command, yet they re-acted the Crimes of
Sedition; among other of their Exploits, many times, fetching great Booty out
of France.

But Henry, the greatest part of the Traitors being subdued, finding himself
really King, and that he was so increased in strength, that, though till this
time he had been able but weakly to defend his, now he appeared able to
vindicate himself, and to threaten an equal Return for Injuries.

He accused Philip in an Edict, That he had, without any probable Reason,
broken the League that he had made with France five and twenty years before;
That he being King of France, (...) content with the Dominion of his Ancestors,
which by the Divine Providence, he now enjoyed, and being an august and
magnificent Possession, he did not desire to intermeddle in the business of
other Princes. That he would not seek a cause of War, against the Neighboring
Cities of the Netherlands, and hoped he should not be forced to one, by
injuries put upon him: but since they had compelled him, he exhorted the People
of Henalt and Attoys, and others his Subjects, to fall upon those foreign
Soldiers, general^y hated and burdensome to all about them, whom none ever
hated without danger but an Enemy, and to drive them out of the French
Territories, and also from Cambray: which if it w^ not done by a set day, he
would bring thither his Armies, and t^ his force upon them: This was all
received in silence, as if it had been denied, for the Cities durst make no
answer: but Philip shortly after, mindful of his affections to the Catholic
Religion, and remembering the League himself had formerly made with France,
declared that the Prince of Bearns, (for he would not vouchsafe the King of
France any other name, who had vainly pretended himself an honourer of that
Religion which he had opposed, and now called himself King of France, was to be
prosecuted with War on all hands: Be this came too late, for after they had for
a whole year, displayed their Ensign on the Netherlandish Borders, all after
actions seemed to claim a shadow of right; But to this foreign War, King Henry
appointed Commander in Chief, Turnis Viscount Turen, who then raised the Repute
of the name of Bulloyn, renowned also by Alliance to Prince Maurice, whose
Sister Elizabeth descended by the Mothers side from the Royal Stock of Bourbon,
he had married. And in this he would be more affectionately diligent, in that
thereby he advanced above the power of the League, a Prince bound (...) him by
private Alliance, and also very high in the King's favor.

It was thought convenient, to carry the War into the Province of Lutzenburg,
because this way he might have a passage for his Italian and German Levies: for
the Hollanders hoped, that if new forces were raised, it might be possible to
bring to naught the old, being neither many, nor well agreeing; and this either
by the Netherlanders consent, of the conjunction of War: But a Messenger met
Philip of Nassau, as he was hastening his march toward the French, with
supplies, consisting of eight and twenty Foot-Companies (for the States having
only promised twenty, had now of their own accord, augmented the number) that
they understood by four Switzers, whom they had taken, that Charles Mansfeldt,
lay in the middle between them. Therefore for securing the Journey, he took
five Troops under the leading of Sir Francis Vere, and a well ordered number of
Foot, least he should give any opportunity to Mansfeldt pressing upon him, and
leads them beyond the River Moselle, to the Borders of Metz, for the Enemy had
prepossessed all the places more inward.

The greatest part of the Troops, having either gained by leave or force, a
passage through Germany, returned into Holland, but the greatest strength of
their Horses was consumed in the length of their Journey. But the greatest
damage that fell upon those was, that the Horsemen being far from home, became
licentious, committing many robberies and Rapes, which either for that Reason,
or else in regard of their Religion, or some other causes, mightily turned the
Peoples hearts against the Hollanders: But the Earl of Buld^s having in charge
matters of greater concernment, but his Forces not able to compass the same,
not daring to besiege Lutzenburg, after he had received the Auxiliary Forces,
about the latter end of Autumn, went to Paris for further Counsel and
Instructions.

And it appeared by the Event, that by reason of the constant allowance of
Pillage and Rapine, the Strength sent for supplies were hastened, both with
great damage at home, and other hazard: And that the Enemy came not into the
very heart of Holland, during the sudden and most sharp Frost following, was
not the success of their Counsels in their own defense, but the evil Fortune
and Discipline of their Adversaries. For Sedition had spread it self all over
the Kings Army, and the end of one mutiny, was but the beginning of another.

This madness, as well for the generality thereof, as the severity of the
remedies applied thereto, far surpassed all before it; because the Tumults
began not in single Regiments, but several Nations at once: not in the Borders,
but in the very Bowels of the Netherlands; for now hatred had enflamed the
Soldiers avarice, which is the prime cause of all such extravagancies: The
Italians, a Nation by Nature emulous and spiteful, observing that the Spaniards
had their Wages paid them, in regard there was likewise at the same time, pay
due to them, presently imagined themselves slighted and affronted: At first a
few of them only complained, That then they lost the esteem of their labors
and blood, when the Duke of Parma, the chief column of their party, and a most
just rewarder of virtue in all, dyed; but although he were dead, yet from him
the Spaniards possess the benefit and Grandeur, that at present makes them
insolent: That they were now as despicable, hurried from place to place, at the
option of a few, who make a stalking-Horse of Ernestus his good Nature, and the
Kings Wealth: But it should suddenly appear, that they had Arms, wherewith they
could challenge their due against all those that defrauded the King of his
Treasure; neither ought they (the Spaniards) to be displeased at the Example,
since they themselves first broke the Ice: And if any one resisted them, he
should find, what men Italy bred, who before this time, had brought in
subjection the real Spayn, not that which is now so called, being an
abominable sink of the basest Nations, who reckon Pride and cruelty, instead of
all other Virtues.

These first threats were now seconded, not only by Corporals and inferior
bands of men, but the valiantest of their Commanders began to speak the same
Language: with which encouragements, as if they had been possessed with some
sudden frenzy, all the Italian Soldiers marched with their Colors to
Sichenen, a Town of Brabant, which, in regard of its strength and Situation
they seized, from whence they fetched in booty all about, even as far as
Bruxels: with these, many Soldiers of other Nations joined, as French, Irish,
Epirots, and even from Italy, such as had formerly been in service for the
Netherlanders, and all under pretense of peace, and hope of rewards, they
refusing to entertain none but Spaniards only.

At all these disturbances, the Officers were present, which, in tumults of
such nature, is very rare, as if they had now been about to contest the honor
of their Nation, not by any right of Authority, but so prevalent more or less,
as they approved themselves notably active in heading the Soldiers rage. New
men were daily listed, and enrolled in the Companies: the mark and badge of
their faction, was a swarm of Bees, before which stood the King, and this by a
military jest, and facetious quip, they called the Commonwealth. They imposed
Tribute upon Lands, and exacted Toll of all things that were carried out of the
Country. Prince Maurice, and the Hollanders, politickly fomented this Sedition,
for fear, least if they should reunite, they might receive thereby some
unlooked for damage; and the rather, because there was a very great Frost,
which had continued rear seventy days, and had covered with Ice, both the
Marshes and Rivers, that they would bear the greatest and most weighty
Carriages.

Thus while the Enemies Country, was tormented on one side with the French War,
on the other side with mutinies of their own Soldiers, first precluding all
places to reduce them to poverty, and afterward, by raising all Provisions to
an excessive price; The Treasury was taken into consideration: and therefore
they being graciously heard, who were sent to Prince Maurice, declaring, that
they were not obliged to the Spaniards by any right of Country, Kindred or
Alliance, but only served them for pay; which not being given to them, they
supposed themselves no longer tied to their defrauders. And if any should come
to assayl them, they would make use of the Law of Nature, which has commended
to all Creatures, even by instinct, self-preservation.

Thus a Truce was made with them, but when they demanded Tribute in the Land of
Cuycke, where the Prince had some paternal Possessions, Herman Count Heremberg,
was ready to defend the Country people denying the same, if the Prince upon his
Request would have permitted him. But here also the Soldiers necessity, who
could not so much weaken one side, was more prevalent, than all the Reason of
the unarmed multitude, which things, when they came to be related at Court, as
they were by the Spaniards represented to the worst, there was a division in
Judgments thereupon, some averting a necessity of mercy; but others replied,
that although in some Cases gentleness was necessary to be used toward
Soldiers, yet these being grown most insolent, and having also a national
hatred, were to be made exemplary, least the Soldiery should make it a Custom
to mutiny, and throw off their obedience, as often as they should fail of their
pay, so soon as it was due. Besides this, the necessary of the time did incite
and provoke the most moderate persons, because otherwise, when there was the
greatest occasion for them, they would obey no orders or Commands.

Among all these advices, it was not concealed from them, what further rigor
was thought upon for them; for they, according to the subtlety and craft of
their Nation, had hired Spies, who gave them Intelligence of all that passed.
Nay, and some of the Noblemen did voluntarily favor the Italians, out of
hatred and impatiency of bearing with the Spaniards. Victuals, Ammunition, and
all things else fit for War, were reasonably provided for them, when the
Spaniards come into the same Province with a strong patty of Soldiers: at
first they dissembled the cause of their coming; but when they were not able to
come near the Italians in these Arts, they marched out seriously to shut them
up in the Town, and being so enclosed, by Famine to reduce them to Reason.

Anon greater numbers are gathered together, and several Castles assaulted,
with the loss of much blood, and so much cruelty was used, that they are
reported to have been privately slain in the Spanish Camp, that either by
foresight, or other affection, repugned those Counsels. But now none would
suffer it, that they should come to punish a fault in others, whereof
themselves but lately, yea, and often before, had been guilty.

Thus on both parts, they showed a most pernicious example. These, in that they
would savagely shed the blood of those who had been mutually engaged with them,
and were bound by the same sacred tie of an Oath: Those, that being taken for
Enemies, they desired Aid from Enemies indeed. For though they made their first
Address to the King of France, yet he commended them to Prince Maurice as
nearer, that so keeping the Sedition a foot, he might, when time should serve,
have aid from them, and enjoy the Valor of so many Courageous Men; whereupon,
Pledges being delivered on both sides, they confirmed the Truce formerly made.

Then they delivered up the Forts and Castles, and because they durst not rely
upon the Town, against an Army approaching with Cannon, and other Artillery,
the whole Bands, accompanied with their Wives and Children, marched away in the
Covert and silence of the night, through places not infested by the Enemy.

They took up their Winter Quarters not far from B^i^ledue, being secure both
in their Rear and Flanks, for that the City of Breda, Hesden, and
Gertruydenburg, did enclose them, and were at all Essays, places of refuge for
them, when in danger; and in the Iuterim, for their more useless Company,
places of abode. If they wanted either Victuals, or Provisions of War, they
were supplied not otherwise than as Allies and Companions; And besides this,
the Prince not despising the fame of liberality, even from Enemies, furnished
them with Artillery, and added to them some Horse, that in their going abroad,
they might more powerfully compel the Country to pay Tribute, or revenge
themselves upon occasion by depopulations. Thus daring to do even the greatest
acts of Hostility, yet not positively become Renegadoes, they made up as it
were, a third party in the War.

Things being at this pass, shortly after, the Regent Ernestus sent Messengers
to them, promising their pay, impunity, and a free P^sse-port; But when they
understood by some intercepted Letters, that they should be circumvented and
brought to punishment, a long time after they suspected all things: Nor were
the only troubles in these parts, round about they were as unquiet; for not a
few, both Horse and Foot-Souldiers, when they fled from Verdugoes Camp, being
pinched with the extreme want of all things, and helped by the People of
Cleves, went beyond the Rhine, and so into the parts next unto Brabant. Besides
the Garrisons of Dunkirk, and of St. Amand, and Capelle began to grow
refractory to Commands: And to be brief, the very Spaniards themselves, but a
little while before appeased, now again wanting their pay, had begun a Sedition
in the Town of St. Paul. And the causes of all these evils, proceeded from that
old negligence, and ill husbandry in the disposing of money, and that Ernestus
was not able to punish the meanest offenders. As also that the American Fleet
was shattered and knised by cross Winds, and retarding diseases, almost into as
forlorn a Condition, as the Spaniard's Credit: Moreover, there were other
damages they suffered by the English, who although they were not so fortunate
this year, in the South parts of America, yet in Brasile, their Voyage proved
well, having taken the Town of Fernambuck, where they got a most wealthy and
plentiful spoil.

The following Winter, as it proved very dangerous by the fierceness of the
Frost and cold, and other wants, to the Spaniards lying at the Siege of
Cambray, so it gave opportunity to Verdugo, to make a Journey into Frizeland,
and the parts about Groeningen, wherein he only vented his malice, in wasting
the Country, and burning the Villages. And now the Cavallery belonging to the
United States, when he returned out of Germany, least he should often do the
like, lay in the way to hinder him. This Winter also, the Hollanders suffered
very great loss by inundations; for the Waters having been long frozen up in
the Rivers, as soon as it began to thaw the force thereof, together with the
Snow dissolving, and falling violently from the tops of the Hills, which was
much increased by great Rains, made both the Maes and the Rhine s^ell over
their Banks, and drown all the adjacent places, making a great destruction of
Cattle, and doing infinite damage to the Country all about.

Toward the end of this Year, an uncertain expectation had attracted the
minds and eyes of all People, concerning a famous Judgment, while some think
severity expedient, but others by too strict and nice a scrutiny, blame every
pretense given to such as are studious in mischiefs.

Arnold Dorpius, sometime Governor of Zyriene^, when it was besieged by the
Spaniards, and familiarly convers^ with the Prince of Aurange, with whom he was
very free in Discourse, so managed both his own, and the public Affairs, that
he was become the Object of Envy, from the common peoples vanity, in giving him
the Name of The Rich Dorpine. He, at the Death of the Prince of Aurange, being
laid aside, had received from Monenius, lately returned from a Danish Embassy,
so of the Covenants agreed upon with the Dane: It fortuned, that the
Ambassadors sent from Ernestus shortly after to the Dane, objected the same
things, that there might be an Alliance with them, whereby the Hollanders might
be dispossessed of, at least disturbed in, their Northerly Navigations. Thus
the Secret was known to have been disclosed by Dorpius: From hence a stronger
suspicion was conceived of him, and while his Papers are perused over and over;
at last, a Copy of the Letter is found, wherein he exhorted Ernestus, To put
himself into a Disguise, and come to the Hague, where professing himself
hitherto unconcerned in the War, but now the Author of Peace, he would strike a
fear into his Enemies from the common people, and would win both to himself,
and to all Lovers of Concord Repute and Trust. But when Dorpius constantly
averred, That this Letter was written to (...) other purpose whatsoever, than
to try his Wit, and exercise his Ingenuity, he was freed from Prison, and
confined to his own House; but afterward, by giving in Pledges, he was
discharged; the heat of the Judgment, as is usual in such cases, vanishing by
little and little: and, as in the power of many, so at last he procured his
Pardon. But Menenius, who descending from the great and public Session of the
Judges of Holland, to be an Assistant in Dort, had made himself a part of the
Commonwealth: being now degraded from that, was put afterward to write the
Annals of his Country, and had therefore an Annual Pension; not so much for any
great hopes of his Labor, as that the Leisure of the Man, being of a great
Ingenuity, and well Learned, but of an active and restless Spirit, might seem
to be employed in some Noble Affair.

The Fourth BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
1595.
AT the beginning of the Year, Ernestus called a Council at Bruxels, wherein he
discoursed before hand of the great Things he was wont to undertake; which, at
a glance, were excellent Matters, as if he had intended to confirm their
Ancient Laws and Customs: But power was not given to the States, according to
the Old Custom, of judging concerning the Weal-publike: Only the Bishops and
Nobles were summoned to meet, because the Nobility are an Ornament, and
Authority to Sovereignty, and the Clergy are bound to be faithful by the Tie of
Religion: The Commons are staggering and unconstant, being greedy of any kind
of Peace; and therefore, except in the case of Tributes, are not to be hearkened
to. As soon as he had gravely declared the great pains he had taken for the
making Peace, in all other Things he desired their Counsel: Whereupon Areschot,
a Nobleman of the first Rank in the Netherlands, is Reported to have made a
Speech in these words:

Our Forefathers, in precedent times, not in any manner biased with Hatred,
but only because they were commanded, took up Arms against most valiant
Nations, but chiefly the French; nor were they ever frighted at the Dangers, or
started at the Evils that follow War, while they fought in Defense of their
Princes Greatness: And therefore they brought to pass the most difficult.
Matters by their Valor and Wisdom. But now our Arms and Counsels are at little
use, our Miseries and Calamities are the things wherewith we are best
acquainted: And this War, which is nicknamed Civil, certainly cannot be
believed such, especially in the contemplation of the Mortal Jars between
Fellow-Citizens, and Contrymen: What then! Do we desire Peace? Certainly, it
had behoved us long since to have cared for that, while those things we would
have had preserved, had yet remained in being, before our Cities were burned,
our Fields wasted, and a general want had surprised our Families, which is
like (for ought I see otherwise) to lie upon them even to Futurity: But if yet,
after thirty years continual slaughters, we have not deserved rest, yet at
least free us from another War? Must we go against the French? first let us
secure our Backs from the Hollanders: But if it seem more convenient, to take
Vengeance on those first, and that surely is very necessary; let us not blow up
our hopes with too much self-conceitedness, lest while we court what belongs to
another we endanger what is our own. But you will say, Peace is now offered to
us: I answer, It is so indeed: But, pray consider, what cause of War has the
French? And how do the Hollanders drive of Peace? No surely, I rather believe,
they are sensibly displeased, as well at ours, as their own sufferings. They
cry out, let the Foreign Soldiers be all sent away, for they are full of
cruelty and pride, and utterly discordant to our Customs, who have no show of
Modesty, nor more Fidelity or Conscience, than to serve their occasions: We
say, these things are spoken maliciously, and by Enemies; true: yet those
things we suffer by them is little else, than what Enemies use: Ask the people
of Artois; Inquire of those of Henalt, and other Provinces near thereby, to
whom the Proprietors impute the Dearth of such Fertile Countries: They will
tell you, it is true, the French took away a little, but the Spaniards robbed us
of all; and the like may be said of all other Foreigners, who, however they
disagree among themselves, yet unite to ruin the Netherlanders. Thus under the
Names of War and Sedition, we (...) made a Prey; but the Injury done to us,
leaves not off here, but we must be delivered to the Rule of Foreigners; so
stupid (...) we our selves accounted by them, while our voluntary patience ^kes
us become their Laughing Stock; whose Lusts and Pleasure, if they still prevail
above our Complaints, and it be thought (...) to encourage wickedness, by
conniving at it, we shall at last be forced to do that, which the necessity
thereof will sufficiently excuse, both to the Christian World, and to our
Sovereign the best of Kings.

While he was yet speaking, the chief of every Degree once round about him with
a general Consent, and rejoicing, That there was one found amongst them, that
durst publicly speak the Troubles of their Minds. But the Spaniards were even
mad against him with Fury; for diverse of them were present: Fontain had avoided
to be at the Assembly, because he was out of hope to be preferred before
Areschot; and his Pride was too great to follow him: So really did he thirst
after a real potency, that he would not slight the appearances thereof. I have
observed, this very Areschot, through all the storms of this War, to have
adhered to the Spaniard with great candor of heart, being such, as bearing an
unspotted Fidelity to his Prince, yet would not make his Honor subservient to
the Lusts and Pride of Strangers; and being sensible of his own Authority, was
accustomed ever to use his freedom without check, mocking at the King's
Ministers, because their Arrogance was hated by all, but himself was never
feared beyond words: Wherefore now secured, by the greatness of his old Age, he
cast out those Words, which were looked upon as Oracles, so highly did they
please the Peoples minds: Without doubt, the Netherlander's Hatred to the
Spaniards, was never greater, since the Peace made at Gaunt; and some believed,
that the Hollanders, as much as they could, heighthen'd it, if as formerly,
under the old Prince of Aurange: So now the Government was not in many hands,
but one Single Person managed the whole Frame of Authority, and all the Secrets
of Leagues and Amity. The too great power of the Spaniards, and the Reciprocal
Hatred, for the difference of their several Customs, were the first causes that
inflamed the Netherlander's miseries. Fontayne given much to sleep and
gluttony; and also, being taken in the very act of Adultery at Antwerp, was
Reported to have very narrowly escaped Ruin. Stephen Ibarra was a Man of a
more approved Ingenuity and Diligence, but all his good Qualities were sullied
by Pride; which also was the cause of an irreconcilable difference between him
and Charles Mansfeldt, insomuch that Charles had very nigh killed Stephen: And
the Spanish Soldiers took hold of this Pretense, to cry out, They would be
commanded by no other Officers, than those of their own Nation. Christopher
More was a good Counselor, and together with Idiaques, ruled Spain; but he
u^urped also the Right of Domestic Power: Yet Didaco Ibarra, a man of so bold
a Spirit, that he complained to the King by Letters, of the small Authority the
Spaniards had with Ernestus, which he supposed the chief cause of all the
present Evils: Taxis was more subtle to p^y into Dangers, and did persuade to
win the Netherlandish Nobles, with great Pretension; of Honor; but to keep the
ordering of the King's Treasure still in the hands of the Spaniards, whereby,
as with a private Knot, tie unto himself all other Matters.

Ernestus having heard out Areschot, and being in his own Nature full of delay;
and knowing that he could by that means best p^event their Violence, answered,
He would advise with the King, to whom he would also be an Intercessor, for
attaining such things as related to the Peace. This hope supported their Minds,
although their Evils were not yet removed: For after both the Kings of Spain
and France had proclaimed War, the lesser Towns of Lutzenburg being possessed,
which could not resist the Storm; the Count de Bulloin wasted all round about,
nay, and ranged even to places far distant with Fire and Sword: But yet the
Enemy met with four Troops belonging to Philip of Nassaw, which they either
killed, or put to flight, being circumvented by Ambushes, and the overflowing
of the Rivers; and afterward, in a greater Battle of Horse, the Victors
prosecuted their good Fortune: Against the more potent Cities, Policy was
rather used than Force, yet the Success was not therefore answerable: There was
Chance, which really might have increased more Parties to the War, and made it
break out in all the Borders, if there had not been more difficulty in keeping,
than acquiring; of which this is compassed often by Boldness and Temerity, but
that must be maintained with Care, and many excellent Policies. Hoye is a Town
of the Bishopric of Liege, which Authors believe to be the Remains of a
greater, and more Cities spoiled of old by the Incursions of the Barbarians;
and the Situation persuades this, from the running of the River Maes through
it, which a Stream breaks into, that runs with more violence, than scantiness
of Water makes show of; this Brook gives Name to the place: The Soil, that is
all about it, is very rugged by reason of Iron Mines, and answers to the Nature
of the People: It has an Arched Bridge, the Rising Bank, on the right side, is
over-looked by a large Castle, seated upon a little Hill: It is a choice place
of Recess for the Bishops, in regard of its pleasantness; and no less difficult
to be Assaulted, because of its steep Ascent. But while it was assured, both by
Peace and Right, those few that by there in Garrison, and spent their time in
Riot and Idleness, and did their Soldiery Duty as a Work of Supererogation:
and by the like neglect all the Buildings Erected upon the Rock, were equal to
the Foundation of the Castle. One of these Houses, by the consent of the Owner,
Heraugier, the Inventor of such Stratagems, who was Governor of Breda, by him
taken, commanded to be filled with Thirty Soldiers, who, in the Night, by the
help of the Window and Ladders, going out, and first using silence, then by
continual beating of Drums and Shouting, hindering the Prospect, they took the
Keepers of the Castle, and bound them; in help of whom, while it was yet but
the Dawning of the Day, their Captain came with six hundred Horse, and one
Thousand five hundred Foot: But the Townsmen, though at the beginning of the
Tumult, they ran to their Arms, when they saw so many Soldiers at their Gates,
and others over their heads, affrighted with that double Terror, losing their
Courage, they submitted. Then Heraugier, placing therein a Garrison, sent his
Horse abroad into the Fields, and the Country within the Maes, which were
subject to the Spaniard, to collect Tribute. This Exploit of War, committed
against a Prince who was at Peace; and however he did not affect the
Hollanders, yet in regard there had been no Hostility declared against him,
according to the Custom of War, might with more facility be answered to the
Spaniards, than excused to him. Not was it altogether unlike that of Bonne and
Berck, which being formerly taken in War, should be retained, now that the
whole Archbishopric of Colen was in peace. When therefore Bojoarus, the Bishop
of Liege and Colen, had sent to examine the matter, and it was answered by the
States, That it was rather out of present Necessity, than any Right they
claimed; neither would they do any Damage to his Government, or Subjects; but
only having taken a Town from the public Enemy, they were ready to restore
it, when Arms were laid down on both sides: And that Bojoarus did not deal
justly with them, in suffering the Spaniard to enjoy it; and thereupon the
Conditions were refused, wherewith they were solicited to Rendition, being in
themselves very reasonable, but that the convenience of the place persuaded the
contrary; for that Castle was a great Safeguard to their Journey, that the
Holland and French Forces might the more securely meet; and in that Town they
intended to place those Italians, which had formerly deserted the War, being
far from the Borders of Holland, and in a rich Country, where they might have
their fill of Plunder.

As soon as the Bishop saw himself slighted, or at least deluded with
Procrastiuation, gathering together some New Soldiers, whereto were added
fifteen hundred Foot, seven hundred Horse, and fifteen pieces of Artillery,
under the Leading of Lamot, he besieged the place on both sides; for the King's
Commanders voluntatily gave their Assistance, their Interest being no less
concerned, than the Bishops, lest thereby the Hollanders should come to possess
all the parts have the Maes, and so connect the Country: Nor did the Spaniard's
want an honest pretense, because the Country of Liege was fiduciary to the
Princes of Brabant, by several Leagues of Philip Duke of Burgundy, and Philip
the First of Austria. The Town was easily gained by Scaling Ladders, and
Breaches, for it was but meanly fortified, and all in it, that resisted, were
slain. The greatest part fled into the Neighboring Castle. But from the next
Hill, which the Hollanders had neglected to possess, being higher than the
Foundation of the Castle, it was sorely battered, and below it was undermined:
For there was present a great Number of the Native Inhabitants, who, being
accustomed to dig for Metal in the Iron Mines, were very skilful in the Art of
undermining.

Heraugier judged, that the Garrison might have held the place longer; and with
the hopes thereof, he had gathered together Forces for their Relief: But
fearing, at length, lest his Journey should be hindered, by the overflowings of
the Rivers, although there were in the Castle Subterfuges and Seluces, to
prevent the inraging of the Enemy, at the Siege the Castle was surrendered,
being observed by many, that he was better at sudden Enterprises, than the
patient enduring of tedious Hazard. He complained, That the Succors promised
both from the French General, and the Italians at Sichem, (...) fell short of
his hopes, in answering the Event, and that the Wall wherein they put their
greatest trust for defense, was not, as it was supposed solid, but made up of
two Walls, which gaped (...) in the middle, and that the innermost parts of the
Castle, were, by the Enemies Battery, laid quite open. The Soldiers that
marched out, that they might not be abused by the Bishop's men were protected
by the Spanish Commanders, with so much honor, that some of them drew their
Swords for their Enemies* against their Companions in Arms: For Heraugier had
Covenanted with them, not immeritedly fearing, lost the Laws of Arms should not
be observed by the Leig^ois: The Bishop was not content to have punished those,
whom he thought guilty of the Stratagem, but he took from the City its Au^
Liberty, as suspecting it to be unfaithful to him: Nor did he leave off to seek
Revenge against Heraugier himself, objecting to him Cowardliness, and sending a
Transcript of so^e Letters to the States, wherein he had irreverently spoken
against them.

Prince Maurice, and such as with him were conscious of the taking of Hoye,
defended him chiefly among the rest, being thus brought in question: The
possession of this Foreign City was not kept long, it being regained the 41
day after it was taken; and the benefit of the Fact was lost, though the Envy
thereof remained: And by chance it had happened, that the same day, wherein
afterward a Messenger arrived with the News of the Rendition of the place,
contrary to all men's Expectation; the States believing the strength and
security of the place, had given a rough Answer to the Bishop's Legate, to wit,
That they would deliver Hoye, when the Enemy surrendered Berck. But the
Spaniards added to the possession of Berck, that also of Hoye, and when they
once had it, kept it, until their Wages were p^id, and the Enemy removed from
those parts, and then they thought they might with safety enough deliver it.

Herein Philip sought the Fame of Piety, protesting, That he would rather
bestow out of his own, upon the Church of Liege, the most ancient in the
Low Countries, then that he would, under any pretense whatsoever, take ought
away that was its proper right. Four hundred of them that marched out of Hoye
with Heraugier, were slain by fourscore Horse of the Enemies, while being
laden with prey, and too covetous to preserve the same, they hindered
themselves; In like manner, were they justly punished, who going out of the
Garrisons in Over-Issell to plunder the Territory of Munster, were in the night
by the Enemy surprised.

Among all these Affairs, King Henry, that he might compel the Enemy lying
about Picardy, to look to his own business at home, commanded his General the
Count de Bulloine, with as great an Army as he could make, to enter into that
Burgundy which obeys the Spaniard, by the name of a County, taking
opportunity, from the convenience thereof, because there was the greatest
passage for Traffic, both ^t of Italy and Germany: The first Onsets were very
violent, with great terror taking the Towns, and killing every where all such
as came to resist, which, at the best, made but a tumultuary crowd of the
People of that Country, who had not, through the whole course of their lives,
known what War was, so that it might rather be termed a Butchery, or Massacre,
than a War or Fight. Yet did not all this make the Spaniard remove his Forces
out of France, toward the Netherlands: but upon knowledge of the danger,
Velasco, Constable of Castele, (which is an hereditary n^me of dignity) who
then governed Millayne, for the Spaniard, with a Select number of Horse and
Foot, drawn out of the Transalpine Garrisons, marched over those Mountains of
Alps, in the deep of Winter, while their tops were covered with Snow, and in
the passage took some Cities, resting at the River S^one, where staying for a
great Recruit of Horse, and other choice Soldiers of Germany, and Spoleto in
Italy, and hereby giving no opportunity of sight, the French Forces began to
moulder away.

Among these hazards, and flying Messengers, Ernestus his sickness grown more
violent by the Winter weather, begin to get the upper hand, and besides, he
knew he had incurred the Spaniards hatred, yet had not given any satisfaction
to the Netherlanders, and that his Enemies accused him to the King, as a guilt
stuck upon him, as well his endeavors of War as Peace, with the thoughts
whereof, his grief so increased, that soon after worn away with a lingering
Fever and Flux of blood he dyed. His death was suspected, as it is generally of
all Princes, but was without any troubles or commotions attending it, the hope
of peace subjecting the idle and the tedious labor of a multiplied War,
employing the rest. The Physicians looking with great circumspection, into the
true cause of his death, upon the dissection of his Body, delivered their
Opinions, That there was a Worm in his Reigns then living, which gnawed all the
parts lying near it.

The Vacant Government was by Philips Orders, supplied by the Senate: among
whom, the chief management of War and Peace, and all other business Foreign and
Domestic, rested in Fontayne by the name of President; for Ernestus, a little
before his death, had by writing, committed that charge to him pro tempore, by
the advice of the other Spaniards, and shortly after, the King confirmed it.
Nor was he unfit for so great a place of Honor, although otherwise vicious
enough, as the Affairs of the Netherlands managed by his care, witnessed, as
well as those of other places. But the Low Country Noblemen, that could hardly
bear him while his power was fat less, and but derivative from that of another,
now received and carried with envy and disdain, the Ensigns of Honor, which
they took from his hand; crying out, that certainly, their Forefathers were
Prophets, when speaking of this their own Country, they foretold, that they
should in time become a Province to the Spaniard, That after Alva, and
Requesens, or which is later, Reda for a short time, and as it were for a show,
they had their own Laws, but the same arrogance of the Spaniard quickly
returned: That now the whole power of peace was in strangers, who being equally
vicious with their former Lords, yet came not near to them in Honor and
Dignity.

Thus every one murmured to himself, and some of the more courageous stuck not
to speak out to others, viz. That it was very grievous and ignominious to all
people, to be subject to strangers: nor is the hatred of Kings so ^it^, that
when the Governments of many several people is to be bestowed, they will give
to others the Command of them, who are willing to be in servitude. Therefore
Charles Mansfeldt, out of a sense of Military Honor, finding himself to have
been taken notice of with an eye of Enmity (as one who had contested first with
the Duke of Parma, then with Ibarra, and now with Fontayne,) and that he was
laid aside under the pretense of Honor; with those Regiments which Philip sent
to the Emperor, he departed to fight against the Turk, who at that time grew
very potent in Hungary. There being next of all to Matthias, who was General of
his Brothers Army, he not long used his ancient Valor and Policy, against the
well-skilled Enemy, before among all the dangers of War, he was taken away by
sickness. But Duke Areschot, that the Netherlanders might never see him
inferior to Fontayne, voluntarily exiled himself to Venice, protesting he went
thither, where he would dye free, and where Fontayne should have nothing to do
with the more happy People, because the Germane Soldiers, that kept Bruxells,
making a small disturbance, he had endeavored wholly to possess the City by
some Regiments of his own Countrymen.

This was odious to all, so that now the tumults of others were not more
feared, than the modesty of the Spanish Soldiers: And the rest of the Cities
were possessed with the same fear: Hence grew a double distemper, from these
complaining that they were excluded, from the others, that they were almost
det^uded; however, upon this occasion, the Fields were harased by both.
Whereupon, when a new misery was added to the calamity of the former year, and
with the very fear of want, the price of Victuals was inhansed, the common
people took to themselves such liberty, as is proper to poverty, and thereby
vented their griefs and sufferings: This made the minds of all people of all
degrees, more inclinable to peace, the desire whereof had been first inflamed
by the hopes of it given them by Ernestus: nor was Fontayne any longer able, by
vain experiments, to resist the current of their resolved desires. The Family
of Croy, was the most earnest of all in laboring for peace, of which Family,
the Marquess of Haure, sent Letters to James Malery, of old allied to their
Stock, but then of great Eminency in Prince Maurice's Court, which were the
very Index of his affection, and being by Malery showed the Prince, and by the
Prince to the chiefest of the States, Malery was commanded to write back to the
Marquess, that there would be hopes of peace conditionally, if the Spanish
Soldiers going out, not only of the bowels of the Netherlands, but Lutzenburg
also, and Burgundy, would remove from them all cause of fear; whereto the
Marquess returning a reply, but passing by that whole demand in silence
therein, Malerye was again commanded to write to him, that there might be means
of agreement and Concord between the United States, and the States of the other
Provinces, be found out, but that they would have no Treaty with the Spaniards.
Therefore an Embassey was prepared to be sent to Prince Maurice, in the name of
the Belgic Noblemen (for at this time, Areschot was not retired to Venice)
whereby they desired him to be just and favorable to their allied Nobilities.

To this Treaty, came Theodorick Liesveldt, sometimes Chancellor of Brabant,
when Frances de Valeis held the Government, together with Masius and Hartye,
all wife men and well skilled in the prudent manage of Affairs.

The Prince was then at Middleburg in Zeland, to whom being brought, they spoke
seriously to him, to the effect following.

When first the foreign Soldiers had made a prey upon the Netherlands, by
means of intestine discords the Senate, who then had the Authority, determined
that civil strife, and made the King agree to a League: Nor will it be any
difficulty for them, after they have agreed among themselves, to free their
Country from foreign Arms: Not long after that first League, many things
intervened by the fault of both sides, or else by the wrath of the Divine
Providence, which hindered the well-nigh cured wound, to heal and grow well as
it should; but rather made it f^ster worse than before: At this time, the same
Senate sits at the Helm of Government, and being we aried out with the same, or
greater Calamities, do entreat for an end thereof from their Neighbors, and
they might be confident, the Senate would not be wanting to give them
satisfaction, and this they might expect with the more reason, because the
Covenants were desired of them, while they were prosperous* and in a
flourishing condition. That they had no doubt, but Prince Maurice, where such a
thing may be with Honor, would rather choose to leave his fortune, than by
tyring it out, force it to forsake him, in regard there is no thing so much
suspected by a wise man, as long prosperity. In good reason therefore, they
hoped, they came to advise with his Highness, who had outgone many of the most
famous Soldiers, to preserve entire his gotten Renown; That he had many great
Governments, and plenty of all other things, wherewith to content the greatness
of his mind; That the Family of Nassau, was not only famous for Arms, but had
been generally renowned for other excell^nt Endowments of Peace; That it was
their hope, he would embrace those Honors which should be attended by joy of
all, and the tears of none, and that he would rather ex^ect obedience from the
Princes of the same blood then compel any to execrate his Greatness. But if he
was best pleased with such Honor, as was gotten with the expense of sweat and
blood, there were honorable Wars, wherein he might advance his Standard
against the Enemies of the name of Christ; so would his Prudence and Valor,
arrive to that height of glory, as for the greatness and Honor of the
Adventure, should exceed the ambition of the present Age.

To which Prince Maurice, a few of the Deputies of the States being present,
according to the usual Custom, made answer to this purpose. Wishing to God,
that he might be so happy, as to set an end to these civil discords, both for
the benefit of the present Age and Posterity; That he would account it more
glorious, than the Name of a Conqueror, or then any Triumphed Garland. If
therefore now at last, they were truly sensible of the smart of the Spaniards
injurious dealing, they should then shew^ Courage suitable to their own Honor,
and the greatness of their Ancestors; So it would come to pass, that Freemen
with Freemen, might make what Agreements they pleased; That by coming into the
League of Union, they were not only vindicators of liberty, but would be
Companions of Kings whose Authority they were now oppressed under; Nor would
the dissimilitude of Religion, be any greater obstacle to Concord, than it is
now in France; But he would not prescribe any rule to them therein, the
Judgment of Religion being to be left to God, and the several Nations
professing the same; Between the United Provinces, and the other parts of the
Netherlands, there are many things common, as ancient Allyances, right of
consanguinity, and the Customs of the places: But between them and the King of
Spain, all things were discordant and hostile, necessity continuing and
increasing those things, which were begun at first, either to please his will
or lust. That it was not possible for the United States, to enter into Articles
with that Enemy, whom they were forced to abandon, and renounce for their King,
and indeed, such Covenants would not be called a peace, but a yielding; The
malice of that Tyrannizing people is implacable, and there is no question to be
made, how he would use his power is peace, who stretches it so in time of War.
That time, and the ^icissitude of Affairs, would bring many things to pass,
which were but vain to hope for at present: But how should they ever give
credit to him, who thought it lawful to set to sale, the Heads of his most
merited Enemies: That they would not rip up old sores, or (...) into President,
former transactions: since all men remembered his Father the Prince of Aurange,
and himself.

When Liesveldt, acknowledging himself to owe the Prince of Aurange all Honor
and respect, began further to say, that is performance of Netherlandish Lords
to him, neither they (...) the Spaniards, were consenting to those Counsels.
The Prince, forewarned of his intent, putting his hand into Liesveldts bosom,
he pulled out the Writings whereby Fontayne gave him license to come, thus by
an evident demonstration, confuting specious words: Thus the Embassey was
dismissed, because they had not power of treating, unless in the Kings Name:
This form of new answer, was variously descanted upon, not only by the Tongues
of the vulgar, but of the more prudent sort part; of whom, got both Honor and
Wealth, by the War, and the other part wished for peace only, because they
earnestly desired it.

The Spaniards, and such as followed them, thought it was a sufficient offense
against the Majesty of the King, if he to whom the care was committed, since
these disastors sitting at the Helm, were called to treat upon their own
accounts, should pardon them: What was the Event, say they, of such Embassies
to the Union, but only to make them more intollerably proud; for having but
from mean success gotten courage, they take the confidence, not only
themselves to shake off all Reverence and Obedience, but they instruct other
Provinces to do the like, to enter into Treaties, and do any thing without the
King: yes, they should go again and hear the rebellious Hollanders proposing
Laws, whereby they would make themselves Conquerours of King Philip: And if it
were hitherto doubted, yet now certainly it was manifest, that they despised,
nay hated Peace.

And according to the Example of Switzerland, waiting if any others would throw
off their Allegiance to their Prince^ Government, that they might grasp within
their own fifts, There is but one kind of peace to be had with them, and that
they must be compelled and beaten into by, Arms, and certainly that would not
be long about, if the Netherlanders have no less courage for duty and
obedience, then is in the Union to maintain the contrary. But others, and they
of the moderator sort, would by no means, that peace, so far prom^^ed, should
now be lost; for what marvel is it, say they, if the Hollanders had rather
yield to the rest of their Brethren of the Netherlands than the King, whom
they, conscious to themselves, of their guilt toward him, dreads as a terrible
revenger? That nothing was demanded contrary to Religion or Sovereignty, and
the very particular concerning foreign Soldiers, was consonant to the desires
of all, and is well advantageous to the War, as necessary for the Peace; That
the Ambassadors might be appointed, and instructed by the Kings Order, whose
name soever was used in the sending them, and that the Netherlanders Fidelity
was not so untryed, as to suppose they would annihilate that Power by Articles,
for which they had so long maintained a War. That the Prince might far better
connive at, and bear many things, then absolutely grant them. And if at last,
expectation was not answered, it was lawful for the King to recede a little
from the extremity of right for public advantage; That be ought to cast an Eye
of pity upon their misery, and how many people lay even at the last gasp ready
to expire. That the fortune of the War had been various, which had been waged
on this side by doing, on the other by suffering damage. Out Enemies have
Pastures, Manufactures, and the Fishing-Trade, to maintain their vast number.

And besides, whit is infinitely more then that, not only Rivers and great
floods, besides their efflux, and return thither as to their Head, but the
boundless Ocean is traversed for advantage: Hence is that multitude of
strangers; and that whole Nations are included with their narrow bounds: They
who rightly know them, say, it is necessary for them to have War. But on the
other side of the Hispaniolized Netherlands, are robbed of the Stock of their
Fields, have a dry shore, and dangerous to Shipping: yet are their burdens, and
the scarcity of all things, hardly to be remedied, or made amends for by any
gain: Moreover, all places are made wast and exhausted, and whatever remains,
is never free from discords and trouble.

It might be disputed indeed, whether Peace can be made; the same needs not be
questioned as to War; At last, after all this, there was another fear added,
lest the People of the United Provinces, vexed with the endless toil of their
miseries, should choose a new Prince, wherein 'twas uncertain, whether they
would admit a foreign Power, or content themselves with the Virtues and Valor
of some Domestic; there was yet some hope, that a vacancy in the Commonwealth
should not be admitted; but if they once pitched upon a Prince, the War would
either be inexplicable, or peace, if ever gotten, attained with loss and infamy.

In these varieties of Judgment and Discourses, some there were, that applauded
a Truce, averring. That the Hollander's Affairs stood hither too upright, by
their Unanimity and Concord, and that their Concord was supported by Fear:
These being once removed, the Vices of Equality would quickly succeed, and
Emulation of Cities, which they could hardly restrain, even among all the
dangers of War: In the interim, with people covetous of Wealth, there must be a
Traffic of Minds; and the great ones being corrupted, the Commons (according
to their Nature) beginning once to love, would quickly cease to hate: Neither
would they be willingly brought under the Burden and Hazards of War again,
if they were but once mollified by the immunity of some small time of peace: In
brief, the Word would quickly pass for Kings: The Hollanders being thus brought
under, among whom is the chief strength, Council and obstinacy. It will be
east for Philip to determine, in what manner to order his Forces against the
lace^ated and torn Body of France, and the Womanlike Kingdom of Britain, when
that should only support the War with consumed Wealth, and this fight only for
fear.

This Counsel was confirmed by Lipsius, with many examples out of ancient
History. However, Taxis believe^ the greatest damage would accrue to the
Netherlands, under the Kings obedience by a Truce. Thus in variety of Opinions,
all things were destined otherwise than they happened, according to the Custom
of Fortune, who being a great Enemy to humane Prudence, for the most part
keeps secret (...) future Events: But lest the People, all their hopes of
Peace being utterly cut off, should run into Sedition, Rumors we^^ scattered
abroad, that the Treaty was prolonged, that thereby the Authority of Foreign
Princes might intervene; And to that purpose, the Emperor sent Letters soon
after, superscribed to the States of Holland, which they received, and (...) in
their General Assembly, whereto they returned this Answer. That they wished for
Peace with their Neighbors, but had often declared why they could have no
peace with the Spaniards: nor had any thing happened, which should cause them
to alter their mind unless after the Kings sending poison and assassines to
destroy them, they should therefore give credit to the Author of such
monstrous and barbarous actions: And together with these Letters, they sent
others to the Emperor, written by Taxis to Philip, and by them intercepted,
wherein as he confessed it necessary for the Netherland States, to make a
Composition with the United States, as it were, upon equal terms, so that he
would refer all things to Fontaynes pleasure, setting forth may Evasions, and
first of a dissuading, that neither the Spanish Soldiers should be sent away,
nor the Germans admitted as Moderators of Peace.

In these parts this year, Philip Count Hohenlo, and George Eberhard, Count
Solmes, were solemnly married, and their Marriages celebrated, with Plays,
Feasting, and public Gifts. Hohenloes Wife was Mary; Count Solmes's, Sabina;
this the Daughter of Lamoral Count Egmonde, that of the Prince of Aurange, both
famous and well approved Matches, (...) well in regard of the great Merits of
the Bridegrooms, as of the great Birth and Nobility of the Brides, both whose
(...), as was yet fresh in memory, became Sacrifices for the liberty of their
Country.

Among all the mischiefs of Civil War, this War one, that the value of money
was mightily inhansed, and every Nation had converted the use of raising the
same, even into a matter of (...); which some were of Opinion, to restore to an
equal Standard, according to the Trades and Commodities of the Provinces. But
of a sudden, even they who forbad that growing licentiousness, failed and give
over the attempt. And there remain strong Arguments of an unsettled Society,
better against the Enemy, than their consent and vanquished La^^ agree among
themselves. And besides, some Commotions among their Neighbors, had made them
attentive, who unless they were shut out by right, even loved to be involved in
a Neighboring War, and making factions; for the Spaniards had openly declared
their minds and design; in claiming the Principalities of Cleves and
Juilliers, as by the Minority and tender age of the former Prince, so by the
sickness of his Son and Successor. The Government hereof, was snatched at on
the one side by the Wife, a Woman of very insolent and shameless Conditions of
the Family of Baden, and supported by the Austrian greatness: On the other
side, by some Noblemen of the Country of Germany, as the Princes of Brandenburg
and Newburg, who by their Wives, the Sisters of the Duke, took to themselves,
the hope of so great an Inheritance; but altogether without the Emperors
knowledge or consent, who when a male line is extinct, supposes the right of
bestowing those Principalities to be a new reverted to him.

These latter were favored by all the Protestants in those Regions, and by
some Catholic also, who feated the Austria Families Pride, ever grievous to
the Subjects, besides the vast Burdens of Tributes, with other Charges. These
therefore using the Name of the States of Juilliers and Monts, they set free
the Duke, who had been so inhumanely kept and handled, that the grief thereof
was believed to be no small me^^ of increasing his Disease, and removed the
Wife from the Guardianship, as one that endeavored mischief: In this i^te^im,
Count Suartzenburge, hitherto a Follower of the Spaniards, was observed to List
Soldiers in those Quarters, to go, as himself gave out, to the Turkish War;
but others c^^ceited it was to strengthen the Austrian Faction, it not being
probable, that Forces which were to be used in the further part of Hungary,
should be raised in the most distant part of Germany, as if they were purposely
to be wasted and con^^med by a long March, after they had long been in pay to
(...) purpose. But the Reverence of the German Empire, was the only Obstacle
that kept the Soldiers of Holland within compass and restrained their
Incursions into the seatter'd and unprovided Country. At this time, the Elector
of Br^^denburgh, began to seek the Friendship and Alliance of the United
States. The same also did the Nobles of those Regions, desiring the Loan of a
Sum of Money for a short time which would soon and easily be paid, when they
had dra^ to themselves both the Government and Treasury. Some of the Hollanders
would have speeded this; for by that means they should have peace with all
those beyond the Rhine; and by the same Bond, their Armies and the French could
quickly (...) joined. Others, more prudently, averred, That so specio^^ a
pretense for War, ought not to be given to so potent (...) Enemy in those
Dukedoms; That there come to take part, not only those who affect the Spaniard
in Cleves, but the Neighboring Bishops and Priests also, when of Money would
be as well wanting to those that craved help, as ^o themselves; nor could it
possibly be defended by their Forces, it being so far distant from them, and so
scattered: Wherefore they must wait, till their Minds and Forces grew meet to
undertake such a business.

At this time also, the City of Emblen had no less Troubles, a rich place
situate beyond the River Ems, into whose Mouth runs a little Rivulet: It is
part of that Frized, which of old contained the Cauchi, an intermingled and
broken S^ore, possessed part by the Hollanders, part by the Danes; from whence
that Region is now called East-Frizeland, because the ancient Frizons on this
Eemes, lie against it toward the West. Their Nature and Customs, were like the
rest of the (...); and, as to their Liberty, being left both by the French
Kings, and the Emperors of Germany, when they could not bear Rule, they were
content with any kind of Obedience. All public Affairs were taken care of by
Contentions of the people divided, and sometime in common of (...) whole
Nation: Judgments were given by some; choice (...), as well in their greater as
in their lesser Assemblies* Among these, all such as possessed Lands or Farms
were ^^^ul; and he who possessed most, had most honor, and for that was only
accounted noble: But these, when they had ^^lded Castles, and strong Holds,
became not only to themselves, but to others, a Succor and Refuge, both in
Domestic and Foreign Wars, yea, and kept always in readiness a standing Force
to repel any Injuries that should be offered to them.

The Moderators of the Conventions and their Judges, who were their Defense
against Factions, by little and little, either through the Discords or
Carelessness of the People; drew to themselves what they could possible; and
when sometimes the memory of their Liberty returned to their Thoughts, they
would fall into Civil Broils among themselves, to be revenged one upon another.
Among these, the Imerge of Graithe became most notable by Marriages,
Inheritances, and enjoyment of many Lands, which from Custom became a
Jurisdiction; Thus, at first, the Dorpes of Em^den were by him gotten, and
afterward growing more hardly from others, he took the Government of the Town
being yet but mean: From this Offspring Ulderic, in the year 1454. first
drawing privily to him others of the nobler sort, and underhand working upon
the people, from the Emperor Frederick, he took upon him the Rule of all that
Tract of Land, which is stretched from the Eemes to the River Vueser, along by
the Sea, by the Name of Earl, or Count, together withal Authority belonging
thereto, as much as the Frizon Liberty would permit: And after ten years, he
published certain Inst^uments in Writing, as Laws, but more contractedly that
before, left the Rights of others, who began within those parts to grow
ambitious, and to get honor by the same means, should be damnified. He
moderated his Government with so much Benignity, either leaving or granting
many Things to the people of Embden, and many Things to the Magistrates; and
his Son Edsard, by adding more, grew (...) potent in the fidelity and love of
his Subjects. that by the help he not only hoped for the Dominion of
Groeningen, and the Principality of the adjoining Country, but also enjoyed and
held the same, until the Saxons Arms, the Geldrians Rebellion; and lastly, the
Austrian Violence, invading (...) things beyond the Eemes, ejected and threw
him out to all.

This man's Son, altogether unlike his Father, and so governing, that he
himself needed to be governed by others, in short time left both his Life and
Dominion. At which time when the Christian World began to be shaken with
Dissertions about Religion, Embden following that Profession which in other
Countries was sought after with Fire, and Sword, by the opportunity of the
River, invited thither and maintained a great multitude of strangers, as well
Dutch, as French and English. The Lady Anne of Oldenburg, was then Governess in
the name of another Edsard, her Son, using with great Civility and Moderation
the growing Principality, and not according to the Custom of German Princes.
She bore a great Reverence to the study of Religion and the Laws, which she
judged not so much a safeguard to Liberty, as Authority: By this place of
Refuge, together with her mildness and sweet behavior, it is almost
incredible, how much this City increased, containing therein no less than six
Thousand: Soon after this followed all the Vices usual predominant in a
flourishing people; as among them Pride and Luxury; among the Magistrates, and
those in Authority, Envy and Emulation: Nor was it yet come to the height of
force, so long as John, a younger Brother of Edsard, by counsel or fear, being
of a mild nature, restrained his Brothers more furious Disposition: But John
being dead, Edsard differing in Religion from the Townsmen (for he held the
Augustane Confession, and the Town owned the Discipline of Geneva) began more
and more to have in Suspicion the Townsmens Felicity: His Wife descended of the
Royal Stock of Sweden, and a Regal Inclination increased the Difference; and,
among other things, this was related as one c^u^e, That she detained to her own
use some parcels of Housholdstuff borrowed of the Townsmen under this pretense,
that it exceeded the Rank of private men. Now by the instigations of those, who
our of design of novelty, either flattered the Prince or People, a dangerous
Contention arose, and came to that height, that the Earl interpreted the
Assemblies and places of Meeting devoted to Religious Uses, Conventicles of
Sedicious persons, and with the Collections of Money, which the City made out
of a pure intent of Charity to relieve the poor, he gave out, they designed to
raise Force against him: But on the other side, a troublesome sort of Tumultuous
persons crying out for Liberty, and (which is the most violent persuasive of
all) Religion, being ignorant of all Civil Customs and Law, only turbulent
under that pretense of Religion, oftentimes do pervert a good cause by ill
managing. The unconquered Valor of their Progenitors, and the fresh and near
Example of the Hollanders with the Frizons were mentioned: And what could they
do more honorably, than to unite themselves into ancient Name and League of
those most valiant Nations? Now the Earl imposed Tributes and Burdens upon
Merchandises; now he so minds Affairs, that he imposed Magistrates upon them of
his own nomination: Hitherto the People's Rage and Fury, though fierce and
obstinate, yet vented it self no other ways than in words; but when they saw a
Garrison in the Castle, they threw off both at once Shame and Delay; and
forthwith, unde a private person, their Leader run, to Arms; they assault the
Court, the Gates, and all other strong places in the City: Neither did they
only choose Colonels and Captains, but by the worst of Presidents, they set
up new Magistrates, deposing them, who withdrew themselves from the Troubles,
in regard of the Oath taken to their Prince: The Keepers of the Castle were
compelled, through Hunger, to desert the same; and all things being thus
forcibly seized, they immediately, without any Dispute, resolved to court the
help of the United Provinces: Both Parties dispatch Legates to the Hague, to
agree with the States: Those accused the rude and unruly multitude of Sedition,
in whose Revenge and Example, the States were concerned, who flourished in
Concord; and if Authority should thus be despised by the Vulgar, it would be to
the injury of all Superiors. These, on the contrary side, called to mind the
Hatred of sincere Piety, violation of the Laws, unjust Taxations and a Dominion
obtained by Arms and Faction; as if they demanded of the States, Whether they
thought such Things tolerable: And they humbly desired, That they would have
compassion on their Associats, both in Religion and suffering: They added
further, That its Count had endeavored the Friendship, both of the Pope, and
King Philip, by whose assistance he would oppress their Liberty, and receiving
Possessions other where, deliver up the City to the Spaniard as a Gift. And
they were well informed by Spies, that the Enemy placed the main strength of
his War therein, if he could but attain the River, and well-contrived Port, and
indeed there is hardly any River more desirable, than that of the Eemes, which
running into the Bay of Dullart, divides the Territories of Embden, from the
Jurisdiction of Groeningen, and from the midst thereof, discharges it self
into the Ocean with a large opening, capable of Ships of the greatest Burden,
and very safe by the interposition of several Islands; among which, its passage
is somewhat incurvated; and this would make it easy for the Spaniard, to raise
a new War in Frizeland, and to set forth a Navy to Sea, which hitherto in these
parts, he could never attain to.

The United States, who foresaw as well the Danger, as the Envy, if they should
be resisted, dispatched away an Embassy with so much policy, as should neither
cause the Earl to lay aside all fear of them, nor the People too confidently
h^pe their Alliance: They commended Peace to both, and if it seemed convenient,
they might, according to Law, decide the matter; for their taking up Arms, was
but a greater cause of Suspicion: That now they were Enemies to neither party,
but if further Contentions did arise, they would declare themselves such, in
particular, to them that began the War: But when News was hastened by speedy
Messengers, relating, That Enno, the Son of Edsard, had levied Soldiers, and
was fortisying Port-Knocken, over against Delphezyle, straightway the number of
Ships, which were wont to guard the Eemes, was increased, and a Regiment of
Frizons commanded to match toward the City for the defense thereof, and to
drive from the Bank those new Undertakers; And the City also overjoyed, as if
thereby secure, delivered both it self, and its Fortunes, to the protection and
warlike defense of the United Provinces: Neither, at that time, did any thing
advantage Edsard, more than to make them Arbitrators of the Quarrel, by whose
power all things were managed. He offered them also a League and Alliance in
Arms, fearing lest the City might anticipate him of that favor. But it will
not be amiss to commemorate what manner of peace the Arbiters sent by the
States to D^lphzyle made, and the chief Heads or Articles thereof; That as they
judged in the Affairs of Embden, so Posterity may judge of them. The Heads of
the said Agr^ment were these:

That Religion should not be a Net for any one; That within the City, the same
Religious Rites should be used as were accustomed; but without the City, the
Earl was at liberty to use his own Religion; That in all Religious Meetings,
only matters of Divinity should be handled, some one super-intending the same,
if the Senate please to nominate him, as is usual in the Palatinate, and among
the Hollanders, that under pretense thereof, no disturbance might be made; That
the said Religious Assemblies, should nominate and ordain all Ministers for
Preaching, but the Prince's approbation to be required therein; that the
Poss^ssions belonging late to Religious persons, should be equally divided
between the Earl and the People; That four of the Burgomasters, and nine of the
chief Assistants by Lot should have the chief Authority, the other by order
every year being changed and altered, none continuing in power above two years,
lest they seek to gain the Sovereignty; That the Senate should name two in the
places of any departing, of which the Earl to choose one, although he used
before, according to his own will, to create what Magistrates he pleased; That
all business, either relating to the City or Sea, should be ordered by these:
As the incorporating the City into Guilds and Fraternities for the better
distinguishing the people the keeping the K^yes of the Gates, and giving the
Watch word to the Gua^ds: They had likewise the power of giving Judgment in
Civil Affairs; as also to punish with Death, as they saw cause: They that were
guilty of more heinous Crimes, being Strangers, were punished by judges,
appointed by the Prince; That the Senate it self (which consiste^ of forty
men) should, by its own choice and suffrages, supply it self; and such as were
admitted into honorable places, should take an Oath of Allegiance to the
Prince, and likewise for the good Administration of Justice in the City; That
such Laws and Tributes should be confirmed only, as were agreeable with the
ancient and municipal Law, so as every City separably might have the ordering
of its own Revenues: But Falder being a new City added to the old, and so more
conformable in their Duty to the Earl, should, for the future, enjoy the same
Privileges with Embden, to take off all occasion of future Discord; And that
the Citizens might be the better assured of Pardon, the Earl should take away
the threatening Terror of his Castle, and deliver it to the City, and for the
future should not keep them in awe by Forts built upon the Banks of the River,
such as came thither with Merchandise: For all which Concessions of the Prince,
the City would make to him a Compensation, with a great Sum of Money.

Thus were the People's Desires gratified by Security, and the Prince's. by
Greatness: Nor did the Covenants displease either, though yet they were found
fault with by malicious and upstart People: However, it was concluded, That all
future Earls and Magistrates should swear to this Peace.

Things there being in this manner settled, The States advised the Earl, that he
would mollify and sweeten all jealousies and offenses with clemency, lest the
Spaniard esteeming a counterfeit friendship, before a real fidelity, should at
once compel him to treacherous actions, and engage him in a War with his
Neighbors; The Citizens of Embden likewise, were commanded to apply their
endeavors to the pattern of their Neighbors, and not by casting off their
obedience, to increase their miseries; That a civil War was well redeemed with
a little servitude; for even they themselves (the States) have suffered and
born the more furious natures of their Princes, so long as foreign Tyranny was
kept away. Hereupon, the Soldiers on both sides being disbanded, quietness
might rather be said restored than concord; for the wound of dissension was not
so perfectly cured, but that as it often festered anew, so it was fain to seek
fresh Remedies.

This year, and the subsequent time for a while, all the Affairs of the United
Provinces to War, proved unsuccesful, as if by a short contempt of their plyant
fortune: The whole Spring, and part of the Summer, was spent by them in
idleness, only some few of their Soldiers warring in France; but their own
discords hindered the motions of their Forces in Other places, though often
called upon by Buzenual, for Succor. For the Frizon Cities, being malicious to
the Countryman, and by the rustic likewise hated, complained, that the
burdens common to them both, were not faithfully distributed, for that many
things of great profit in the Country, were either partially remitted, or
totally omitted. And they of Zeland, did very sharply quarrel with the
Hollanders, concerning the Customs for exported Merchandise, and by this means,
a long time deferred to pay their Tribute money into the Treasury of the Union;
They also of Geldres and Over-Issell, excusing themselves by poverty, growing
from the Enemies continual incursions, at last the Hollanders too, who bear at
least two third parts of the common charge of the League, took example, either
to imitate or revenge the humor: For if men follow after their profit, nor
more out of necessity, than Wisdom or Policy, while the Enemies Affairs were
very unprosperous, and themselves had most advantageous Trading, and the French
War raging, that time certainly, called for their more vigorous endeavors, and
not to cast off all to a season, when the people being more impoverished, must,
through the mercies of unprosperous events, yet run the hazards, and bear the
burden and heat of the day. Neither did the successes in Lutzenburg, answer
expectation; for though several Forts and Castles were assaulted rashly and
taken, yet neither was the Enemy much damnified, or the Victors any thing
advantaged thereby. But after King Henry by making a great Progress in
Burgundy, had drawn thither the Forces of his Kingdom, the Earl of Bulloyns
Forces being exhausted, who by an ostentous defiance, had brought the Spanish
Army against him, he was not only not able to perform his threats, but also
unable to defend himself, he saw the French Borders pillaged, himself being
only able to assist them with a helpless and sorrowful look; By the irksomness
whereof, and because the Soldiers began to grow insolent, through hunger and
thirst, having nothing but water to drink, Philip of Nassau, much against the
Earl of Bulloyns will, made have to return, but by a contrary way to that, he
went out, for that the Enemy had blocked up. But the Foot being commanded to go
back, by the way where France is encompassed by the Sea, that so they might
sail into Holland, himself with the Horse came into Gelderland, through
Germany. And Fontayne, by how much he held a spited Government, by so much be
the more earnestly studied, that his Adversaries might have no cause to accuse
him for any thing besides his greatness; His chief care was for the Soldiers,
to strengthen the old, and to recruit them with a new Militia, and well knowing
the Revolt of the Italians, and whatever miseries followed thereupon, was
accounted his fault, for the mitigating the envy he had contracted, he supposed
to reduce them to obedience, would be his readiest way: wherefore hastening the
conclusion of the Agreements, begun by Ernestus, but interrupted and broke off
by his death, in regard moneys did not yet arrive, he gave them pay from day to
day, and pledges for performance of what was agreed; Notwithstanding which,
being Commanded to take possession of Tilemonte, they refused to follow their
Colors; yet they made an advantage of it, averting the use of those Soldiers,
which they themselves wanted, even against the Enemy; and shortly after,
divided them, some under new Officers, others into Garrisons.

The King of Spain's Forces were hardly at any time greater, or more numerous
than now, yet being far dispersed in several parts, were never able to compass
any great matter; In Burgundy, under Velasius, was a strong Army: In the
Confines of Artois and Picardy, after the departure of Charles Mansfield
Varembonius was quartered, to bridle Cambray, and by making excursions into
France, to revenge Rapine by Rapine. Mondragonio attended Prince Maurice, to
observe his motions, and in time to meet or prevent him.

In this lying about Hulst, there were four thousand Armed men. Verdugo with
six thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse, being Commanded, drew near to
Ferte, to drive the Earl of Bulloin, who had less Forces, out of Lutzenburg,
and to recover the Towns by him taken.

The Walls of this Town of Fert, by continual Batteries, and breaches, lay
open, yet a great power of the French, being sent to help the Town by a fierce
and violent Assault, did repress and beat off the Besiegers; But this Town thus
freed from the Siege, being soon after by accident, for the greatest part
burned and spoiled by Gunpowder, by the Earl of Bulloyne himself, was
dismantled and ungarrisoned. In the interim, Verdugo turning his strength
against weaker places, after a few Assaults, by a growing Disease, and the
accomplishment of his Fate, dies, report also being both doubtful and
suspicious about his death: for he merited a name of Honor, although in the
unsuccesful Government of Frizeland, as rather wanting opportunity and
strength, then Valor and Industry. He was faithful to the height of Religion,
and eloquent beyond the mode of a Soldier; His nature was full of urbanity,
and thereby easily distinguished from other Spaniards, who generally do not use
so prayse-worthy a quality, and because he was raised from nothing, to great
Honors, being born of a House not ignoble, though impoverished, he remembered
his former Fortune, as much as was necessary.

The Cities of the Netherlands, made it their general Request to Fontayne at
last, that he would stick close to the Siege of Cambray, offering him a great
sum of money, and also Soldiers, because while neither the City was closely
besieged, nor the Spanish Army reduced thereto from their lying scattered up
and down, they were spoiled by both; But he of his own accord, that the time of
his Government might not pass away without something memorable, and that be
might supply the empty Treasury, he sends to Varembonius his Camp, and
increases his Forces, to make them up twelve thousand Foot, and two thousand
Horse; With this Army, he secured all the adjacent parts from the French, and
that done, he took Castellat, being first much weakened by Battery, and
afterward forced them to surrender, who had retreated into the Castle.

This is a Town in Vermandois, near the Head of the Scheldt, which another
Henry King of France, had appointed for a defense to Cambray; and if any
invasion should happen out of the Netherlands, for a frontire Guard to the
Kingdom.

About the same time, Hanen a Town in the same Borders, was taken by force,
with such variety of chances, as have made the Relation wonderful, and brought
it almost within the compass of fabulous. The Governor thereof was one Gomero,
one Of those Frenchmen, who under pretense of the Roman Religion, had sought to
win foreign favor to his advantage. This man, at what time the greatest
Affairs in those parts were turned against the King of France his Fortune,
Covenanting with the Spaniards, for a great sum of money, delivered up the
Town, only retaining the Castle, while the Articles were performed; But by the
Policy of Fontayne, drawn out, he was overcome, together with his two Brothers:
his Mother, and his Kinsman, Orvillier, still remained to the Garrison, with
the danger of which dearest Pledges they were threatened, unless they forthwith
departed.

The Woman between fear and affection, consented; but Orvillier, being nearer
to the incensed French, by secret Messengers, sent to the Earl of Bulloyne, and
the rest of the Kings Commanders, who then resided in Picardy, who coming, and
being admitted into the Castle, all the whole day after, there was a sharp
conflict with the Towns, wherein there were twelve hundred Soldiers Spaniards,
Walloons, Germans, and Italians, nor was the Dispute ended, without the loss of
some Noble Blood; for Humerius a great Soldier, well experienced in the Art of
War, and beloved of the King, was slain: At last, they hewed out their passage
by fire and Sword, and they who with Orvillier, survived the Fight, were
delivered for Pledges, according to Agreement, to prevent the Spaniards
threatenings; But the Captives, by the treachery of their Keepers breaking
Prison, brought the Castle into that danger, that they were fain to be
discharged by Articles.

Thus by Orvillier's want of Courage, the French obtained the Castle, which he
had resolved before to keep for himself; And Fontayne, because the Town being
taken, he came too late, changing his fame into fury, brought the Governor
before the Walls, even ready to die under the hands of the Executioner; There
he in a weeping tone, now beseeches his Mother, then his friend, if they had
any mercy, any consideration of his blood, that they would not imagine while he
stood under the stroke of death, to raise to themselves Trophies of Honor and
Dignity; And when they answered, that it was not in their power, because the
French possessed both the Town and Castle, he was immediately strangled before
their faces.

Let these men's unhappy examples be a warning to others, and make them know,
that they who follow several sides, by a wavering Judgment, make themselves be
esteemed Enemies by both.

From thence the Enemy proceeded to Dorlens, that so Cambray might be compassed
behind, it having been in vain, and without, success, attempted about that
time, by the treachery of some Priests, and of the Townsmen. Here while
Valentine Pardieu Lamot, was viewing the place, and observing the
Fortifications by Moonlight, he was killed with a Bullet-shot from the Town.

This was the first of all the Commanders, who had formerly foreseen the
discord of the States in the greatest Affairs and the increase of the Spaniards
Wealth; He was eminent in virtue, and more than ordinarily skilful in Military
understanding and Policy, manifesting what he ought to be, that will, as he
did, from a common Soldier, come to be General of the Ordinance, Governor of
the Town of Graveling, and attaining great Wealth, had the name and Honor of
an Earl.

The Count Bulloyne had sent into the City a Garrison, and soon after, he
himself, together with the Count St. Paul, came thither to bring both
Gunpowder, and other Provision and Ammunition. But Villars, the Commander of
the Vanguard (this Villars had by King Henry's Command, the charge of all that
Coast by the Sea side) while he, greedily desirous to fight, contemned the
Command of his Superiors, being circumvented, and taken by Fontains Army, was,
together with many other Noblemen thereabout, slain, because he had revolted
from the Guisian League, to King Henry: (this day was then, by chance, the
Feast of Saint James the Apostle, which the Spaniards look upon as a very lucky
day to them, and often by such belief make it so) the rest got off, Fortune
giving a Pardon to the error of both parties; for if the French had joined
Battle with greater Forces, which then the Count Nevers had raised, both the
way into the City, and the place had layn open to them for Victory. And the
Spaniard, if he had followed his Fortune, had put the French to flight, and
there would have been little difference between this Battle, and those of Paugo
and St. Quintins: the Conqueror assailed the Castle, which was ill defended;
for the Governor of the place, Gamache, while according to the fashion of the
time, he consulted rather his own safety than the Kingdoms, out of twelve
hundred Frenchmen which he had with him, he took only a few of such as he
could confide in into the Castle, leaving the rest in the Town, that they might
be ready, if any necessity did accrue, which proved to be his ruin; for some
of the Spaniards being sent to review the breach made in the Castle by the
Cannon, when they perceived it deserted, testifying their joy by a sudden
shout, they drew more of their Company to them, who breaking into the Castle,
they pursued their opportunity so close, as they likewise at the same time
entered the Town; when death and slaughter raged without control, for where
Valor could not defend the Armed men, mercy nothing prevailed for the safety
of the unarmed.

Now while the Army wearied with these Affairs, rested themselves in French
Garrisons, toward the latter end of Summer, Prince Maurice drawing together
the Soldiery that had remained with himself, and those other Regiments
returned with Philip of Nassau, for Service, and minding to gain those few
places which the Enemy yet held about Frizeland, sat down before Groll, a Town
in the Territory of Zutphen. The Garrison consisted only of six hundred men,
there were but few great Guns in the Town, and no store of Provision for a long
Siege; and besides, the Well or Ditch that supplied it with water, was easily
to be drained, or dried up. And these things were the main causes of the
Princes hopes.

This design being understood by Mondragonio, who with a flying Brigade
marching out of Antwerp, infested all the Garrisons in his way, beyond the Maes
and the Rhine; he had about five thousand Foot, and about a thousand Horse; but
^e much multiplying their number, Prince Maurice, though he had twice as many
in his Army, distrusting Provision^, leaving the Siege, and burning what they
could not carry away, marched to the Issell, intending to stay for the Enemy
within Germany; But Mondragonio, not daring to adventure upon his Camp, but
content to have raised the Siege from Grolle, and not to have broken the mutual
quietness of the year, retreated: keeping the River Luppe for his safeguard
against the Enemy: For Prince Maurice followed him, being now satisfied, that
he came not with so great an Army, as had been reported: He sent therefore
beyond the River, Philip of Nassau, with five hundred Horse, suddenly to fall
upon the Enemies Cavallery, as they lay dispersed and gra^ing. But Mondragonio
receiving unquestionable Intelligence of these directions from some Renegadoes,
sent into the same place all his whole strength of Horse; Philip, as soon as
ever he was come out of the narrow ways, into the open Champayne, was
presently enclosed, and they in the Rear not able to give any help, themselves
also being entangled, as in the confused violence of their flying Camer^des, so
also in the straightness and lubricity of the way, but as the fortune of the
fight between the Horse near at hand, was ambiguous, by the endeavors of some
that violently broke in upon them, the Enemy was at a nonplus.

But the Commanders being unserviceable, by reason of their wounds, quickly
abated their Courage; some remaining yet entire, freshly set upon the troubled
Enemy, but the greater part fled even to the River Luppe, upon whose Bank on
the other side, the Prince stood ready with his Army to receive them.

This slaughter was neither great nor memorable, for any other thing than this,
That the men of greatest Quality (...) Command, bore the greatest share in the
misfortune; (...) Philip of Nassau himself, while he most strenuously m^tained
the Fight, being first wounded, then taken Prison^ soon after, among the
signal respects of his Neighbors, (...) Counts of Heremberg, he yielded up
the Ghost. The ^^fulness of his Spirit was not to be daunted, having form^ been
very succesful in War, wherein it is probable, he had (...) miscarryed, if the
fervency of his mind had by age been (...) within bounds.

In this Fight also was slain Ernestus one of the Count (...) Solmes: But
Ernestus of Nassau, Philips Brother, rans^ himself; and after all, the dead
Bodies were buried: ^^ther did any thing else happen, while the Armies lay
(...) and each attended the others motion and Counsels, so sp^^ing the Autumn,
and more secure times of the year; (...) that Prince Maurice his men attempting
Mursa by a No^^nall Stratagem, and being come to the Trench, while (...) cut
down the Palizadoes that stopped them there, the day ^pearing, they were forced
to retreat; At length, M^gonio first drew off to Winter Quarters, not able any
lo^ to bear the incommodious season for War: he was a Commander of ninety years
of Age, who coming to command^ Army, then publicly ready to fall into
Sedition, for means to prevent that growing evil, by sending part of (...)
beyond the Maes; and keeping the rest on this side the ^^ver he not only
repressed their madness, but separated (...) Counsels; Nor did the Prince
prolong the time much (...) him. Immediately after this, Mondragonius, by his
de^ helped to increase the Funeral Solemnities of that year, being a very old
Soldier, and continually in the War, (...) the first beginning thereof in
Alva's time, to his end; (...) knew how to order and rule the Soldiery, as
well by Policy ^thority; and there are scarcely so many, and so famous ^ of any
of those great Commanders, who were his Predi^ors, to be remembered, as there
are of him; no to forget (...) felicity, that being never timorous of danger,
but always desirous of Honor, he had yet arrived to very old (...), having
never received any wounds; The Duke of ^trana dyed also, known only by the
Nobility of his Expect and nothing else.

This Year also, Don Antonio deceased, who formerly dri^^ out of the Kingdom of
Portugal, by the Spanish Ar^ under the Duke of Alva's Conduct, when he might
have raised Factions, not quite drooping both in Africa, Italy, (...) other
places possessed by the Spaniard, yet fled for Re^ to France and England, and
in vain placed his hopes upon the mercy and Charity of Christian Princes; yet
refusing the Aid diverse times offered to him by the Turks, and (...) Moors,
which he would have the World believe he did (...) of Piety: his Friends
reported that he was poisoned, because he would not be wrought upon to confer
his right of ^ym in that Kingdom to Philip, notwithstanding all the great
promises of Moneys and Honors made by Philip to (...).

In these varieties of Fortune, Fontayne was not long at rest, but set forth
against Cambray, nor did the reason of his hope to attain the same, appear in
public; however, many of the Netherlandish Nobility attending, and several
French Commanders, who disdained the pardon of their own Prince, and also the
Soldiers after the spoil of Dorleus, being greedy of a greater booty, and
moved with the entreaties of the Neighboring Cities offering them money, in a
manner, compelled them to shut up all the Avenues into, or out, of the Town,
and, under the show of a Siege, to wait for an opportunity of enterprising
somewhat.

And King Philip himself had written to him, that it was a dishonorable act,
that a strong Hold erected as a boundary by his Father, should be left in the
Enemies hands: Incited therefore by all these Reasons, they were necessitated
to hope well of that, which they could no way avoid; Barlat drove the Besieged
from their outer Works, from thence they began Mines, Batteries, breaches, and
other both Clandestine and open Stratagems were used, but the great and notable
strength of the French, ready to receive their Assault, yet terrified them; for
Gonzaga, the Count of Nevers his Son, had by the Command of his Father, brought
thither a hundred, and soon after, other five hundred conducted by the Horse,
through unguarded places, in the dawning of the morning, came in to their
assistance; Then also was it found by a noble example, how dangerous it is to
be feared of many, and that there is no Guard strong enough to uphold a
Dominion, which is contrary to the peoples liking, where the greater danger
arising from fear, quickly moves to anger. For Balagny, that he might
strengthen by force, his unjust power, imposed Tributes, and grievous Guards,
and all other things usual in a Tyranny, which drew upon him the hatred of the
multitude; and at last, turned him out of all; Nor was Fontayne wanting privily
to inslame their minds already disturbed, sometimes by Religion, otherwhile by
fear, and anon by money: by which means, before the Enemy got to the Trench,
all the common people being gathered together from all parts, with whom joined
the Switzer Soldiers, by reason of diverse private injuries, and also because
Balagny commanded Brass money to be given them in pay, instead of Gold and
Silver, but at if he would have redeemed the same; which kind of fact, has in
some places been allowed for liberty sake, but never was admitted to be given
to the Soldiers for pay; all which things were now urged to Fontayne, treating
with them

Neither did the Articles of Surrender contain many Heads; for the Spaniard's
were easily admitted, for fear of the French; although they now must suffer
more from them, than from the French whom they turned out: And they that
retired into the Castle, staid not to expect a Battery, or any other Assault.

And now appeared many Examples of the Spaciard's cruelty, though the Surrender
of the Town was concluded, unless the King of France, within six days, sent
them new Relief; whereof he failing, the Town was accordingly delivered, and
the Soldiers sent safe away, Balagny himself departing from his usurped
Command, but as a private man, even prosecuted by the French, he very ill
deserved that Fortune, which had been to him favorable enough; because a long
time, deceiving both parties, and being faithful to neither, he had sometimes
received Money and Provisions from the French, sometimes from the Spaniard, yea
and from the United States themselves; and a little before the Siege, he sold
all the Victuals necessary for the City, giving out, that the Soldiers
necessity required it, although the Customs he received must needs be great;
for that he kept in his own hands all Offices both Civil and Sacred: His Wife
was a Woman of a Masculine Spirit; for while any hope remained, she herself
would look to the Watches and Guards, help to carry Turf, to Traverse the
Cannon, to oversee the Corporals, and, in short, to perform all the Duty both
of a good Captain, and a good Soldier: Nay, she attempted the common people
with a Largess; which Things proving all in vain, she acknowledged, that it was
her unlucky Fate; yet would she not endure to leave her Dominion to the Enemy,
or own her Life as received from their Mercy; for the same day wherein the
Covenants for Surrender of the Castle, were concluded, she dyed of Grief, or
rather took something to hasten the same: Now were the Images of Alencon and
Balagny thrown down, and forthwith an Oath exacted from the Townsmen (
Richardot, being skilful in the Forms thereof, contrived it,) as if the City
had been to have continued for ever under the Spanish Obedience. For, at that
time, the Princes of Burgundy and Austria, had, under pretense of Guardianship,
usurped the ancient Right of the Counts of Alost; and by that Title, the
Emperor Charles Erected a Castle in the City, that it might not again Revolt
to the French. But F^^tayn, with his Armed Power, soon decided the Controversy
of Right, and commanded to swear Obedience to Philip as their Prince; saying
before the Siege, That it was convenient, when Treating with Lewis Barlaymont
Bishop of that City, he urged him, to rest contented with the Sacred Function,
and to assign to the Spaniard his Right of Dominion; which had ever belonged to
the Bishop, under a Tie of Reverence to the Imperial Majesty of Germany. Nor
did Barlaymont, notwithstanding the said Oath, cease to demand his due and
ancient Right, the Townsmen all endeavoring the same, though to no purpose,
reaping no other Fruit of their vain Labor, but Hatred; for the Spanish
keeping the Castle, forbore no so^ of Licentiousness, whereby it came to pass,
that the Trade of Linen Cloth, the greatest gain and advantage the City
enjoyed, was carried thence into the Neighboring Towns: And the Italians being
entreated by Fontayu to assist the Siege, when the City being taken, as they
did return to possess Tilemont, they valiantly set upon some Troops of
Hollanders which they met, and then first of all gave a proof both of their
Fidelity and Courage in War. But the Honor of the Mauritian Horse was quickly
repaired, by an Irruption into Weert, a Town in the County of Horn, where they
took Henry one of the Counts of Heremberg, prisoner, and afterward discomfited
the Convoy, that was guarding thither Provisions. But Weert, lying at too great
a distance from their Confines, was again presently deserted: But Heraugier,
grown experienced by practice, that in making many Attempts, Fortune will
sometimes favor one or other of them, studied to repair the loss of Hoye, with
the taking of Liere. It is a Town which the Spaniards formerly got by
Treachery, and a Victory cruel enough at the little River of Neths, situate in
the middle between Antwerp and Mechlin, and serves them both oftentimes to
great advantage: Hither were men invited on all hands by Heraugier, with the
hope of prey; the Ensigns in the Twilight climbing up with Ladders over the
Walls, fall upon the ignorant and unprovided Watch, killing them: Then the
Gates are opened, the Foot enter, and a few of the Horse, in all about a
Thousand, culled men out of Breda, and other Garrisons thereabouts, and,
without all peradventure, might have kept the place, if there had been as much
Valor and Obedience showed in defending it, as there was Industry and Policy
in getting it. Alphonsus Luna was the Governor, who not being abashed, or
faltting in Courage, at the first Shock in the Town, places his Soldiers, and
as many of the People, as on a sudden could be got together, in the
Marketplace, and before the Court: Anon mistrusting those strengths, he went
to the Gate that was behind the Enemy in the way to Lonuayn: But the
Conquerours, who were altogether secure, dispersed themselves, some into the
Churches, others into the Houses; but all to Rapine, Plunder, and
Licentiousness: Thus they spent the greatest part of the day within the Walls;
nor could Heraugier, either by Reverence to his Commands, or by Entreaties or
Threatenings prevail, that so many of the Soldiers would come to their Colors,
as might drive away that small party from the Gate: In the interim, Soccours
and Relief were sent to Luna out of the next Garrisons, among whom, a great
Company of Citizens of Antwerp, and some few Spaniards out of the Castle.
Heraugier seeing this, caused the Gate, whereat he and his men entered, to be
shut up, that thereby he might necessitate them to fight: But for all that,
these Straglers would neither mind their own, nor their Enemies Forces; only
so much was their fear now, because they were in no fear before: And for that
there was no other way to go out, and they that were first killed, stopped up
that against those that followed; some of them leaped headlong from the Rampire
into the Trench; others were slain amongst the people, and a great number both
of Men and Horse taken: The Captain, and such as were skilful in swimming, got
safe away. And herein the Deliverers of the Town show a great Example of
singular Continence; for that whatever was found among the prey, that belonged
to the Townsmen, was carefully restored to the Owners.

During all these Vicissitudes of Affairs, both the Spanish and French Armies
followed the War in Burgundy, with greater preparation than event. Of old, the
Aedui, famous for their Alliance with the Romans, and the Sequani, both Nations
of Gaul, possessed that Territory; into whose possession shortly after, when
the Roman Empire was torn in pieces, the Burgundians succeeded a people coming
out of the North, but settled some time before in the nearer parts of Germany.
These extended their Dominion a large compass, both on this side, and beyond
the River Saone, even to the Name and Greatness of a Kingdom, but was first
diminished by the French Grandeur, and afterward, in a manner quite
obliterated: From thence those parts were sometimes given to Friends, but more
often appointed to the French King's Sons, while that Empire could be divided,
the Kingly Honor reserved: After this, all that Region almost which the Aed^^
possessed, was Erected into a Dukedom, and that of the Sequani into an County
or Earldom. After the death of Charles the Bold, Lewis of Valois, the 11th of
that Name King of France, took the Dukedom from Mary, the Daughter of Duke
Charles, pretending the Succession of that Government could not devolve to the
Female Line: But the County or Earldom, which began to be subject to Germany,
as soon as it was an Empire, after the Marriage of Maximilian with Mary, was
claimed and held by the House of Austria. At this time, certain French
Commanders, advised King Henry, That he should invade the Spaniard on that
part, where he lay most open to be (...) and damnified; and that by this means,
the Spaniard's passage out of Italy into France, or the Low Countries, would be
(...) up, and the right due to his Ancestors be regained. The ^ter was at first
begun by inferior Captains, and little Parties: But when King Philip, fearing
the danger, had sent Velasco, as we before mentioned, from Millayn, which he
then governed, to Burgundy, with Ten Thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse,
that strength of the Enemy first brought thither Biron, and after that the King
himself. In many light and accidental Skirmishes of Horse, the French went off
Victor; And Velasco avoided a Pitch'd-Battel, desiring to preserve the Towns.
In the Duchy of Burgundy, King Henry subjected to his Power the City of Dijon,
which in the last Civil War of France followed the Guisian Faction, then headed
by the Duke de Mayn, to whom there was nothing left Fortified in that Dukedom,
but Chalons sur la Saone. But when he began to prosecute his Victory, into the
Bounds of the County, or Earldom, the Switzers interceded him to respite his
Fury; because being bound at that time by Leagues to the House of Austria, they
were obliged to resist all Force that should be offered, either to the
Government of Millain, of the County of Burgundy: Whereupon King Henry took
occasion, by means of a Truce, to withdraw his Army without any dishonor, he
himself being even tired out with the Controversy, and the thing it self
contended for, not being worth so many lives. And also, being solicited by
Cambray, he marched that way, when a sorrowful Messenger met him with the News
of the loss of the City: Therefore he accused his Allies, That he himself being
employed in Wars at so great a distance, they had betrayed to the Enemy the
Confines both of France and the Netherlands; That they gave him other hopes,
that his Borders should not be left destitute of Aid, else why should he so
often have refused Conditions of Peace, when offered to him; And if they
repented them of their League, that he was yet ready to agree with the
Spaniard. The Hollanders excused themselves to these Taunts, with the
necessities of that year and furnished the King with Corn and Money, and two
Regiments of men, the one of Scots, the other of Zelanders, under the Leading
of Justine of Nassau; wherewith being well Recruited, he fell into Vermandois;
and careful, that where he had now begun, the Enemy might not break further
into the Bowels of the Country, the people of Soissons being subdued, he shut
up Fayer with a difficult and Winter-Siege: But by how much the States more
earnestly endeavored to please the King, by so much more grievously they
offended Queen Elizabeth; for King Henry's prosperity, in stead of pity, had
renewed in the English Nation their old Envy, and the Queen was incensed with
the difference of his Religion, especial for that she knew, what Laws, and how
dangerous to the Protestants, the Pope had prescribed to King Henry, for the
obtaining his Peace.

And this was the Reason, that lately before upon his desiring of her four
Regiments of men, for whose Pay the City of Paris should engage their Credit.

The Queen answered, That it was an inconsiderate Desire proceeding from his
Youth, to request her to denude her Kingdom, which was ^^^ed at by so many
Treasons; yet if he would deliver to her, Diope, Bulloin, and Calais, she would
furnish him with some Soldiers.

This gave suspicion to the French; and besides, there was added, that lately
in Bretaign, a Province of France, the English were unworthily Treated, nor
could be admitted to such places as they desired, the Actions of their
Predecessors being objected against them. But Queen Elizabeth sent Letters to
the Hollanders, and one Thomas Budleigh, objecting to them, with much Regret,
the Aid they sent to France, saying, They could not want her help, who could so
freely gratify others. Whereto the States made this Answer, That they did it
not out of any ambitious counsel but mere necessity; that the Enemy being drawn
into many places at once, they might weary him out of breath, and themselves
get a breathing space, for they were as it were forced, in regard the Queen
sent Pay only for six hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse which were in the
Camp, where as six thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse of the League required
the (...).

She, on the other side, replied, That although this was continued within the
League, that at the end of the War, whatever was disbursed, should be repaid;
yet she desired very earnestly, payment of what she had laid out, at leastwise
that they would pay for some part thereof at the present, and she would take
the rest by Annual Portions. Adding withal Threats, That if she were not
obeyed herein, that she should take such course as her Lenity (...) not use to
be acquainted with.

To these, the States, after the return of many Thanks, Desired the Queen to
cast an Eye upon the present times; to observe, that the War was very
burthensom to them, and not wholly so successful as was hoped: And that of late
the enlargment of their Bounds, had little increased their Tributes, but much
augmented their trouble and charge in the defense; That their Merchandising and
Fishing Trade, upon which two only they lived, that was spoiled by the
detention of their Ships in Spain; and this oftentimes the Injuries of the
English, and the Dunkirkers Pyraous much impaired and the Sea also had done
them very great damages by Innundations: Over all which, if they should now be
forced to repay to England the Money due, and also the Queen should openly fly
from the Covenants of the League the French already beginning to stagger It was
with great reason to be feared, that the insinuating Designs of the Enemy, and
the Allurements of a dangerous Peace, would prevail with the people: But it was
not to be avoided however but that the States must pay with their own Money the
English Soldiers, that lay not in the Towns put to Pledge to the Queen.

While these things were arguing between them, some new Endeavors of the Enemy
brought the Queen to be more mild toward these her Allies: For the Spaniards,
out of French Bretaign, had fallen into Cornwall, wasting the Country, and
carrying away great Booty, together with some honorable persons; and also they
began in the open Face of the World to assist the Rebellion in Ireland; which
Country, was, from all Antiquity, possessed by many Petty Princes Natives
thereof: Of whom, Dermack, the Son of Munhard the most Potent, was despoiled of
his Dominion, for many Acts of Tyranny by him committed: Whereupon he got to
him, for his Son-in-law and Assistant, Richard Earl of Pembrook, who making War
there in Ireland very successfully, was recalled by an Edict of Henry the
Second King of England, and compelled to transfer all his Right and hope of
Principality to the King; who himself, in defense of her new Acquisition, went
into Ireland with a great Army, and made some of the Lords by Force; others, by
Treaties and Promises, to acknowledge his Authority as Supreme. But such was
the blindness and simplicity of that Age, that it was believed a great support
of future Right and Jurisdiction, if the Pope's Authority and Consent were
obtained; and he who never bestowed gratis upon any man so much as words, gave
to the Kings of England the Dominion of Ireland; but so, as he should be a
Feodary of the Church, and pay to the same a certain Tribute: But the following
Kings refused to make any such Payment; pretending, That the Peers of the
Kingdom of England had never consented to it.

At last, King Henry the Eighth, despising the Name of Lord, (for till then the
Kings of England were only called Lords of Ireland) first took to himself the
most Noble Title of King, by his own power assuming that Honor, which his
Daughter Queen Mary afterward chose rather to receive from the Pope.

But although Ireland, where it is most civilized, has by little and little
learned to receive and endure both the English Laws and Governors; yet it
remained in other parts, which are fuller of Woods and Bogs, a Lover of its
pristine and Natural Liberty: For, by that Name, the Licentiousness almost of
all, which in other places is forbidden, was called. Among the rest, the Family
of Oneal is very eminent; of which, one first challenged the Principality of
Ulster, and soon after of all Ireland.

These Irish, under such a Head, gathered Courage, especially because England
was at that time miserably torn, by the Bloody Dissentions of the two Royal
Families of York and Lancaster. But Henry the Eighth ruling peaceably, yet with
a severe Hand, compelled the Heir of that Stock, entitled Con Oneal, to abjure
the Name and Title of Oneal, which was presently swallowed up in the Honor and
Dignity of the Earl of Tyrone. Some believed, that Matthew was Son to this Man;
but others suppose the same Matthew to be the Son of a Blacksmith: But his
Grandfather Con exceedingly loved his Wife, and therefore suffered to be
obtruded upon him, either a strange, or an uncertain Issue. This Man was slain
by John, who affirmed himself the lawful Son of Con; yet, before his Murder,
had a Son, called Hugh, who was partly bred at Home, partly in England, and, by
the Favor of Queen Elizabeth, had both the Earldom of Tyrone, and whatever
belonged to Con, (the aforementioned John being killed in his Rebellion, and all
his Goods and Estate confiscated) but under such Conditions, as for the future,
took from him all possibility of doing a prejudice. He was a Man very knowing
in matters of War; and, being entrusted in many Affairs, faithfully performed
his Duty to the Queen; until in the year, 1588. when that most notable Spanish
Fleet being beaten and scattered, some of the Commanders therein, with some
Vessels, were cast away upon the Coast of Ireland; at which time, holding
private Conferences with him, they stirred him up to recover the Right and
Title of Oneal: Yet however he might then fix his Resolution, he discovered no
sign thereof at the present: But others being risen in Arms, moved thereto,
either out of Zeal to the Roman Religion, or by the Injuries received from the
English, he a long time covering his Hostile Mind with the Veil of Obedience,
denied the guilt of any Crimes, with no less Confidence, than they were
objected against him: However, without doubt, it was a great failing in the
English, who would not, when they might, put into safe custody, a man of so
fierce a Nature, whom they supposed guilty: But he, first casting into Prison
the Children of John, that he might not be impeded by any Domestic Quarrel;
and this year having heard, that General John Norris, a man famous in the
Belgike War, and then employed in French Bretaigne, was called thence with the
old Soldiers, to appease the Irish Commotions, put himself in the Head of the
Rebels; but yet not omitting, with most humble words, to desire peace and
pardon, throwing the cause of the Quarrel upon the cruelty of the Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland: By this kind of Policy, and by Truces, he endeavored to
protract the War, until the Assistance promised from Spain might arrive: And
there his Devices and Intents were much forwarded, by the Discords between
Russel Deputy of Ireland, and Norris, who was appointed General of the War;
Their Enmity growing to that height^, that whatever seemed fit to the one, the
other would not consent to; because the first liked, and for no other Reason.
But the Queen, after the breaking forth of this Rebellion, began a more fierce
War; Not for her Allies, as before was pretended, but for her own sake: And
therefore she sent out out Drake a person well known in the Western World, with
a great Fleet prepared, partly at her own Charges, and partly at the cost of
private Men, with hope to seize and take the Wealth gathered together and laid
up in Porto Ricco. But the News of their coming being gotten thither before
them, all the Wealth being carried thence more into the Land, the Port it self
was enclosed and stopped up by the Spaniards: Wherefore Drake wasting all the
other places of the Canaries, going from thence to the American Streights, he
spoiled the Town of Nombre de Dios, that lies between two Seas; where himself,
together with many of his men, either by the untemperateness of the Air, or
with grief of mind, that the Success of his Voyage answered not his Desires,
dyed. About which time also another Englishman, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Captain
of the Queen's Guard, entering the River Orenoco, came to Guiana, a place never
conquered by the Spaniards, of which he made a discovery, from his own sight
and knowledge. But as to the Amazons, and those whose Faces are in their
Breast, having only been heard of, but never seen, he left the finding of them
out to others.

I should deprive Posterity, both Foreign and Domestic, of the profitable, and
no less delightful part of the History, if I should not set forth at large the
Voyages at Sea; whereby it is brought to pass, That the Hollander's Felicity,
even in the midst of their Troubles, has not only exceeded the happiness of
others in peace, but also of themselves: For these being as it were born
Seamen, have from thence raised the chief, if not the sole support of their
War; not studying to divide the World, or caring to be subject to the Bishop of
Rome's Rules, who has ascribed to the Spaniard the greatest part of his
Nature; whereby, under the Cloak of Religion, he might oppress the Liberty of
the whole World.

The ancient Bounds of Merchandise and Trade, for which these Nations, through
many Ages, were famous, besides a few Islands, were two Narrow Straights, and
the Seas within them; This Way toward the Sound; That Way toward Hercules
Pillars, and the Islands of Gades. There is between these a middle Coast of the
Ocean, where all the Profit arising to the Traders upon one side, grows by
their Selling or Battering the same on the other side; for they (the Dutch)
have a want of Corn, nor indeed have plenty of any other considerable
Commodity. Their Gain arises, by carrying it from place to place; and by such
Things as are wrought by the Hands of Artificers, commonly called,
Manufactures: But after, by the good Providence of God, the Efficacy of the
Lodestone was found out, whereby men were guided to understand the Course of
the Sea; and also, the Records of Books taught us, to make search after the
knowledge of the Ancients, and not to despair the value of new Inventions;
nothing now remained too hard for the Scrutiny of Human Experience.

The Portugeze found the utmost Borders of Africa and Asia, and the Castilian
new Coasts beyond* the Ocean, or, indeed, more truly another World: The
Endeavors of the French quickly grew faint, after an unhappy Attempt upon
Brasile, they came to Terra-Nova, and found a Coast abounding with Fish, but
barren enough of all things else: Not was that Sea, and those Lands, that lying
furthest off to the South Mallegon first of all found, now left unsearched: But
the English, in a short space following, in part discovered the North Sea.
After all the Hollanders, that had without doubt been hitherto oppressed by the
Cruelty of their Princes, as men that would not tremblingly send to Sea their
People, whom they knew valiant and mindful of their Liberty, now out of Envy to
their Enemies, and Emulation to their Allies, took the Courage and Boldness,
that making use of what was already known, they would now, in their Turn,
contribute their Labors for the benefit of Mankind, in the natural laying open
of things, which, to that Age, had remained as a secret in the Breast of
Nature. Neither in this further Quest of newer Things, were the old omitted or
forgotten; And indeed, what Shore is able to satisfy them, who have always at
Sea above Seventy Thousand men? This little Country, in multitude of Shipping,
not giving place to any the greatest Kingdom, and though enclosed in such
narrow Limits, has yet so great a strength abroad. The Cities every year,
build two thousand new Ships: therefore besides England, France, the Parts of
Germany, and the Baltic Sea, mutual poverty has admitted and carried them to
Spayn, importing thither Merchandise, and bringing thence Coin, and the
dissimulation and fear of King Philip, was least if he should de^a^ them of
Trade with their Neighbors, they should seek for ^is further off, and it may
be, to his disadvantage; nevertheless, sometimes they received injuries, when
only for their Religions sake, they should be taken notice of; (for they
generally used the names of other Nations) and at last, as if the King needed
their help, both the Ships and Mariners should be stayed; by which means, not
only themselves were endangered, but all they had was a prey to those that
overpowred them.

In this very year, no less than fifty Ships were thus raised; And the
Portugueses said, that the King would take care to moderate these injuries, if
the Hollanders would forbear to send Navall Assistance, as well to Brytain as
France. But the Spanish losses were repaired out of Italy, for their so many
barren Summers last past, for France was not able, by reason the Country had
been so harassed with War. Thus by the Swedish Voyage, the Dutch had gotten
into their hands all Grain, which by a short recourse hither and thither, they
had made have to get to their no small advantage; Nor as it happened, did that
Commodity wait upon the Rich only for vent, being dispersed far and wide among
the common People, with a small charge, and a quick return.

They went also to Barbary, where it is opposite to the Ocean, and where it
coasts upon any more inward Sea; with the Muscovite also the Hollanders Traded,
before they were at War, and through the Baltic Sea, and Norva in Livonia, as
far as Novograde: which Trade afterward, was transferred by the English,
through the Rushian Gulf to St. Nicholas Port, and by the Hollanders to
Podesemser, and the Monastery of St. Michael he Archangel, all situate upon
the River Duina, and the English have earnestly labored since that, to get it
all to themselves the Prayers and liberty of the Hollanders scarcely
prevailing: Shortly after, they fetched a longer course to the Kingdom of
Guiny, abounding in Gold, Ivory, and Ebony, and the rest of Ethiopia; and at
last, in a two years Voyage, they arrived to the Isles in the Indian Sea. That
was begun to be attempted with four Ships, set out at the costs of private men.
At first it was doubtful, and seemed to be full of danger, while every where,
as they came in those unknown places, they met with none but barbarous Nations,
and such as were at enmity with all the World; Here they were mightily
afflicted with Diseases, and the injurious heat of the patching Air; Besides,
the Portugueses hindered them all they could by punishments, if they were either
by stress of Weather, or want of any thing driven to their Vessels or Colonies,
nor ceased they so, but pursued them with false accusations unto those Kings
and People, that were not subjected to them: which a long time was very bitter,
while all things were encumbered by the infrequent use of a strange Tongue, and
suspicions of treachery on every hand: But after it appeared by public Letters
and Testimonials of Trade, that they came not to rob and do violence, or to
seek dominion, but that they were a People careful of the liberty, even of
strangers, and that they had for that end passed so many Seas, that they might
with equal fidelity, uphold the Law of Nations, on a sudden, the same and
admiration of the Hollanders was greatly augmented: Thus the Spaniard's malice
opened a way for such far distant Allyances by the common gain of Renowned
Merchandise, and the name of Pr^ Maurice, the famous Warrier, was honored even
in those remote places.

The Religion of those that first went to the Indies, was wonderful, so was the
care of their Reputation; for because they received no Commission, other then
to defend themselves, when they met the Spanish Navy, a rich Prey, and as it
were prepared for them they let it pass untouched; Scarcely could the
Portugueses cruelty, which would admit none into that World, besides
themselves, be drawn to consent otherwise, But that these private Ships would
strengthen their Trade by War; however, Embassies of the Indians followed, and
Gifts and Sea Fights against the Enemy, and which helped most of all, it
appeared, that the Spaniard could be overcome: for to the taken of Towns, the^e
was no great space of ground belonging, so that the Conquerours gained but
little, and yet the Conquered lost not much.

The parts of that Kingdom are far divided, their Wealth, which is the support
both of their bounty and W^r, lies at a great distance; which being taken away,
o^ exhausted by troubles, how can it happen otherwise to that vast scattered,
and separated Empire, which is no where so near to it self, as to its Enemies:
but that it should become a prey to all Nations? The Coast also of America,
where yet it is publicly free, and where it is privately subject, has become
known by the fear of the King of Spain. From thence is brought Salt, Pearl, and
Skins of Buff* I pass by other Lands and people, discovered and honored with
the care of the finders. That Voyage seems to me the most memorable, wherein
the Hollanders went so far to the Northward, that it might be known whereof the
whole World before was ignorant, what Ocean did join Europe and Asia: so both
the Nobles and Merchants had conceived a hope, that the most opulent Kingdom of
Cathay and China, and farther off, the Moluccas and India, might be gone to a
far nearer way, than that used by the Spaniards. Three Ships, one of Holland,
one of Zeland, and one Westfrizeland, went out to this intent, which having
passed by Norway and Finland, at ^uilodun, an Isle of Lapland, they separated,
and every one took a several course; The Hollanders coming first through the
furthermost Sea, to the side of Nova Zembla, over against them, where the
Stream runs a great way to the North-west, some two Islands, which as a token
or limit of their Voyage, they named, Orange-Islands, being about the degree
seventy six. The rest passing the Sea which leads to Rushia, and choosing the
Coast of Condore and Pitzore, came to the Straights, where they saw Land,
fronting, o^ lying opposite to the Continent, which narrowing the Sea, gives
it the name of Waygats. They doubted, whether it were a narrow Sea, or only a
Bay or Creek.

Here the day was darkened with Clouds, and the Ice continued for a long space,
which the cold North wind, with equal danger, both tumbles together, and
casts asunder. A long time they were in suspense, whether they should make
any further search toward the end of the World; At last, with much struggling,
breaking forth those unknown, and uncouth bounds, where they begun to withdraw
themselves from the Land, with a direct course to the South-East, from thence
they sailed toward Scithia, by the outmost part of Zembla, in the one hundred
and tenth degree of the Equator, until they conjectured, they were past that
Sea, wherein the River Obis, coming out of the Sarmatian Marshes, is swallowed
up in the Sea.

This is the ancient River Carambuci, as the Learned believe, than which there
needs no better a boundary between Europe and Asia. Which trials performed,
and meeting the other Ship, which the exceeding great Ice had driven back from
Zembla, the third Month after they went out, they returned home again.

This was done the Summer before this year: And so much satisfaction was
received from this first Assay, that it was concluded, more Ships should be
sent to make further experiment not toward Zembla, but by the Nassavian Sea,
which way carried with it more of hope: So had they said at first, of that
which runs between Waygats and the Sarmatians. But here delay, a frequent
impediment to the greatest Affairs, steps in, so that the Ships going out later
in the year, than they ought to have done, found the Sea impassable: so cruel
and vehement a cold, and, which in that Clymate was rare, had turned all into
Ice.

They who came back from both the Voyages, declared the nature both of the Sea
and Soil, the unheard of forms of Birds and Beasts, as they found and saw the
same. They observed also the prominent Capes, Bays, Culphs, and Rivers, with
the Situation of the places, together with the names of the Country, Prince,
yea and of the very people: they told also of many little Islands, and what was
spoken of by the Ancients, that they were so variable, by the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea, that now they would appear to be really Islands, and anon,
they would seem parts of the Continent.

The bigger of these beyond the Strait, worthy to be remembered for its safe
Harbor in time of danger, they called by the name of the States, and because
it produces upon the tops of the Frozen Mountains Crystal, not much unlike to
Diamonds. It seems to me very congruous, to describe the Situation of this
Country, and what Men or Beast are to be found there, it being then first
thoroughly known, and whether Authors of greatest Antiquity, have related
concerning this matter, the same things, or other more vain and frivolous. Also
we rashly believe, that by Magic Art there are caused at the North Pole, four
Euripi, or Arms of the Sea; and how to go to the Caspian Gulf to the North, of
old was questioned by wise men, while others affirm from the Verses of the
Poets, That the whole World was shut up in the Sea: Another sort in that part,
define an unbounded Land, extended into the utmost extremity of cold, under the
Frozen Zone. And they who have assumed to themselves the License of fabulous
Inventions, upon unknown places, stick not to say, That the very Sea it self
stands still, and is without any motion* and is as it were a vast Body, and
natural Mass, deficient in it self, from the intent for which it was made, or
else forsooth, that it is a secret proper only to the Gods or more sacred
Theory: Some o^ the contrary, affirm it unaccessible, through the violence of
Whirl-winds and Monsters: But if any could pass to the end of that Sea, they
should either meet again with fertile Countries, or nothing but Air and Fire.

They have given great hope of sailing through it, in whose Books it is
signified, that the Indians h^ve often by the force of tempest, been taken from
thence, and driven forth upon the Coast of Germany: Neither needed it to speak
more of the temperature of the Air, and the nature of the place, since some
have placed these Northern People in continual daylight, and report them most
exemplary for Fidelity and Justice; Others that the whole Region is covered
with thick darkness, and utterly alienated from the lively Aspect of one
benevolent Star; being altogether desert, by reason of wild Beasts, and the
barbarity of the Inhabitants, (if any) and covered over with Snow, and some
first say, it may be seen, and presently, that it is without the World. All
which so great repugnances, seem for the most part, to have drawn their
Original from truth, as far as the same may be proved, by the experiments of
Navigators, and the Speeches of the Inhabitants; for about that Sea, which
extends it self all along upon the Coast of Lapland, Rushia, and that Country
which we call Samogitta, the Summer daylight by two Months longer, does
promise the like darkness in Winter; But that very time of the Suns appearance,
is so obscured with Clouds, little lightsomer than night it self, and the
benefit of heat so far remote, that the Sun can indeed by exhalation, procure
or cause a Cloud, but not d^ssipate or dissolve it. And then again, the whole
place is for the most part so covered with Snow, that one cannot readily
distinguish between the Sea and Land. The Sea indeed is not very dangerous by
storms, because on both sides, it grow larger from the Strait, as it were
restrained by its own coldness: So that the Ancients did not without Reason,
call it sometimes the Dead, and other whiles the Frozen Sea. For wheresoever it
approaches the Land, its condensed Waves congealed into Ice, continue a long
time, and at a great distance to be seen upon the shore, nay sometimes the
continued congelations of many years, may be seen together in one great heap;
but when the Wind breaks, o^ a remission of cold loosens these conjoined
condensations, the several fragments, like little Mountains or Islands, are
violently carried into the Sea, and sometimes meet and dash one against
another, like two Rocks.

And this terror has beyond measure afflicted Navigators, because when they
make off from Land in search, the narrow Sea, whose breath is but two hours
Sail, but the length contains five days passages, of a sudden, becomes all so
concrete, that it may be walked upon: and when it is thawed, the Ice goes not
away by degrees, but is forced as it were, to fall into two Seas.

There are scarce fifty days of ours, at the greatest time of hear, before the
latter Equinoctial; and that very time cannot with them be accounted Summer,
but rather an internal, or small relaxation of Winter: then indeed, you may
positively discern the decay of the Ice, but longer than that, the Frost again
approaching, will not suffer any Sailings; within that time, the People did go
to Rushia, where was seen the remains of some unfortunate Voyage, as floating
^lanks, and the like, whether the returning cold, or any other Reason, made
them appear, is uncertain. These People also trade beyond the River Obis; and
there their home-dangers have taught them to Winter, and at the ^ccustomed time
to go back, when the Waters are open, and p^ssable for them: By the same means
that the Hollanders had confidence to pass the Streights of Magellan, they
took Courage through these Straights also to get into the Ocean; sometimes by
the violent streams of Rivers running into the Sea, being carried out, and then
as if they doubted what course to hold, or if the Wind did but abate, by the
force of the same Rivers to be carried back again; thus as it were, being
divided between the Surges of the salt Sea, and the pleasures of the fresh
Water; and anon, in their passage from side to side, leaving the shore, they
might see the rolling Waves, foaming and dancing in the prosundity of the main
Ocean; together, with several sorts of Monsters; for it is wonderful to be
told, how full that Sea is bestial Animals.

There are both Sea-Calves, and Sea-Dogs, and the best of all wild Creatures,
which is called a Morse, of a wonder^ul and active fagacity to defend it self,
yet scarcely penetrable by any blows. It has seet almost like a Beavor, has
a large Body, and use lie equally, both the Sea and Land; for sometimes it is
seen to lie upon the Ice, and other times to lie at sunning upon the tops of
the Banks, and Cliffs near the Sea. It climbs up but slowly, and with great
pains, but descends with an incredible swiftness; The People of those parts,
set as great a value upon their Teeth, as we do upon Ivory.

The Rushians do say, that the divided Sea once past Waygats meets together
again, and again breaks out, from which Speech I cannot affirm, whether they
intend Tabi^, or the Scythian Mountain, so well known of old, and Zemble
stretching into the East, though a little short, do meet, or the narrow Sea, by
which America divided from Tartary, does make out by countenance manners and
Customs, that those Nations have the same Original; From Pitzone, a Province of
Muscovy, as far as the River Obis, whatever borders upon the Sea, is, I cannot
say, inhabited, but perambulated by the Samogitians, a kind of Sarmatian
People, Cou^agious and Fortunate, contrary to the barbarousness of their
nature, and the inclination of the Clymate: it is true, their Countenances are
ill favored, and black with smoke, with little Eyes, and wide Nost^^ls. Their
Bodies, though but of an ordinary size, yet are very strong, so that they equal
in swiftness the most Creatures: They content themselves with little, and are
always in action, neither weakened with pleasures and ^yot, nor worn out with
cares: Wherever they go, all that they lay their hands on, is properly their
own; nor have they any other kind of Possession, then a mind resolved to, and
content with all hazards and adventures; Thus they enjoy all things, because
they cover nothing; Their Arms are according to the Soythian and Parthian
manner, a Bow and Arrows, which they chiefly use against wild Beasts: from
these they have their Garments made of their Skins, wherewith they cover
themselves all over, both Head and Hands; and their Food is the raw flesh of
the same Beasts, as if they satisfied themselves with the gifts of nature,
without any addition. They are so far from having any delicates, that both the
use and name of Bread, is unknown among them. This kind of life they think
better, than to plow up the Ocean, and weary out the over-toyled Earth, and
still to promise themselves a further accomplishment of their desires, being
hateful both to our selves and others.

They know there are Ships, but never troubled themselves with the study of
making the like, but keeping themselves within their own Territories, unless as
it were by Divine Assistance, when the several Elements are consolidated into
one Body of Ice.

Thus they go sorth and return, when in a long Hunting, they trace their prey,
as far as Waygats, and Zembla; They affirmed those places to be two Islands,
and that they were torn off from the Continent, but by a small Arm of the Sea:
There they have born sway, longer than they know themselves, because beyond
them, there is nothing but vast Wildernesses, and wild Beasts: The Mariners in
their second Voyage, saw him, that boasted himself to be the Prince of all
those People, a Man who was remarkable, neither in Habit, nor Majesty, his Age
being the only thing in him, that deserved respect.

From Muscovy, whose Dominion has been much increased within few Ages, the
Rhiphean Mountains encompass them on the back and sides, as is believed, which
being unaccessible, by reason of the Snow, they call the Girdle of their Land,
and their poverty is their defense: notwithstanding which, their Neighbors pay
them Tribute, the Skins of wild Beasts; for indeed they have nothing else, and
this they do, rather out of hatred to, than fear of War: The appearances of the
Coasts of Samogitia, Sembla and Waygats ^ are almost the same, in some places
dangerous, because of Rocks, and in other places so even, that it is fordable.

The Ground there is ^offey, and full of Marshes, but no where Woody: no Herbs
or Grass fit for any good use grows there, whereof in most places, nature is
prodigal, only here no such thing is ever seen. And this makes it the greater
wonder, to see the boughs and Bodies of Trees, swimming here and there in this
place, unless it be, that the vast Ocean stirred with the very turnings of the
shores, breaks into those remoter Lands toward the North, and so overturns all
before it. It Is probable, that by such like force, the Islands which we now
see, have been broken off from the Continent of Sarmatian, perchance of old,
jetting out so hither and thither, as their sight makes appear. What part
soever of that Coast, our Ships touched upon, they perceived sometimes smoke,
and the footsteps of men, but no Cities, nor so much as a Village; The inner
part of the Country, is believed to have Woods and Lakes, which are filled and
nourished by the perpetual dissolutions of Snow: All hereabouts, according as
the Soil and water pleased, diverse that lurked scatteringly here and there in
poor Hovels, or in Caves, appeared, which places, served them only for fire to
refresh their Bodies, against the bitterness of the Weather: wherein, though
they could hardly stir, yet would they not be idle; The chief, nay and only
Housholdstuff they have, is a kind of Sledge, which is drawn with incredible
celerity, by four-footed Creatures, not much unlike a Heart, sliding as it were
in these, they trace their prey through the deepest Snows, yea, and change
their Seats. All this Region is divided, though somewhat unequally between wild
Beasts, and these Savage men.

There is abundance of Hares and Wolves, both with white Skins; Martins also,
Sables, and many other Beasts, whose Skins are of great value: Here are Bears
of a more than ordinary bigness (which are made white too, by the sharpness of
the cold) and are beyond expression, fierce and ravenous, because they want
Pasture, insomuch, as if they but once get a scent of prey, neither the fear of
Weapons, nor the Sea it self, can put a stop to their eagerness, or lessen
their pursuit. This mischief, miserably lost some of the unwary Seamen, that
went ashore, nor were their Companions able to help them otherwise, than by
seeing them eaten, and afterward to seek a too late Revenge. Upon the rising
part of this Coast, was observed a sad division between Religion and
profaneness; when upon the tops of the Hills on one side, innumerable Effigies
of the Gods, testified both an ignorance of Art and dullness of understanding;
and on the other Erected Crosses, showed marks of Christianity: For the
Rushians, whom either Tempest, or the desire of Trading for Furs, had brought
into that part of the Continent, and among those Islands, had been taught
Christianity by the Greek Church, fix Ages before; The Samogitians worship the
Heavens and the Stars, (Deities not worse than others.) according to their old
Custom, nor do they believe it lawful, to hate those that dissent from them.

There are some, that in those Woods, stick not to worship by an unknown kind
of Superstition, things horrible, both to sight, and hideous for their dreadful
noise; nay, and call Snakes and Serpents sacred. But the Samogitian Customs are
not so barbarous, not much differing from those used in Lapland, and Finland;
although some, from their name, would argue, that in former Ages they did eat
man's flesh; which if we allow, there are these to be numbered among those
people, whose lives were so mollified by age and example, showed an apt
inclination of mankind, to leave off their old and customary barbarity: At the
first coming thither of the Hollanders, they were fearful merely our of
ignorance, they provided for their security, either by Arms or flight: But
after they had tried out innocence, and received some trivial Presents; (two
sacred ties) they called to witness the Sun, and their own poverty, that they
were even against their wills, overcome by good turns; And if at any time
afterward, Fortune smiled upon us, we were altogether beholding to the
affections of those People which border upon the Sea; though it were very
necessary, that Castles should be built in those passages, to preserve the use
of that new found Sea, and where Ships may have shelter and Harbor, if any
sudden accident should happen. Then if industrious care, together with men meet
there, the Island of Waygats is no less fit for Tillage, than those places
which are inhabited in the utmost skirts of the Danish Kingdom; for as under
the very line, where the Country is beyond measure hot, so those places which
being far off at both the Poles, or frozen up, will both admit humane
Inhabitants, which by Custom, or being born there, after the first Plantation,
will be naturalized to the Clymate, contrary to the Opinion of the Ancients, as
experience convinces us; for certainly, Nature condemned no part of her self
to Solitude, so that Groenland being more to the Northward, yet may, and
without question would, produce and bear Fruit and Corn, according to our
manner in Europe. It Is true, and equally probable to be believed, that at first
many places lay desert and unmanured, while yet the choycer parts of the Earth
would suffice for all; But when by little and little, either multitude or
discord, forced men to seek further Habitations, the Land demonstrated the Sea,
and that again discovered more Land.

Obdor is the next Region to Obis, famous for the Effigies and Oracle of a
Noble old Woman: Beyond the little River Molgomzay, there is another greater,
and a Bank of the same Name, whereof the Russians used by Authority not for
Trade: But all the rest surely is fabulous; as, That the people of Leucomoria,
die in the Winter, and revive again in the Spring, while, in the interim, the
only Religion of the Inhabitants, is performed in the exchanging Commodities
exposed to Barter: That the men's Bodies are all rough and hairy, and their
Heads and Faces resembling a Dogs, is no less vain surely, than those forged
Inventions of the Ancients, who have bestowed upon some people Horses Feet;
upon others, Ears of such bigness, that they cover their whole body; so that
every where almost, the Report of these Things is made more wonderful, by
additional hearsay: yet that some of these, and which is confirmed with more
certain Testimony of Truth, as Men without Heads, who have their Faces in their
Breasts, either really be such, or seem so to be, by the shortness of their
Necks and their Shoulders sticking up. I will not obstinately deny, well
knowing, as in some places, the violence of Heat; so in other, the extremity of
Cold, has often warped Nature, and made it become deformed: From hence it is
agreed. That the next are the Loppians, and the Mountain Imaus, and the
Tartarian Hordes, removed to and fro among the Deserts, by a part of whom is
Cathay possessed: Thence is the way to China, and other places in the Eastern
part of the World.

This same Year was made unlucky by Pirates of Dunkirk, who took five and
Thirty Ships of Holland sent to Norway for Timber, among all which, was but one
Ship of War; but in regard they could not carry them off, they took the Masters
of them as Pledges, till the Money promised for their Redemption was paid.

And shortly after, they took no less a prey from others going to France; But
one of the Pirates Vessels being circumvented by the Hollanders, the greatest
part of their men being killed in fight, with the execution of forty three that
survived, they alittle repressed that villinous, and growing presumption and
besides, above twenty Ships more were freed, which were taken and detained by
that Ship, every of which had promised, for the preservation of their lives,
two thousand Florens and more.

The Fifth BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
1596.
THE Netherlanders, under the Spanish Obedience, began the year merrily, from
the unaccustomed Joy of them, which were come from the French Borders, as well
as from the new hope conceived from Albertus, Archduke of Austria, who was
sent with great honor to be Successor to Ernestus: He was the youngest of all
his Brothers; But, which is a great advantage to Nobility, and an implicit
Agreement between the Pope and Kings, he was graced with a Cardinals Hat.
Afterward, being approved by Philip, for his Government of Portugal, where he
had gotten Repute by his careful Obedience and Affability toward the Subjects;
and therefore now was not thou^ht unworthy to be bound to the King in a nearer
Tie, according to the Custom of People agreeing in Affection. To this purpose,
that he might with the greater Honor unde^take and enter upon this Government,
belonging to the House of Austria, great store of Provisions were made, both
for Peace and War: He had a safe Journey from Spain into Italy, and thence,
through Savoy and Burgundy as far as Lutzenburg, and the Borders of the
Netherlands: Soldiers both of Horse and Foot were on all hands drawn together;
not only as a Defense for the whole, but as a Supplement to the old exhausted
Militia; which he, as soon as he came to the Army, he reduced into a few
Regiments or Brigades, and partly filld them with old Soldiers, wisely
desiring to find true Valor among them, rather than great Name and an outward
show, lest he should by an unnecessary multitude of Officers, both trouble the
Soldiers, and burden the Treasury: And therefore he removed from being
Governors and Colonels, all those Netherlandish Noblemen, who seldom coming at
their charges, scarcely made use of any thing, besides the name and profit
arising therefrom, putting others in their places, who by long obedience, had
deserved to command; He appointed also, other things worthy of imitation, as,
That none should carry an Ensign, unless he had thrice received pay; Moneys
also were looked after, because a new Sedition was feared, and the old Sores
began again to rankle; for prevention whereof, for the future, the Spaniard
promised every Month, eleven hundred thousand Florens, but the same should not
proceed beyond the first Autumn.

The Archduke Albert, brought along with him a great Mass of uncoyned Silver,
by which means, the damage of money to be returned by Writings, or Bill of
Exchange, would be much advanced, and because being coined in the Netherlands,
it would bear the greater price; Besides, otherwise, the many hazards of long
Journies were now prevented the same at present being defended with a strong
Guard* he brought with him also, and boasted it as a great Pledge of his
clemency, the Prince of Aurange, whose name was Philip William, who at the
first beginning of the troubles in the Netherlands, had been carried thence,
where being honorably kept in the Spanish Court, had now first received his
Liberty, for being firmly grounded in the Catholic Religion, and obliged by
that benefit, if he should go to his younger Brother and the Provinces where
his Fathers Memory was yet f^^^ it was hoped he would either become a Moderator
for Peace or be the cause of Discord among the Enemies: Nor truly was Albertus
himself looked upon by the Hollanders with a^ Evil Eye, being known to most of
the Seamen for his libe^^ Clemency, when being all seized in Portugal, he
dismissed them, to this very end, as was believed, in hope that the^ would
spread abroad his Fame. But above all, he was most beloved before all others;
because, by his coming, Ibarra and Fontayne, were removed from their maligned
Greatness, and sent into Spain. But the absence of those was supplied with many
more; as, Francisco Mendoza, Admiral of the Arragenian Sea, a chief man both in
Counsel and Actions of War, Gonsalvo Carilia, Girolam Zapata, and Baptista
Taxis, persons with other Names, but of the same Nature and Disposition with
the former, whereby dissembled Goodness was more feared, than the remaining
Evils.

The States of the United Provinces, fearing lest the Vulgar should be changed
by the speech and presence of the Prince of Aurange writ to him, congratulating
his Freedom from a Captivity of Twenty Eight years continuance: But that it was
not safe for him to come within their Jurisdiction being all in Arms, unless he
were publicly invited, nor could they, as present Affairs then stood, come to
him: However, they hoped, that he, who had so thoroughly tried the Spanish
Cruelty, would not seek to subvert their Liberty, founded by his Fathers
Counsels, and cemented with his Blood. Whereto he answered, as concerning his
Father dissemblingly, but to the rest friendly; to wit, That he was come
thither, to be an Author of nothing, but what might conduce to the benefit of
both Parties, whereupon he hoped he should meritedly expect their best Wishes.

Being then debarred thereof, for the time to come, he af^^^ed nothing,
complaining, That the Hollanders suspected (...), and the Spaniards hated him
for his Alliance; wherefore he (...) not take up Arms, chiefly as being
desirous of a private life, (...) partly also out of respect to his Brothers
Honor. But Prince Maurice, and his Sister, who was married to Count Hohenlo,
before he came into the Duchy of Cleves, sent to him by particular Messengers,
both Gifts and Money, each offering to clear themselves, concerning the
Domestic Administrations of those great Possessions in their Power. But the
States, publicly desiring to avoid all imminent Snares laid to catch them,
give Order for strict Watches upon the Ways; their chief Care was against the
Jesuits, lest any Seditious Doctrine should be blown among the people. But
Albertus, not ^elying upon these Inventions, although desirous of peace, yet so
he might be ready for War; to which purpose, he made ready an Army of 15
Thousand, besides his Garri^on.

Fayer, a Town in Vermandois, surrounded both with War and Want, there was no
reason or possibility to maintain, unless by continual Additions of little
Forces, which must be put in by stealth, because all about it lay the Enemies
Towns, with a great Body of Horse, beside the dampness of the fields: By how
much the Besiegers Fortifications were greater, by so much more they terrified
all that endeavored to approach it with the greater danger: Wherefore, to
withdraw the Besiegers, (...) if they should stay, it was nearer to attaque
Calais, a Town of greater value, and the ill repaired Fortifications of that
City, persuaded the Avarice of the Praefects hereto.

The Duke of Parma formerly destined the same thing; so did Fontayne
afterward, by the advice and persuasions of La^^^. But the honor of beginning
thereof was reserved for a new Governor. This most eminent Reward and remain
of their Transmarine Expeditions, the English kept for two hundred years, as
the main Port of their Sea; which being regained by the Valor of Francis Duke
of Guise, one Gordon had the Government thereof, which he soon after
transmitted to a near Kinsman of his own: But neither of them had to much care,
as to amend what was decayed and become ruinous, either by Age or War. And the
Works were far short of an Age in standing, a Stone Wall encompassing the City:
It has a little Castle, slightly running out with four Platforms; there was
not a Soldier in it that thought of an Enemy, but made it their business to
strengthen their Authority, while they only study to enrich themselves by Sea
and Land, and (which is frequent, where there is a distraction in Affairs) out
of a Captainship erect a Kingdom. Wherefore, neither the King of France, though
he was forewarned of the danger by some intercepted Letters, could help it, he
ruling yet as it were but at pleasure, and by his Subjects good will. Moreover,
the Governor, hearing it strongly reported, that Calais was aimed at,
conscious to himself of the defects of the Town, admitted two Companies of
Holland Soldiers into the Town, but no more, he himself having six more;
whereof when Albertus was told, the more to spread abroad the Terror of his
Design, he commanded several Bands to go out of the Town of Valenciennes under
their Captains, and in the nearest parts of France to make a great Uprore.

The Camp-Master-General Christian Ronee, the famousest Man among all the
French Exiles, sent with part of the Army to begirt the Town, cut off all the
Passages, by which only Relief might come: For taking the Bridge, whereby the
Land-Entrance is straightened, he raised against the Wall a Tower, which is called
a Rice-Bank, just at the sides of the Port (this same way the Duke of Guise
before found into the Town) where the Fortifications were long since half
fallen down; which, the danger being not yet fully known, every one helped to
fasten again, being shaken with Cannon placed upon the Shore, and not defended
so long as it ought to have been, the Conqueror ascended and won.

After this the Hollanders Ships, which lay upon the Coast of Flanders, were
driven off, that they might not so commodiously assist the Besieged:
Notwithstanding which, among all the Shot, the Haven being very large, a Ship
was conveyed into the Town, which delivered to the Governor such Workmen as he
requested, for the mending his Works together with a quantity of Gunpowder,
and then returned. Shortly after the Count St. Paul, who had brought 1500
Frenchmen to the Seashore, for Relief of the Town, was promised by a Seaman
to be put into it, but he durst not undergo the danger.

At last all the Arch-Duke's Forces being met together, and fought with upon
the Sand-Hills; from whence the Besieged being forced, forthwith the Suburbs
were gained. Within a while after, the Town it self, after a three days Siege,
when the Gate began to be battered, between the People's Fear, and the Hatred
of their old Lord (because the Governor himself was wanting both in Authority
and Counsel) was surrendered to the Spaniard. The Soldiery retired into the
Castle, which was held six days, during a Truce, in hope of Relief: And now
Prince Maurice, with 50 Sail of Ships, and a great number of Soldiers, was
come thither, to see what was the Resolution, as well of the English, as the
French: But the Count St. Paul marched away, and the Earl of Essex was ready
with a Fleet to fight the Spaniards, if, by chance, they should offer an
Invasion: But the Emulation of the People never well agreeing, hindered it. For
the Earl of Essex tried Mounsieur de Vique, the Governor of the next French
Garrisons, if he would suffer the English to have the Custody of Calais. if it
were recovered: But the French believed, that the English, now under a show of
Friendship, did clandestinely seek to regain, what they had long since gained
by War. However, King Henry not minding to leave his Siege, but leaving his
Army at Payer, and doing so, either because he despaired of passage to Calais,
the Way being cut off by Duchess that let to the Sea, he came with 4000 men by
the River Sama^ to Boloyn the next Harbor. And there he advised, but too late,
about relieving the Castle of Calais. Prince Maurice being desired by the King
to come on Land, he excused It, affirming, He was to advise concerning their
own Borders (...) Home, which were left unprovided. But while they were
arguing, almost 300 Soldiers, under the Conduct of Campsa^^ making use of the
Night, and the Ebb of the Sea, with great silence marching by Land, broke
through the Trenches into the Castle, giving rather an Example of Courage, than
any other help to the Besieged; for many of them, the Forts lying open to the
Assailants, were killed, together with the Dutch Soldiers, at their very
entrance, while the rest of the French, being altogether unaccustomed and unfit
so; War, by an inconsiderate Sally, caused the Ruin both of themselves and
there is; at which time the Governor himself was slain: About 60 Hollanders
valiantly defending themselves from the Topt of Houses, obtained a Grant to be
sent away safe. The presence of the Archduke caused the Victory to be
moderately used, who having gained Calais, without the loss of many of (...)
men and being a Town in the uttermost Borders of France augmenting and
strengthening with good Works, he subjected it to the Government of Flanders,
the Speech of which Province was agreeable to the same. By the Fame of this
Victory Arde, a Town lying not far off within the Land, (and formerly a stop to
the English invading that Country) soon yielded it self to the power of
Albertus; by which mean^ there was a passage this way opened into France, with
the same Felicity to him, as it was much to the blame of the Enemies, that they
had oppressed them e're they were aware: Two Thousand Soldiers marched out of
this Town, which was indifferently well Fortified, having honorable. Terms,
though dishonourably obtained; for they did not hold out so long, as to endure
one Assault, being frighted with the dennutiation of Death, if they forthwith
did not surrender.

While these Things were doing, at last Fayer, being subdued by Famine, King
Henry distributed his Army into all places about, and near to, Calais, lest any
of the weaker Cities' who were surprised with great fear, should make a
defection to the Conqueror: whom the Flandrians entreated, (being now
compelled to depart out of France, by want of all necessaries) promising to
assist him with great Sums of Money, if he would besiege Ostend, and restore it
to them, that Town only being wanting upon all that Coast: And Prince Maurice
fearing the same, went himself to view it, and took care at his departure, that
they at present be supplied with Soldiers enough, and afterward should be
stored with Victuals, and all other Things, both for maintaining their Works,
and for War; which the Scouts and Spies relating; as also, that the Sea came up
to the very Town, with a commodious Haven, and that all backward was very
dangerous, being full of Elluaries: So that Siege was put off, left being
rashly begun, it should wound and lacerate the Fame of his first Successes. Yet
because, besides the Auxiliaries sent to France, a great part of the Holland
Soldiers was swallowed in the English Fleet, Peace was by them condemned,
though it mainly was contested by the Requests of the Cities, and the Counsels
of the Captains; whither they should carry the War. But while the Dukes Forces
were employed in France, Prince Maurice his Horse wasted all the utmost Skirts
of Brabant, and the Netherlanders with Fire and Sword, and took Echt^^^ach, a
Town in Lutzenburg; and as soon as those Retreated into Flanders, the French
likewise fell in there. Thus had each of them continually a troublesome Enemy at
his Back or Side; Fusa's and Albertus Troops attending each others motions, as
Fortune or Opportunity presented occasions. And certainly, this time, by much
Exercise, and the Care of the Commanders, gave to the Hollander's established
Horse, not only an Example of being mo^e active and vigilant to the greatest
Attempts, but also instructed them better, and reduced them to a more settled
Discipline. For the Spanish Brigades were even enclosed and unfit for Service,
when, on the other side, all the Enemies Country lay open to the Nassania
Horse, as a fit Object for their Spoil. The Archduke, when he thought fit to
march out, that he might not leave any thing dangerous, or suspectfull to him
behind, removed from T^^mont all the Italians, first giving them their Pay;
then be^ing all his Hopes and Counsels against Hulst, because it seemed the
reducing thereof would quiet Flanders, and be of no small advantage also to
Brabant. It is a Town of no strength, by reason of the Antiquity of its
Building, whereof Prince Maurice being Conqueror, and having a long time
designed to change and alter the round fashion of the Walls, he had added, in
the interim, some Fortifications to the new made Trench. Soon after the
Zelanders, undertaking the defense, and keeping thereof, erecting some Forts
about the adjacent Fields, did seem rather to have taken Counsel for preserving
the Country, than the Town: The chief strength of the place is a River arising
not far off, which being helped forward by Art, that it might, so passing
further, fall into the Hont, was also brought back into the Scheldt; for, that
same River, by both Names, being full of Meanders, washes all the back-part of
the Territory of Hulst: By which means, it is on every side inaccessible, as is
an Island; and being in^pendent on both Battles, daily sent forth Soldiers to
plunder and wast the Land of Wase, and the Province of Brabant: Besides, they
could cut their Sea-Banks, to let in the Water upon their Enemies; and then
they that were within the River were liable to Slaughter by the Darts and Shot
of the Town. During the several Governments of Ernestus and Fontayn, the
Flandrians had erected two Castles, to stop their Excursions: The United States
had raised more for the Defense of the Bank. Two of these were annexed to the
Town, by an excurrent Rampire or Breast-Work; which Passage, as we has the
mutual assistance of each to the other, was hidden by the Ground which lay open
between them. These were not both of an equal strength, for that which was
called Nassau Fort, was the stronger, being opposite to the Hont, because it
served as a safeguard for the bringing Recruits, either from Axele, or the
Isles of Zeland.

They that were sent by Albertus to view the place, being testified with these
Difficulties, advised quite contrary to what was before resolved on: For how
was it possible (say they) to carry over naked Soldiers, a great quantity of
Provisions, and a Train of Artillery, which can but move slowly, while those
Threatening Forts stand there to resist, and especially a great Fleet of the
Enemies lying in the Scheldt, into the very middle whereof, their lesser
Vessels will penetrate. Certainly, it was both a difficult and doubtful
Attempt, not did the rest seem to have any thing more of Expedition, for the
Soll was full of Marshes, the Enemy active and vigilant, and the Siege would
be to little purpose, in regard of their free passage with shipping: Nor had
they any better hopes to gain the same by Assault, for that the Town would be
continually supplied with found and fresh men: Besides all this; the King of
France, having taken many of his Rebels into Mercy, it was to be feared, he
would venture into all vacant places with greater Force: Nor indeed could it be
accounted an Honorable Action, to attaque Hulst through so many Hazards.

But Claudius Barlot, a Netherlander, and the most earnest of all the Colonels,
rising up, desired he might have the carrying over those Regiments, against
which the Spanish Officers had spoken: That the rest of their Arguments were
filled with nothing but vain fear, whereas they ought, to expect some good
success, to wait upon their courage, and hope for an opportunity, either from
the error or fear of the Enemy; That the vicissitudos of War should be brought
to a stay, if equal Counsels should be found on both sides, and a like valor
in every one: At present, the matter being dissembled to most, but some few,
that they might the better dr^w the Enemy into a Condition of Security, whom to
remove one of the suspected places, was the chief work: the design ^^^ed not
its effect; For Rones, by making a Bridge over the Scheldt, was commanded to
march with some Ensign into Brabant, merely to affright them of Berghen or
Breda, whereby he compelled Prince Maurice, leaving a Garrison at Hulst,
whereof Count Solmes was Governor, to follow him diligently with the rest of
his Bands.

Then certainly, if ever at any time, were the Forces of the United Provinces
small because for the avoiding too great charges, they were contented only to
maintain their own Borders; but this year made them sensible of the folly of
such kind of Resolves, they having therein suffered so many losses, and
undergone so vast expenc^s: Part of their Soldiers were by agreement aboard
the English Fleet; the other part was gone into France, to relieve Cambray, and
whit remained, was almost taken up by their Garrisons; the German Soldiers of
late being dismissed, and no new Regiments yet raised in their stead; Prince
Maurice had scarce two thousand, wherewith to follow and observe the uncertain
motions of the Enemy; But for supply thereof, the Soldiers out of France being
eighteen Companies, were recalled, and soon came; In the interim, Barlot (with
whom was present Prist in hope of the future Government of the Town) commanded
some little Boats, which he caused to be brought from the next Castle in
Flanders, through the ditches, in the night to be put into the Channel of the
River; Barlotts Walloon, and Teslines German Regiments, being about fifteen
hundred, of rather more, laden with their Arms, and some few days Provisions,
followed them with slippery steps, the place consisting of a soft Clay, mingled
with water. At last, being gotten aboard (for there were no Fords) they had a
safe passage, wrought by their own silence, and the carelessness of the Holland
Seamen, who as they dreaded no danger, so the negligent and sloathful Watch,
never offered to hinder, or stop with their Ship-Boats, which was easy to be
done, the Enemy, while he was upon the Water; It was in vain to shoot or throw
Darts in this darkness of the night, nor did the Guards get into the Town in
time, for there being a little Fortification at the Bank, which thirty
Soldiers were commanded to keep, as there was Reason, they, out of a rash
bra^ado, going out thence, and being killed, furnished the Enemy; then wanting
Engines, and a place of safety and retreat, with both; suddenly after followed
a Fight, but it happening in the night, proved more confused, neither party
being able to know which were Friends or Enemies, yet the Germans, at the very
first brunt, their Colonel Tescline being killed, who came along with Barlotte,
turned their backs, and being in vain withheld, ran into the increasing Waters
(for it then flowed) and there met a cowardly and obscure death. But Barlotte
with his men, by much labor and valor, restored their Fortune, encouraging
them to Honor with his words, and the Assaylants being compelled to return
into the Town, both parts reported the number of the slain, to be greater than
it was, each affirming themselves Conquerours; Count Solmes, because he had
taken some Colors, and they, because they had some Prisoners: Some Soldiers,
which Barlotte had left beyond the River, to assist and be as a supply to the
Germans, being hired to swim over, were rewarded with the spoils of such as
were slain; Then was it, if any things lying nigh was, in that sudden and
nocturnal attempt, possessed by the Enemy, that it happened (for within, there
ra^ to and fro cross Banks, to prevent the over-flowings of the Rivers, in the
same manner, as Prince Maurice had commanded them to be kept.)

These things, as soon as they were noysed through Brabant, both the Commanders
by diverse marches, tend to one and the same place.

The Prince, that he might drive out of the Isle this increasing Company; the
other, least those few who had entered, should be destroyed, either by the
multitude of the Enemies Forces, or by Famine; for they had no more Provisions,
than what they carried upon their shoulders, there being no passage for Carts
or Wagons: But Prince Maurice labored in vain, to recover the lost places,
because Ro^es had brought thither five Regiments from beyond the Scheldt, to
wit, the Neopolitan, Walloon, and three Spanish Regiments, but not without
great danger and some loss; with the rest of the Army, Albertus himself filled
the further Banks: Prince Maurice remained at Cruning, in the utmost Borders of
Zeland, sending from thence into the Town, as many Soldiers as he could
possible; for the Zelanders earnestly conjured their Allies, that they would
not be neglectful of them, against whom, both a valiant and victorious Army was
coming, and would lie upon them with all their force, wasting and spoiling
their Country, although they would have all Provisions from Gaunt, which is
close at hand, and Antwerp not far off.

Therefore, Soldiers were both raised and encouraged in the Cities beyond the
Rhine, and in other places where hitherto they had been feared. The Guard of
the Borders w^ committed to some fresh water Soldiers lately raised, who
besides their Oath taken as Soldiers, were further obliged by half pay.
Besides, it was decreed, that there should be Drums beat up in England, for the
raising two thousand good Soldiers, the Queen being beseeched, that she would
by her Authority, be contributary to their Assistance in this great necessity.
But the King of France sought to for the same purpose, that he would lay hold
of this opportunity against his careless Enemy, and make some speedy incursions
into his Territories, was backward in granting their Request, from some designs
of peace, whereof he now began to hope.

In the mean time, the Spanish brought in by one side, and the Hollanders Horse
by the other, filled the whole Country about Hulst, with sudden fear and
slaughter: The Hollanders had the greater strength, and as often as the water
overflowed the Fields, they passed backward and forward with their small
Vessels unmolested. Then between the Town and the Castle adjoining to the Town,
which looks toward the Scheldt, and so to the Enemy, slighting their
Fortifications, they laid themselves open, by which mock or scorn, the Enemies
being provoked, as they pursued them seeming to fly, were cruelly shattered,
and beaten by the Townsmens shot, and also a more compact and well ordered
Sally: It was manifest, that these things happened for want of Cannon; without
which no good could be done; and there was no small difficulty in the wafting
them over the River: the more marishy places were by little and little, made
firm with Faggots, and other blushwood.

In the Estuary, several Ships were bound, and tied one to another so strongly,
that they were as good as a Bridge, and at the furthest part of the Bank,
served the Kings Forces like a Sconce, framed into the shape of a half Moon;
from hence the great Artillery battered-both the Town and Castle. But at that
time there were two, which had been brought at the first coming, into the very
Island, and as any of the rest were brought over, they were planted immediately
against the Enemy. Afterward, many others were brought thither, for security
of the former, and Rouce attempted to take from the Hulstians a Fort, which was
(as we said) to secure their Provisions) and to cut off the use of the River
from the Town, yet make it advantageous to themselves, which after it had not
succeeded by several mean assaults, at length, with the Thunder of Cannons, and
the noise of Trumpets and Drums, whereby (as he openly confessed) he intended
to strike at the same time, terror into the Enemies, and infuse Courage into
his own men, at midnight, he commanded the Italians to go and break through the
middle bank, possessed by the Enemy, which led from the Castle to the City. The
darkness of the night was spent in wounds and slaughters, with a confused
noise, while the doubtful strokes fall among the Crowd, and there is no
possibility to foresee or avoid them.

In the morning, the Garrison was driven out; And in this interim, the Germans
of the same side, that they might by policy assist them in the assault, with
great labor passing through the marishy and unguarded places, had won the
outer Trench of the Castle, and cutting down the Palizadoes, fell upon the
Watch, and killed them, not thinking of any danger from abroad: Thus keeping
one part from the relief of the other, he became Conqueror of both, and all
that day battered the Castle with his Cannon, which as it was principally
strengthened with a Bank of moist plashy Earth, so was it easily beaten down;
the Besieged therein, were no less than eight hundred, yet although the breach
was not made wide enough, and they were sensible of no force near to assault
them, feared nevertheless, the Bridge taken by the Enemy, and many other
doubtful and unseasonable events of chance, but chiefly, by the commixture of
those, who flying from the Battle in the night, and mingled themselves among
them, and would not suffer one among them to remain honest and just: And
throwing down their Arms, with horrible clamours and threats, and force against
their Commanders, if they could not consent forthwith to surrender. And just as
the Count Solmes was bringing to them Relief, they marched out late in the
Evening, being derided by their Enemies, and according to the merits of their
cowardice, punished by their Commanders in chief; so highly oftentimes are the
manners and Customs of an Age corrupted, that the remedies of evils are more to
be feared, than the evils themselves.

The Spaniard having thus sooner, nay beyond his hope, obtained so easy an
entrance against all stops, drained all the ground near the Trench, and from
thence, what with Stratagems, and what with force, he sorely battered all the
Fortifications encompassed with the Trench: and also by the help of the Fort,
could now secure the River, draw his Forces round the Town, and take order for
encamping them: and which was as much as all this, by reason hereof, the prices
of all things were abated, which the difficulty of transporting before, had
made so scarce, that the Soldiers were much pinched with hunger.

The Besieged labored, and earnestly strove, by breaking down some water, to
have let in an inundation upon their Enemies, but they found means to prevent
the same, and turned all those Banks which they had gotten from the Townsmen,
to serve against them for present use: But they bending their whole study to
procure eruption of the Water, made a Cave under their Walls, whereby they
might drown them unawares; and after much slaughter, some Ensigns and Prisoners
were taken, without harm to the Assaylants, while they took the Soldiers,
either idle in their Quarters, or sometimes at play at Dice, which of late is
become the passe-time of Military retirements and leisure; or, if they were
forewarned by the Sallyers outcries, that a greater number came out, they
would shun the danger, either by fighting at distance, and waveringly, or else
by a lingering and flow retreat. The Cannon aid the greatest damage, together
with Grenades; for against all persons that came toward the City, there were
empty Baskets set out for blindes, as well to hinder their sight, as to keep
off their Darts; notwithstanding all which, not only they that were fain to
expose themselves to danger in their continual attendance upon the batteries,
were slain, but also not a few of the Commanders were in like manner killed;
and among these, Rones, by whose advice all the noble actions of the Spaniards,
achieved in France, were managed, but that both the Archduke Albertus,
Fontayne, and the Duke of Parma, took the glory thereof to themselves, by
commanding the same things,

He was by Nation a Lorrayner, and of a Noble Family, who, from the beginning
of the French Commotions, followed the Party and Fortune of Francis de Valois.
Afterward, the Duke of Guise, observing him to be a man no less subtly
politic, than truly valiant, and one that would not think any thing dishonest
that was profitable, by great Gifts and Bounty made him his own. In these last
years, he had underhand discovered many of the Spanish Counsels to King Henry,
as if his Affection banded toward him but, in truth, that he might hide his
greater Aims: The Office of Camp-Master-General, being void by his Death, was
bestowed upon Herma^ Count Heremberg. But to proceed, The Townsmen were by
their own streights compelled to fight, the Banks and Hills round about
beholding them with a threatening Aspect, for Varas being General of the
Ordnance under the Duke, had armed all those places with Cannon.

Thus there was nothing covered, but their filthy biding places under Ground,
or which lay under the Covert of the lofty Rampire: Count Solmes being wounded
with a Shot in the Thigh, performed the Duties of his Command by Messengers,
and Conference with the Colonels: And Prince Maurice himself, from the
Neighboring Shore, had an Eye toward all Things; so as whoever were wounded,
or unable to bear Arms, being near fifty every day, were taken out of the Town,
and placed in Hospitals, in the several adjacent Cities and Islands: Piron also
a Colonel of Zealand, by continual labor, and studious vigilance, weakened
and fallen sick, was licensed to depart. Supplies, and all other Things
necessary for War or Provisions, were brought thither also from the same place
first by the Care of Ernestus of Nassau, and afterward by Captain Dorpius: And
the Garrison, by little and little, increased, till there were in the Town 36
Companies, and in Nassau's Fort 6 Companies: Besides, such plenty of Corn, that
when they could not conveniently keep it within the Town, part of it was laid
up in the Ships: But this was hardly to be endured by the Enemy, that Ships
should so frequently pass to and fro, as in Trade, while he lay there in Siege:
And therefore against the Port, they raised several long Works, sometimes
extending one way, anon turning another way, that so they might from thence
infest the Haven with their Artillery; but for the most part in vain: For by
the interposition of the Marshes, and long distance of place, the Shot was
spent, before it came to the place, which it was intended to batter: And
besides, the Enemy lay within reach of the Shot from Nassau Fort. And the
flowing of the Sea, growing more violent, proved to them both an hindrance and
damage. From thence, the Italians, under the Leading of the Marquess of
Trevigiana, attaqued the Fortification, which Count Solms had lately made
before the Gate of the Town, looking toward the Camp: First, they begun with
plain and open force of Pioneers; but as soon as appearing out of the Trench,
they found themselves galled with Shot, presently raising two Breast Works,
they enclosed their Flanks, and then began to shoot furiously, and the Italians
soon after, climbing up to the very bottom of the Fortification, were thrown
down in Fight; from whence again rising, by the Valor of the Zelanders, thick
showrs of Bullets, and casting of Wildfire, they were totally put to flight.
They had joined to them some other Aids of other Nations, which stood every one
separated by themselves, that so their Valor might be the better discerned.
Nay, and a proper Band of Volunteers was commanded to go forward, with not
only Military Ensigns displayed before them; but such as were wont to be used
at Processions, and Solemn Times of Prayer appointed by the Church.

This was an ordinary thing with the Spaniards of old, as often as they had War
against any Profane or Barbarous Enemy; and because it is a Nation much
addicted to the Ceremonies of Religion, there is no surer way can be devised to
encourage them. On the other side, the several Regiments by turns, took care of
the Guards, and the whole multitude of Towns-people became subservient to the
War, bringing Darts to the Soldiers, and Faggots, Firebrarnds, and other
Materials, both for Offense and Defense. Thus for three days, one after
another, continued a sharp Fight, but with the greatest slaughter of the
Assailants; for as the Soldiers of the first Rank, by reason of their heavy
Armor, were like a Wall to the rest, their Arms not being penetrable by Shot,
so if they were kept nigh at hand, for the avoiding of stroke, by their
standing still, they hindered both themselves and others. At last, they fell
from Force to Stratagems; the one, beginning to undermine; the other, to
countermine; so as the Damage yet fell equally: There were some for the
Assailants, who, partly by the plainness of the overturned Ground in one part,
and partly by the rising thereof in another, were helped by the Slaughters both
of their Friends and Enemies: But then did Death appear most terrible, when the
Ground, made uneven by daily Graves, and slippery with Blood, caused such as
staggered thereon, that they could neither avoid to tread upon the sprawling
Limbs of their Fellow Soldiers, nor keep themselves from being annoyed, though
in the heat of Fury, by their dying spurns. Notwithstanding all which, the
increasing Enemy drove the Defendants to Extremity; and lest, being the less
followed, they might at once break through the Bulwark, which already began to
lie open by Breaches, made with continual Battery, there was raised more
inwardly, by the Providential Care of Count Solms, a new Work in form of a
Half Moon, and with a deep Trench, whither was drawn together, a great strength
of Soldiers to make resistance: Neither did the Spaniard keep long the use of
that Fortification, which they had obtained with so much Labor and Blood. For
whatever remained thereof, the Besieged threw down by the force of Gunpowder
from a Mine; and besides, in the void place, which lay between that and the
Rampire, they had made a little lurking Hole, from whose obscure mouth they
shot against the Enemy, who hardly detecting the fraud, yet at last when
discovered, they stopped it up, from doing further mischief; but when the
Besiegers had stopped it up behind also first throwing fire therein, the
repressed force thereof, at length burst out with ^^^th violence, that it
overwhelmed with Earth diverse of the Enemies: In the interim, they ceased not
to drain all the rest of the Water out of the Trench, and to batter the
Rampire, with so much the more violence, because the breaches of the Walls were
sustained by Palizadoes, decaying toward the bottom, and wherever at any time
the Works grew defective, the Townsmen brought thither Faggots, Wood and other
heaps of things to amend of stop up the same: Neither was the Assaylants labor
small against the mayn Bullwark, that reached to the ravelin at the Haven,
which they began to batter without success; for the Gunpowder destined to that
Work, being by chance fired, destroyed many of the bystanders, with so much
Thunder and terror, that it was heard beyond the Sea of Middleburg: At which
time, either by reason of this chance, or else being otherwise wearied, the
Besiegers fury beginning somewhat to abate, a select party out of several
Companies of Hollanders, to the number of six hundred, at open noonday, that
being the time of the Waters great ebb, passed over the River, partly with
Boats, and partly by the Fords, and attained the parts beyond the River, and
then so suddenly slying into diverse places, that they slew the Spaniards even
within the Trenches, wherein they lay fortified.

The great Guns that were planted against them, as they sailed over the River,
they clogged, because they could not bring them away, and presently after so
beat down, and worsted several Troops of Horse, and eight hundred Foot, that
came to relieve their Fellows, or revenge their deaths, that they returned with
very great Honor, and little or no damage.

And after this, they made from other parts of the Town, many succesful
Sallies: yet for all there things, the Spaniard continued to batter the Walls,
and in one place had made a breach in the Bulwark, where there was not a more
inward Work, though Prince Maurice had commanded one to be made there, the
neglect whereof was excused by them that were guilty of it, by the Townsmens
poverty, and Soldiers inability to undergo so many and great labors at once.

Albertus, according to the Custom of War, sent another Summons to the Town,
being in this Condition, denouncing against them great threats, unless they
would surrender. Whereto receiving a courageous Answer, he yet durst not begin
a new Assault, because in the former Skirmishes, he had lost above two thousand
men; among whom, fell many Captains, and other Commanders, with the most
vallant men, while they drew the Soldiers to prolong the Fight by their
Example, striving to win to themselves, favor and Reputation with the new
Governor; and also an incredible number of sick and wounded men, were
scattered in the Fields, for the Neighboring Cities would not entertain them,
the horribleness of which Spectacle, made a mixture together of fear and pity.
Therefore he endeavors to undermine the Rampire and Bulwark, but without any
certain hope, so long as they daily saw fresh men brought into the Town; but
Fortune soon after ridded them of this trouble; for some did advise, suspecting
the lying still of so furious and active an Enemy, that they should endeavor
to get from the Besieged, some Islands and Fords, whereby they might command
the River and Ships; Others, that Ambushes should be laid to break into the
City from the Trenches, whereby not only the Front as heretofore, but the
backside also should be rendered unsafe; or else to give sudden Assaults upon
the breaches: Thus fear inventing many things, first conceived in the breast of
one, is afterward made public by voice and consent of others: whereupon, some
who were eloquent presently said, that to begin to extol the Enemies Forces
and to undervalue their own, which had before in those days slighted their
greatest Valor, was one of the greatest evils that could be: Hereupon, they
go to Count Solmes, where at a frequent Consultation (and there were some who
blamed that very thing, that he had not advised with them, or some choice men)
a Captain persuading a Surrender used these, or the like words.

[If the greatest documents of Virtue, had not been published for this place, I
my self should yet doubt, whether we could walk in is more ready way to Honor:
That fame is unjust, which will not be satisfied; How often have we sustained
the shock of the Enemies fury powered out upon us? how often have we voluntarily
fallen upon them? But alas, instead of being diminished, he rather increases
by the slaughters we make of him. We cannot receive so great Supplies as will
answer the losses we suffer in being victorious; What have we gotten by this
whole Months fighting, but the beating down of our Fortifications about the
Town, and to devide our void works with the Enemy, and all our wast ground is
taken up by making new defenses within the former: What do we stay for
therefore? Do you look for an Army to come, to drive the Enemy out of their
Trenches and Leaguer, whom they could not keep off? Far be from you such a vain
expectation: for France, and the furthest parts of the World, withhold our
hopes; We are here fifteen hundred, who are daily called out to fight, the rest
being either dead or wounded: We are besieged with twenty thousand, with whose
very Arms we may be overwhelmed: What should I mention, the Ambushes and
Snares hidden under ground, from which, no Virtue nor Valor can be safe; but
we must perish without either defense or revenge; Truly we have been instructed
by our Ancestors, that a valiant man will never slight apparent and visible
dangers, nor do rash persons merit to be praised as wise, while they seek a
certain, but not an honorable grave; But now there is a far greater difference
between us and our Enemies: We, furnished only with a few Companies, think by
the cheerfulness of our Obedience, to supply the defects of our number. They
Powerful, exceeding Wealthy, prodigal of their Soldiers lives esteeming it
costs but lietle, that is bought only with blood. And who would desire to have
him become an Enemy, who so lavishly wastes his Friends? But miserable is the
poor Soldier, who having so often with contempt, even looked death in the face,
if yet at last he should not deserve to live; Rather let us take heed for the
benefit of our Country, least while we defend a small part so stiffly, the rest
be left open to the same fury. Let him then be Superior, whom we cannot but
acknowledge more potent. Let him have the ground so sated with the blood of his
followers: They will have no great cause to boast of this Victory, which has
robbed us of so many famous Leaders, and such a multitude of common Soldiers.]

This accurate defense of fear, did not work upon all one Matthias Helly, being
the chief of the resisters, cried out; [This is altogether anew mischief of
War, to desert the Works before they are assaulted, and to entreat a safe
passage from the Enemy, out of that place, from whence yet they were able to
make good their defense, rather let some time be taken for deliberation in
which interim, they might keep out the Enemy, by repairing their Works, or else
by force and Sallies beat him off valiantly, until they could receive further
advice and directions from Prince Maurice and the States, the Prince lying but
in the next Island, full of care for the Town, not expecting from thence any
such news.]

For all this, safety was preferred by all the valiant men, and Count Solmes,
who a little before had promised the Prince, to hold the Town to the utmost
extremity, and was encouraged by Letters, and Promises from the States to the
same purpose, now fearing the Soldiers rashness, or else as it is
experimentally observed, that generous Valor, which in Field-Fights is
undanted, and not Conquerable, is not able in a Siege to endure the toyls and
miseries of War, thought it fit to hasten the Surrender, left the Condition and
State of Affairs within the Town, should be discovered by the Treachery of any
Renegadoes. They themselves in a manner, prescribed their own terms of
delivery; which Albertus consented to with the greater joy, by how much it came
so unexpectedly, and beyond his hopes.

About the end of August, when the Siege had devoured no less than threescore
Officers, and near five thousand Soldiers, Hulst was delivered to Albertus,
together with Nassau Fort, not so much as defaced in the least manner, during
the whole Siege; the rest of the Fortifications upon that Coast, the Garrison
Soldiers that were therein, when they sled, did overthrow and destroy. The
Hollanders took very heinously the loss of this Town, by which they had
compelled the Province of Flanders, to bear a part of their burdens, in paying
them Tribute. Besides, they were possessed with great fear of the victorious
Army, for that the greatest part of the year yet remained fit for Service; and
what City would Hand out against them, if the touching of their Works by the
Enemy, were enough to fright them into a Surrender, and if three thousand men
durst not put off, and delay the Enemy by skirmishing and fighting? The
multitude hereupon, murmured cruelly against Count Solmes, as become effeminate
with the carasses and amors of his Lady, and as if they would be pleased, to
have one guilty person sacrificed to the public Calamities. Nor did the
Zelanders defer to remove him from the Command of their Regiments, being now ^^
pleased with him, because he had of late behaved himself impetiously among
them: professing they wanted his help no further, and dissembling the rest of
their anger. But he being conscious to himself, answered the same both by word
and writing, as he heard thereof, excusing his actions by necessity: so that he
obtained from the confederate States, a new Regiment, they of Zeland not
opposing the same.

At which time he protested, that having been in the War for the Hollanders,
during the space of thirteen years, he had always resolved, for the public
good, to pardon all the injuries he could receive from any particular persons.

The Cardinal Albert was received with extraordinary applause of all his
followers, because the Austrian Family was not barren of Valor and Virtue, and
that he being the restorer of Flanders and the French limits, after seven
years, had then perfected their returned felicity with a treble Victory, and
once more made their good Fortune permanent to them. Thus at present, they
showed nothing but content and joy, but the future did not continue to them the
same hopes.

The War thus speedily ended, when the consumed Soldiery on both sides, and
the exhausted Treasury should have given rest to the remainder of the year: he
cast both his mind and eyes to the enlarging his bounds otherwise: sending
Francisco Mendoza to the Emperor his Brother, to desire of him many things in
the Kings Name; As, [ That Besancos claiming liberty to it self, under the
Reverence due to the German Empire, might be restored to that Burgundy which is
subject is the Spaniards. That the Citizens of Aquisgrave, might be compelled
to submit to the Decree, which commanded the Magistrates to receive the
Catholic Religion, and from thenceforth to forbid all Novel Rites of Religion.
That as to the Ansiatike Cities, He would not suffer the English unpunished, to
infest the Sea by Pyracy. And that the Spaniard, for the listing and raising of
Soldiers in Germany, might be assisted by public Authority, which hitherto
had been allowed but by permission.]

But the chief hopes of the Spaniard were removed a great distance into the
Duchy of Cleves and Juliers, where the Wife of the mad Duke, being struck
suddenly dead, had with new jealousies and suspicions, inflamed the old
discords.

The Counselors retained the Government, against the wills of most of the
Native Noblemen, enjoying the benefit of their false report, that the Duke, was
recovered: These, because they ordained for the Duke, another Wife of the
Family of Lorraign, were believed to have wished and plotted the death of the
former, and now while the Spanish Affairs prospered, arrived to that pitch of
pride, that they commanded the Procurators of the Marquess of Brandenburg, and
the Palatine of Newburg, to depart out of their Territories; and besides, they
sent to the United States, with great demanding, if they expected ought from
them.

The States knowing their own imbecility, and their Enemies strength, modestly
answered, that they were Friends, both to the Marquess of Brandenburg, and the
Palatine of Newburg; yet nevertheless, they would observe peace with them, so
long as they remained within the rights of Peace; yet wished them to be
advised, lest they fetched foreign Forces out of Germany, to their great
damage: Soon after, they accused and prepared to degrade from his Honor Count
Brugny, and several others of the Protestants, as guilty of a Plot against
them: And at the same time, sent to excuse themselves to Albertus, that they
were compelled to dissemble many things, and to defer them until more
seasonable and happy opportunities: And Mendoza had brought it to pass, that
these men's Authority was confirmed by the Emperors Decree; And when they
requested more, in answer whereto the Emperor declared, that He himself feared
to give offense to the Protestants, whose Aid and Assistance would be very
necessary for him in his War against the Turks; Mendoza replied, that remote
Wars ought so to be minded, that in the mean while, nearer injuries should not
be tolerated. And now the Spaniard admits a discourse of Peace, being very
acceptable to Germany, though without any Reason, or hope from himself; And
Albertus wrote to King Philip to that purpose.

Whereupon the Emperor sent to the States a Nobleman, to require safe Conduct
for some Ambassadors that were to come thither; which when they excused, the
Spaniards were, from their own words, charged with the Envy of the refused
Peace; yet did Albertus keep the people obedient to him (...) whit the less, by
the hope of Settlement.

While all these Accidents happen in and about the Netherlands, in the interim,
a Fleet of English and Hollander (which I spoke of before) passed up and down
the Spanish Seas victorious: The cause of sending it was, because it appeared
to the Queen, that the Spaniards had gathered together a great Navy, wherewith
he intended to take some Pole in France, or near thereabout. Nor were the
Threats vented ^ years before quite forgotten; and that the Earl of Tyrone then
Rebelling in Ireland, was greatly assisted and encouraged with the hope of
Spanish Supplies: And thereupon it was thought very necessary, because both the
charge and occasion offered it self, to divert those Forces raised and prepared
for Defense of her Borders against he procra^inating Enemy. In this Fleet there
were drawn together 16 of the Queens great Ships, and 40 lesser Ships, all fit
for War; whereto were added 50 more for carrying Soldiers, and transporting
Provisions: Reb^^ Earl of Essex was made General of all the Landforces, a
person in great favor with the Queen, for the Honor of his Age.

The Charge of the Fleet was committed to the Lord Charles Howard, the Admiral
thereof; both of them had equal power and authority; which Thing has ever been
observed prejudicial to Enterprises of that Nature, and to have damnified them,
and hindered their Success. They were both of very unsuitable Dispositions;
Essex, in a Youthful Heat of Blood, seeking to get to himself both the Honor
and Name of Chief Captain, was wont to force the Queen into Arms, under the
Notion of Danger; though she her self, as a Woman, endeavored to avoid
Expenses: And, that the Fleet might the more honorably proceed, he expended
therein no small matter of his own Estate; himself showing the way to his
Relations and Familiars, that they might follow his Example. Howard being a
person more wary of managing Affairs, by reason of his Age, tended to the
contrary, and endeavored by all means he could, to delay the going out of the
Fleet: And when it was ready, he had persuaded the Queen, that she would
admonish Essex by her Letters, that he would desist from that dangerous
Undertaking and that she would re-imburse him what he had laid out. But he
because he was not plainly forbidden, answered, That he would proceed in his
Voyage, and doubted not his good Fortune. Nor did he refuse his Emulator, to be
equal with him in Command, knowing, that his own Authority was greater with the
Seamen; and that he, upon any Miscarriage, should be less blamed where all
Things were done with a Companion. And besides, under pretense of Honor, he
had won as many Noblemen as he could to go with him, who, he knew, had no
kindness for him; lest, in his absence, they should do him greater damage at
home. There were added to both of them as Counselors, several great Soldiers,
and no Order should be effectual, but what was approved by the consent of the
greater part of them. The Queen's principal Care was, That they should fall
upon the Spanish Fleet, that was set out against England or Ireland, and
destroy whatever they met to that intent. Moreover, And if they could intercept
the Ships coming from the Indies, or elsewhere, the Prey therein taken should
be the Reward of their well-deservings.

The Ships set out by the Hollanders, and the rest of the League were in number
24. the greatest part of which were well fitted and prepared for War; the
Admiral whereof was John Duvenvord Warmondt, to whom, next to the Prince, the
chief Command, in Sea-Affairs, through Holland was committed. Also, there were
some selected men out of the English Regiments, then in Pay in the
Low Countries, sent aboard, which indeed were the strength of the Fleet, and a
Pattern to the Fresh Water Soldiers. And the States willingly consented to it,
that they might by such a Friendly Office, please the incensed Queen, although
they feared the Evils. which afterward happened, upon their want of Money. Lewis
of Nassau, the Son of Jehu and Cozen-German to Philip and Ernestus, going with
those Soldiers, laid before them famous Rudiments of Virtue and Valor.

The 23 day of June, the great Commanders determined early to depart from
Plymouth, with Order, To meddle or sight with none but Spaniards, or People
subject to the Spaniards, or such as furnished them with Ships, Guns,
Soldiers, or Provisions; And that all other People might safely go about their
Affairs, whether they would follow the Fleet or depart to Sea; with promise of
Impunity, to all that would forsake them, and come over to the English.

All the hope and preparation of this Fleet, was rather to look after Prey,
than to fight; because being far from Home, far from any Assistance, among
their Enemies Countries, the danger of the Sea, and their Passage subject to
Storms and Tempests, no delay could be safe enough. Nor do old Chronicles alone
teach this, and the Portugal Voyage not long since undertaken, but the success
of the very former year in America, which fell so far short of expectation: And
therefore, those Things seemed rather to be put in Execution, which would, by
their sudden violence, in no small manner, terrify and break the Enemies
strength; and they were not resolved in what part to set upon them, a little
before they came to Cadiz. At length, by private Letters, all the Navy was
commanded to meet there: These Letters, close sealed and signed, the Captains
received, with this Order, The they should not open them, unless they were by
foul Weather separated from the Fleet.

This most noble City of Cadiz, from its very first Original (when many say it
was called Tartessus) and afterward a Colony of the Tyrians, was said to be
the furthest part of the World: Neither will it suffice to show, that it was
now far decayed from its ancient Opulency. The Scituarion thereof, with other
Things belonging to the same, has been described by many. At this day, it is
beholding to a Bridge, which they call Suaca, for making it no Island; for that
joyneth it to the Coast of Spain, separated there from only by a small Inlet
of the Sea: On which side, the Name of the Region testifies, that formerly the
Vandals inhabited there: Beyond is that Straight, where first the Ocean broke
in upon, and divided the Land: On this side is a convenient Bay, for the
Reception and Safety of Ships: And then, by chance, a great Fleet lay under the
Defenses of the Island, which was partly prepared for the American Voyage, and
partly furnished for War, which had not so much increased the difficulty for
the English to land, as it had their Expectations, to the hope of a most
plentiful and rich Booty. There were four Galeoons, two of Epidaurus, every one
of them carrying fifty Guns, or more, and near 700 men: Of the Kings own Ships
of War, there were 21. and as many Merchants Ships, which carried 20 Guns a
piece: Three Frigates, each of them beating 18 Guns, and laden with more for use
of the Fleet, that was at Lisbone, and other Ports of Spain; for this Fleet
here was only the Third Part of the Spanish Naval Force. There were then also
50 Sail of other Ships belonging to private persons, come both from Spain,
Italy, and other parts, which were either unarmed, or but weakly furnished: And
not far off from the City, lay 21 long Ships more. The Earl of Essex earnestly
desired to fall upon them, while they knew not what to do, and before their
fear should decay or grow less, lest he might give them time, either to take
counsel, or gather strength; which if he could have persuaded others to effect,
(and indeed the Hollanders were willing to have assisted him) they had then
gotten infinite Honor, together with an inestimable Booty.

But the Lord Admiral Howard was afraid to suffer in Ships committed to his
Charge, especially those of the Queens, which she had forbidden to be rashly
brought into danger, to come into that narrow Straight of Sea, which was full
of dangerous Shelves and Quicksands, because the Wind blew a little high.
Thus, by delaying the time, they lost their Opportunity. The next day, being
the first of July, the Ebb of the Sea hindered them, that they could not come
to fight. Upon the left hand, as you enter into that Straight, is the Royal
Port, so called; hither the Spanish Ships had withdrawn themselves, excepting
only the Galeoons, and Long Ships, which remained nearer to the City, where
the Shore runs out into Linga, which the Inhabitants call Punta^. But Sir
Francis Vere setting upon these with some lighter Vessels, and soon after the
Earl of Essex pressed forward, that they forced them to the Bridge Suaca, and
there an Engine being placed, they were lifted over, that so they might get
into the Straight, or escape into the Sea, that lies more inward from thence.
Essex and Howard, for 4 hours together, battered the Galeoons; and that the
more violently, for that the Flood of the Sea increasing had brought them
nearer; and it happened at this time, that a Holland Ship, by the negligence of
Captain Peter Henry, perishing in her own fire, and the Gunpowder she carried,
yielded to the Enemy a short cause of rejoicing for presently the Galeoons not
daring to stand out the fight, curting their Cables, fell upon the Sands, all
the Seamen escaping. Part were carried away, and part burned, either by
themselves, or their Enemies; at which time also one of the English ships was
burned. And this struck no small Terror into the Spaniards, that were wont to
confide in the great Bulk of their Ships; so as King Philip receiving News
hereof by a peculiar Messenger, presently sent to Naples, Genoa, and Sicily,
That they should immediately send what great Ships they had to the Relief of
Cadiz; And the Assistance also of the Knights of Malta was demanded: But the
French that were there in service, urged and insisted on the contrary. After
the Sea Fight, the Earl of Essex, the day now declining, landed his Soldiers
at Puntal without resistance; and the Holland Mariners having taken a Castle
that lay upon the Sea, set up their Ensign thereon. Others also were sent, to
break the Bridge Suaca, lest any Relief should come that way, which accordingly
they performed: All the Spanish Noblemen, that lived thereabouts, came to the
Defense of the City with 600 Foot, and as many Horse: Against whom was sent
Lewis of Nassau, with 400 Spear-men, and a Band of English Volunteers; nor was
the Fight long against them, being unaccustomed to Matters of War: At the first
Onset being routed, and flying to the City in no order; They were followed by
the Conquerours, who, while the Terror remained fresh, entered the City, part
over the Walls, and other part by the Gates, which they had how forced open.

The People of Cadiz, at the beginning trusted to the Tops of their Houses,
which were flat, from thence casting stones down upon the Enemy, as they were
scattered in the Streets, not a few at a time, but as it were by whole Loads.
Anon, when the Court and the Marketplace were possessed, here the Townsmen all
ran together into the Castle; there two Companies of Soldiers followed, but
staid not long in it, because they understood the Passage to them was shutting
up by the Bridge, which we before mentioned: Whereupon the chief persons of the
City being given for Pledges, they redeemed their Lives only for One Hundred
and Twenty Thousand Ducats: And these Pledges being soon after carried into
England, in regard the Queen would not suffer them to be Ransomed, being
provoked with new Injuries, dyed in Prison.

There was also a Treaty between the Earl of Essex, and one Peter Herrera, a
Spanish Merchant, for redeeming the Town and Ships from spoil, for the Sum of
Twenty Hundred Thousand Florens, whereto Essex was consenting, as discerning
the Prey would be imbezill'd and wasted by the Soldiers, and serve for the
future to no purpose; but the Duke of Medina Sidonia would not allow of that
Agreement, being the Supervisor of all the adjacent Coast, choosing rather, that
the King should be despoiled of his Fleet, and Ten Thousand Citizens outed of
their Estates and Fortunes, supposing that then to be Gain in the midst of
Damage, if nothing afterward accrewed to the Enemy: and therefore the Town was
spoiled, no small Damage alighting upon the Merchants of Holland thereby; many
of whom were by long Voyages intermingled with the Enemy, who esteemed this
Loss at Three Hundred Thousand pounds. And moreover, a Holland Ship, which came
over to the English, upon the Credit of Proclamation, had Fifty thousand
Florens taken from her, upon pretense, that it was the Enemies Money. And the
Americas Fleet, well laded with Merchandise, and consisting of Two and Thirty
Sail, was burned by the Spaniards, together with some Ships of War that were
for their Convoy. The Commodities there burned, amounted to no less value than
One Hundred Thousand Florens. Here the Commanders differed in Judgment, Essex
advising, to retain their Victory, while the greatness of the Report upon a
sudden, should strike such a Terror into all the Neighboring Ports, and even
in Sevil it self, that they might dig through the Streights; which being taken
away, the City it self would be made an Island; protesting, That he himself
would be ready, if the rest would go away, with four hundred Soldiers, either
to perform for his Country an eminent and noble piece of Service, or else, that
he would valiantly dye in the Enemies Country; and if they had no other Reward
for their stay, than the Preyes of Ships, passing through those Streights, that
they may go the next way into Africa and Europe, it would certainly amount to
an immense Revenue. But the Lord Admiral Howard, pretending to fear scarcity of
Provisions, hindered Essex his Glory, whose Honor and Wealth, gotten at the
taking of Cadiz, was never any where equalled with the like Naval Success.

And it was true, that the English going from Home with no great store of
Provisions, had yet profusely, and unadvisedly wasted, even in the City, what
would have sufficed them for many days. Neither would the Dutch Admiral War^ be
hearkened to, offering to the Fleet a Months Provision out of his own Ships;
and that, in the mean time, as the Wind favored, Provisions might be fetched,
either out of Italy or England; and he believed (as he said) That the People of
Carthage, who maintain War constantly against the Spaniards, would not refuse
to furnish them. Notwithstanding all which Advice, first setting the Town on
fire, they hoysted Sails: And although Essex did again demonstrate, That the
Plate-Fleet coming from America, was not far off, bringing no less than
threescore and ten hundred thousand Florens; and that there was another going
to the Indies, bring as it were a Booty prepared for them, if, next after
Cadiz, they would, which he conceived best to go to the Islands of Azores, not
far from the Line, (which the Netherlanders call the Isles of Flanders, because
they say they were of old inhabited by the People or their Country) all Succor
being intercepted, by the speedy Expedition and Report of the Matter. But other
Advices were preferred, which oftentimes under the Vizor of an over-careful
Providence and Foresight, do many times vitiate, if not ruin, the most noble
and valiant Undertakings. And the same Envy, as before, pretending danger of
the Ships, and want of Victuals, would not suffer him with the Fleet, to touch
upon any of the obvious parts of Spain: So that they passed by so great an open
Shore, and almost void of Towns, doing nothing but dishonorable Pyracies.

Thus it came to pass, that the spoil and burning of the City of Cadiz, could
not have been the least of his Actions, when the whole Land and Continent of
Spain, offered it self to be spoiled, if it had not been deferred, by the never
agreeing Minds of men equ^l in Authority; so that Fortune had in vain thus far
flattered the Earl of Essex. They praised also the Industry of the Dutchmen,
whom they were not willing to make use of; yet the Queen sent Letters to
Admiral W^mondt, wherein she gave him Thanks for his faithful and good Service:
Nor did it a little augment the Trouble of the Spaniards, for their decaying
Wealth, that their Fleet was burned at Cadiz; all the Tribute and Customs of
the following year were lost, his strength at Sea much diminished, about Twelve
Hundred great Guns lost and consumed; and, which was worst of all, it was made
known to the World, how weak they were at Home, that were so much feared
abroad. As an Addition to all which Losses, that old Evil of Usury, eat up all
the public Revenues: For Philip, Twenty years before, having much impaired his
Credit, while he was yet entangled in the Dutch War, not depressing his
ambitious Things, after the Kingdoms belonging to others, nor comparing his
infinite Disbursements, with his ordinary Income, by nourishing too covetous
Endeavors, wherein Fortune proved various, he brought upon himself Poverty.
For the greatest part of the King's Creditors suspecting his potency, only
some Merchants of Genoa and Germany, much improved their Money, by the hazard
of Commerce, and dealing with him, To these were given in Pledge as Security,
almost all the Customs, who reckoning all the Hazards, both of War and the Sea,
the incommodiousness of Transportation, and also infinite Use and Extortion for
their Money, did, for a long time, prevent the coming in of the Revenues to the
King's use.

Thus, his Treasury bring besieged, as it were by his Creditors, from whence he
should place and displace Officers, or at leastwise bear the Charge of his
Wars, nothing came to the King, until some Politicians of his Court, rather
careful for the present, than provident for the future, invented a way, though
not very honorable; which Advice, the King laying hold of, in the Month of
November, he set forth an Edict, wherein declaring, with many Circumlocutions,
the grievousness of the Usury he suffered; insomuch that Husbandry ceased, and
Merchandising was left off: That the Customs of the Kingdom, the Tenths of
Priests, granted to him by the Pope, and the Tributes of several Nations, were
all detained by most unjust Covenants, which the fear of worse Evils had
extorted: And in regard that ail his many Labors, in behalf of Christianity,
would be perverted, unless some speedy course were taken, to supply or prevent
those Necessities. Wherefore, without any other pretense of words, he declared,
That whatsoever had been by him pawned, or laid to pledge, was absolutely free
from every such Obligation: So that he presently laid hold of all his
Possessions, leaving to the Usurers, at the present, nothing but hopes: Adding
withal this Proviso, That whatsoever had been paid above lawful Interest,
should be deducted from the Principal. In the mean while, a great many were
stripped of their Wealth, though some, under a false pretense of Poverty,
abused it to great advantage: And this same Calamity, for the like Reasons,
fell also upon some in the Netherlands.

The Archduke hereby was surprised with such a want of Money, that the next
year he suffered by it most inexplicable Damage: So that at last all came to
his wonted course; not so much for shame of the Creditors, who cried out, There
was no Faith left, if the Royal Power would take upon it self the infringement
of Covenants; as because the Names of the Revenues coming in were various, and
where hence Money should be brought, the Ways were infested with Thieves, and
the Charges of the War required a present Remedy. But this could not be
obtained, before the Promises and Engagements were renewed by the Restoration
of the Pawns, and promise to pay every Month Eighteen Thousand Ducats, and
add to the old Bank Four Hundred more; the Third Part of which to be paid in
Spain, and the Residue in the Netherlands, by Bill of Exchange. But, among the
Hollanders, as the Dearth and scarcity of Provision in Italy decreased, so did
their Revenues, both public and private: For supply whereof, the Hollanders,
besides their old Taxes, lately increased an Eighth Part, imposed a new one,
whereby they might restrain Riot and Excess daily increasing, or else bring the
Gain thereof to the public Advantage. There was a Rate set upon all those that
sold Silk, and other such like precious Commodities for Garments. But when as
the Collector began to put in Execution the said Tax, at first the People began
to rail with scurrilous Language; but afterward they fell to open force and
blows. They, who without grudging, underwent the burden of daily Provision for
Extraordinaries, yet strove against this, as if it had bin for their Liberty.
But this seemed a Reproach, not a Tribute; for the Contumacy of some so
witstood the public Authority, that it appeared unsafe, to incline to the
contrary: But, in Frizeland, they who had the charge both of the Cities and the
Country, not yet agreeing, while every one defends his Possessions against the
payment of Tributes, they made it evident, with what Diseases chiefly the
Commonwealth may be afflicted, where there is not likewise a common profit.
But the chief care of the Nobles, was bent to settle and confirm a League
between themselves and the French and English; for hitherto they had given
Assistance one to the other at request, and their own pleasure; which had
sometimes been the cause of Complaints among them, and on all sides produced
Threats, tending to the breach of Peace. But the Hollanders, who had perpetual
cause of War, and, as for the most part, such Alliances overstrain the
Inferiors, while their Forces were at War in France, or at Sea with the
English, lost Hulst, and all the Tributes growing out of Flanders, no man
caring for their Griefs or Losses.

In the mean while, the French not dissembling concerning Calais, and the
Succors sent too late, complainad, That the King's Confidence was deluded,
who, lying at the Siege of Fayer with his own Forces, feared the danger of no
part less than of the Seacoast. And their Courage was heightened from de Maiu,
and others of that Faction, who had preferred the King's Pardon, before the
Commerce of Foreign Pride: And now the great Council of the whole Kingdom of
France being summoned at Roan, there appeared the lawful Face of a Kingdom: Nor
was there any great aversion in King Philip, from harkening to Pacification;
which as it was true, so that he should marry the King of France his Daughter,
was first only a Spanish Device; a little after strengthened with a false
^umour.

But Queen Elizabeth, the Counts of Bulloin and Sancy, being sent Ambassadors
to her from France, at such time as Albertus had taken Calais, at first showed
her self very strange toward them, as if she could very ill spare to lend them
five and twenty thousand Scutes: But shortly after, taking a nearer view of the
danger, of her own accord, she not only kept the Ambassadors with her, but
treated with them of a more settled League, the Conditions and Articles whereof
were then begun to be discoursed of. In the interim, the talk of Peace more and
more increasing, the King signified to the United States, (and by that Name,
they being much troubled, that the King had changed his Religion) that he was
so high in the Pope's Favor, that he accepted of him to be a Moderator and
Reconciler of Differences in Religion; nor was it a wonder, if he endeavored
to win the Minds of the Vulgar, by the pretense of Peace: But if the League was
confirmed, he would be ready to invade the Borders of Artois with 8000 men,
which was beyond the strength of his Nobility. But for all this great
ostentation: when, at the Siege of Hulst, a little after, such an Action would
have been most acceptable, the French never so much as made an offer to stir.
And besides, Count Bulloin being returned home, and again to be sent into
England, for conclusion of the League, was detained Three Months: And there
was at this time a Truce agreed between the Garrisons of Calais and Bulloin;
all which Things the French excused thus: That they were not able to bring
forth their Army, because the French Nobility are always wont to rest
themselves from all Actions Military in time of Harvest; and not only so, but
the Netherlandish Border: also were visited with the Plague; That the League
was delayed only, while it might be fully deliberated in all the French
Parliaments, and that the Truce was quickly broken off. But the Hollanders had
more to do with Queen Elizabeth, who now, for two years together, had required
them to come to an Account, and re-imburce her Money; enumerating, the
Successes of the War, not without a show of Emulation, and the stately
structures of their Cities: And, on the other side, declaring her own
Necessities, which she could not supply with continual Veins of Metal, as the
Spaniard did, but only from the Love and Benignity of her Subjects: And the
Irish Rebellion, as it enforced the new raising of Money at Home; so likewise
it necessitated her to call in what she had abroad: On the other side, the
Dutch Ambassadors, first rendering many Thanks, beseeched her to stand to the
League; complaining, That they had had but a short Benefit of those Things,
which had bin agreed 12 Years before: And that the Covenants did not set down
any set number of Soldiers; whereupon they, who as they never had staggered in
their Fidelity, nor had inclined to the War with wavering Counsels, yet had
bin, by the uncertainty of Forces, oftentimes revolved unto vain Attempts; and
that this was very unseasonable in the heat of War, to expect that, which did
not begin to be a debt, until there were a Peace settled, as by the Agreement
will appear: That their Condition was not so much altered, but that they still
deserved rather Pity, than Envy: For besides the rich Cities of Brabant, they
had lost certain Towns at the Maes, and particularly, those which were most
convenient both by Sea and Land, for raising and collecting the Flandrian
Tributes. Nor had they bin at a small charge, after the driving away the
Spanish Fleet from England, in so many Naval Expeditions of the English; and to
what end had they assisted France, but that the War might be repelled, and the
Seas be kept open, while the Enemy was employed at Land. Hereto was added the
Shipwracks they had suffered, the restriction or taking of their Ships, the
breaches of their Banks by the Sea, and other daily Evils they had undergone,
by Misfortunes and Casualties. Concerning these Things, there was a long
Argument with Bodley, who was Leiger for the Queen among the Hollanders,
concerning the Dutch Affairs: Notwithstanding all which, Queen Elizabeth grew
every day more obdurate, till at length she was mollified by procrastination,
but chiefly by the Supplies they sent to her for the Cadiz Voyage.

But no sooner was the benefit of that Kindness consumed, but presently the
same Contest was again renewed, and Sebastian Lose, James Valquy, and Abel
Franken, being sent Ambassadors into England, the Queen gave them this short
Answer; That, that was not the intent of the League, that the Hollanders should
prolong a War against themselves, on purpose to delay, without measure or end,
the payment of those Charges, by others disbursed for them. And as to the Peace
they hoped, if it proved disadvantageous to them, neither had it been
profitable to her those 12 years, having both for that time, and hitherto
e^hausted both her self and her people, in sending them perpetual Aids, and
keeping the Towns delivered to her for a Pledge. And what kind of Alliance must
that be, whose very Branch must depend upon the pleasure of another? But if
they would look upon the Laws as the Queen was pleased to do, she would urge
nothing further than was in them: That it was truly so conceived, Words of
Promise, upon Honor, were plighted.

The Lord Burghly added also, the Irish Rebellion, and the proper fears of
England, were Causes just enough, why the Queen might fall off from those
Agreements, when even private Promises are wont to be absolved, upon unexpected
Events. Therefore, this Debate of Right being in vain, and but for a show made
use of, the Hollanders ran back to their old Guard, showing the danger they
should incur from all their Neighboring Dominions, if the strength of their
Cities already weakened, should be utterly dejected by such Demands, and so much
both of Wealth and Power by Sea added to the Spaniards: But above all, when the
dubious state of the matter, and so discordant in the settling the Account of
Receipts and Disbursements, had almost brought them to a Nonplus: The English
urged the payment at least of some part of the Debt; and, for the future, not
to seek a Remedy against growing Danger, from old Covenants, as by Compulsion;
but rather to merit new Favors by their Gratitude and Thanks for the former.
The Ambassadors, with many humble Entreaties, offered, That there should be an
Annual Portion paid, notwithstanding all their present streights, and the
residue, at the end of the War; which the Queen slighted as inconsiderable,
while in the interim, a great fearspread it self, arising from a Rumor, that
there was Hostility intended against her in Spain; and that the preparations
there made, to that purpose, were greater than ever before. Hereupon the Wise
of those times, began seriously to consider of both Affairs, and judged, that
the Hollanders were not so much oppressed with Poverty, but that it would
oblige them to the Queen in a strict Alliance, especially considering the
danger of so great a Loss, and that the Queen might at some time want Money,
they might well bear, unless their Counsel could put the Hollanders, now tired
with importunate Demands, in mind of her Power, it being not to be suffered,
that her Debtors should raise themselves to a more prosperous Fortune by
Foreign Amities.

Now the Count of Bulloyne was sent into England, to conclude the long Treaty
of a League between the two Kingdoms, which was at last agreed upon, in manner
following: The League and Alliance, concerning inf^ring or resisting Wars,
between, or upon the King of France, and the People of England, is concluded
under these Articles and Conditions.

That all former Leagues and Covenants be confirmed; That both shall endeavor
to bring other Princes and Nations into the same League: And when either shall
be offended, or invaded at Home, that one common Army of the Allies, shall
transfer the War into the Enemies Country; That it shall not be lawful for
either Kingdom without the other, to make either Peace, or a General Truce:
That either shall assist the other with Arms, and other things necessary for
War among themselves, at a reasonable price, and without fraud, and aid the
Soldiers with all Provisions without Treachery; That all things relating to
Religion, and Travelers of either Country, be used no otherwise, than as
natural Subjects; That the King of France use no violence to any English for
difference in Religion; and in regard he was at the present most subject to the
Injuries of his Enemies, the Queen promised him four thousand English
Soldiers, for the Defense of Normandy and Picardy, which are the nearest parts
of France to her Kingdom, giving them half a years Pay, and taking Pledges: But
if they were kept any longer there, it should be at the King's Charge; Who, on
the other side, promised the like Aid to the Queen, so as they should remain
near the Shore, or within fifty Leagues; That it may be lawful to raise and
take into Pay four thousand men, and the Command of the Soldiers to be in that
Prince, within whose Borders the War is.

These were the Heads that were publicly known; for by some private
Agreements, the number of Soldiers the Queen was to send this year was
lessned. To the performance of this League the Queen was sworn. And the Earl of
Salisbury went to see the King take the like Oath on his part. From hence the
Count of Bulloyn went into Holland, to receive their consent and submission. At
the confirmation of this League were present there, Paul Busanual, who was the
King's continual Leiger with the States, and George Gilpin an Englishman, and
an Assistant in the Senate by the old League. After Prince Maurice and the
Senate's Advice had, the United States were also included within the same
words, only there were added these peculiar Things; [ That the King of France,
at the beginning of the Spring, shall have Soldiers ready upon the Borders of
Artois and Henalt; and, on the other side, the States shall have ready 8000
Foot, and 1500 Horse, that the lying, as it were in the middle may be divided
in his purposes, what to do in so doubtful a case. Therefore the States will
add to the two Auxiliary Regiments, which they sent at their own charge to aid
the King, two Regiments more; but, if for all that, the Enemy should turn his
whole strength upon them, that it shall be lawful for them to recall those
Forces. And the French King, for his part, shall at his best convenience, send
as many Regiments to the Hollanders, as also 1000 Horse; That each shall have
the chief Command in his own Country. What has formerly been agreed, and is
not by this present League renewed or altered, to be, and remain as they were:
That the King have great Care and Honor to the Confederate Cities, and the
Subjects within this League, and above all other, to the House of Nassau, for
their everlastingly famous Merits toward the Commonwealth; That all Journeys,
backward and forward, and all Trade, be free on both sides; That neither of
them impose heavier Tributes upon the Subjects, of the other, than upon their
own Citizens; That all the Laws which confiscate the Estates of Strangers, be
cut off, and invalidate between them, and that the Right of Succession, and
making Wills and Testaments be restored: That all Booty taken at Sea shall
belong to them who first invaded or set the Enemy: That the Hollanders may sail
whither they will even into the Western Kingdoms: That there be no demands nor
distresses made for a public debt upon private persons. That it shall not be
lawful for any to retain any ships, either in their passage by, or coming to
the Shore, to unlade, or to expose them to sale.

The public Instruments of this League, were signed the last day of October,
which were solemnly attested with public Joy, wherein there was nothing
omitted to make it complete. For besides that, it was for the settlement of
peace. It also conduced much to the Honor and Majesty of the Commonwealth,
much envyed for its new rising, that it was looked upon by Kings in Honorable
Leagues; which that it might be brought to pass, the French King had exceeded,
while he esteems it convenient and agreeable to his own Affairs, and the
benefit of the Hollanders, even against themselves, although Queen Elizabeth
had labored, that these her old Allies, should be comprehended under her
Patronage: affirming, that it was enough, there being no cause, why Cities
falling from a strange Government, should be inserted among Names of Princes of
the highest Rank.

There were some who would have repeated former seuds, how the Franks of old
passed the River Wael, and seated themselves in that part of the Country, which
is called Gelderland, that they possessed the Isle of Holland, from whence
their Kings took the name of Meronee. That Governors were sent out of France
into Holland; Then also that the English confess them of Frizon original by the
idiom of their Tongue. Shortly after, their Princes were obliged to both the
Kingdoms by Marriage; and that a great while before, when the Roman Power
carried all before it, the Hollanders were famous for Arms, fidelity and honest
liberty, so that they were called the Emperors People, Brothers and Friends.
When the Romans renounced all right and fair dealing, these choosing themselves
a civil Leader, opposed them, making a confederacy both with Germany and
France; O hers took notice of the vicissitude of their Affairs nearer hand, as
particularly that, now the King of France had made a public League against the
Spaniard, with them, whose Deputies but a few years before for fear of the
Spaniard, they durst hardly hearken to.

But the Regiments, which the Hollanders by the League, were bound to send,
were not sent, but according to the King's desire, money instead thereof, which
he rather wanted than men; But this the English took amiss, nor did the Queen
vouchsafe to send any person to go to the German Princes, together with the
Holland and French Embassadus, and certainly there was nothing proved a greater
hindrance of others to join in that Alliance, then that Emulation; from hence
the French conceived a deadly suspicion, that the English desired to have a
perpetual War with them: Nor with any other mind, was the Queen desired to
forward the making a Peace between the Turk and the House of Austria: And not
long after, there being a Conference appointed at Diope, to consider what
course should be taken for carrying on the War the next year. There again the
French were offended at a Request made by the English, to wit, that if they
could recover Calais, a Garrison might be put into it for the Queen. But they
had rather the Spaniards should keep it, hoping that they might in the future,
extort it from them, either by force, or by Article, which they much doubted,
if once the English should get it.

About the same time, it was desired of King Henry, That the Professors of
several Arts which had been taught at Leyden, by ingenious persons bred there,
might be allowed in France. The Prince of Aurange had formerly chosen this
place for a Seat for the liberal Sciences, least for fear of charge, the People
at a great distance, and being bred and born among Arms, should grow rude and
barbarous; And by this means also, the City was repaired, and the ruins which
it had suffered by a Siege amended; for being famous for fidelity and
constancy, it rather chose this Reward of Learning, than to be free from Taxes,
which was offered to it. The main motive hereto was Religion, the prop of their
party, the gift of expounding whereof, had hitherto been assumed by Artificers,
or of the unlearned and illiterate common people; while the labor it self
being without hope of preferment, and certainly attended by poverty, was the
cause of penury, both in the teachers and learners. In a short time, although
the Frizons also had to the like purpose ordained Franecre, this School of
Holland, by the fame of the Instructors, and the flocking thither of much
youth, both of their own and foreign Countries, got the pre-eminence: The
Teacher of the study of the Civil Law, was Hugo Donnell, who following the
steps of Connanus and Duarenus, composed the Discipline of the Laws, into an
order and method of Art, taking away those things which the too secure
ignorance of the former age had disordered, yet not so, as that it should give
place to modern want of knowledge, which in empty dress of words, has infringed
the very sinues of that kind of Learning. But this man, by the infection of the
Earl of Leicesters party, was carried so far, that he forgot not only his
Studies, but even the duties of a private person, and a stranger, and from
thence went away to Altorf: For interpreting the Manners and Customs of the
Romans, and discoveries and dilucidations of Antiquity, was Justus Lipsius, who
added both to his own fame, and the Honor of the place by his Learning, a
person, who by the pleasing gravity of his behavior, was honored beyond his
Profession, alluring most men to delight in him, by the sweetness of his
Discourse; for since Nature had denied him neither Rhetoric nor Oratory, he
rather chose that concise manner of speaking, which is intermingled with mirth,
which was in truth, a new mode of Speech, but yet in some sort resembling
Antiquity; which when such did strive to imitate, as were not equal to him in
wit and Judgment, they deviated into the most corrupt conceptions: But when
public fear, and private injury had forced Lipsius to change his party, there
was sent for out of France, Joseph the Son of Julius, who had conferred to the
Family of Scaliger, from which he was descended, not only Nobility, but the
virtue of paternal Wisdom, by the laying open all things that were to be known,
either concerning Nations or Ages, he was not wearied with continual study,
even to his old Age, and might solace himself with this, that from his very
Childhood, his Fame and Renown continually increased.

The Oriental Tongues were taught by Francis Raphelenge, and the Greek by
Vulcanius, with no little Reputation; For disputation in Divinity, there was
Franciscus Junius, a Man of a very sharp Wit, and one that would with great
inginuity, use the subtilty of the Adversaries Arguments against themselves.

Here also was famous Hadrianus Julius, a Hollander, for his Learning in
natural Philosophy and Medicine: nor was he contemptible for other parts of
Wisdom. Hither also came that great light Aldegonde, there seeking leisure to
translate the divine Law, into the Language of his Country. And that most
famous Herbalist, Charles Clusius of Artois. Among the rest, we may reckon
Janus Dowsa, who was appointed by the States, to oversee and govern the
Students. (We may call him Chancellor of the University,) to whom Posterity
will attribute great Honor, for his description of quality, the Honors born
and enduring of the Siege of Leyden, in everlasting Poetry, yet in that kind,
his Son, which bore the same name, excelled him; the same also being joined
with his Father, for composing the Annals of Holland, and it is probable, he
would have been fit for greater Employments, if immature death had not taken
him away, being a young man of highest expectation for Learning. With such
Masters, and such examples as these, were Youth trained up, whose number in a
short time so increased, that Arts necessary both for public and private
Commodity, which before, by the unfrequentedness of the place were neglected,
now were not sufficient for instructing Ingenuity. And although others of their
own accord, do earnestly labor by literature and Poetry, to advance their name
above the vulgar, Holland having never been barren in that kind of Eloquence,
wherein formerly excelled Peter Mannius, and Janus Secundi^, and his Brothers;
so now also, the like is found in the Writings of many young men. But yet the
raw Studies of this Nation, which rather minds the getting of Wealth, were not
come to their height, for yet had it not been the Country, either of Erasmus
or Longolius. But the Reverence I bear to the Names of these great Men, and the
Reputation of that more peaceable sort of Wisdom, has made run far astray,
both from the Commonwealth and the War. But now I return.

There were Ambassadors sent to Christian the Fourth, who now being come to his
full and lawful Age, was of himself, without a Governor, King of Denmark, and
had taken into his own hands, the full power of Government; and these were to
congratulate him in the name of the States, with their Joy and well-wishes; but
they were not to present themselves, before the greatest of the Solemnities
were past, least among so great an Assembly of Ambassadors, there should arise
any Contest for pre-eminence out of envy, or least they should voluntarily give
place to all, to the diminution of their dignity. There wanted nothing, but
that they for the common fear of the Spanish domineering, should have requested
aid.

The Privileges of Amsterdam only, were confirmed; Those old ones claimed by
the Cities of Schidam, and Enchuysen, from former Kings, were disannu^led, yet
the Emb^ssadors were dismissed with Honor and Gifts, and so not long after,
John Baptista Taxis, coming to him from the Spaniard, although he brought far
richer Gifts, yet was not received with the like kindness. The Reason hereof,
was believed to be this, because the Spaniard, who not long before had promised
three hundred thousand Ducats yearly to the Dane, instead of a Tribute, that
he would not suffer the Hollanders to come into these Streights, having not
performed this, was afterward convicted, that he would by treachery have
invaded his Castles upon the Sound, whereof notice had been sent him by the
United States.

After the taking of Hulst, all things about the Hollanders were quiet,
excepting only some light and memorable Skirmishes between the Horse. For as
well theirs, as the Enemies Militia, was so exhausted, that they could hardly
defend the Borders of the Netherlands against the French; And at the beginning
of Autumn, fulfilling his promises with an easy hope, and the great favor of
his Allies, sent against the Artoysians, the Marshall, Biron, Commander of a
considerable Body of Horse, seeming as if he went to defend Picardy.

Verembonius, earnestly desiring to free the Government, committed to him from
rapine, marched with twelve Troops of Horse against the French, being then not
so many in number, yet nevertheless, he was overcome and taken Prisoner,
together with Count Montecuculi, an Italian, and several others, upon whom was
imposed a great Sum of money for their Ransom: And presently, the Conquerours
falling not only into Artois, but Flanders, so pillaged the whole Country,
that they made a greater wast and havoc there, than had ever been remembered to
be made in France in the Wars, either of Charles formerly, or Philip lately.
The Country people and Boors, flying into the Cities, carried thither not only
Poverty, but Infectious Diseases. Whereupon the Lord of Cimace was presently
sent with a new strength to defend the Borders; but he also was put to flight,
Ambrosio Landriano, the General of the Horse, undervaluing his Command, who
being afterward taken by that Name, besides the ignominy, was glad to redeem
himself with a great Sum of Money.

Thus were the French wholly become Masters of the Field, and being Conquerors
in all the Fights of Horse, with long Marches tired out the Foot.

The Winter now approaching, the King of France, as if he intended somewhat
against Henalt, required the States, That they would disturb the Enemies quiet
in another part. They fulfilling the Request, without any other Reason, though
to their great disadvantage, put some Soldiers aboard Ships at Berghen, until
they were informed, that the King's Endeavors were hindted, by the increase and
overflowings of the Rivers, and that all the French Forces, for fear of the
Cold, were marched quite out of the Netherlands.

Another great and insolent Mischief attended the Arch-Duke's Poverty; for the
Germans, though they were sworn to him, because they were not paid their Wages,
seized Herentals, against whom some Spaniards being sent, to revenge the
imitation of their own Customs, and strongly repulsed, infinitely increased the
Sedition. And, in Walcheren, one John Wr^mys a Scot, was put to Death, for that
he solicited others, to deliver up to the Spaniard, Vere, a Town in that
Island; yet affirming, he was moved thereto by the Jesuits.

About this time, Messengers were sent to the King of Spain, day after day,
That he labor, by all means, to raise what Money he could, that the Fleet
might be expedited; and, to the same purpose, that he would lay a Restriction
upon all Foreign Ships whatsoever; and besides, that they make diligent search
for all Hollanders, and bring them to punishment.

This being heard, it pleased the States to make a Decree, for that there was
not caution enough used against danger, that no one should dare to carry Corn
into Spain, and there was the greater Reason, for this being a dangerous year,
both Poland and Prussia retaining their Harvests, by the like means, by
shunning Famine at home, they sent it to their Enemy; and notwithstanding,
Amsterdam resisted this Decree, whose principal gain consisted in that
Transportation, yet by the consent of the rest of the Cities it was confirmed.
And lest domestic offenses should make any of them become a prey to the French
or English, they set some Ships of War upon the Sea running by their Coasts,
which when to search all Ships when they went out.

In the Month of November, the Spanish Fleet, as if impatient through fury, to
defer the revenge of the injury done to them at Cadiz, until the Summer, set
out, consisting of one hundred Sail of Ships, wherein were fourteen thousand
Soldiers, under the Command of Martin Padilla, report giving out, that they
intended for Cornwall, where Britain stretches out her Land to the Southward,
between France and Ireland; And it was added further, that the King of Spain
would give England as a Dowry to his Daughter, having first purged it from
Heresy in Religion, and this was given out, least the fear of Foreign Empire
should avert their affections. But the same God who had often before prevented
them in the like endeavors, now again showed his power; for in one night,
forty of their Ships were cast away upon the Sands and Shallowes, with the loss
of five thousand men, and a great Sum of Money.

The greatest harm to the Spaniard, was his own diffidence; for the German and
Netherlandish Officers, which they had taken into the Fleet, admonishing them
to go another way, they compelled with drawn Swords, to follow the ill
presaging Signs of them going before: At length among the hindermost of the
Ships, a certain Seaman of Holland, was believed, who eight years before,
having great Rewards for preserving many of the Spaniards, by so much the more
faithfully he now again performed the like Office. They that survived this
mischief (which happened about the Promontory called Artabram) returned home. But
the Dunkerkers in the Netherlands, being commanded to expect this Fleet in the
mean while rested quiet.

Thus without damage done to any of the Seacoasts, this yea^ was ended with
the Hollanders, but on the contrary, they burned two Ships which were built at
Newport.

Moreover, this restless People sailed to the places of the Spanish
Negotiation, being Islands beyond the Equinoctial Circle, being most fruitful
of Salt, without any labor of man; They went also to Guiny for Gold, Ivory,
Pepper, and Brasile-Wood, and St. Thomas Island for Sugar, and all this for
gain sake, contrary to the Kings Edict, feigning themselves to be Portugueses;
But most wonderful, and where to the Ancients have not delivered any like
matter, nor are there any Testimonies of this more experienced Age like to
that; which the Hollanders undertook, and performed the latter end of this
year, and the beginning of the next, when now the third time they went into the
North, all whose Secrets they thoroughly searched. They remembered, that the
search after great things is long and difficult, that all the corners of the
new World were not found out at once, that the Portugueses had made long stays
upon the edges and skirts of America. And they who were skilful in Nature,
pointed out a surer way through the open Ocean, whose reciprocal ebbing and
flowing, keeping by motion, the Waves thereof free, defends them also against
the violence of the cold.

Two Ships leaving the Islands of Orckney and Norway, putting out far to Sea,
from thence steered diverse courses, both toward the North, but the one
inclining more to the East, the other to the West. There lies in that Sea, a
Land full of grass, which is wonderful in that Situation, and most pleasantly
green, where the Pole is elevated eighty degrees (though the Ancients counted
it distant from the Equator, above ninety.) But whether it was encompassed by
the Sea, or has further behind it a larger Continent, was not then tried. Some
of the Seamen thought it to be the Isle of Groenland, famous of old for the
Commerce from Venice, Norway, and the Low Countries: now the name thereof is
only mentioned, the Dane claiming it as a part of his Dominions, but to little
purpose, since he cannot find it.

This proceeded from the sloth of such, as denied things formerly known, both
in Writings of Antiquity, and even in the memories of some alive. Whereas we
follow Nature to the most remote distances, as knowing what God has discovered
to us by nearer Journies. But afterward, a more diligent search being made by
Island, we found that Groenland was something more distant from the North: In
this Land, which we found, having no Inhabitants, the first discoverer,
thereof, had placed Monuments made of thick square Timber and Stones, whereon
was written the name of Spitsberg, from the sharp pointed Mountain tops, so
called-as was believed; in which very place, as appears both by Fame and
Records, that in aftertimes, the fruitfulness of its many bays, for the
catching of Whales, has been no small occasion of discord between the English
and the Hollanders.

There also are found Birds, not unknown in ou^ Clymates, (it is a kind of
Goose) which the ignorance of former times believed, to be bred in Scotland
upon Trees, whence falling in^o he Water they took life: Then bending their
course a little toward the South, their Ship endeavoring to steer to the
Westward, was by Tempests driven back to the Coast of Russia.

A little lower is another Island, besides those found by them passing^ which
as al^o that which bears the Discoverers name, to wit, Willoughby, they came to
Z^mbla, where the Pole is elevated seventy and six degrees; where while the
Seamen reviewed the known place of the Coast, and the appearances of their
former Voyage, hindered first by Winds, then by Ice, so that they could not
pass that Sea. At length, among many delays, and great dangers, both of the
Men and Ships, they scarce reached the Aurange Islands, for now they were set
fast, as in a consolidated Body of continual Ice, and anon, the same breaking,
and returning upon them, made all things full of danger: which were really
true, yet yet no less wondrous, (...) Greeks, proceeding a little so (...)
passage was quite (...) by (...) well into the Scythian Sea, a^ into the
Straigh^ Nassaus at last, being reduced to the ultimate hope, (...), by the
same way they came, the Ship was quite frozen up, not far from the Shore;
whereby it came to pass, that afterward, when the rest of the Sea was thawed,
yet the Ice still kept the Ship fast. Nor did there any thing ^e^ain, but that
wintering in Zembla, they should wait for a better season: Wherefore taking out
of their Ship, Boards and Planks, they built for themselves and then s^ffe a
poor (...) And by chance, the Tide had thrown upon the same Coast, a great
quantity of T^^ber, but uncertain from whence it should come, which in this
their desolate Condition, was a great help for perfecting their House, and
yielded withal, good Provisions for Fuel: during their above here, they had
continual and daily sights with Beats, which sometimes were driven away by
making great outcries; but otherwhiles, being more hungry, and so more
furious, they were fain to make use of shot, as well to affright them, as
defend themselves; Their flesh they found to be unwholsom for food, not without
some harm (for in this place, the Maritime wild Beasts are the only Food to the
wild Beasts of the Land) the fa^ they made use of to make them lights to burn
in the night.

These miserable poor Creatures, were at last after all other humane benefits,
lest by the (...) Country, and among none but wild Beasts* And here it is to be
remembered, that a certain (...) the Sun (...) and does not arise again of a
long time, as we have elsewhere remembered; And now their fear and horror
increased with darkness, and the cruel untemperateness of the Air.

The vast accumulated Mountains of Snow, with much pain and difficulty, they
very hardly removed, for fear least it should overwhelm their Habitation, and
were fain to make the same into steps, and such was the bitter sharpness of the
Air, all about, that if at any time they went forth, they were so benumbed in
their joints, that they could scarcely bring them to be again warm, until they
scorched them into blisters: nay, even within doors, such so penetrating, and
fierce was the cold, that both the men's Apparel, the Walls, yea, and the very
fire it self was so deaded, that they might as soon be burned as warmed. And
now while they endeavored to keep out the cold, by shutting their doors; the
vapor of the Coals had like to have suffocated them all. They found it the
greatest help to them, to imitate their own Country Stoves, or else to warm
their beds with exceeding hot Iron or Stones.

Now did Foxes occupy the empty places left by the Bears (for the Bear is a
Creature, whose sight being more dull, and therefore afraid of the darkness,
had hidden themselves in Caves.

These Foxes being taken by Traps, served them both for Victuals and Raiment.
Long had their better hope to see once again, the light spun out of their
over-worn patience, when as it were by divine mercy and providence, the Sun
began to spread his splendiferous tayes, sooner than the ordinary course of the
Heavens directed; For the night was three months shorter, then that part of the
World, being under seventy degrees usually is acquainted with, unless it may
be, they erred either in the Situation of the place, or in the reckoning and
measure of that disconsolate darkness, which their Diary or Journal will scarce
allow to be believed; or else, while the Sun was passing not far off under the
Earth, some thick Clouds received its opposite light, and there dispersed the
same by repercussion, or some yet undiscovered parts of the Earth might cause
the wonder: however it was, it is sure, they begun then first to creep abroad,
and habituate their weakened Bodies to labor, which they were very earnest at,
though to them at that time, both grievous and painful; For the Sea now growing
open toward the very North it self, not toward Scythia, called them away.

By which Argument, many have been induced to believe, that the Ice was brought
down cut of the River of Scythia, and that the violence of the cold is
increased, by the vicinity of the shores, rather than of the Pole; for the heat
does not presently abate as much as you back from the Equinoctial: wherefore
they were forced to take their Journey in this open Sea, under the very North
Star, if any for the future durst make an attempt there after them. Another
confirmation of this Opinion was, that the Island which we mentioned formerly
to be green, lay below Zembla in regard Zembla it self, nourishes nothing
green, and therefore in all that Land, there is no Creature bred, which uses
such Pasture. But now the Mariners in vain, delayed the egress of their Ship,
yet detained by the Ice, and by this procrastination, the Victuals which
hitherto they had moderately distributed every day man by man, began to fail,
and their drink being corrupted, and spoiled by the Frost, compelled them to
melt Snow to assuage their thirst, and if they should stay any longer, Winter
would again return, and together with it, certain mine: hereupon, they speeded
forwards, their Shipboats, and although most of them were sick, (for poverty,
and the many great miseries they had undergone, had even worn out all their
strength:) yet necessity, which is stronger then any Disease, so did encourage
them, that they hewed the Ice rising into great Hills, until they had made it
level, and then drawing their little Vessels that way, at length they got a
float, yet had they not then an end of their Labors; for being often stopped
with Ice, and scarcely escaping away by the help both of their Oars, Sails and
hands, they were compelled to go thence to the next Coast, for mere hunge^; and
there they found Eggs and Birds, easy to be taken, for that they knew not the
guite of humane Rapine, and covetousness; and also it was found, all along the
subsequent places, that we are shunned by other Animals, not that they want
gentleness, but only we. In the interim, they among them that were sick, being
exposed to the Rain, and the injuries of the piercing Air, dying, were a great
cause of grief to their Companions, if not of envy, when they looked back upon
their own condition, trembling to think what end, Fortune, or rather Providence
would allot them.

Among those that dyed, was William Barent, the Master of the unfortunate Ship,
who was no less worthy to be remembered in the Catalogue of famous men, then was
Vesputius and Columbus though in dispight of Fortune. Those few that survived,
sometimes drew the Boats over the Ice, other whiles repaired their decays.

Thus while their Labor increased, and their strength decayed, an auspicious
Wind brought them, even now fainting, and able to work no more, to the utmost
Skirts of Zembla, opposite to our Ocean. Here, after a whole year, they first
saw some Russian Seamen, and, by hap they were the same, which they found nig^
the Straight in their second Navigation. They therefore, as indeed the whole
Nation is very Religious, comforted and pitied them both by Countenance and
Speech, as much as could be understood thereby, beholding them to be the
Relics of a Fleet, so late before terrible; and besides, they voluntarily
supplied them with Provisions. Here they found a very wholesome Herb, for
weakened and strained Members; which very Disease, had and did vehemently
afflict the Seamen at that present, caused by the violence of the former and
present Cold: Thus equal and tender is Nature, that provides fit Remedies for
all Distempers and Climates. This Herb was supposed to be the Britannica, or
Spoonwart of Plimy, which a most diligent Writer commemorates, that the Romans
used against the same Disease, by the reaching of the Frizons. After this,
being long retained by a cross Wind, in the Entrance of the Russian Sea; and as
often as they were pinched with any Extremity of Hunger, by chance, by the last
meeting of some Ships belonging to the Laplanders, living on that Coast, whose
Hospitality refreshing them, when the Darkness had separated their Boats, they
arrived at the Isle of Quilodun. There they understand (so does Chance
o^tentimes restore the most desperate Affairs) that there was in the
Neighboring Port a Ship, which had come with them out of Holland, and wa^
th^own by Tempest upon that Shore, to furnish and promote their Return into
their own Country. They were Twelve, the chief of them being Jacob Hemskerk,
who, after so many perils, and so much labor, returned even miraculously to
Amsterdam, from the furthest and most desolate part of the World.

The Sixth BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
1597.
THE Winter was not above half past, when a Fortunate Chance gave the Hollanders
a notable good Omen of Success in the beginning Year, and showed a Return of
that good Fortune, which had, since the Honor achieved at Groening, been at a
stay. For the Archduke Albertus, having freed the Borders of Artois from fear
of the French, had put his Soldiers into Garrisons; yet leaving the greatest
part thereof in Brabant, wherein there were four Regiments of old Soldiers,
and some fresh men, for Supplies: so as they were above four Thousand Foot, and
five Troops, containing five hundred Horse, which all quarrer'd in and about
Turnhoult. This is a considerable Village of Brabant, having round about it
open Fields, formerly much delighted in by the Princes, when Hunting, and
innocent Recreations, diverted their more serious Thoughts: Then it was chosen
for concealing of Counsels, because the place being of equal distance to many
places, yields no show of a Journey.

This, in regard of its incertainty, made the Hollanders more fearful, while he
was suspected in the next Towns of Brabant, and the Isles of Zeland, especially
by reason of the Ice, whereby the Rivers, which are the strongest Defense of
those parts, being Frozen, showed them an easy Passage to go whither they
listed. And the Conjecture was not much dissonant from their Actions, which
supposed them to be there quartered, that they might, in stead of Pay, waste
and plunder the Fertile Country adjoining. The Governors of the Neighboring
Garrisons, advised the Prince, upon occasion of the Enemies Foraging; that,
before their Forces were too much multiplied there, cutting off that Body,
which was the chief strength of the Enemy, all fear for the future would be
utterly taken away: And that which gave the greatest Encouragement to their
Hopes of Success, was the Commander of the Forces there, which was Count de
Warras, Varembonius his Brother, a man altogether ignorant in Martial Affairs,
neither did he command with any certain Foresight, nor was much beloved of his
men. But, on the contrary, they were afraid, that to gather the Soldiers and
Guns into a Body, lying dispersedly scattered in Towns at a great distance, the
troublesomness of the Journey in the depth of Winter, when though it did freez,
yet the Ground was not thereby hardened, perhaps the Enemy might hear thereof,
and then all their Consultations had been to no purpose: However, Hope banished
Fear; and removing Difficulties as much as was possible, by secret Commands to
the Captains, and preparation of all other Things necessary, the Enterprise was
speeded as much as might be: Fortune also favored the Design by a moderate
Thaw and fair Weather.

The place, where all the States Forces were to meet, was Gertruydenberg,
distant thence not above six hours Journey; and because the greatest part of
the Horse lying all about, it was convenient for their Conveyance and
Transportation over the Maes. The appointed day of Meeting was disappointed;
yet the Prince, the next day, leads out five Thousand Foot, and eight hundred
Horse; with which, at the beginning of the Night he came to Raveil, with two
Pieces of Cannon for Battery, and as many Fieldpieces, ready in the
duskishness of the Light, as Opportunity had or should present it self; either
to assault the slight Works of the Enemy, or to dare him to fight in the open
Field; for, from hence, they were within an hours march of the Enemy, who being
startled by some Scouts that went before, or else, it may be, seeing the Fires,
wherewith the Hollanders refreshed their Bodies, were of diverse Opinions, not
well knowing what to think: part of them advised to stay for the Enemy within
their Fortifications: Others counseled, with more Reason, forthwith to fall
upon them, being weary with their March, and wet with Dirt; and that so great
Honor should not be given to Prince Maurice, whereby it should be said, that
an Army of old Soldiers, which had undergone the Brunt and Heat of the War,
had declined to give Battle, to much more greater Forces than he had: But the
greater Number pretended very ^usibly to conceal their Fear, that it was better
to ^aren^^ff with their Forces inti^e, to Herentals, which was not f^ off and
would be a place of safety for them; for no m^n ough^ to be prodigal, either of
his Valor, or Fortunes: Wherewith, and with Fear, Count Warras being amazed,
agreeing, That same last Counsels though both more dishonorable and dangerous,
prevailed: But it was too late, since the Enemy was so near; and although all
things that might be Impediments to them, were sent away before at the latter
end of the Night; and as soon as it was day, they had with a selected party
made show rather of a March, than a Flight; yet they could not avoid, but they
would appear most valiant who followed. Now was Silence commanded, and no Noise
heard either of Drum or Trumpet, things probably in themselves vain; but in
Military Minds they prevailed much, either to encourage or dishearten. Of
which, the Prince having Intelligence, he then no longer consulted of the Event
of the Battle, but all his care was, that the Enemy might not escape (...); and
this the rather, because he foresaw, that the Moo^ishness of the Fields, and
he Interposition of the River, would delay him in his March, he hasted early in
the Morning with some Troops, and the most Nimble Men picked out of the
Regiments, to the Number of Two Hundred, into the Field, commanding the Foot to
follow a far off at a distance with the Cannon. There was re^en^ the Count
Hohenlo, then prepared for a Journey into Germany; and although the Prince h^d
omitted to call him, yet he conjecturing the Reasons of this Preparation,
preferred the occasion of the good Management of that Affair, before his own
private Business: And Eberhard Count Solms, minding to wipe away the stain of
his last years Dispute by new Merit. There were also of English Sir Francis
Vere, and Sir Robert Sydney, Governor of Flushing: And, of Netherlanders,
Marcellus Baxius, a Captain of a most valiant Troop of Horse, and one of the
chief Counselors of this Expedition, besides many others. Sir Francis Vere was
sent with some light Foot to scour the Woods and Hedges, that no Ambushes
might surprise them, and coming to the River running by the Fields, whose long
and narrow Streights and Fords were very troublesome to pass, and there was
but one Wooden little Bridge, which was only broad enough for one at once to
go over a breast, he drove away the Enemy by the force of his Shot, which had
been left at that place, on purpose to hinder the pursuit.

Thence having overtaken a good Body of the Enemies, he fell upon their Rear:
they being not far from a narrow Lane, which being woody on both sides, led to
Herentals: which if the Enemy had reached (and the Carriages were already
entered) there could have been no place to fight. In the interim, Count Hohenlo,
to whom the Prince had given four hundred Horse to assist the Foot, fell in
upon the Enemies Flank: But they could not yet come to close fight, by reason
of a Moorish Valley, that lay between, which yet was not so plain or large,
that a moderate Army could be drawn up therein. The Regiments under the Command
of the Count de Warras, marched at a just distance in their nine and eleven
Foot order. The first was a Regiment of Germans, Commanded by Count Sul^yo.
The second of Walloons, being old Soldiers formerly of Lam^t^ and Coquelle,
but now led by Aschicurtio. Barlot had the charge of another Regiment of the
same Nation, and the Neapolitans brought up the Rear; which belonged to the
Marquess of Trevigiana, then absent in Italy. On the left hand, they were
secured by continual Woods and a River that runs down to Turnhoult. The Horse
in three Bodies, sometimes defended the Front, other times the Right Flank,
Commanded by B^stu, and under him Drake, Grobendon* Gusman and others. The
place and Word being given for the Onter Hohenlo charging through the rest of
the Enemies Forces, ^u^^ell on upon them: At which time, the Horse appointed to
defend the Flank, returning disorderly, put their Foot into confusion. Thus the
Germans were easily routed: Nor were the Italians able to abide the shake of
Sir Francis Vere, who was sent to fall on their Rear, with part of the Horse,
which till then, had remained with the Prince.

These being thus put to flight, the middle Regiments, with rare celerity, were
soiled: in so much, that the Conquerours marvailed to see the old Soldiers so
easily quit the place. But besides this, the flying Horse had caused a general
terror, and the Regiments themselves were not advantagiously ordered; for the
great Bodies of Pikes, made up out of all the Bands, did not defend the rest,
but stood here and there, thin and dispersedly, so that the Nassavians might
with ease break in among them, and that the more safely, because the Musketeers
had discharged their shot, not by turns, and one after another, but in a
manner, all at once.

And Basta afterward accused, that he had not rather maintained the Rear of
the Foot, showed Count Warras his Orders to him. Of the Nassavian Assaylants,
four only were killed, and six hurt, this day yielding a Noble document of new
fighting. For Prince Maurice had not armed his Horsemen with Lance, according
to general Customs, but with Carabines (for so is that sort of Gun called.)
Therefore the Darts which were first thrown, being avoided, before the Spearmen
could get time and place, for use of their Spears, they were so suddenly and
furiously wounded, that they were neither able to weild their Arms, or keep
themselves in any order. And when they were thus routed, and brought into
confusion, they had no room to fly away, because the Woods and Waters which
were a defense to them fighting, were turned to their great hindrance and
prejudice, as they fled; so that the Victors by their too much confidence, were
like to have fallen into danger; for while some of them continued the
slaughter, and others were fallen upon their Prey; Basta accompanied with a few
of his men, understanding that all the narrow Streights and Passages of the
ways, were stopped, he feigned boldness out of necessity, he turns his Bridle,
and runs back upon the Enemy.

This unexpected and sudden chance, made many of the Nassavians, who were
wholly minding the spoil, and searching the Wagons, to turn their backs and
fly (for that kind of People are for the most part full of fear.) But the chief
Commanders of the Horse, part of which had followed behind in a great and slow
moving Body, by Fortune, then came in to stop those that fled, and encourage
those that were afraid, threatening withal, that unless they turned head upon
their Enemies, themselves would become their Executioners: And with this fear,
some Prisoners, who stood about the Prince begging for their lives, doubting a
change of Fortune, were run through with Swords, and killed; But the Prince,
careful to prevent the like for the future, had newly appointed as a safeguard
to themselves and the Victory, four Troops then before exempted from danger:
yet the Captain of one Troop being commanded to lead up his, taking the Command
in evil part, had intermingled them all in the Fight, being indeed of
themselves, more ready for pillage then obedience; yet flocking at last to
their Commander in Chief, they especially, who were moved either with the
sense, or reverence of Duty or Reputation, they escaped the danger; and the
Enemies once more put to flight, were equally afflicted with their own
slaughters, and the narrowness of the ways: having all this while, scarce
sullyed the Victory with the loss of ten of the Conquerours: The Foot came in
only to part of the Soil.

After this Fight, here were buried above two thousand of the Enemies; there
were five hundred taken Prisoners, and a great number of Ensigns: some dyed of
their wounds. Next day the Castle of Turnhoult well encompassed with Trenches
was surrendered. The Foot being returned into Garrisons, and the Horse Commanded
forthwith to depart, least the Enemy should rally any of his Forces, and in the
night set upon them wearied with the pursuit. Thence the Prince Maurice
tryumphing among the joyful gratulations of the People, he hanged up in the
Counsel-House at the Hagne, eight and thirty Foot-Colours taken from the Enemy,
and one Cornet of Horse, which had been Drakes: Nor was the Reputation of the
Victory any thing lessened by this, that Count Warras himself, being at the
very first, struck down to the ground, his breathless Corpse was sent together
with Letters to Albertus, who returned great thanks for the same, and when of
late, a Horseman or Trooper belonging to the Prince, being hanged by the Enemy*
had been vindicated by the like punishment of a Spaniard, the Archduke for the
future, promised faithfully, to observe the Laws of Arms, himself being
naturally a great stranger to all cruelty.

This was the first Experiment Prince Maurice, who had now for ten years been
General, received of him by Letters. Nor did there grow a Confidence in the
Soldier only, against the Enemy, from the Event; but likewise it made him
more cautious of what might happen, in regard he had seen that the Discipline
of the Army, was not sufficiently supported against sudden accidents, and the
War proved dubious, upon any slight turning of men's minds, and that there was
so much danger, even in the obtaining of Victory.

But Albertus, being at once oppressed with the want of Money, and so great a
slaughter of his men, fell to Consultation night and day, but yet was hardly
able to procure a remedy to either of these mischiefs.

He was exhausted also before, not by payment of debts, but giving of
Gratuities, so that at the one Siege of Hulst, he gave away more in Rewards,
then the Duke of Parma spent in three years, by which means, from that time,
there had been a failer of payment of the Soldiers Wages: Thus he who before
by extraordinary Gifts, had allured many to come over from their own party to
him, was now very much weakened by the desertions of his own men. The Germans
being a People very greedy for money, of who^ he had Commanded to be levied
both Horse and Fo^^ either denied him their help, or else as soon as they (...)
away again; Diverse Cities, and first of ^ll Ipre for fear of Sedition, refused
Garrisons; And h^ as much ^s he could endeavoring to meet and stop ou^ w^n,
had put to p^^ge, and pawned most of his own Household Stuff, and desired the
Cities, that they would lend him some Montes, which they of Bruxells took the
boldness to deny. And he would also have Covenanted with them of Fuck^e, but
the uncertainty of their credit, and the example of the late Spanish Edict
terrified them: the remaining (...) of Winter, and the beginning of the Spring,
were passed over between S^atagems, and sudden actions, while there was no Army
abroad, while small parties undertake great attempts.

Ferdinando Tellius Portocarrera, Gove^ned Dorlens for the Spaniard, from which
Town, Amiens was not far distan^, the Metropolis of Picardy, and reckoned among
the greatest Cities of France, very rich, and well Situate, as well for War,
as Provisions and Trade, and watered by the old River Samar.

This City was subject to Henry King of France, but turning out their Garrison,
and committing the Custody of the City to the Magistrates, under the pretense
of Privileges, they usurped more carel^sly, the righ^ of liberty, ha^e^ by
their Princes, and dangerous as to the Enemy. Whereof, Ferdinando receiving
Intelligence, by the Advice of some Exiles, but especially of a certain Monk,
after he had by Spies and Scouts, learned the Situation of places, received
Soldiers from Albertus, for perfecting the Design. First of all, eighteen
nimble and ingenious men as soon as ever the entrance into the City was open,
were in the twi^light sent in, and after them others, in the habits of Boors,
carrying Apples; and part of them drove a Cart laden with Hay, by which the
Percullises, the stays that held them up, being cut, as is usual in time of
danger, might be supported against a fall. The Keepers of the Passage were
easily killed, either with the Weapons that were hid before, or those that were
gotten by the first slaughter; and by the speedy running in of those, who lay
hid in certain places near the City, a way was made for the following
Companies; By chance, in that very Punctillio of time, (for it was Lent) a
certain man in a Sermon to the People, laying before them their sins, and
altogether ignorant of the design, said, they were worthy to fall into the
power of the Spaniards, and so they did. For although the City was both strong
and populous, inhabited by no less then fourteen thousand men, yet did it not
long resist, whether from the ambiguity of their Allegiance to the King, or
being grown void of Valor, from their former security, or wanting of
Government, is uncertain; but this is sure, that the Count St. Paul, the
Governor of the Place, hearing the Tumult, fled out of the Town another way:
Things thus secured, the Garrison was augmented, all things that adjoined to
the City burned, the Citizens disarmed and spoiled, yielded a great booty, as
well to the Soldiery as the Commanders, especially the Archduke, because the
King a little before had sent in thither a great number of Artillery, and all
other Furniture for War.

Albertus sent a Messenger to King Philip, with the news of this good success,
affirming, that it was one, and that the chiefest of the Cities Situate on the
River Samar, and formerly possessed by the Dukes of Burgundy, until the French
extorted them from their Heyr, a fatherless Virgin; and therefore now, what was
gotten by War, he should endeavor still to retain, if at any time thereafter,
a Peace should happen to be concluded.

This produced a great damage to the French, but not without some benefit: For
the Citizens of Amiens, being used hardly by the Spaniard, made even those in
France that were of the Catholic Religion, more obedient to the King, and not
to refuse Garrisons as before they did. The King himself, the thoughts of Peace
being shaken off, spent all his time with his Allies, so that now he seemed
ready to accept the same Conditions, which the English had offered before
concerning Calais. In the mean time, the Fortune of one day, made the French a
long work to recover what was lost; whereupon, the Horse being Quartered all
about the Country, from thence Biron increased his Forces by all means to
besiege Amiens, until the King himself came before it, and being allured to
try his turn, he unfortunately attempted Artois, by blowing up the Walls with
Gunpowder, and Scaling-Ladders: Nor had the French any better success, either
at Cambray or Dorlens: And the Spaniards likewise lost their design upon
Gravewaert, an Island within the division of the Rhine, and also upon Steenwie,
against which there were a thousand Foot out of the Garrisons, and twenty and
four hundred Horse gathered together by several marches. These in the dead of
the night, having cut down the Palisadoes that stood in the way, endeavored to
come up to the Rampire. And as they had much forwarded their first attempts by
silence, so that the terror might by reason of the darkness, be greater, they
assaulted diverse parts of the Walls, with a hideous Outcry and Singing; but the
Sentinels not troubled with bare noyses, exposed themselves to the danger, and
that advertised others that stood not far off; (for most of them were in small
covered Huts near the Rampire:) part of whom without their Clothes, as they
leaped out of their Beds, threw down Stones upon the Assaylants heads, as they
climbed up the Walls; Others half Armed, killed the Enemies retiring from the
Rampire, or else by their shot, driving away such as came on afresh, and
pursuing them when they fled.

Thus the Assaylants, though diverse times gathering fresh Courage, yet at
length were beaten off, striving to hide the greatness of their slaughter, by
carrying away the dead Bodies privately: About the same time, as it Fortune
intended to bear her self equally toward all, Prince Maurice conducting some
Foot, and a few Troops of Horse to Ni^ghen, without any halt upon their march,
with a well-layd design upon solid Counsel to take Venloo, was met by ill
success, though he had before sent some Soldiers up the River, aboard two
Ships: out of the first, the Soldiers coming ashore, had now taken the Gate,
and killed such as guarded the same, helped also by the foreknowledge of some
in the City. But the other Ship, laden with an hundred Soldiers, was hindered
by the slacking of the wind, and a Ford or Shallow in the River, in which time,
the daylight fully appearing, the Townsmen assembled, and with great labor
stopped at first the inner Gate; then their number increasing, they drove away
those that kept the Skirts of the Town, being not above fifty men. And as they
sled, they were wounded by the Seamen from Liege.

In this third Experiment of his Valor, was slain Matthias Holly, yet no less
worthy of Honor there then at Breda and Nordam. With him also fell Schalque
the Captain of the Ship. Others were taken and punished, that the right of War
might as it were by consent, prevail in averting such kinds of dangers. One who
had delivered, or rather betrayed the Gate by a Politic confidence running
about the City, affrighted as it were with the common terror, and not being
known, escaped away on the contrary side of the Town. Moreover, some Soldiers
being sent with a Fleet to the Coast of Flanders, returned, having effected
nothing.

In this mean while, the Count of Bulloyn, with a small party, wasting and
plundering Henault, and the Country about the Maes, never rested long in one
place; and Prince Maurice's Horse, being by their late Victory grown more
confident, going out of their Garrisons in Brabant and Gelderland, were both of
them, though in several places, surprised by the Enemy and slain. Then was the
Summer spent among the Hollanders, in trivial actions and attempts, and by the
Archduke, in taking care to retain and keep Amiens; and because the United
Provinces, while they had leisure, neglected all occasions of the War, having
enough to do, to send aid to their Allies, and not themselves also to be
wearied out. At this time, some discords begun to grow among them, although not
sufficient to make a breach of the League, yet the more suspected, because they
fell out at that time.

The City of Groeninge, and they that inhabited the open Country, between the
Rivers Emes, and Lecke, breathing out inveterate and cankered hate one against
the other, were not easily united or reconciled, while the City obstinately
urges those things, which the Duke of Parma had granted to it, when it
followed the Kings Party, not by a settled and perpetual Law, but in the manner
of an Interloquatory Edict.

On the contrary, the Boors brake the ancient League with it, and refuse all
Society, as if the City had endeavored a diminution of their liberty, whereas
they would manage their own business separately; It was true, that as formerly
all the People of Germany, so likewise the Frizons, had distinct Dominions,
that no Consultations should be held, but by their Consent; But the Country
beyond Lecke, and such as were distinguished into Dorpes, had agreed by
Article, to join their Forces with those of the City, which was their
Neighbor, as well against foreign, as domestic evils; to whom likewise
flourishing in Merchandise, and Reverenced for Sanctimony of Judgment, they had
given great Authority in the ordering both, and all the Neighboring People
willingly offered them thereby, the Reward of their Alliance, being accustomed
there to proclaim all their Solemn Conventions: But that which at the beginning
was free, by long use, and many Covenants, had now passed into the force of Law
and Right; yet this was not the time, that all Bonds, however strictly tied,
should be loosed; It Is true, the Spaniard looked upon it, as a main part of his
Potency, to nourish the divisions of his Subjects, by giving no definitive
Sentence between them; But the Strength of the United States was augmented by
Concord, and therefore they appointed Judges for the deciding these
Controversies: At first, three, and when the Country People were offended at
their Judgment, nine others were added, whose Decree was allowed and confirmed
in the Counsel of the General States.

To this purpose, the Deputies as well for the City, as the Country, are
Commanded to make one Body Politic out of both, to Govern as one
Commonwealth, and all matters of the greatest Concernment, were to be debated
in that Assembly; but things of meaner quality, to be discussed by the
Deputies. To their care was committed, all the common Tributes and Taxes, and
whatsoever had belonged, either to the Prince or Priesthood, that in all equal
suff^ages, although the City should have Priority, yet it should not have any
Superiority; yet it was provided, that they who governed the Affairs of the
Country, (they were called Hovet-men) according to Custom, should be chosen by
the City Senate, which the House of Austria had preserved entire in Gelderland,
the rest of the same Court by the States: As to Merchandising, it was thus
moderated, That whatever was of the Growth of the Country, or Manufacted there,
should not be exported, till it had been first brought to Groeningen Market,
neither might they use any other Drink, then what was brewed there in Groening:
(this Ale there made, is of Water boiled with Barley, the common Drink of
Germany) and the familiar use there, made this the more easily accepted by
both; but for foreign Merchandises, free liberty was allowed.

Many other things there, were of like nature composed, which although at first
moved with high Contests, yet coming short of the intent aimed at, it irked to
perform. But now the contention of the Hollanders, with those of Zeland, was so
much the more grievous, by how much the Unity of the entire Body was maintained
by the Wealth of these: The difference was about Customs, which were raised by
Transportation of Commodities, either to Foreign Nations, or the Enemy.

This the several Provinces looked upon, not as a peculiar Propriety, but the
common Stock of the League; for bearing the Charge of the Naval-Affairs, which
if it fell short by any means, they were for the public good to make up out of
their private Purses.

The Zelanders stretched this further, compelling all sorts of Commodities that
were brought out of Holland, and passed by their Islands to other places, to
pay another part of Custom with them, which because it could not be hindered,
was by a temporary Agreement between the two Provinces confined; But the
Hollander renounced this Convention, relying upon an Edict of the United
States, which declared, that where Carryage was taken in, there the freight
ought to be paid; Besides this, the Zelanders were accused, that by diminishing
the Customs and punishments, they had reduced the common Stock into their
hands, as of right, and by that means, and the like deceits, they had
converted all foreign Trade, and the advantages thereof, to themselves,
against the Faith and Agreement of so necessary an Alliance: whereto when they
answered, that the Hollanders by their Covetousness, obtruded the name of the
States, as otherwhere the name of the Prince and Senate, that they intermingled
in one, many Controversies: Nor did they both cease to prefer their own merits,
in the management of the War before those of the other, objecting to each
other, sloth and neglect, and if the League should be dissolved, they could
among themselves have sufficient strength to maintain and defend their private
Affairs. Nay, to such a height, was the Zelanders fury risen, that they denied
to pay any Tribute to the League, which afterward, other meaner and less
considerable People taking into example, it was scarce agreed at length, that
some Commodities of Zeland being relinquished, for the future, their Authority
should be preserved in the great Counsel of the General States.

While these things were in Agitation, several Foreign Embassies were heard,
where were at large discoursed, the benefits and praise of Peace, with the
miseries and complaints of War, the Spaniard in the interim taking care, not so
much to obtain Peace, as to throw the Odium of the War upon the States, as
denying and being averse to peace; Among these Embassies, the ungrateful Speech
of Paulus Dialius, sent to them from Sigismund, King of Poland, was taken
notice of, who in a Latin Speech thundering aloud, when he talked much of the
duties of Subjects toward their Princes, he threatened to the Hollanders,
certain ruin from the Spanish greatness, unless they acknowledged their fault,
and desired Pardon, offering the King his Master as a Mediator; but on the
contrary, he highly extolled King Philips goodness and fidelity, and that
before the Sons and Kinsmen of the Prince of Aurange, and Count Egmonde: no
less were the names of Christianity, and that the Turkish Power, though at such
distance, hung over their heads with terror, the hither Poland to redeem its
fear thereof with Peace, having withdrawn it self from the common War. Nor was
it unknown to the States, how the Polander and Spaniard were linked together,
both by necessity and Alliance, and which was the nearest tie of all, the
Jesuits residence in the Kings Court.

To this it was modestly answered, as to cause and danger of Peace, and that
the Spaniard waged more cruel Wars against the Christians than the Turks, cut
of an excessive ambition of Sovereignty. Whereof Sigismund ought rather to take
care before any domestic Conjunction. And when He notwithstanding this, yet
grew more choleric, as if he intended to break off all commerce, they who
treated with him, affirmed, that they were in no more need of the Polanders
Harvest, if the Laws of humanity should be violated, then the Polanders were of
their money.

At this time also, the Emperor and Princes of Germany, and the chief City,
sent to require Audience of a most magnificent Embassy, which the States,
suspecting the preparation of so great an Authority, excused: whereupon, they
sent other Letters by Charles Nutselius, questioning with some bitterness,
whether that were the Reverence they bore to the Germane Alliance, and whether
they would return this thanks for all the benefits they had received, to deny
to them their Friends, what was granted even to Enemies among all Nations: Nor
would it be sufficient for the Ambassadors only to treat of Peace, which yet,
that it might be without Fraud, and secure, if any occasion should be given,
they should diligently take care, but also of many other weighty Affairs, which
concerned the Hollanders no less, than the Germans: This Nutselius interpreted
to relate to the restoration of the old Leagues, protesting not without
threats, that no man should despise the Majesty of the Empire unpunished.

To this, the States with great Humility replied, that they did this only out
of Honor and Reverence to the German name, that they might be premonished,
lest they should put themselves to the trouble of a vain and fruitless
Embassy: There being no persons in the World, that could better understand
their Affairs, and what was expedient for them, then themselves.

With a little more seriousness, came from the King of Denmark, Arnoldus
Witfeldius, the President of that Kingdom, and Christian Barnicavius, the same
King, as was believed by most, doing this, rather because he could not refuse
it, than of his own accord; for he had been a Fatherly Friend, both to the
House Nassau, and the People of Holland, and besides, prosessed the sincere and
reformed Religion, and therefore would require nothing, that might seem
fraudulent, either to that or them. But because in Peace God might be more
purely worshipped, and both public and private Affairs, consisted more safely
without the chances of War, he hoped they would not look upon him as an
unacceptable, or incapable Author of so great a good; To these so many and
great Advisers of Concord, the States in effect gave one and the same Answer,
the words only varyed, but they wrote to the Dane, with more civility than any
of the rest.

I will here briefly relate the Reasons of this their Resolve so often
beforementioned, least that pass for current with the Reader, which they
began by often hearing, and repeating the same things to nauseate. They
insisted, that both by the French and English Alliance, and afterward by the
great virtue of Prince Maurice, they were so obliged, that they could not in
private, either accept, or suffer any Articles of Peace, which as it would be
wicked, so likewise would it be dangerous for them to think, because the
thoughts of Peace, though frivolous, yet makes all men more remiss in matters
of War, and for the most part, from the liberty and Leagues of Cities, springs,
discord and hatred. And at this time, were certain Letters written by William
Clement, the Spanish Orator to the Emperor discovered, which did set forth
such hopes, and that the Germans had only gotten envy from the Hollanders, by
their motioning of Peace: And then were added, the examples of diverse things
done at Breda, Gaunt, Colen, and in Brabant and Flanders, which had much
promoted the Enemies snares: After which things, they averred, that they could
never hope for an end of the War from the Spanish infidelity, but by the
goodness of God, the only Ruler of Armies, if perchance then the Netherlanders
consent might prevail.

A word or two now for the cause: how and under what necessity of laboring,
they were compelled to those things, whereof no agreement could make them
secure; It was the Interest of their Neighbors, least the King of Spain being
eased of so great a War, should grow greater by the addition of those Forces,
which should by Peace become subject to him, which if he once attained, he
might have always in readiness, an Hundred Thousand Men. Now to oppress and
enslave one, anon another. That it was a frequent Speech in the mouths of the
Spaniards, that the Heretics were to be Conquered by the blood of Heretics;
nor did they by that Name, comprehend the followers of the Reformed Religion,
as it is called; but also those of the Augustane Confession, both by their own
and the Popes Judgment, and because that name is no less hated now by the
Commonwealth; then of old was that name of King, among the most puissant
Romans; and yet there remain some tracks thereof, with those People which
affect such a Sovereign Dominion, as is next of all to liberty; neither is that
Form of Government, which the Polanders publicly maintain; so much grounded
upon the Right of Birth, as the consent of Election, whereof also, the German
and Dane retain a Similitude, giving almost the same account of their
Governments; They say, the Netherlanders were never enslaved, but had always a
moderated Empire bounded by Laws; That the care of the Laws was committed from
their Ancestors, to such as gave particular Testimonies of Valor and Virtue.
That the Inclinations and Affections of Governing by Justice, passed from
Father to Son; for then there was no infinite, unbounded, and Arbitrary Power,
but it was kept within Assemblies, which made the Name of King, be wholly
unknown. Then both Prince and People, had a Confidence and Faith of each other,
until Philip, not only by perverting Judgment, and exacting things never
granted, violated the Oath he had taken; but also on the other side, he
contemned and said aside, contrary to all Justice and Equity, the true intents
of Embassies, dipping his hands in the blood of innumerable Innocents. That
which Nature Commands all Creatures, which is the Principle of
self-preservation, we have done, and not promiscuously as Libertines, but under
the Conduct of a worthy Prince, the Prince of Aurange. In the interim, many
Supplications were made to Philip, and the Neighbour-Princes solicited him to
mitigate the severity of his Resolutions; But after that Treachery and Revenge
were found to lie hid under the pretenses of his peace, We removed (which is no
new thing among Subjects) him doing by his power, such things as were contrary
to his duty as a Prince, and this by a public Decree, wherein were set forth
all the Causes and Motives thereof.

And then again it seemed good to some, to Elect for their Prince the King of
France his Brother, while others submitted to the power of the Prince of
Aurange, which they had no sooner done, but forthwith he was assassinated by
Spanish Treachery, and the Succession of Government by his death, devolving to
Prince Maurice, who now being supported by the Allyances of sundry great
Princes, defends and enlarges our limits by Arms. I have in this manner
declared these things, that among Remote Nations, the Report of Affairs then
might be known from the use of matters at present.

Nor were the Hollanders satisfied, to shake off the offers of Peace, but that
they incited others to take up Arms, objecting against the Spaniard^, his
ambition and thirst after Kingdoms, and the greatness of his Power to do
mischief, Reproaches of a long standing, which great Empires, very hardly, or
never can escape. And for the better winning of Credit hereto, besides the
manifest Examples of France and Britain, were published all Albertus his
Demands against many Cities of Germany, and also a fresh document from Erabant,
what might be hoped for touching Religion; The Relation thereof follows.

Anna Hovia a Maid, living in Family with her Sisters, to whom she was in
nature of a Servant, being suspected of dissenting from the Popes Sanctions,
was thrown into Prison, and when they overcome either by the threats, or
prayers of her Friends, or the allurement of life, wherewith, even the greatest
minds are made to sloop, had begged her Pardon by acknowledging her ignorance,
she alone was nothing moved; but in the interim, with modest Speeches, she
obtested, that being a Woman, and so both by Sex and Fortune, exempts from
troubles, and as she her self believed, maintaining no false Opinion; but if it
were so, that she was guilty of error, who could pardon her for it; for that
was an offense, not against men, but God, and he would take vengeance for the
same, if any one overcome by fear, against the thoughts of their heart should
recant, although it were thereby to maintain the truth; of whom the Senate
advising, whether they should give judgment or ^^, Albertus is reported to
have made answer, Let the Laws be put in execution. You may the more justly
wonder hereat, that so cruel and inhumane a punishment, should yield delight or
satisfaction to any Spectators; for she was buried alive under ground at
Bruxells: the Authors of this Barbarism probably expecting she would have
repented; But she now descending into the Cave, and being placed between Death
and the Priests, ready to give her absolution, without any show of fear,
calling only upon God, she was covered over with the Earth, and buried alive.
This Woman's constancy, was looked upon by all the Netherlanders, with great
c^mmiseration, Report adding to the novelty of the matter, in regard of old,
many millions of Butcheries were transacted upon short and small hearing. And
afterward, Albertus thought it almost enough to punish Crimes of that sort by
threatenings, but if at any time he proceeded further, the torments were
inflicted in more secret manner.

At this time a return of thanks was made to those several Kings and Princes,
who had been solicitous for the peace of the Netherlands, recommending their
Affairs in particular to every one of them; And in the interim, by reason of
the Archdukes envy, they stirred up all who had any care of Religion, to a
severe revenge: The Entertainment and Charge of the Ambassadors, was defrayed
out of the public Stock, out of which also, at their departure, great gifts
were given to them. In their Letters to Germany, they excused several
incursions into the adjoining parts of their Country by the like actions of the
Spaniards, and the necessity of the War, whereto there was but one remedy, to
wit, utterly to drive them away, as far as was possible: against whose
insolency in taking several places of Germany, they had often received a
hearing, but never any redress. Whereupon, they were compelled concerning this
affair also to put all their hope in their Arms, which yet should not be
prejudicial to the Neighbors all about, that were in peace; to which purpose,
they had lately augmented the Soldiers pay, that so they might be kept subject
by a stricter Discipline; The Danes also seperately and a part requested, that
the War, wherein they were altogether unconcerned, might not be made a burden
to them, and that they might not be restrained from Spanish Commerce; which
Queen Elizabeth, by the same Ambassadors, had denied to the Kings of Denmark
and Poland, and when they praised nature, who willed the Sea should be open to
all, and the right of exchange or Trade be debarred to none, She answered, That
there was nothing so congruous to the Customs both of men and nature it self,
then to repel danger, and therefore no wise man would suffer him to receive any
assistance, who lay at watch for his ruin. Nor did she deny them Arms only,
but all other sores of Provisions whatsoever, avouching in defense of the same,
an ancient League of the English, with the Anseatike Cities, and the examples
of other Princes: deriding the vanity of Paulus Dialius, behaving himself
insolently, protesting, she rather took him for a Herald, then an Orator, nor
did she spare his Master Sigismund himself, who she said, was ignorant what
belonged to a King, and for that he received his Government but by Election.
That his Father and Grandfather, when they warred with the Muscovile, showed
another kind of respect to England. But this was all the thanks the was like to
have, who had by her Ambassadors care and pains, delivered Sweden from the
Muscovitish War, and freed Poland from the Turks. But the Hollanders not
esteeming it just, to prescribe harder Laws to others, then they were willing
to submit to themselves, did not intercede hinder other people from going to
the Westward, and the Enemies Coasts by the same Rule that the United States
themselves did.

This year were made some expeditions by Sea, begun with great Councels, but by
reason of so many incertainties to little or no purpose: for the English
encouraged by the yet fresh success of the Cadiz Voyage, made new and great
preparations at Sea, to countervail the Enemies designs there, and fall upon
the rich Islands of the Azores, with endeavor also to seize and take all Ships
coming from the other far distant World; The Queen set forth sixteen strong and
well armed Ships, among which, were two taken at Cadiz, to whom the Hollanders
joined twenty of theirs, under the Conduct of their Admiral Warmonde, besides
almost threescore less Vessels for carrying the Soldiery and Instruments of
War; wherein were contained some great Artillery for battering of Cities and
Towns, together with six thousand Land Soldiers; although they heard that
diverse numbers of Foot Soldiers were levied, and ready upon all the Seacoasts
of Spain: The Command as General, both of the Fleet and Soldiers, was
committed to the Earl of Essex, for the avoiding those evils, which of late a
divided Commission had made them sensible of.

In the Month of July, they set Sail, favored at first with the calmness of
the Sea, and a gentle Northerly Wind; but soon after, the Wind increasing, and
when the Fleet was arrived in the great Ocean, over against Gallicia, the Sea
and the Heavens changed Countenance, for the Ships being tossed in the surging
Waves of a horrible Sea, divided as well the Counsels of the Commanders, as
separated the Ships one from another: Some having more nimble Vessels, were
hurried in oblique courses, even into the Coasts and sight of Spain, and many
wearied by the Sea and dangers, that they might the sooner return into their
Country, of their free wills followed the pleasure of the Winds: But although
the Earl of Essex his Ship was restrained by the loss of her Masts, and the
springing of several great Leaks, so that the entering Water, could hardly be
exhausted by all the toil and labor of the Pump; yet did he still endeavor to
go forward, and steer his course, even in despite of Fortune. Until at last,
all sight being taken away with the thick darkness of the Clouds, and the sense
of hearing, become useless by the outcries of such as were overcharged with
fear, the dashing of the Waves, and the blustering of the Winds, present fear
had made the Seamen senseless of their duties, so that there was no obedience
to Commands.

Thus, by the consent of the Commanders, most of the Ships having many Leaks,
so that they could hardly be kept upright with all their labor, yet at last,
he brought them all back into England safe, the tenth day after he went out,
where while they waited for their Companions, and contrary Winds detain them in
the Port, by scarcity of Provisions, and the increasing of Diseases, they were
compelled to dismiss their Ships of burden and Soldiers, retaining only one
Regiment, which being well Disciplined in Military Affairs, Sir Francis Vere
had brought thither by the consent of the Hollanders: And now their Counsels
being contracted as their Forces, and the hope of a Land War totally lost, it
was thought convenient to wait about the Islands of Azores, to intercept the
great Fleet now ready to return from the Indies; But the English Ships being
again torn and spoiled, by cruel Tempests, Essex having long compassed the Sea,
and wasting the Islands, was at last, by the error of his Pilots, carried out
of his way, and Sir Walter Rawleigh, not able any longer to be subject to
Command, took his course, though without any certainty, another way.

The Spaniards in the mean while, arrive at the Port of Augra, on the contrary
part of the Isle Tercera, the most powerful of all the Azores, and bringing
with them infinite Wealth. But the English by cross and contrary Winds, and
other imminent evils were so kept back, that they could not come near them:
yet three Ships being separated from their Company, were either sunk or taken
and made a prey. Here began a mischievous contest, the Hollanders accusing
Rawleigh, who had Command of a part of the English Fleet, that he by force took
away from them, a Ship which they had taken, while they were in pursuit of
another.

In this Voyage, some small and open Towns were burned by the English, as also
a Carack coming from the Indies, was fired by her own men, to prevent the
falling thereof into the Enemies hands. The Commanders thus frustrated of their
hope, and returning to winter in England, were derided by their evil willers,
so that being before emulous among themselves, and now become enemies, yet they
consented to aver sound advise, and their own endeavors not wanting for
prevention of their ill success. Hereby appears that fortune is not to be
commanded by wise men, nor forced by just ones.

The case of Padilia was harder, who was sent with like Commands as of late out
of Spain, to indammage Britain, with one hundred and eight Ships, wherein were
embarked eight thousand men: for having made a large progress, by the
boisterous North-winds, three Galcoones, six other Ships, and a great quantity
of men and money was drowned.

Padilia returning home, whether guilty of imprudence or Infelicity, in his
unfortunate Attempts, was removed from being Admiral of the Fleet, to whom, in
the same place, succeeded Didaco Brocurus.

This Summer, four Holland Ships, which had sailed out three years before, were
the first that returned from the Iodies: Nor was the Citizens joy greater then
their admiration, when they heard tell of men circumcised, whose genitals only
being covered, the rest of their Bodies was quite naked, living about those
parts where you go out of Africa, into the East, and inhabiting the Island of
Madagascar, These neither well knew, nor are totally ignorant of God; Their
miserable genius prompting them to all manner of licentiousness: nor
distinguishing themselves by names, nor knowing any varieties of seasons, and
so ignorant of our manners and Customs, that they would give in exchange for a
small quantity of Tin, a good Ox. They related also, the dangerous sedition of
the Mariners, notwithstanding all these dangers: together, with the persidious
natures of the Barbarians, whom the Portugueses brought up every where, but
especially in Java, that under the pretense of peace, they might the better
hide their murders and depredations. From hence proceeded as well fighting as
delays: Not were the Hollanders free from fault, for they that were sent
thither by their Kinsfolks or Friends, being such as were forced from their own
Country, either by debt, or their own wickedness, yielded to the Barbarians
nothing but an evil pattern to follow. Nay, so great was the stupidity of some
of them, that among all the people at noonday, they sounded the depth of the
Haven at Bantam.

Java is an Island almost as big as England, and not as some believe, a part of
the South Continent, as appeared by the Circuit. It has many Kings, a part of
them according to the Custom of their Fathers, worship false Gods, the other
part not long since have received the Mohammedan Doctrine. They saw also
Sumatra, the greater Java, and a little Island called Balis: and in their
return another, which is called by the name of Helena, fruitful in the product
of many things, but not inhabited by any men:

From hence the Hollanders then first began to fetch Pepper and other Fruits,
the usual growth of those warmer Clymates, which kind of Trade had of old been
very gainful to the Venetians, by Egyptian Transportations; but for the space
of an hundred years, solely usurped by the Portugueses, who discovered that
Ocean, and claimed the same as their reward of their long Navigations, and the
gift of the Pope. The first Voyage after many difficulties, being free from
damage, yet for the future, gave hope of better advantage, and invited many
others out of Holland, Zeland, and exiles of Brabant, to attempt the same with
a greater number of Ships.

From the beginning of the Spring for many months, had the Siege of Amiens
been delayed, while the King, though with a strong Army of fourteen thousand
men, yet sparing of his own Soldiers blood, and not greedy of his Enemies,
only fortified his Camp against all force, as well inward as outward. And
first he endeavored to raise a Confederacy among the Citizens, and when that
was discovered, he attempted to fill up the Trenches, undermine the Rampire,
and to do other things, which though they cost little blood, yet they took up
great expense of time, especially the Besiegers being unexperienced in such
works, and the Besieged wanting neither Valor or Policy to withstand the same,
and to protract the Siege in hope of getting Relief, and having turned out of
the Town, above six thousand Citizens, whom they suspected. Besides, while the
Enemy was gathering together his force, a Body of Horse entered the Town,
thereby both strengthening and augmenting the Garrison. And although they were
infested with the Plague, yet they made frequent Sallies in defense of their
Walls, with various Fortune; in several of which, diverse eminent men on both
sides were slain, among whom was Portocarrera, the main Author of all their
Stratagems: Yet the Townsmen, by cutting their Bark^ turned the River upon the
Enemy. And after many Repulses, caused by neglect of such as were sent to enter
the City, the Archduke in Autumn, with his new and old Forces, and according
to ancient Custom, having raised the Netherlandish Nobility, which were
modelled into Horse and Foot, came thither with more Fame than Hope. At the
first sight, he perceived, that it was not possible, either to force the King's
Works, nor to draw the coming Enemy, though more than ordinarily cautious, to
the hazard of a Battle: Only some few loose Bands encountered. But now Picardy
being wasted by War, was first afflicted with scarcity of Victuals and soon
after with Sickness. These Things forced the Archduke to depart, overcome
almost with Sorrow, for loss of the City, which (a Truce of eight days,
according to Agreement being elapsed, which was, that if in that they were not
relieved with above a Thousand men) was delivered up to King Henry; and
Albertus, that the King might the less persist in his Successes, by scarcity of
Victuals, and fear of the Winter, left the Siege of Dorlens.

Soon after that, Albertus sent part of his Soldiers to block up all the
Avenues of Ostend with Forts, at the Request of the Flandrians; for as yet
having sent Spies to seated the strength of all Fortifications about the place,
as well to the Seaward, as Land, and conscious to himself of his own weakness,
he durst not attempt the Siege of it. In the mean while, Devastations being
hindered, Sir Edward Noris being made Governor there, raged scot-free all over
the Country, being grown more terrible to the Enemy, because he had lately
taken Alvares Agilarius, the Governor of Dunkirk, prisoner, with some other
booty. Here I have a mind to draw all Affairs into one Series, until the end of
the Year, that I may not place what was done during that time by the
Hollanders, or continued by them apart.

They were quiet the greatest part of the Summer, while France detained their
Money, and England their Soldiers, either expecting other business, or hoping
some Sedition among the Enemies. But now Albertus his Forces being all recalled
from Amions, there was a necessity for some action, but not resolved whither to
carry the War, their Affections wavering toward diverse places, until at length
it was left to the Judgment of the Prince, Count William, and the Senate; who
thought it convenient, to drive the Enemy out of the Garrisons in Overissel,
whereof the Spaniard had not many remained, but they which were, were governed
and kept by Frederick Count Heremberg, that so the War being removed within the
Rhine, all that part of the Country that lies beyond, might be exempted from
payment of Contribution to the Enemy; and that they might compass this with the
more safety (for they had not equal Forces at Home to cope with the Enemy; and,
it might be doubted, least the Spaniard might alter his Counsel, and come back)
they thought fit to put off the Journey to some following time, with Commands
where the Rhine might be passed: The same thing also proved famously
advantageous, for the safety of the Borders; and that there might be a safe
Passage into Germany opened, which was now shut up by the Enemy, to the great
damage of Trade, while it is prohibited to carry through Rivers what was taken
at Sea, and to carry back other things in lieu thereof.

At this time Henry Frederick entering into the 14th Year of his Age, having
till those years spent his time at Leyden, in the study of the Liberal
Sciences, was first taken to be instructed in the Rudiments of War: With which
Companion, and many others of the same House, the Prince, and the rest of the
Commanders, having privately held a Council, go toward Gravewaert, so that the
Enemy might not be aware, to what place chiefly they intended. He had Seven
Thousand Foot, and Twelve Hundred Horse, who passed the Rhine in little Boats,
and the Wael by a Bridge of Ships fastened together, carrying along with them
their Wagons and Baggage. But the Ships, by force of the Wind, were carried up
the Rivers, wherein were contained forty great Guns fit for Battery, and the
rest of the Provisions proportionable. The Army marched along the Banks, which
of old was called the Gallick, or rather the Roman Cawsey, and in their
Journey, upon sight of the Army and Artillery, Fort Alba, a Hold of
unreasonable strength, was without delay surrendered; and the same Evening, some
Horse were sent out to encompass Berck. There are some who would have this Town
to be the Tiberiacum of the Ancients, and that there yet remains some
glimmering of the same in the word Berck, as it is now contracted. It is a
small Town, but rich in Customs; for lying upon that Bank of the Rhine, which
as we said, is beyond Xantem, which is also known by the Name of Veteracastra,
being a place famous in former Ages, for the Siege of the Legions, and the War
of Holland: A little upon the one hand appears Wesel, near the back of
Gelderland; but both sides of it are enclosed by the Regions of Cleves and
Juilliers. It is within the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Colen; but the
Duke of Parma, under pretense of the Truxian War beforementioned, after much
contest, seized and possessed it; for safety whereof, besides the sweetness of
the place, and the Antiquity of the Fortifications, there was kept in it a
Garrison of no less than a Thousand Men, part Netherlanders, part Germans: In
the upper part of the River, there is an Island three miles in compass,
adjoining to the Town, and separated only by a River. Hither the Prince sent a
sufficient number of men to guard it, and made a Bridge over the Channel, that
there might be a secure Way for Pastures, and other Provisions. Afterward he
pitched his Camp chiefly in two places, although at that time the Weather was
very raging; and that no place might be left open, a Line, with a Trench, was
commanded to be drawn on both sides the River all along. Thus the Town was shut
up, many ships stopping the passages of the Rhine; And all Forts, whether in
Ways, or upon meaner Rivers, were strengthened and maintained by the Guard of
the Beleaguerers by turns; which afterward being laid aside, there was another
great Work raised against the Town, for the securing Passages from place to
place; nor had the Besieged either Valor or Confidence enough to disturb their
Enemies Work by S^llies, they only vindicating themselves by shot at a
distance, having the greatest plenty of Ammunition, though indeed they wanted
nothing else; for there were found in the City almost fourscore great Guns,
with these they had furnished the Fortifications, to resist any thing that
might oppose the Town. The chief Defense against all such Damages was a Tower,
which raised its height somewhat above the Palace, and so infested all the
places near the River; from hence arose Pity, Fear, and Wrath, to many falling
in the Camp; for Lewis of Nassau was shot in the Thigh, and the Prince himself
was not free from danger, for by accident his Tent was overthrown; yet the
Besiegers began to set in order their Canon against the Town, whereby the
beforementioned Tower was so weakened, that none durst remain or stay therein:
Hitherto all that was done, was by snatches and intervals, as it were at a
breathing. Afterward the Trench was filled up, and although the Weathe^ were
very bad, by reason of continual Rains; yet the Galleries began to be wrought
on forward to the very Rampire, to a great breadth: The Artillery never
ceasing, to ba^^^ the Gate, which lay upon the River from the Island
beforementioned. This caused the Besiegers to send Messengers, that should
Treat about the delivery of the Town, it being manifest to them, that those
Threats were not in vain, in regard they beheld and felt the Forerunners of a
Storm; yet could not all their Prayers at the present, prevail to obtain a
Truce, the Battery continuing all that day, with the expense of Two Thousand
shot.

In this interim also, William of Nassau had assaulted and taken an Half Moon
Sconce that lay upon the River, the Defendants being beaten out thereof by
violence of shooting. Now also was the Courage of the Besieged utterly
overthrown by a sharp Summons, whereby they were advised to prevent Extremity;
and that if they should yet continue in their Obstinacy, they should be
exempted from Mercy. Thus on the Tenth day was Berck delivered, the whole
Garrison marching forth with all that belonged to them. All the public Stores
of the Enemy, together with the Artillery and Ships, were (according to Custom)
delivered to the Conqueror. Some there are, who lay the fault of this
Surrender, upon a too sudden fear, especially for that Herman Count Heremberg,
Governor of Gelderland, came to the Garrison, either because the Commander in
Chief there was blameworthy, being an immoderate Boaster, and before the
appearance of danger beyond measure insolent; or else that the Soldiers were
equally criminal, whom presently after their going out of Gelderland, many
reprehended as growing Seditious within the Town: This thing done, Legates were
sent from the Archbishop of Colen, and the College of Priests, to the Prince,
with Command to go from him to the States, to demand the re-delivery of that
being a Free Town, and not obnoxious to their War. But the great convenience of
the place, moved the States to return an Answer in these terms:

Although whatsoever was possessed by our Enemies, and taken from them by War,
may seem ours by right of Victory, yet the (...) Confidence you have of the
Batavian's Equity, is not altogether vain, since what has been so long
permitted, to undergo the Yoke of Spanish Tyranny, you are not ashamed to
challenge out of our hands: We would truly have given way of our own accord,
unless that former Action had taught us, that you yourselves were unable to
defend it: And certainly, he is deservedly wretched, that will be deceived by
another man's slothfulness. Now if the Spaniard may reside still at Berck, you
ought also to take the same Care both for Bonne and Nuiss. We are continually
exhausted and damaged by Excursions: Nay, our own Land, and the common River is
taken from us, so that we shall be said not to restore, but to have given you
the City: Rather then so, still believe it to be yours, and that it is ours a
Pledge only against danger, and a caution for our Expenses, which in all
Reason and Justice you ought to pay, if we have conquered the same for you;
notwithstanding which, we promise that the Revenues which the Bishop usually
received thence, shall carefully be reserved to his use.

With these Words the Legates were dismissed; nor did the States as yet
fortify this Town of Berck as their own, for they only repaired the Breaches
made by the Batteries and Assaults, and placed therein for Defense of the place
a Regiment of Foot, with a few Horse; and that no part might lie open to the
Enemy, they levelled Mutelen to the ground, because it seemed too far off, to
fortify and defend the same sufficiently. Camillus Sachino, who was in Command
under the Duke of Parma, had raised that Castle upon the Bank of the Rhine, in
an excellent situation, and as was believed, in the very place of old
Duysburg: the original of which Town the old Germans refer to the fabulous
Wanderings of Ulysses. And being the Duke of Parma's Countryman, gave the Name
to this place, as promising to himself wi^^ ^s doubt, by that Work, the
perpetuating of his Fame, and ^ontinuation of his Memory to after-Ages: But at
that time the Count Hohenlo accidentally passing that way in his Journey, with
a small Re^inue toward Germany, it was with great fear desetted, and by the
Prince's Command levelled with the ground, the Italian's Arrogance being looked
on with Contempt, who (to speak his own words) affirmed it to be built in the
height of his Courage, to such advantage, that it was inexpugnable.

At this time the United States writ to the Princes of Newenberg, and
Brandenburg, wishing them rather to lay open to them a Passage into the Dukedom
of Cleves in reality, than to Tantalize them with empty Words and Promises, and
to leave it to them, to lay hold on a fit time to vindicate Right. In those
parts of the Bishopric of Colen, yet under the Patronage of the Duchy of
Cleves, is situate Moers. The Proprietors whereof were called Counts, and the
last Heir of which was Valburgis, innobled of old by an intermarriage with the
Count of Horn, and through the Duke of Alva's Cruelty a Widow, and now again
intermarryed, and the Widow of a related Family the Count Menar. She living
among the Hollanders, the Spaniard had possessed both the Town and Castle,
being a considerable strength, above eleven years, with a strong Garrison,
whose number was increased to above eight hundred, by the Count Herman of
Heremberg, upon the Report of the Siege of Berck, being otherwise helpless, and
unable to have resisted. Wherefore taking along with him the rest of the Forces
that were left, he retreated beyond the Maes: From whose Bank the Town lies a
little distant, by which means an access thereto is more easy for the Enemy,
and greater damage accrewing to the Besiegers: In this well-known Site, the
Prince in two several places settled his Force, but without any defensive
Trench, and their nearer Approaches which they had begun, were retarded by the
Autumnal Showers, yet the Day brought them to the Ditch, which in three places
was filled up.

Hitherto no great Guns had vomited Thunder to the Battery, or Ruin^ of the
Works, though the Prince had commanded many to be planted, and a Bridge to be
prepared as for an Assault, when unexpectedly the Governor of the Town and
Castle (his name was Andrew Miranda, by Nation a Spaniard) came to a Treaty,
Pledges on both sides being given (although a little before, being summoned by
Letters from Prince Maurice, That if he could defend the Castle, yet he should
take pity upon the Town, and not leave the Citizens lying to the severity of
War. He returned a proud and uncivil Answer): The Soldiers that marched out
were permitted by Article to carry away their Colors, Arms, and one great Gun;
the Prince, by the Concessions of these Honorary Vacuities, redeeming the War
from delay, and the Enemy, under the pretense of a Titulary Repute, flattering
himself in his own disgrace, notwithstanding he pretended a want of Gunpowder,
beyond the Exemplar of Berck; but certainly he might have furnished himself
with those things, neither indeed could he have wanted means to have moderately
relieved the Town, but that Fear wholly prevented their Care.

While the Frizon Forces attended Prince Maurice, in the mean while Frederick
Count Heremberg, drawing the Garrison Soldiers out of Lingen, and other Towns,
into that part of Frizeland, which is called Septemsylue, began to wast and
burn the Villages thereof, carrying away many prisoners, and a great Booty:
Nevertheless private damages did no way put a stop to public Endeavors;
wherefore the Hollanders Army passing the Rhine by a Bridge, thereabouts where
the Village called Rees. And here also the same Fortune followed the
Conquerours, none daring to resist them; for Albertus had resolved to lie on
the French Borders, which made the Garrisons in these parts the more afraid.

If I should commemorate like Wars among the Ancients, and the concurring
strength of diverse ^ssant Kingdoms and People into one Body, by a like Sim^de
and Alliance of Chance, it would be no wonder, though I should weary my self in
the plentiful recital thereof, and should undertake the Toil of deciphering all
both persons and places, where such Things have been seen: But my Work is
circumscribed and brought into a narrower Compass; for here is not to be
declared the Conjunctions of Allies, fatal Battles, eminent Slaughters, and
great Dangers; but only the Sieges and Assaults of some mean Towns, and that
too, if I discern any thing, more for advantage and gain, than pleasure or
ambition. For in many other Parts there have been of old, yea even among our
own Ancestors, more numerous Armies, Fifty or Threescore Thousand have been often
mustered in the Fields, sufficient to have drawn after them, in common
Judgment, the success of a War: in which Tempestuous Meetings, the whole
Discipline depended, in nothing more, than to equalize Valor, keep footing,
and drive away the Enemy. But the following Age participated of less Cruelty,
by the use of more Policy; nor, as before, were the hazards of War run upon at
adventure, to the decision of a Quarrel at a Fight, but by fortifying against
intervening Dangers; and, on the contrary, when a visible strength is found
either near or far off, to lay open all fenced places, dry up all Fenny and
Moorish Parts, to fill up Valleys, and level Hills: Which if any one would sift
out and Value, according to the Experience of the Times and the War, no Land
before our own could show the like Patterns, where a man might find Cities
either more strong, or more frequent. Hither have been brought all the Politic
Inventions, both of Pristine and Modern Warfare, the long continuance of the
War having drawn from all Parts Foreign Spectators, as to a public School of
War.

For at this very time the chief Dukes, Counts, and Great Commanders, as well
out of Germany, France, Britain, as from other more remote Parts, followed the
Prince in the management of the War in Over-Issel. Himself went beyond the
River Lip in Germany, but the Ships were conveyed through the Rhine, and so
into the Issel, till they arrived at Doesburg. A little further inward lies
Grolle, within the Jurisdiction of Zutphen, which having been besieged formerly
about two years ago, though in vain, did seem to be a Reproach to the Prince,
unless it were taken. The Fortifications of this Town were not ordinary,
boasting the Care of the Emperor Charles the Fifth for their strength and
Limits. There were five great Bulwarks standing out from the Rampire, with such
Flankers, as commanded on every side any that should venture to assault it: The
compass of the City is but small, and under the Government of John Count
Strumbo, with a Garrison of eight hundred Foor, and three Troops of Horse; nor
had he omitted, when he heard of the Prince's Approach toward him, to amend
and make thicker his Works: But the Prince nothing affrighted therewith, but
esteeming it very advantageous, that the Enemies Horse should be shut up, which
otherwise might possess and infest the Ways, straight with more than ordinary
diligence, to prevent any sudden Sallies, by one continued Trench with
interposed Forts, in one Night he quite enclosed two parts of the City, Eight
hundred Soldiers were designed to the Work, and were guarded by Two Thousand
others in Arms. The next Night he encompassed with like Expedition the two
remaining parts; in the day time the Works were made more strong and complete;
from thence toward the Towns, the way was broken by many Turnings and
Windings, which while they were made, and soon after, the Water brought
thither, which before had been contained in the Town Trenches, they were
quickly filled up with Earth. The Besieged were very obstinate, in their
denying to surrender, by all means endeavoring to revenge themselves with
their Guns, and by their frequent Sallies, until Prince Maurice his Gunners
shot fire into the Town; which taking, and expatiating it self to the burning
of above Threescore Houses, made them turn all their Care from the hindering of
the Prince's Works, to the preservation of themselves, and what belonged to
them: Nor yet did faint, although they were afflicted with Fire and Wounds
within, and with the terrible Fear of unknown Miseries from abroad, having in
two places begun some inward or second Works, for their better Defense, in case
the old Works before them should be beaten down and become useless. But
afterward, when the Prince had wrought seven Galleries, unto the very Rampire
of the Town, which he commanded to be undermined and blown up; and likewise
that Four and Twenty Pieces of Canon should be drawn down for Battery, that so
the Town might on all sides be laid open by Breaches: The Garrison recanted
their Obstinacy, and craved Pardon, which was granted to them. This was the
17th Day of the Siege; some were appointed, to conduct the Enemy marching off
with his Horses, and Colors, and Wagons, and Ships to carry away such as were
sick; but upon all was laid this Restriction, That within three Months they
should not bear Arms about the River Maes.

About two hours Journey from Grolle, is distant Breefoort, a small Town of the
same Jurisdiction; but, for the strength of the same, reckoned among the chief;
for one continued Work runs round the Town: no^ is there any passing beyond it,
but by one narrow Path, every place else all about being encompassed with
unpassable Marshes and Moors, which a man no sooner treads upon, but he sticks
in the Mud and Dirt: so that there was no way to go on to an Assault, not any
place to pitch a Camp, for continuing the Siege.

Nor were other Things provided with less Care; The Wall being of very ancient
Work, was surrounded with a very deep Trench, which was the Work of Martino
Rossem, when he made Wars in those Parts Forty Years before: Three hundred
Soldiers were sufficient to maintain the small Circumference of the Works
about this small Town. But it was reported, that both these, and the Townsmen,
were in Contest, and had a difference with the Governor, whose Name was
Gardoto, by which means greater strength was added to their fear of our
extrinsick Terror. Nevertheless, they were not hearkened to, that urged a
Surrender, as repining at the Governors Authority, in whom there was too much
Courage, for the present Condition of Affairs there; or else for that their
Confidence, in the strength of the place, with those helps beforementioned,
had made them all agree in this.

But Prince Maurice persisting, the Soldiers were much troubled with the
appearance of so great Labor, and the vastness of the Marshes more offended,
than their daily Conflicts with the Enemy; especially, because they were
ignorant, what Sw^llows and Quagmires lay hid in the deceitful Nature of the
Soil: For the Ground which lately was firm and solid, by the then wetness of
the Season with continual Showers, were overflowed and covered with Water; so
that wherever they went, there was nothing but a thick stiff Mud, and no
safety or certainty any where; not could they find any Ground fit to raise a
Breastwork in. But when the Prince had with great Diligence used all the Arts
formerly tried at Gertruydenberg, and Coeverden, all these Difficulties were by
Experience mollified; And himself became hoth an Advisor and Director of the
Work, sending put of the Forces under Count Solmes, and Col. Brederode, into
those places that answered to the Gates; that which lay in the middle toward
the North, being the most difficult, he reserved to himself.

The Moory places he made firm, by stuffing them with Stones, Wood, and other
sound Earth, laying over all Planks, and into the deeper Water were thrown
Bundles of great Rushes and Brushwood. Thus, upon this made Ground, Hurdles
being set upright, with Earth between them, at small distance, served both for
Blinds and Defense, by this means a Breastwork was brought even to the Hill
hard by the Town, but much helped by the singular industry of the Seamen,
whose continual being in danger makes them fearless: There was erected a
Platform for Twenty Canon, and so much pains was taken in eight days, that they
were gotten to the very Trench of the Town: But there was no Expedient found to
drain the Water from thence, for that the daily Rains, and the lower Springs in
all that open Country, still more and more supplied and filled it. This,
together with the Promise of Count Frederick Hereinberg, to send Three Hundred
Soldiers to their Relief, through the Shallows, so heigntned the Confidence of
the Besieged, that they yet refused to surrender: Whereupon now the whole Camp
intended a Storm, nor were the Captains backward, especially the English, who
having lost many of their men, were incited by the Prince and encouraged, that
at length after their Toilsom Labor in digging, they should be rewarded with
the blood and spoil of their Enemies: Protesting, since the Enemy had had so
many Examples of his Clemency, which he had refused, that now he should feel
the severity of their Revenge. That there was a method in Pardon, as in all
other Things, and Limits within which it is lawful to resist or relent; That
Terror and Moderation, are turned to Glory and Advantage, when too much Lenity
breeds nothing but Contempt and Pride; That for all this, there ought to be
Concessions of Favor, in all public Dealings of War, for the Honor and
Encouragement of Military Virtue, least the Victory should at any time set upon
unfortunate Valor, the undeserved Stamp of a Vice: But on the other side, if
any shall despise, and mock at Threats and certain Destruction, it was never
known, but that such weak Pretenders to Honor, suffered the punishment of
their own Delay.

Wherefore the Prince beginning his Batteries, had beaten down with his
Artillery the Towers and Steeples, at also the Tops of the Bulwarks and
Fortifications; among which, the Rampire without the Gate, having been long
battered, at last was taken; And the Besieged defended the Ruins of their
Lines and Works with their Bodies and strength, throwing down upon the Prince's
men, as well great Bullets as Stones: The Trench alone kept off the Assault
till this time; but now a Bridge of Cork prepared not far off, was soon brought
thither: And this being a Work full of danger, was undertaken by the Seamen;
for they, not waiting for the Word of Command, began to undermine the Rampire,
not so much as minding their own Weapons, which they had carried thither with
them. At the sight of the Bridge, as some stupendous Wonder, the whole People
of the Town were affrighted, so that they could neither agree in Labor or
Design for a space* But at last, leaving off all other business, all flocked to
that part: But when they saw their Enemies advancing with certain steps, and in
a plain and even way, and others to stand behind with glistring Ensigns, fierce
Looks, and threatening Weapons, and that the noise and whistling of Bullets had
now taken away all the Advantages and Opportunities of Speaking or Hearing,
they showed up and down their Heads, and the Coverings thereof, which were a
sure token that they sought for Peace: Whereto, when Prince Maurice's men gave
no other Answer than Wounds, then flying back into the Castle yet entire, they
left to the Rage and Fury of the Pursuers, a miserable Company of Women and
Children, who falling upon their Knees with elevated Hands, although to an
angry Victor, yet either their Sex or Age procured Mercy. About Seventy were
killed in the flight; they who had entered the Castle, forthwith delivered both
it and themselves to the Prince's power; who joyful, that, after the
satisfaction of his Revenge, there was yet opportunity for him to show mercy,
gave them their Lives, and set mulct upon them, which they were to pay to the
Conquering Soldiers, and to that purpose he took Hostages of them: But
afterward this also was remitted, toward the re-building of Houses, which had
been there burned, which happened to begin in the Night, by means of a burning
Bullet, which lying unobserved, among many others that were cooled, set fire on
many Houses, the flame much increasing, by the great quantities of Straw
scattered all about: And in the mean while, the Governor no less conscious to
himself of the hatred of his own men, for his severity toward them, then
fearful of the Enemies indignation, and doubting least the Soldier would
expiate his own pertinacy, by the punishment of his Captains, did not fly with
the Multitude, but hid himself in a dark and close Cave under the Town, there
expecting better Times; whence being drawn out, as he stood before Prince
Maurice, retaining much of his old Contumacy, he began to dispute for himself,
concerning the truth of the differing Parties, and many other Things, which at
such a time, when all Affairs were in such disorder, are neither wisely, nor
with safety spoken of: Whereto, when the Prince, even against his Nature, had
bid forced, he laid all the f^ult thereof upon him, by whose punishment so
great mischief should in some sort be made satisfaction for, with much more
Justice, than the blood of the People or Soldiers: At the hea^ing of which
Sentence, both his Speech and Countenance were quickly altered, till humbling
himself with many submissive Prayers and Tears, at last his Life was re-granted
to him. Now were some few days allotted to the Soldiers, for refreshment of
their Bodies, as well against the past, as the future Labors they were to
undergo, wherein they were not a little comforted with the Booty they had got;
for all the Neighborhood round about had brought thither their Goods, and left
them there as in a most safe Repository.

Soon after this, the Army marched in a Rainy, Season* through a dirty Country,
into Over-Issel, now filled with War, the Terror whereof had already gained
many Towns, though indeed there were few there comparable with the former; for
Gouen was deserted of it self, and the Garrison of Euschede, part of them were
met and slain in the March; and they that remained, affrighted to see and hear
so much, removed away their Guns, and that was enough for them. From hence the
Army was divided to go part of it to Otmarsen, and part to Oldenzeel: It is
supposed, that both these Towns drew their Original from the Marsi, and the
Salii (sometimes noble Nations of Germany) whereof, yet appears some
Glimmerings in their Names. And now is Otmarsen, which we related five years
ago to be lost and taken from Us, re-taken by Us in an instant: For the
Soldiers made no delay, but demanded it of the Enemy, battering the Walls with
their great Guns, to make them believe the necessity of their Surrender the
greater. Oldenzeele held out three days, for there were three Rampires and
Trenches round about the Town, and six Companies filled up the Ditches and the
rest of the Works; though the number of the Town Soldiers did not answer the
Report made of them, yet were they such, as having been old Soldiers, might
well supply the place of a greater number. These, to ingratiate themselves with
the Townsmen, urged a speedy Surrender of the Town, least the houses, by any
pretense of delay; should be battered down or spoiled.

Thus did these two Town; fall into the Prince's hand at once; and, by Decree
of the Deputies of Over-Issel, the Works were thrown down and dismantled,
because they did not think them worthy of Repair, and were afraid, lest if they
should be left so as they then were, they might invite the Enemy to a too
sudden Return.

There remained yet one, and that a very difficult piece of Work, in regard the
Winter approached, which was to quiet all the right side of the Rhine. For that
part of Germany, which has grown into one Body with the Ne^herlanders, both in
Name and Government, contains toward the East the People of Westfalia; and,
near the Seashore, those of Emblen. Upon these Confines, Lingen is situate,
beyond the River Eemes, being the Hereditary Demesnes of the Family of
Te^l^nborg: But the Emperor Charles, in that War when he made the League of
Smalcalde, drew to himself the Possession thereof, though formerly given to
Maximilian Count Buren, as a Reward of his Service in the Wars; for he was
desirous to enlarge the old Bounds, and that he might obtrude Garrisons more
into that Country, and in time come to command unto the further Bank, where men
pass to Hamburgh and Breme, Seacoast Towns of Germany. This City and Country
adjoining, the Prince of Aurange had, among other things, accepted as a Gift,
at what time through Civil Discords, he enjoyed the most happy Affections of
the Netherlanders.

The strength of Lingen was not overgreat, although Frederick late Count
Heremberg, by the Advice of a Renegade. had begun to fortify the same anew;
but the Castle was of a competent strength, being encompassed with a Winding
Bulwork, which contained four Half-Moons, each at an equal distance. At this
time six hundred men lay there in Gari^on, most of them Foot, with a small
party of Horse, but without all doubt, the choice of all the King's Cavalry:
That there were no more, was occasioned by an Oath, whereby they that had gone
out of the next Towns, were ^o bidden to fight beyond the Rhine, during the
space of three Months: It was observed by them, who were wont to judge of
Things after the Event, that the Spaniards had done more politikely, when they
saw there was no hopes to break up the Siege, if they had gathered their Forces
together, though to the leaving open and hazard of other parts; whereas now,
the rest being lost, they had all reduced themselves hither, as if they
intended with all their Forces to contest there, for the last Fort and strong
Hold of their Government. They had here also both Brass and Iron Guns, and
other Instruments, both for Defense, and Offense, Against this Town Prince
Maurice, having sent before some to possess the Passage of the River Dincle,
and himself following the fourth day after, pitched beyond the Eemes, where he
found the Enemy wasting the Villages and Houses with Fire; by which means, he
was compelled to quarter the Soldiers in the Villages at a greater distance
from the Town: There then he pitched his Camp, without any fear of an Enemy
from abroad, aching no care on their backside, and but meanly fortifying their
Front: Against the Town Batteries, they raised Batteries in the Camp, and drew
a Line against any sudden Sallies that should be made by the Besieged: At this
time, the Air was more mild, than usually at that Season of the Year, and the
Ground easily swelling into little Hillocks, much facilitated the privacy of
working. And now, that which was wet with the Water being penetrated, some
being beaten back by the Townsmen, discovered to them the secret Way, to the
great destruction of such as came thither; and not only so, but such of Prince
Maurice's men, as came for Supplies, were shot at with so much vehemence, that
with the fire from the Guns, the Castle seemed to be all in a flame: And this
was t^en done with the less hazard, because the Prince, in hastening his
Expedition, had only brought with him a few light Fieldpieces; the greater
being commanded to be brought through the Mouth of the Eemes, by an easy
Passage of the Ships, until the Wind and the Tide should meet: And as soon as
they were arrived, the whole heat of the Siege continued about the Castle; for
Count Heremberg had brought thither all the main of his strength, and the
Prince was sparing in the Assaults of the Town, as hoping shortly it would be
his own, lest if he batter the Works of it, and so take it first, it should
after he ruinated from the Castle: And here they met with a hard piece of Work,
which was to draw away the Water in the Ditch, before which lay a Bulwark,
strongly defended by the Besieged; so that as i^ was beaten down, by any means
they endeavored to raise it a new: But when at length continual Batteries had
laid it quite slat, the Ditch being filled up, and ^alleries made, then was
sent to them a Summons, which had hitherto been delayed, by reason of the
Scoffs which had bin put upon others in former Sieges; adding withal, That as
this was the first, so also should it be their last Summons. Count Heremberg
hearing that, and having received Letters from Albertus, whereby he was
commanded to have both his own, and his Soldiers Lives, for better Services,
upon the 16th Day after the beginning of the Siege, delivered up both the Town
and Castle; thus being by his Kinsmans Valor deprived, and put out of the
Command, which he had hitherto obtain^d and kept. This Action thus finished,
the Soldiers were drawn into Winter Quarters; And as the Fame of the Prince's
Actions was glorious abroad, so was his happy Return, (which in 3 Months time,
and with so small Forces, had compassed such long Marches through diverse
Countries, and reduced them from the Contribution and Prey of the Enemy, for
the future to be safe by the Boundaries of Rivers) was celebrated with the more
than ordinary Affection and Joy, both of the States and People. Insomuch, that
some of the Princes of Germany, publicly in their Diet made the Motion, That
he might be made General of the War against the Turks, whose Valor and
Fortune, it was probable, would put new Life into the Hungarian Affairs, which
then lay gasping through unprosperous Successes.

But this Joy did not continue long without a Repulse, being inte^rupted by a
Domestic Affliction, because his Sister Aemilia, being stricken with Love,
without the Knowledge, either of her B^other, or the States, was married; and
this she did, as believing or hoping; that their Pardon would be sooner
obtained for such an Action, than their Consent. This Lady, hitherto unspotted
from the Evil, or any of the Germane Manners, was allured by the Speeches and
Countenance of Emanuel, who was no^ unskilled under the Similitudes of
Obsequiou^ness, to find means no raise Pity, especially because being a young
man, and of Royal Bir^h, he was by Force and Injury driven from his Paternal
In^tance; for he boasted Don Antonio for his Father, who for a while was King
of Portugal. This man with his Brother Christopher, having wandered through
France, England, and all other places in Hostility with King Philip, seeing the
young Lady, and conversing with her as often as he pleased, (which Liberty is
granted by Custom, and remains as the only Relic of Ancient Simplicity,
since it self was lost) he assumed the hoped of Affinity, with the Nassuian
Family, although besides the inequality of his Fortune, there was a discr^pancy
in the Religion, which they ^oth professed from their Father.

At first therefore, this new Bride and Bridegroom are forbidden the Princes
presence; and thereupon, for asswaging his Anger, they retired to Wesel from
whence, returning into Holland, with their small Revenue, they lived after the
manner of private persons: This was so much the more grievous to her, being the
Prince of Aurange's Daughter, and Niece to the Duke, of Saxony; because, both
before, and also at the same time, she had Sisters, of the Bourbonian Blood by
the Mothers side, that by the Authority of the State, who gave them Portions
out of the Publike-Stock lived like Princes in great state, and with a noble
Retinue; for Ludovica Julian^ was married to the Prince Palatine, one of the
Electors of the Empire; Isabella to Henry Duke of Bulloyne; and Catharina,
surnamed Belgica, to Philip Count of Harcovia, a Person of no small Wealth
among the Franks: But Carola, to whom the Brabanders would have that Name
given, was bestowed upon Claudius, of the Family of Tremoyle, Duke of Tuart in
Poictou, a man of eminent power; for whose Marriage sake, Henry Frederick
obtained to have an Embassage from the States, as well to see the manners of
France with his Mother, as the King.

The Winter this year proved dangerous to Holland, on that side toward the
North, by breaking down the Banks, and causing great Inundations; the like
whereof happened also about Gro^^gen; And the frequent breaking out of Fires in
Amsterdam, made them there have suspicion of Treachereous dealing from the
Enemy. With the Archduke there was such a scarcity of Money, that the
Soldiers began to mutiny in every place; for beginning at first in Gelders,
the Example passed to Wachtendone, and thence soon after to Calais, C^mbray,
Ardres, Capelle^, Chaste^et, Lire, Dorsan, Scl^ya, S^um, and Gaunt, which were
all infected with the same Contagion: In some places, they thrust out their
Captains: in other places, the Officers joined voluntarily with the Soldiers;
and when a little money was procured, and sent to some of them that was but a
provocation of others, that had none, to the like or greater Disorders; choosing
rather the Rewards of a Licentious Sedition, than the empty Honor of an
unprofitable Obedience: Hereupon several Cities refused to receive Garrisons;
And the Archduke himself, with his Retinue, was shut out of Venloo, and all
the rest of the Winter was spent in diverse contrivances, relating both to Bea^
and War, even until the beginning of the following Year ^ Some Traitors also
were hired, to bring the Spaniards into the Isle of Tolen; but they ex^iated
their impious and unhappy Designs with the loss of their Lives; And again^
another while, a Party was sent to take the strong Hold of Barghen-op-Zoom by
force, while yet the Fortifications were imperfect; and, at the same time,
another select Band, to force the Gate of Gertruydenberg; but both of them
being discovered by Scouts, were forced to depart without attempting any thing.

About this time, all Things seemed to incline toward Peace; for Philip
himself being wearyed out, both of his Courage and Forces, by a Foreign War
with France, a Naval War with England, and as it were a Civil War in the
Netherlands; and learning by Example, That many times Hopes are destroyed by
Hopes, or that the hasty Steps of Old Age and Diseases, wherewith he was now
broken had inclined him to more wild and moderate Counsels, he desired to hide
his Arms, or to distract and break the new-made Society of his Enemies. And the
Opinion of most was that he chiefly aimed to rid himself of the French and
Dutch Wars, that so he might the more readily revenge himself upon England and
with the less charge; for, in France the loss of A^iens and in the Netherlands,
of several Cities beyond the Rhine, had much increased his Enemies Forces, and
lessned his own: besides the Country was wasted, his Credit exhausted, from
whence grew Seditions, it being impossible to keep a settled and strict
Discipline, where the Soldiers want their Pay; and if any part of the
Soldiery be sent away, while the Enemy hovers up and down, it is very
dangerous, because both the Cities of the Netherlands, and the Nobility, are
for their forepassed Acts as much suspected as any: In the mean while among the
Hollanders, the Country is secure, and the Sea open, which daily yields much
profit, and still promises more: And to this purpose, certain Letters written
by Albertus to the King, and intercepted, spoke.

It pleased him therefore to begin with the French King, because under the
pretense of the same Religion, that seemed both more feazible and convenient;
especially since Pope Clement had often admonished him, That, since the Family
of Bourbon was received into the Roman Church, he should incease to trouble
him. And if he yet did proceed further, that his former Wars would seem to have
been made more out of Ambition, and the Thirst of Empire, than his Care of
Religion or Piety: Adding moreover, all that could be said for the advancement
of Concord among Christians, and promoting the War against the Turks. But
Philip along time contemned all these Warnings; though now at last he began to
approve thereof; but chiefly, when he saw the profuse Largesses toward the
French, and that his Armies sent against them were destroyed; that what he
hoped for was vanished, and his hopes punished with so much severity, that he
was thrown out of the possession of much which his Grandfathers enjoyed. Nor
was it displeasing to King Henry to recover his own, that he might once enjoy
in peace that Kingdom which he had obtained by War; and that he might settle by
good Laws all those Things, which for the space of forty years had been
corrupted and run to Ruin: And this way moved also all the Catholics,
formerly a Faction only averse to him, but now the chief men in favor. More
over, (...) all places as he passed, there still met him Crowds of poor People,
humbly supplicating him to hearken to Peace. The honor of counselling and
advising these two Kings, fell to Alexander Medices the Popes ^egate, and
Bonaventure Calatagiron a Sicilian, the Chief of all the Order of Francistans,
who omitted not to show to the French King, That among the Allies of War, the
Reward of it always came to his Lot that first laid hold of Peace: Yet for all
these persuasions be would not hearken to a Treaty, until he had Assurance
given him That the Articles of the Peace should be such, that he might thereby
not only claim but enjoy the whole Kingdom of France.

Fraught with this hope, the Mounsieur's Belleur and Brularde, from the French
King, and Mendosa Taxis, Richard^ and Mariensarde from Alterius, to whom King
Philip had given full power concerning this Peace, met at St. Quintins, where
they proceeded in a very procrastinating manner. In the mean while Henry, that
he might not seem irreligiously to break the League with England, sends thither
his Ambassador, to declare, That by this slow kind of fighting, France did not,
us formerly, decay, but die; That all the Noble Families were exhausted by the
War, the People brought to Poverty, the Towns lay wasted and burnt, and the
Fields unmanured, which must needs yield to the King a sad Spectacle of Misery;
And the Extremity of all these Evils was aggravated by this, That they wanted
Remedy: Wherefore, unless he were furnished with an Army speedily at the Charge
of his Allies, so as he might therewith, even at once, put an end to the War,
What should he do, when even they fought Peace, who must thereby lose the
Reward of their Arms and Valor? however, he would endeavor, that whatever
Peace ^e made, both the Queen and the rest of his Allies, should have equal
benefit thereof; but if they should not think fit thereof, yet it with no
wonder, if he dealt one way with those who sought Prey and Safety from War, and
another with such, as sought nothing but certain Ruin. And that Queen
Elizabeth might have the less to accuse the King's Infidelity, this was added,
That by the League she had promised to send him 4000 Auxiliaries, but (...) of
^a^e by the guilt of some few Persons, he was fain to be con^ with 2000. and
those also in a manner extorted from her; At which the King of France had
suffered^ while he desired to retain the Noise of her fruitless Alliance, yet
could not forget the Injury against the Hollanders: He had no such plausible
Pretense, however he sent Mounsieur Buzanvale, to let them know, what small
helps he had either from their Promises or Performances, and that they had
received and carried more out of France by Pay, than they expended by the
Charges of their Assistance.

Both these People were sensible of the King's Arts in this Management of his
Affairs, that he was weary of the War, though he would not seem so. But Queen
Elizabeth calling to memory the great Charges she had been at, in behalf of the
Hollanders; and considering Ireland, which although at that time infested by
Rebels, though indeed their strength was broken; yet detained there John
Norris, and Thomas Borrage, formerly famous Captains in the Low Countries, and
there also emulous of each other, had destroyed the Rebels by War indeed, but
not by fighting, Upon these Considerations therefore, the Queen re^urned this
Answer; That as she had not been wanting to her Ally, while he proceeded in the
War, so if Peace were made, she would willingly be present at the hearing of
the Conditions. Only the Hollanders easily perceived, that they were the
persons, that were by Peace to be distinguished, from those against whom a
common War was to be waged: For, between the Kings this was one certain Rule
leading to Peace: For the future, to abstain from d^ any further, Injuries and
both to give and take Indemnity for al^ former Actions: Besides, they well
knew, that if a man undertake to reconcile a Prince and People, he will find,
that the one must enjoy his Will in all Things: and the other must suffer for
the Offenses of both: Whereupon they were not ignorant, how hard a Task they
should undergo, if the whole strength of Spain were turned against them, they
thought fit to hint both at the Force and Fraud of their Enemies, thereby to
deter others, yet themselves politikely to offer any thing: And as to the King
of France, who was now advancing against Nants, besides the Regiments of the
League, they offered as many ships as he would toward the shutting up of the
Loyre, and greater ^^ds then all that, if any of the Netherlanders should
invade the Borders of France, But behold, as a prevention of all these intended
Designs, they themselves are attempted by new Allurements, viz. King Philip had
two Daughters, the younger was married to the Duke of Savoy; the Elder named
Izabella*Clara-Eugenia be had kept at Home, thereby the better to ensnare and
Tantalize many with the hopes of so great a Marriage: For the truth is, she was
looked after by the late Emperor Rudolphus, Eruestus, and the Duke of Guise,
(though this last had spent the principal part of his Age in an unfruitful
Coelibate) but now at length is betrothed to the Archduke Albertus of Austria,
not without the heavy displeasure of Rudolphus the Emperor, as many reported,
that the honor of marrying with her should be refused to him, having formerly
so earnestly sought after it.

But Philip not minding that, proceeded to the New Marriage, promising in Dowry
with her, Burgundy with the Netherlands, not only that by this division, the
right Heir msght be provided for against her younger Brother; but also for the
reconciling and winning the Affections of such as had Rebelled, if perhaps the
Name of Austria should be more acceptable to them, than that of Spain, whose
fresh Injuries would make the others former Benefits be remembered and well
resented.

But all these Endeavors vere vain, and to no purpose, with People, who would
neither be persuaded out of their Fear or Liberty, but weighing all the
Necessaries and Pretenses of that House, who even by force usurped the Name of
the Balgick Empire, they suspected every Thing proceeding from thence: But the
Netherlanders of the other part, returned Answers fit for the time, to the
Letters Philip had sent them; wherein was transmitted what he had determined,
to this purpose.

That it was much against their wills, that they should be disunited in their
Obedience from the King, of whose Justice and Clemency they had had so many
Examples, unless that it should be taken as a part of their Duty, that at their
Prince's Command, they would acknowledge his true Effigies: Thence they fell
into Eulogies of their New Lords, highly extolling the virtues of him who was
present among them, as daily seen; and no less admiring those of Her who was
absent, which they had but heard of; humbly begging one thing, That he would
not withdraw his Assistance from them now, when their Affairs were in a manner
desperate; That as to his Care of Religion, and his Commiseration, his Fame was
celebrated even in the most remote Nations, who had been obliged to him for
many Benefits: How much more justly then should they esteem his Goodness, who
had advised with his most Noble Daughter, his most generous Kinsman and them
his ancient Subjects against that endless Calamity, wherewith they are
threatened on one side by the Enemy; on the other, by their own Soldiers, no
loss grievous than an Enemy? And if they might continue fixed to himself, and
his Son and Heir, the Netherlanders would refuse nothing, to show they h^re an
Honorable Reverence to the same Majesty, under what Na^ soever. The
Brabanders, but chiefly they of Flanders, did separately urge and insist, That
some means might be found of making Peace with the Hollanders but if He would
seek, from their Obstinacy to heighten their Punishment, he must th^n seek to
win some Princes of the Old Religion, and likewise some Ecclesiastical Persons,
to be willing, either by Arms or some other help; to give Assistance to the
common Cause; for even they that hitherto have feared the dreadful Greatness of
Spain, will think themselves much more equal to it when they shall see that
Power divided. But all these Things, as they were intermingled with Truth and
Falsehood, the Sequel of the History, wherein I shall proceed in the next Book,
will make manifest.

The Seventh BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
1598.
THE United States did not delay to add new Signs of their old Hatred to their
Enemy; for they set forth an Edict, That nothing that was fit, either for War
or Shipping, should be transported either into Spain, or any People allied to
them; and thereupon followed another, whereby a Restraint was laid upon all
Home-growing Fruits, least while they sought for advantage abroad, they should
breed a scarcity at Home; but Hostile Flanders was forbidden of all sort of
Trade: Among which Passages, the French Peace, that had never been well
observed, disappointed such as greedily sought after Advantage, and dealt in
Matters of that Nature, by abating the Custom, and using other Crafty Policies.
Now also, Counsels began to be taken concerning new Arming the Militia, as well
such as were to be Lanceers, as those who had either in the Infantry or Cavalry
deserved well by their Experience, and use of greater and lesser Guns: Besides,
new Troops were gathered, with the Revenues which had been raised out of the
Fields the last Autumn. But afterward, when they began to search into the
Frauds and false Dealings of the Captains, they found by Experience, that all
their great Noise of Remedies fell short, and that it little profited to reduce
the Numbers of every Company, so long as the same means of Deceit remained,
whereby the more their Numbers were lessned, the more pernitiously they gaped
to devour what was possible.

Moreover, the most active and v^liant Soldiers of that chaffering Age, whom
the Captains used to invite over with the hopes of greater Rewards and Pay than
they had before, were now only equalled to the rest, by this contracted
Licentiousness of Defrauding, although themselves with infinite Greediness
sucked dry the Common Treasury for those uses: From hence began frequent
running away, even to the spoiling of whole Regiments; and certainly, the
Mischief would have increased, had it not been stopped by the Enemies Poverty:
Which Things being perceived at length, by the Prince's daily Admonition, the
States acknowledged; the Evils were grown too big for them.

In this mean while, there was a secure Quiet beyond the Rhine, which made all
the Provinces of the Union, as their Tributes increased, to consider of a way
to gratify their Governors Prince Maurice, and Count William, either with the
Rewards of Lands or Money; though there wanted not some, who would have blasted
this Testimony of their grateful Minds, with the ignominious Name of an
Ambitious Prodigality.

About this time, being the second Month of the Year, happened a more rare than
admirable Thing hereabouts, which because real Prodigies were not sufficient,
was reputed in the account of an Ostent. A kind of Whale was found upon the
Coast of Holland by certain Fishermen, and drawn ashore by them with Ropes;
which is a Creature not so much unknown, but that many of our Contrymen that
live by the Seaside are well acquainted both with its Name and Shape: The
place where it was taken is called Bercheyde, between Schevelin and Catwick, an
old Village, drawing its Original from the Catt^, as the Name testifies: from
whence, not far off, is a Passage into the middle Channel of the Rhine, and a
Castle, which is now utterly ruined by the Encroachments of the Sea, the Ruins
whereof may sometimes be seen at a Low Water: This Castle is said to be one of
the Works of Drusus, or rather of Severus, to whom our Ancestors, by reason of
its standing opposite to Britain, gave the Name of Arx Brittanica. But to
return to the Whale, which reached Seventy Foot in length, filling all the
Shore between the Sea and the Sand-hills; to the sight whereof, went a vast
multitude of People, not minding the filthy and nausious Savor thereof; for
after it was dead upon the Land, as it lay the Bowels burst our, which so
infected the Air thereabout, that many of those that went to see it, were cast
into Diseases by the stench of it, and some dyed: Certainly, to Wisemen
nothing could seem less wonderful, than one such Creature, whereof the vast
Ocean contains a Multitude in her immense Profundities, cast upon the Shallows
by WinterStorms, where at the Ebb of the Tide, it could not get off, but
discovered it self by the vain struggling, and bea^ing of her great Body upon
the Flats: But among the Vulgar, who have liberty to interpret all Things
according to their own Fancy, and to draw all the Works either of Nature or
Chance into Parties, and from thence to foretell to the Hollanders, who were
the Conquerors of that Creature, rich Spoils, and the Victory over their
Enemies: Others, from hence, denounce sad and unlucky Omens to them, who are
followed by such Monsters in their own Seas: Which Things also being bandied
backward and forward in Books, the Year following manifestly convicted of
Vanity; being a Year of Idleness, if compared with some that went before. Nay,
though some, from the Event, would seem with Reason to conclude, from the
taking of a Sea-Calf in the River, not far from Gorrichen, not long after, that
these Creatures were the Forerunners of those Actions, which in aftertimes
were transacted near those Places. This indeed is true, that seldom in any Year
have more Things happened, contrary both to Hope and Expectation, the very
beginning thereof, from the Winter going all along with unsuccessful
Endeavors: For the Commanders of the Garrison of Berghen-op-Zoom being
persuaded, that by an agreed Connivence of the Scouts, they might get Wonde,
which is a Castle situate inward; from whence some of the King's Soldiers
being sent out into the Estuaries, did infest all the Rivers; the Setter
forward of this Design, being a man no less timorous than imprudent; as soon as
the Danger began to appear, himself by his own flight, spoiled the Plot which
had been laid by his counsel. But Prince Maurice suffered a greater Mishap with
the Fleet sailing into Flanders, without the fault or neglect of any man; for
the Winds raging without intermission, quite destroyed such ships as lay
abroad, while the rest, not without great hazard, sought to get into Harbor:
And by chance it happened, that some few days after, a Castle or Fort of the same
Coast, that lies opposite to Bierfleet beyond Zealand, was by some Garrison
French Soldiers delivered to the Spaniards, who bought it of them, the Third
Year after it had bin in the hands of the Hollanders, by the Treachery of some
Waloon Soldiers; and in this manner was both the shame and loss recompensed.

A Party of Horse also marched toward Limburg, covering to intercept some
Companies of Foot lying thereabouts; but their Journey being discovered, they
were forced to return Home empty through the deep Snow. The same in the Duchy
of Juillers, by the surprise of some Troops, about Burick, were forced to leave
some Provisions to the Enemy, which they had intercepted, though not without
the loss of some blood. And others returning from Liege and Trevier, were met
by the Enemy and worsted: Which trivial, but frequent Mischances, in some
measure, diminished the Honor they had gotten the former Year, in the action
of Turnh^nt. In the interim, the Hollanders neither lost the good that comes by
Peace, nor those Advantages which in other Wars were unknown: Nay, they made
good use of the Discord that fell out between the English and Germans; the
beginning of which Contention, when, in the Event, it reached the
Low Countries. I must begin at a greater distance.

In former Times, the chief Trade for Merchants was settled in the German
Cities; of which they that were situate, either by the Sea, or some famous
Rivers, to the Number of Seventy, were by the just Laws of Commerce
incorporated into one Body, but consisting of diverse Nations; as the Venedians,
Saxons, Borussians, and Westfalians, who were all united by one League, which
was named the Ansiatike League: Nor were the Superior Northerly Parts, and the
Netherlandish Parts, only frequented by the Industry of the Germans, but also
London it self was a great Mart for them; where, after they had publicly
flourished for their Fidelity and Profit in Trading, it was granted by the
Kings of England, that they might barter or exchange their Commodities, paying
but small Customs: But at that time, the Pastures of Britains, with the only
proceed of their Wool, did almost answer all Importations from Foreign Parts,
although nothing was then fetched out of the Island, but rough Wool in the
Fleece; until the Netherlanders, weary of their Domestic Evils, and for
diverse uses, being banished out of their own Countries, as they taught some
People in other Things, so they instructed the English, in ordering and working
of their Wool. This happened during the Reign of King Edward, who minding to
draw some part of this new Gain into his own Treasury, thought himself hindered
in his intent by the Ansiatike League: Wherefore, seeking some cause of
Quarrel, whereby he might recede from what his Prede^^ssors had granted, the
English begin to turn all Topsie-Turvey, yet still to offer the Germans their
old Privileges, if they would undergo the Customs and Burdens laid upon
Clothing; with the same readiness and obedience, as the Citizens and Subjects
of the Kingdom did; averting, That nothing was so contrary to the Duty of (...)
Prince, as to release that Burden to Strangers, which the Subjects were forced
to bear; and therefore required, that they might enjoy the like Immunities
through Germany. All which prevailed nothing with the Germans; who retorted,
That by these new Inventions, the Privileges which they had purchased with
three hundred years Merits, and had been confirmed unto them by the Oaths of
fourteen Kings, were utterly infringed. And no less were they proved at the new
settled Company of the English, who took away all their Gain, by serving other
Nations with their Cloth. Hence arose. Envy and Complaints to the Emperor,
especially at that time, when by reason of the Quarrels between Queen
Elizabeth, and the Duke of Alva, the English being commanded out of the
Netherlands, had settled beyond the Feines: They were accused for spoiling and
undervaluing the Commodity in the Manufacture, by discovery of the Prices at
the first hand: In this manner much time was spent, partly in Wranglings
between the Subjects, and partly in Letters of Princes, sent to and fro, until
the English Name, growing more and more hated, by continual Pyracies at Se^,
Philip, the Inciter of such Feuds, renewed these old Controversies, undertaking
the Deferce of the Cause with Caesar by his Ministers Mendosa and Clement, not
with any Affection to the Ansiatike League, but that he might ri^ up old Sores,
and disturb the Sea with an Enemy. Now also Lubeck, the Head City of the
League, in an Embassy by them sent, (at which time the Authority of the King
of Denmark was ^ought after, for the working upon the Hollanders, of which
Embassy. Plous Barlayment was the Chief) blamed the Germans; wh^ passing by
all the rest of the Ne^herlanders, only endeavored, by their Commerce, to
increase the Weal^h of Rebels; which showed, that they bore neither an honest,
nor grateful Mind, for such a good Office of the King: And now they were daily
solicited to take Arms against the English, with Promises of great Assistance
to them therein: And thereupon the Germans sent these Demands to the Cities,
formerly of the Ansiatike, but now of the Belgike League, with Letters
discovering Hatred, either out of Envy against that People, growing potent by
Merchandise; or else, because it has been found true by frequent Experiments,
that the nearer men agree in Religion, the more sharply they differ; for they
of the Augustane Confession, and the Catholics, the more different they are in
Judgment, the more concurrent they are in Affection.

These Things were all done the former Year; wherein, at last, by the Decree of
the Emperor Rudolphus, the English, that exercised the Manufactories of Cloth,
within the Bounds of the Germane Empire, were commanded by a certain Day to
depart: Nor did the Queen indulge much longer time to the Ansiatikes in
England; And it was in vain to begin Treaties, in regard there could be no
convenient Meetings, for the English departing from Stoad, which was the chief
Seat for their Trading, from thence all sort of Traffic and Negotiating
Factories were translated to Bruges, (though it had been sometime at Antwerp)
and from thence again, it was forced to remove by the miseries of the War; and
then the Merchants, for the betrer choosing of themselves a convenient station,
the War being now carried away to the Borders, they compassed and tried most of
the Cities of Holland, who were in Trading, as in the midst of a fe^led Peace;
by whose Emulation, and contending who should excel most, in rich Presents to
them, they were divided in Opinions: But at last complaining, that the Waters,
in many places, were not good for the washing of their Wools, they settled at
Middleburg in Walch^ren; from whence also, part of the same Body again had
formerly gone away, when the Affairs of Antwerp were in a distracted Condition,
as well by a Siege, as by Fear. The States, for the inviting of Society and
Commerce, answered all Things to the Desires of their Suitors, as knowing, that
their Company would advance both their Stock and Tributes.

Much time was spent, in contriving Covenants between the English and Germans:
In the interim, the Hollanders, whom they of Flanders not long before forced
Home, having gotten the Manufactory of Cloth to Leyden and Harlem, by the same
mightily increased those places, making to themselves an advantage from other
men's harms; yea, and several Renegadoes of Portugal, part of which were the
Remainders of the Jews in that Kingdom, that they might be free from question,
for professing the Religion of their Country; and also out of hope of greater
Gain, much advanced the bigness and Trade of Amsterdam; and their Navigation at
Sea, by how much they were more subject to danger in Spain, by so much they
spread themselve far and wide into other parts of the World: One Wind brought
out of the Baltike Sea one hundred and fifty ships all laden with Corn, which
by the Covetousness of the Merchants, was either so kept up, or dispersed into
Foreign Parts, that the Price of Corn was no whit abated thereby; and this was
reckoned among the Advantages of the Common wealth, not only for the Gain it
brought from abroad, but because Necessity had reduced Matters to that pass,
that any one could live more easily, than he that Ti^led the Ground. They went
also by other Seas toward Constantinople, and the Ports of Syria and Egypt,
and the Islands in the Egeau Seas, under the Name and Protection of English, or
French Traders: In all which places, they passed backward and forward with
safety. But yet they could not avoid, but that they might be intercepted,
either by the Spaniard, or if they escaped him, they might fall upon the Coasts
of Barbary, or meet a Turkish Galley: by all which, being Enemies to one
another, they were sure to be seized and taken as Enemies: And in all these
Cases, the Danger was more grievous; for that the Fortune and Custom of their
War is such, that the smallest of their suffering or punishment, is to pay an
excessive Ransom for their Liberty.

And certainly, herein the Merchants Avarice is worthily accused, who run their
Ships naked, both of Men and Arms, into so great and univoidable Dangers, and
yet do not endeavor to win some Vindicators of their Rights in those Barbarous
Regions, but are glad to fly to the Patronage of them; by joining with some of
whom, the rest become more enraged: For the Hollanders followed the French and
English, as they formerly did the Venetians; from whence sprung, among
Christians, Discords concerning Gain, rather than a Sacred Society, which heir
Name obliged them to.

The same Spring, and the Summer that followed, no less than fourscore Sail of
Ships, of great Bulk and Burden, set out for long Voyages; part went to the
Golden Shore of Ethiopia; part to the Indies, and the Molluca Islands; and some
to America, or that part of the World which is opposite to Us, or to the
Streights of Magellan: Questionless, this is no new Thing, to make several
Attempts in diverse places a once.

About this time, one of the Ships of Zeland, which had bin at the Indies upon
the English Coast, either by the sticking of the Rudder in a Shelf, or for want
of Balast, turning on one side, at all the Port-holes of the Guns, (which by
chance were open) took in the Sea, and, on a sudden was overwhelmed in the
Waves, and all her Lading, which consisted most of Silver, together with the
men that were in it, were u^terly lost. Unfo^tunate also, and full of Damage,
was that audacious Attempt of Balthazar Mucero, who being a Merchant, and
revolving in his Mind how to acquire a New Government, because the States and
Prince Maurice, had granted him Letters of Mart upon his Request, assayed to
take from the Portugezes, and King Philip, a certain Island in the Ethiopick
Sea, upon the Bennine Shore, near the Equin^ctial Circle; which, although it
were not over-fertile, yet it was very convenient for such as passed that way:
Two hundred Soldiers and Mariners blown up with Hope, that they should each
of them have six hundred Florens Yearly Wages, took his part. Over these he
placed as Commander Julianus Clerhage a Captain of a restless Nature, and
unfaithful to his Country, and its Governors; for, under the Earl of
Leicester, he was not so free from Sedition, but that he was accused to have
been willing to have had a hand therein. To him were joined other young men of
small Fortune: At first, they flattered the Islanders and Natives; and, upon
pretense of Feasting, upon a private persons words, the chief men of the Island
were cunningly allured into the Ships, and there kept, giving to the Portugezes
this hope, That they should find the Friendship of Holland more advantageous to
them than the Castilian; and promising the Natives a more moderate Servitude.
And now by sowing the Land with Seed, and using other Husbandry, they began
very successfully to flourish: But the Priest of the Island instigated to
Revengeful Arms and Slaughter, all the men, who were of their own record
fearful of Things untryed, and choosing rather their old and known Slavery:
Thus their first Instigator, being afterward taken and put to death, by a
pretense of Law, the Multitude were so exasperated, by his Death and
Punishment, that they continually were in Counsel to Rebel; though at the
present, they seemed to crave both Peace and Pardon. But some other Legates of
Mucero were slain by Treachery, not without suspicion of Clerhage, as having
purposely remove^ the Watch; and they which remained with him, leaving their
Care of fortifying themselves, fell to such variance, that they much augmented
their Enemies Boldness and Courage to set upon them.

At last, Diseases increasing, through the unseasonableness of the Air and
Weather, Clerhage, with many others, being dead, the few that remained in
health, having no supply of Victuals, but what their Ships afforded (...) of
Aid, which the Portugezes had sent for to the Neighboring Islands; and the
Continent left carelessly, and, with much do, their new-built Garrison, when, in
hope of a growing Colony, Women as well as Men, Arms and Provisions were sent
(though too late) out of Holland, to relieve them.

Neither at this time did the English lie still, of whom the Earl of Cumb
rland, with Forty Sail of private men ships, beset Lisbone, which was of very
great advantage to the Hollanders, who, when the Portugezes were shut up, were
like by themselves only, to obtain the whose Trade of the Indies: Nor could it
be otherwise, as the Enemies themselves ingeniously confessed; for if they
durst not not cope with one Fleet of Pirates upon their own Coast, they might
for the future, well despair, that they should not (...) the possession of the
Sea under their Dominion: From thence passing toward America, by the Fortunate
Islands, he struck the King's Pla^e-Fleet into a great fear; and, not long
(...), forcing the Island of Porto-Rico, he got nothing but a little Booty; and
so, either broken by the Diseases of his Men, or ignorant how to use his
Victory, as has been observed to be the fault of many of that Nation, he
departed. But the Hollanders suffered great Losses in their own Sea, the
Enemies frequenting it being only Pirates, which formerly harbored at
Dunkirk, but now lu^ked in the Narrow Sea near Calais: With which Trouble, the
Fishermen were much perplexed; yet if as any time, they perceived themselves
equal in strength, they blamed their Sea-Captains, for avoiding to meet the
Pirates; for that since they could not enjoy their safety, they would fight
with them to the Death, for Honor and Revenge: Against this l^v^l, many
Remedies were sought after: And some there were that believed, that our great
Ships would have been sunk in the Enemies Harbors; but the Force of the Winds
and Waves, helped by the Labor of Men, in some manner, saved them, though by
reason of their great Bulks the danger was the greater. Wherefore the number of
these ships being increased by some that were new built, they were sent to keep
Guard upon the Enemies Coasts, to secure the Enemy from coming out, and be a
Convoy and Safeguard to other Vessels that were unarmed: Other part of them
were commanded to scour their lurking places, and to clear the Sea, by running
backward and forward cross-wise: And; the Guard of the Narrow Sea was committed
to Peter Douse, who had under his Command an indifferent Fleet.

The chief Care of the States was, that as the War increased upon them,
proportionably to augment the Revenue that was to maintain them against it,
which was submitted to by the Common People, sensible of their danger, with
much modesty: Only in Utrecht, the giddy-headed Multitude, with great Fury,
withstood these New Taxes, as long as the Revenues of the Church, which the
other Provinces had converted to the public Use, were detained in private
hands.

At the beginning of Christianity, and afterward as Affection thereto
increased, every famous City did collect the Products of Religious Charity,
wherewith the Convents of Men and Holy Women, separated by diverse Names to the
Service of God, maintained themselves in their Pious Recess; which being
conveyed from hand to hand, for the ease of Posterity, long since grew into an
Ancient Custom: But the very Face of Religion being altered by these Wars, they
have now not so much as the Shadow, while partly Youth brought up in Learning,
takes the Monastike ^^fe upon him as a Pleasure; and partly while every
sluggish and idle Drone, either for Favor or Money, obtaining the same,
infinitely abuses it, by his Lascivious Life, disorderly Carriage, and
supersluous Pampring: And yet these same, by the Name of Ecclesiastics, both
in the Senate which Commands, and among the Judges that put the Law in
Execution, are the first who give their Opinion; and that by the same Right, as
the whole Nobility, and the third Estate; the one part of them is drawn out of
the Cities, and the other out of the Towns.

Scarce could the Authority of the United States, or the Prince, abate the Rage
of the Commons, against these Things, though the Example thereof began to be
dreadful, and might prove a matter of evil Consequence, yet at last they
reduced them to Order: In the mean while Philip having settled his Affairs, as
to matter of Money, as well as he could, together with the Threats of War, he
used Invitations and Allurements to advance Peace: And because in the
Netherlands, there were as well Soldiers wanting as Money; and that, besides
the new raised men, his chief Confidence was in the Spaniards, who lay about
the Borders of the Country: He set Sail from Calais with 38 Ships laden with
men being part of that Fleet, which we formerly related to have been driven by
Tempest from the English Coasts, where they last attempted to invade that
Kingdom. In this Fleet were four Regiments consisting of so many Thousand Men,
of which Sancius Le^va, the Commander in chief of the Fleet had the Charge: He,
with a prosperous; Gale, and the steerage of a Renegado Hollander, brought most
of them safe to Harbor, while a contrary Wind and Tempest had beaten back the
Hollanders, that were to guard those narrow parts of the Sea: But the
Spaniards, with all their Labor, were scarcely gotten within the Port before
they ran a ground: For so they were commanded, that if any considerable
strength of the Enemy appeared at Sea, they should be sure to land the
Soldiers, though by that means they should be forced to lose their ships: yet
notwithstanding all his their have, one ship fell into the Hollanders hands;
wherein, contrary to the Custom of a Maratime War, the Captives had all their
Lives spared; and the Reason was, Because the first Heat being passed in
Consultation, it would have seemed very inhumane to have killed them in cool
Blood: But they which passed by, part of them by the Advice of the Germans and
Danes, went out upon their Shores; and others being taken up by the Spaniard,
by the Hollanders consent, had leave to pass the Sea quietly Home; the rest
were to be refurnish'd with Men and Arms, and with a greater Fleet, which was
to be built and rigged up in Spain, they were, by Report, to begin a new War at
Sea; because, within a few days, Calais was to be delivered up to the French
King.

Not long after, two ships, hoping to take a Voyage privily into Spain, fell
into the Hollanders hands, being full of rich Merchandise, and well manned with
Soldiers, who having had enough of War, and gotten therein sufficient Wealth,
were there returning to their Country to take their ease: There were in it also
take a Letters, wherein were discovered the Intentions and Gifts of the Cities,
destined and allo^ted to Fontain, which Prince Maurice sent back to him. The
coming of the Spanish Soldiers was every where displeasing to the Common
People, as well for the Hatred of their Persons* a^ of War: But the Archduke
glad of them, their Poverty having, by the sense or fear of Evil, overcome all
Difficulties, by their Aid, and the service of Herman Count Heremberg put an
end to that long-continued Sedition of the Soldiers at Grave for want of their
Pay; although some Prisoners and Letters also did certify, that though they
were pacified more were offended, that among all these Turnings, would yet
remain faithful to their Parties: This was the state of the Law Countries on
both sides, before the state of Affairs was the^e anew changed.

At this time, between the Ambassadors of France, and the Archduke Albertus,
the long-continued Treaty, produced great hopes of Peace; and the Queen of
England had sent thither Cecil, Son to the Lord Burghly, and with him one
Wilks, who was privy to all his Secrets: And therefore now the matter it self
required, that the United States should send Ambassadors to France; and Queen
Elizabeth desiring, that they might be authorized with a full and free power,
together with her Ambassadors, to Treat of War and Peace; They disapproved the
Motion, lest afterward, if they denied to consent, they should be over-powred
by her Royal Authority.

Hereupon a double Embassy is appointed with a convenient Retinue; one of
which was to go into England. The Persons were, the Lords Warm^nde, often
beforementioned, and beloved by the English, in remembrance of his good
service in the Cadiz Expedition; Min Here Heffingen a Frizon, and John Wercken
of Zeland. To France they sent Justine Nassau, Governor of the Sea for Zeland,
and John Olden-Barnev^lt, principal Counselor and Assistant to the States of
Holland, a man well skilled and industrious for the public good of his
Country, and by his Authority did, and obtained is much as by the help of Art,
Wit, and Industry could be done, or obtained among a free People: And here,
among many other things which I have cause to fear, this is one, lest any
strangers, into whose hands these Histories shall come, should wonder, how the
Names of such famous men, an honorable Report of whom they have received in
their own Country, should come to be so seldom mentioned in my Writings: But I
hope the great difference between the Government of that State, and the Empire
of other Countries, shall be a sufficient Excuse for me. For where the Actions
of Cities and Towns are related, which are ruled either by the Senate or
People, if any more eminent matter of Valor o^ Policy happen, there is given a
fair occasion merely in a return of G^ati^nce, to set out the Authors or
Inventors thereof: Neither in Kingdoms do the great Ministers of State remain
obscure. But, among the Hollanders, all things are transacted in the Name of
the Council, without any mention of the Authors; whom, although you know, yet
you would seem ambitious, in seeking to praise them; nor would you avoid the
ha^red and displeasure of many, by whom another Glory is looked upon as their
shame, and the praise of their active Honor, as a Reproof of their sluggish
and dull Nature.

The Ambassadors that went to England, endeavored by many Arguments to make
the Queen averse to a Pacification; advising also, That she would, in some
measure, gratify the French King, in his desire concerning Aid; and then urge
him further, being encouraged by Ambassadors, that he would, of his own accord,
rather seek Reparation both for Old and New, former and later Injuries by War,
than to think to appear his Domestic Discords against such a restless Nation:
And then bowing the Knee, according to the Customs of the Court, when they had
returned large Thanks for so mer Benefits, They added in these words:

All who are called from their just Arms, to talk of Peace, ought to consider,
whither the Peace that is offered be real and sound, or deceitful and infirm
and, on the other side, whether the War be terrible or dubious, or be not mo^e
safe than Peace; for it is a vain thing to talk of the goodness of Peace* where
men shall never be suffered to enjoy it: The Sp^niard, O Queen, is reported to
solicit you to a Peace, whose perfidy Con^unct with Barbarous Cruelty, and
whose Ambition of reaching at the Rights of others, we need not accuse. when
his Masters openly teach, that with men differing from them in point of
Religion, no Faith or Promise is to be kept, neither ought they to partake of
the Benefit either of Divine or Humane Laws: Others have not feared to say,
that by the Decree of Fate, the h^ighth of Empire is allotted to the West; and
that, am^ng Christians, there shall be no other visible Empire on Earth, than
that of Spain. And though it might be to purpose, to speak of the impotent
Pride of the Austrian Family to other Princes, and how, by Trisling Leagues, it
has claimed to it self that Angle as Hereditary, with other the furthest Parts
of the Earth, that whatever lies within the Bounds of Lutope, if it be not his
own, is accounted and looked upon as an Enemy; yet it will be to little
purpose, to remember these things to you, which have suffered and undergone
many Hazards by him. And can it be doubted, but that he still has the same
Mind, who has not only armed the People of your Kingdom to Rebellion, and
more than once sought to invade it by Fleets, ( though prevented by Almighty
God) but also, so far contemned all Honesty and Justice, that he has precured
Murderers and Poysoners to do mischief to your Sacred Person: Certainly, it is
not to be doubted, for the old Grudges, and the Causes thereof remain; and as
you continue fixed in your ancient Piety, so is he nothing altered from his
wonted Avarice. And now this man seems to seek to make an honorable Peace with
you, with a just and pious intent is it not that he may wage his Wars at his
own pleasure, while now he is forced to wait upon yours? And therefore, he
presuming, from the present Affairs, to gain opportunity for greater Matters,
will lie in wait for all occasions. And shall we, in so great danger, be caught
and wrapped up into a stuggish security; We know, that since he cannot catch us
all, he endeavors by this League (which he surely intends to break) to ^o^se
as many of us as he can: Former Kings and People did better; for though they
were not at all troubled, yet they never feared to ioyn together against
increasing Empires while they had time, lest at one time or other, though
piecemeal, they might be all conquered. For they knew, that some Wars were
waged only to obtain Peace: Others because a safe Peace could never be
obtained: And as the Nature of Fire and Water are directly contrary and
endless, so is the Contention of them that on the one hand s^ek to domineer
over all, and of those, on the other side, that will serve none: wherein to
seek Revenge or Defense too late is folly; but to anticipate (...) very
beginnings is a glorious act befitting wise men: For it is not so much for the
punishing of Injuries, as for preventing Princes of that sort of Dominion,
which is nicknamed to be Power given them by Heaven. He cannot be said to
preserve himself, that lies upon the Defensive Posture: It Is Impunity makes
wicked Minds worse: Let Philip 's Pretenses be what they will, it is sure he
will always keep Armies a foot both by Sea and Land; What to do? To fight with
the Turk, or keep other Foreign Enemies in awe? No, no, but to bring Us under
his Yoke, or otherwise to ^^o with Us what Providence will suffer him. Nor can
England be free either from Charge or Fear, while his Armi^s are raging every
where. Let but this Question be answered, Whether is an Act of greater Valor
to be afraid of, or fight with an Enemy? and whether is it more just and
honorable, to take Tributes from our Subjects, or Booties from our Foes? We do
not boast, Great Queen, our Alliance with you; We acknowledge our selves
obliged to you for infinite Benefits; which, that they may not be forgotten or
l^st, a little concerns you, but us highly, who both would be, and be accounted
grateful, And if We, on our part, have done ought in requital, which might be
acceptable for the readiness of our Intents, in regard the multiplicity of our
pressing Necessities could not grant more, We doubt not but You will be ready
to remember it with more Equity, than behooves us to speak of it. This is
without all Dispute, that your Ancestors have had such an Esteem of the Belgic
Provinces, in regard of their Site and Customs, that they always thought it a
matter of great moment, in all their great Affairs, to have their Friendship,
and of Prejudice to have them Enemies. But herein yon have excelled the Glory
of your Ancestors, that by how much you exceed others in Power, by so much you
excel them in Acts of Mercy and Piety; by whose Means and Aid the French have
gained many Victories, and We more which will redound to the Honor, not only
of your Self, but those that shall come after you. The future Events of Wars
are in the Hands of Almighty God, whom we (...) found propitious to us, beyond
all Humane Expectation. And as far as it is lawful for a Wiseman to judge of
Futurities, we have all those things, that put Life, and add Sinews and
Strength to War; for we have Men M^neyes, Towns, Cities, and Forts; nay more,
we have a General so famously exemplary for Valor and Virtue, that it is
hardly to be imagined, how any of these things should decrease, and not rather
be augmented: Whereas the Enemy, unless by our giving way, has not where to
settle: And as his Dominion it wider, so is ours more convenient; for in a
great and over-spatious Empire, it is usual for some People to Rebel: Upon
which occasion, if at any time he be employed, it will be easy for other
Princes to appoint what Method they will use for the future for their own
Security. That which is usually said, or thought to the contrary, That a man
ought not to thrust himself into another Man's Affairs or Business; I will not
say it is a hard Speech, against Humanity, against the Honor and Glory of
Princes, with whom nothing that is good or great, is less unquestioned, nor any
suffered to do good that would: And, where any puts that upon another, that he
is not willing to undergo himself, may it be his Fortune to obtain no other
Doom. In this case whatever we speak of our selves, the same may be said of
England; for they that, without themselves, would endanger the Hollanders, with
an intent only to save themselves, do little consider, that it is alike easy
to Fortune, to make an end of them, as for any one to set Bounds to his
desires. Will therefore our Ruin add any thing to you, or to your strength? Or
will it any whit diminish your Enemies Ambition? Or rather, will not any man
think it more truly probable, that if we are devoured, the Danger will not go
over to the English, who, as they were not behind us in Wealth, so they are
like to be second to us in Misery? Wherefore, what advantage is it to consider,
whether you fight in Holland, or your Country for your own Lands and
Territories: You may have us for your Associates, in Defense of the Common
Weal; and is not that safer, than to have us unwilling Servants, to advance the
Spaniards Tyranny?

For if three Nations, which are at this day powerful at Sea, if the Hollanders
be joined to the Spaniards, it is much to be feared, that England afterward
will have a hard Task to cope with them, especially since the Sea and their
Navies are the main, if not sole Defenses of the Kingdom: Besides, none will be
then equal to match Philip in Wealth, if his Revenues out of the new World, and
the Indies, since the Conquest of Portugal, till this time infested with War,
be once brought to a certain and safe Return. Thus, in fine, his own Forces
will be able to accomplish his Desires, upon those whom he has hitherto
treated as his Inferiors; and then shall it no longer be lawful for the
English to be any where, than now it is lawful for them to be in Germany, from
whence he has driven you by bought Decrees, as profane and guilty persons,
and, as much as in him lies, would banish them from all Humane Society and
Commerce. But this thing troubles us, for we hear there are some, who by
Clandestine Speeches, object against us the Envy of an ill Example, at if we
were guilty of a new Defection: This has been spoken before Philip; but to
gratify whom, we shall not say, but chose rather not to know them: What has
been done in France and Ireland, merely out of a desire of Innovation, the
Hollanders were compelled thereto by a most excusable Necessity; otherwise,
with what Confidence durst they have called it a Fault, that Kings had approved
and assisted them, by Leagues, Writing, and Arms? We seek the good our Grand
Fathers enjoyed which is Liberty: Let no man start at that Word, for we believe
Liberty to be in a most flourishing condition under a lawful, Principality. We
do not yet fear Foreign Powers; and now, if any one will look upon Oppression,
and not Names, we shall quickly agree. There is no other or better Tie to keep
Subjects in their Obedience, to be used either by you, O Queen, Us, or all
Governments, than to teach them this one Rule, That they would be content in
their present estate, and not seek change or alteration. Observe also, what a
pernicious Example he induces, who, however for Ambition and Dominion sake, he
has voluntarily submitted himself to the Yoke, commands all Kingdoms to bow to
the Pope, and calls not only the People thereof, whom he hires to Sedition,
but the very Kings themselves, Rebels: Certainly, to this man there will never
be wanting, either a cause, or a pretense, for War: but that he may sometimes
want hopes, next to God Almighty, it lies, Great Queen, in your Hands; and if
you resolve with Us to Conquer, We shall be ready to run the extremest Hazards
for our Social Fidelity; and we hope you will rather maintain your wonted
Constancy, than neglect Advantage; and, by the ruin of your Friends,
promulgate and corroborate the Enemies strength.

The Consultations upon this Matter, in the Queen's Court, were various, and
both Opinions had strong Supporters; to know whose Behavior and Affections,
will not be from the purpose, that it may appear how the Perswaders Authority
bore sway in the Public Counsels.

The Earl of Essex, as we have elsewhere declared, being a young man, and
burning with the desire of Glory, was a Liberal Giver, beyond the Ability of
his Estate, wholly spending himself in compassing the Love of the Nobles,
Commons, and Soldiers, having no hopes in Peace but putting great Confidence
in the Friendship of the Hollanders; and therefore, he, being General of all
Forces in England, was for the War with Spain; affirming, That it could not be
put off, unless at once, both the Queen's Security, Credit, and Charges, should
all be hazarded. On the other side, the Lord Burghly from a private Person
being called to the Court, and advanced to the high Honor of being Lord
Treasurer of England, minding wholly the Care of the Treasury, especially now
in the declining of his Age, and his Parsimony agreeing with that of the Queen,
being also very rich, and well-grounded in Experience, and so, by his
Authority, preceding the others Favor; This man, with grave Words, praising
Christian Concord, debated among all the doubtful Counsels, what was the most
pious and honest to be followed; He said, [That a present Commodity ought to be
preferred before the Incertainties of Suspicion, and that Peace would not be
more profitable to the Enemy, than to the English; and is the strength of out
Country so little known, that it cannot be safe, but at the pleasure of the
Hollander, when, in the mean time, the French out of common fear, and the
Hollanders themselves out of their Care of Religion, are tied with stronger
Bonds against Danger by Necessity; than by a League? Besides, the Spaniard is
willing to be quiet, out of a sense of his own infirmi^y: And then Peace would
follow without more ado, both in Ireland, and elsewhere.]

Queen Elizabeth either really wavering in her Mind, or else willing to express
all other Things by her fear of Peace, made Answer in a very temperate manner.
[That from the beginning she had done nothing without the Advice of her Allies;
that it was acceptable to her, that they had declared their Minds so freely,
yet there were many and great causes, both for her Self, and the French, that
moved them to desire an end of the War, and to make her trust to Peace, by
removing or disbanding her Armies; for since the Spaniards old hopes have been
crossed, by the Netherlanders abjuring him, the loss of France, and so many
other slaughters and misfortunes, if he should think fit to reassume his Arms,
the same God that had helped them before, would, she doubted not, assist them
again, to maintain their Right by the Sword; but if they thought fit to
continue in Arms, things more certain ought to be offered.] This thing the
Peers of England interpreted thus: That there was no Fault more heinous, than
to defraud the Queen of her Rights and Duties, sometimes by Cavillings,
otherwhiles by deceitful Supplications, and Pretenses of Poverty, which the
Wealth of the Cities in Holland, and their well-stocked Treasury, openly
consuted.

Nor was it more to be endured, that the English should lose the Trade of Spain
for them, and yet they preferred their own Gain, before the famishing of their
Enemies, and so make Merchandise of the War.

At last, this Delay was put to the Pacification, that Ambassadors from both
should go to take notice of the French Affairs: And, to that purpose, by the
Queen were sent thither, the beforementioned Cecil and Wilks, with whom the
hopes of Peace was grown dead, by being at the Treaty at St. Quintins; for the
Spaniards preferred, by the Name of Allies, those whom the French Peace would
advantage, giving out at last, that they only should be included in the
Treaty, who observed the Roman Rites in point of Religion: The Ambassadors
from Holland came a little later, by reason of contrary Winds. The King, at
this time, was at Angeires, busy in pacifying Bretayn, which is otherwise
called Armorica; which, as yet, Duke Mercury, one of the Lorrain Princes, (the
Fury of both Parties being assuaged) forcibly detained, having delivered to the
Spaniards the Port of Blavette, that they might with more ease land with
Supplies. But he seeing the King's Army prepared on the one hand, and a Pardon
offered in the other, and knowing well that when an end is put to a War, all
subsequent Offenses are with severity punished, obtains for himself, and his
noble Conditions, and an Augmentation of Honor.

The King, at this time, was happily without a Wife, Margaret of Valois being
divorced from him; but though his Body was exercised in Military Matters, yet
his Mind was liable to the Darts of Love, for he was absolutely taken with one
Gabrielis Estraea, a Noble Woman, but led aside from the Embraces of her vowed
Husband: This Woman, what with her Beauty, and what with her sweet Temptations
and alluring Arts, had so vanquished the King, that advancing her to the Title
of a Duchess, which was then a Novelty in France, so heightened her Pride, that
though but a Concubine, she aspired beyond the Greatness and Authority of a
Wife: And she also was numbered among the Causes, that induced the King's Mind
to be inclinable to Peace, that he might the more securely enjoy his pleasures
with her. She had a Son by the King that was four years old, and at that time
called Caesar, whom the King, with great Obtestations, gave in Charge to
Mercury, (this Woman had also by the King a Daughter very young) and appoints
to the said Mercury a great Allowance of Money, and bestowing upon his Son the
Dukedom of Vendosme, and the Government of Bretaign.

And now the Ambassadors of Holland just arrive, and find the King puffed up
with these Matters, together with the Spanish Pacification; and yet, if by
chance that had failed he had called a Council of the Brittons, to consult
about the Siege of Blavette.

Mounsieur Buzanvale, who was well-skill'd in Affairs of that sort, and one of
the King's Council, was there present, who went and recommended the Ambassadors
to the King; who* after he had received their Salu^e, very pleasingly and
without any pride, Olden-Barnevalie, in a grave and composed style, according
to his Custom, began [First to applaud the hopes of his Alliance, to urge their
la^e made League, and to require his faithful performance thereof, which would
be much to the advancement, both of the King's Honor and Authority; and
advised him to take heed of the Peace that was offered him: Adding, in the Name
of the States, many Promises of Assistance and Money for the future, both by
Sea and Land, which way soever the King would please to command them, that the
War might, in some manner, be again renewed against the Spaniard: urging also
many other things, that might inflame their Minds, to resolve anew to fall to
Arms. And, among the choice of the King's Council, it was debated, how much
more safe and honorable would it be, to make an Example to Posterity of this
Enemy, whose Treasury was drained, and Mind perplexed, with the wavering
Obedience of his Subjects; witnessed, by his seeking for Peace, as well his
fear, as the inconveniences he suffered out of this League of ours to deter,
for the future, any from thirsting after the Dominions that are belonging to
another.] There were present at this time the English, who now more freely
commemorating the many Benefits they had done him, and how unworthy an Act it
was to lay aside his sworn Faith for present Utility, helped forward the Speech
made by the Dutch, sometimes by their Silence, and sometimes by applauding
Speeches, not forbearing to demand the Money which had been lent to him. The
King, on the other side, dealt plainly, confessing his Necessities to be such,
as would not bear slow Remedy: And that he doubted, for all this Noise of
Peace, whether the Spaniard would deliver up to him, either Calais or Blavette;
which if he did not, he assured them he would continue the War; giving them
Thanks, that they had so freely offered their Assistance. The States
Ambassadors replied, That if the King rested in that Judgment yet they hoped
their coming and Offers would be advantageous to France, and cause the Enemy to
make larger Concessions, than perhaps otherwise he would: And therefore they
prayed, on behalf of their Masters, that if a Peace were concluded, yet the
Alliance might continue between them; by which the Hollanders might m^ke use
thereof to their private benefit, and to the security of the French in the
man^gery of the War in Holland. The King answered, That he would be willing,
not only to continue his own Friendship with them, but that they should
likewise enjoy the benefit of the Friendship he was to have with others: Those
things at present being only removed, whereby the Commerce of several Nations
was hindered; and how much might be wrought thereby, was learned by Experience
in the future Times, when the King, no less intent to keep, than to get Money,
gave so much scope to the defense of Liberty, as the Kings of old would hardly
have afforded to any People, unless with a Design to entrench upon it. The
first Liberality given to him was two hundred and forty thousand Florens, which
after, in the Years following, was increased according, as his Necessities
required: For now remembering the Moneys he had received from his Allies, and at
what time, he resolved how he might repay the same, that it might not seem
altogether as the payment of a Debt; but as if it carried along with it the
grateful show of a Remuneration: Here the King carefully excusing his own,
highly applauded the Counsel of the States, that they would stand upon their
Defense, since (which few Kings could boast of) they could, upon occasion, be
on a sudden in a readiness, in regard any new Necessity would forthwith put
the idle Multitude into Arms.

For maintaining this Friendship with the King, because Levinus Calward dyed
there in performing the same, Francis Arsen was left in France, whose Father
Cornelius wrote the Chronology of the States.

And now it appeared, that the Spaniard had by many Arguments persuaded the
French to lay down Arms, being contented, rather to have the English still
their Enemies* than to make a Peace with them upon equal Terms: And this was
the cause, why the Holland Ambassadors in France, Justire Nassau, and Olden
Barnevelt, went thence into England, neglecting thereby a while their former
Embassy, and assuming a boldness, till that time dreaded; where they delivered
themselves in Terms, to this effect, That if the Queen would follow the French,
there should be no hazards of Peace so great to the Hollanders, that they would
not rather hazard, than singly to undergo the unsupportable Burden of the War.

And these Dissemblers thus used their Art, as believing that the English would
yet disturb the Pacification, if they supposed the Hollanders could be drawn to
it: But they offered the Queen all manner of Assistance, if she would Resolve
to continue the War; and the hope of perfecting the same with Expedition,
though she had hitherto for a time surceased, as being moved rather to incline
to Peace.

In this mean while at V^rbin, (for thither was the Meeting, upon the Treaty,
adjourned from St. Quintins) by the endeavor of the Ambassadors, a Peace was
concluded between those two eminent and great Princes of Christendom,
containing the same Articles, which formerly had been concluded on 29 Years
before, between the same Philip, and King Henry the Second of France; only
there was a small Addition of some others, which to insert here in words at
length, I think to be altogether unfit for him, who professes himself to write
only the Dutch Affairs: However, in brief, take them thus: That there should
be a free Trade between the People; That all Prisoners should be set at
liberty, and at their going away, should be restored to what they had lost, or
had been detained from them; That the Spaniard received into the County of
Charlois, should, in the Name thereof, owe to the French Faith and Homage; That
Calais, and other places in Picardy, and last of all Blavette, as they Were
then, should be delivered up to the French, all other places, which the
Spaniard had fortified, being dismantled: These were the Articles agreed to,
and accordingly, having given Pledges on both sides, they were within Three
Months after performed. But for the Oblivion of Injuries, and continuance of
mutual Concord for the future, that if War were made upon either of them, the
other should neither help against him himself, nor suffer any belonging to him
to interest themselves; and if any thing of doubt arose between them, that it
should be argued, neither by Violence or Fraud, but referred to indifferent
Judges. But these things were agreed more for show, than that such equal
Greatness should leave any Thing out, that might seem to secure Friendship.
Both of Them comprehended their Allies by Leagues, whether Kings, Princes, or
People; especially Philip took Care for his Daughter, to whom he was about to
give the Low Countries; as also, for the Duke of Savoy. Hereupon, Areschot,
Mendosa, and Aremberg, went into France, and Marshall Biron was sent by the
King to Bruxels, to see Albertus take the Oath, where the impotent Mind and
Spirit of that great Soldier, which was always beyond his Fortune, was said to
be corrupted into Treachery, which afterward more clearly appeared.

All Things, on both sides, being thus done, for the conclusion of the Peace,
which yet was repined at by some, whose Valor and Hopes was nourished by other
Men's Evils; but all the Commons rejoiced at it, not so much for that, hereby
much Christian Blood would be saved, as for that the Law was restored to its
power, by which they should with security enjoy their Possessions, reap the
Rents and profits of their Lands, and the Ways be all open for free Trading.
Then was the first day, that France could boast of a solid Peace, after it had
been for 36 Years wasted with War, and bathed in her own Blood, then was
restored to this most ancient Kingdom its pristine Face of Beauty; and all by
the King's Care, that the Governors and Magistrates being reduced to Order,
himself growing powerful, by the Excuse of the Catholics, in regard of the
Times, that he might by Fear or Force compel the Professors of another
Religion; when, in the interim, the Netherlanders were left in Arms, that they
might not only lose the Hopes of Peace, but any interval or solace from their
Neighbor's sufferings: Yet the King sent back Mounsieur Buzanvale to the
Hollanders, by which Witness of his Friendship, and secret Converse, he might
confirm his Peace, even while there continued by public Declaration a Foreign
War. The business of France thus finished, there was no less Experiment of
Princely Alliance received out of England, by the earnest Desire of Qu.
Elizabeth; which being related to the States by Sir Francis Vere when at the
same time, other Ambassadors were sent to Albertus, as if she would seem still
to retain the hopes of Peace; of which, she said, This had been the only Delay
hitherto, that she desired to lay down Arms with the same Colleagues, for whom
at first she took them up: And that nothing could be now demanded of her by the
Hollanders, but only Right, they having given the first cause of War, it was
necessary, if it might be, that an end should be put to it by them; but if not,
that, for the future, they should give their Reasons for the continuance of it.
And certainly, it would be a sufficient Cause for all Princes to envy and hate
them, that they have been, and are, the only Obstructers of the Peace of
Europe: But God, she hoped, would not suffer, that being deluded by ungrateful
Determinations, she should be a Pattern to Princes, to abstain from helping
such a People, who bear no Reverence to their Superiors, nor take care for
Advantage, Reputation, or Safety, of any but themselves.

The States now thought themselves, at one blow, almost overwhelmed, both for
their former and future Charge: yet, that, the Name of an Alliance with
England, was of such benefit to them, that they would submit to such
Conditions, as the Queen of England, being their Superior in strength, would
lay upon them: Wherefore, sending them who had been employed in both the former
Embassies, together with Andrew Ascel, who had private Instructions, which gave
him power of Treating, concerning the Moneys due to her, and concluding about
the same, even to the Sum of a Hundred Thousand Florens. At this time, there
were diverse occasions offered themselves to the Queen, who already pretended
great Fears, whereby she was dissuaded from War. For James King of Scotland, of
whom Queen Elizabeth made no mention, secretly claiming the Inheritance of the
Crown Of England, did not think himself able enough thereto, unless he were
supported by some Foreign Help: Not did there want some, who, pretending to have
found some Letters written by King James that came to the Pope, raised from
thence great Hatred and Jealousies: Moreover, the Lord Burghley being grown
very weak, through Age and Diseases, Beseeched her, as she loved God, to have
regard to his dying Words; whereby he advised Her, That she would give Credit
to him, now going out of the World, that she would, without an inforcement of
Necessity, consult the good of her Kingdom, and by the making of Peace in
Earth, merit the everlasting Peace of Heaven: Nor did he omit, to declare to
her, her ill Fortune in America, and the fear that was conceived of the Irish
Affairs; affirming, That the Belgic Wars were never to be ended by Conquest.

As soon as this man was dead, and Essex, for the avoiding of Envy, declined to
come to the Council Table, the Court soon appeared empty of Care and Counsel,
in Defense of its own Right: Whereto the States Ambassadors being often
admitted, they excused themselves, by reason of the Times, for their not paying
of the Queens old Debt due from them; professing, That as to what related to
the Spanish Negotiation, they did not intercede, whereby the English, if they
pleased, should be hindered more than the Dutch, from making use of the Name of
any People being in Peace, unless they believed it more profitable to compass
what they desire by Arms, than by Commerce or Trading. Neither did they desire,
but that the League made 18 years before (when the Troubles of Antwerp
affrighted the English no less than the Hollander) yet never faithfully
observed, should so long after be changed into another form, that it might now
bind all those, which before thought themselves free from the performance
thereof.

Sometime was spent in debating and settling the Sum of the Debt, for that the
Engish reckoned their Musters of Men, and their Transportation and Wages too
high; while, the other side averred, those Musters to be untrue; maintaining
withal, That several Naval Expeditions of the English had cost the Hollanders
more, than all the Money they ever borrowed would make a Compensation for. At
last, after Cautions entered, it was agreed to the Sum of Fourscore Hundred
Thousand Florens: The one part of which should be paid by Three Hundred
Thousand Florens Yearly during the War, And, at the end of the War, if ought
remained behind, it should be paid by Twenty Thousand Florens Yearly: The other
moiety, should be peaceably appointed, when there was a Peace concluded, and
payment thereof made, upon the Surrender of the cautionary Towns: In the
interim, the English should continue their Garrisons therein, to the number of
One Thousand, a hundred and fifty. By this Reckoning also, the States were to
pay every Three Months Five Thousand, and a Hundred Florens to the said
Garrisons, besides all other Necessaries fitting for the Soldiers. And, for
the future, the Queen's Promise of sending hem more Aid, was remitted. The
English that were in the States Service already, or hereafter should be Listed
for their Service, should be raised only in their Name, and should fight under
their sole Command, and at their Charge: And from thenceforth, the so much
envyed Authority of the English Ambassador, was absolutely taken away: Yet
still the Queens Privilege of nominating an Assistant to sit with the Senate,
was reserved: If the Queens Enemies should invade her, either by Land or Sea,
or the Queen should think sit to make War upon her Enemies, the Dutch, upon
notice, should add to her Fleet 30 or 40 lusty and stout Ships; together with
an Army of Five Thousand Foot, and Five Hundred Horse. Upon these Articles and
Covenants, a firm Agreement was made; but reserving to the Queen her Right,
that she might vindicate her cause against the Netherlander, under the King of
Spain's Jurisdiction.

There was excepted out of this League, Horatio Palavine's Debt of Fourscore
Thousand Florens, which was afterward privately compounded. It was not, that
England chose Peace rather than War by this League; but that as it was eased of
a Burden, so it had gained thereby a Fortification.

Not long after this some were taken, who went about to poison Queen Elizabeth;
and, in Ireland, by one happy Fight, and the taking of a Castle, was the cruel
Tyrone made Prisoner, while he was drawing the Province of Munster to partake
in his Rebellion: No more did the Hollanders repent them of their Old
Resolution, although there was a new Face of Affairs with the Enemy, and many
ways were sought to invite them.

Aod now the Report of the New Marriage grew every day more frequent, these
being Letters brought to the Netherlanders by Friasio, whereby the whole
Government of them was turned over to the Princess Isabella; The Causes and
Articles of which, King Philip published to be these:

When by the Pope's License he had destined, and by the Consent of all his
Relations Resolved, to bestow his best Beloved Daughter in Marriage upon his
Kinsman, he conceived it would be of great Advantage to the Netherlanders, to
the advancement of Peace, and settlement of the present Government, that they
might always have their Prince present among them; which their Ancestors could
not be, in regard of their many and great Cares; and therefore he did give and
grant unto his said Daughter, all the whole Country of the Netherlands, and
every part thereof, together with Charlois, and the County of Burgundy,
together with the Name of Duke of Burgundy, (for the French had long since got
the possession thereof) yet so, that himself and his Successors, Kings of
Spain, should enjoy the Honor of the same Title, with the chief place among
the Knights, or Companions of the Golden Fleece, being an Order instituted by
his Forefathers. Adding moreover all other Things, that were thought fit by
Men learned in the Law, for Confirmation of the Premises; by which the Rights
of Principality, and the Revenues, and all other Incidents pertaining thereto,
might the more rightly descend, and pass unto the said Isabella, and her
Posterity. These Things were the more remarkable, because Philip using the word
(Clientole) did declare, That he gave all those Dominions to his Daughter in
Fee: And this seems to be added, because the greatest part of the Lands were
held of the Empire, and other part of the Crown of France; and then because by
his Command, the Oath which the Nobles had formerly taken, was to be altered
now from the Obligation to himself, in a New Obedience to his Daughter: And if
any thing contained in these Instruments, seemed to contradict the Law in my
point, that he did confirm by his Supreme and Royal Authority: And if it should
happen, that no Children should proceed of this Marriage, or that Issue, Male
or Female, did ever fail, all the aforesaid Premises, and the Right thereof,
to revert to the Kings of Spain. And this was given as a Reward to the Merits
of Albertus, that he might have the Government of the Netherlands, as a Comfort
to his Wi^owship. And if there were any Issue, then the use and profits
thereof, but nothing to descend to the Heir, besides the Revenue of the Duchy
of Lutzenburg, and the County of Chiny. There was also prescribed an Order of
Succession: First, to the Male, then to the Female, and so to the Younger, and
the Elder Daughters Nephew should proceed the Younger Son; That it should not
be lawful to divide or alien the Lands, unless by the King's License; And it
was provided also, that this Gift should return to the Donor many ways; As if
any Woman should, for the future, attain the Netherlands, that it should
presently return to the Hands of the King of Spain, or his Heirs; neither might
it be lawful for a Son or Daughter, being Princes of the Country, to marry, or
otherwise alter their condition, unless by the Consent of the same King.

Moreover, They are forbidden by themselves, or their Ministers, to intermeddle
in the Trade of America, or the Indies, and that every one coming to that
Government, is to swear to these Articles, and also to maintain the Roman
Catholic Religion. And if any thing be done to the contrary, the Right of the
Netherlands to come to the Spaniards.

These Instruments were signed by the Father, and attested by Witnesses, the
Sixth of May. The same day, the King's Son and Heir, Philip also by Name, gave
his Consent to the same by Writing, carefully taking Cautions according to the
Laws.

There were diverse Speeches concerning this matter, and they disagreeing among
themselves, as is usual in such Cases: Some accused this as an Evil Custom,
that the Heads of Freemen, or any private Service, should be rated and valued:
That it was only used by Barbarians, to give and bestow Dominions: For of what
value was a Prince among them, who never knew what belonged to Lordship: But to
them that make a distinction between Right and Wrong, it is nothing ambiguous;
because the matter belonging to the People, makes the Government, from thence,
be called a Commonwealth: The ordering whereof, as it is in some places,
committed to the Nobles or Senate; so, with most, it is settled under the
Tuition of a Prince. Nor was there ever any just Empire, but what begun by the
Consent of the People, who have trusted the Defense thereof, either to one
Single Person; or else, by reason of Faction in Suffrages, to more; who have
this only Reward of their Honor, that next to their own Welfare, they take
Care of the benefit of their Subjects: Which, as it is true every where, so is
it more manifest among the Netherlanders, who being neither Conquered by Arms,
nor yet willing of their own accord to serve, will not suffer their Princes to
do many Things, but with a Limited Power and Revenues, it being chiefly
forbidden, left at any time they should break any part of the Trust commi^ted
to them: And therefore, in former Time, the Daughters were put off with a small
Portion in Money: To the rest of the Children were given Governments, and other
small Offices; the Name of King, unknown to the Netherlanders being
circumscribed by such Limits, needs neither to be feared nor opposed. The
French Greatness indeed (if it be necessary to use Examples) no otherwise
increased than by this, that many Collations of Fortune meeting in one, no
cross Event ever separated or pulled them in sunder; whereas, on the other
part, is it not a miserable condition, that in Regions involved in, and
exhausted by Wars, in whose Sides lies a powerful Enemy, an envious
Neighborhood, and Foreign Greatness, that should be taken away, which for a
hundred Years had nourished it, and been as nutriment, and the Radical
Moisture, to a weak and infirm Body?

We find in History the Emperor Charles, when desirous of private Repose, by
transferring his Worldly Cares on his Son, he only a little anticipated the
Gift of the Law, himself and his Son, both standing in the Great Council of his
Nobles, that nothing might be wanting of ancient Customs. But how by a Letter
to renounce, and by a Letter to assume a Government, and by Sight and Speech,
to seem to set free a People, as it were disdained, from one Dominion to
another, and that not virile; when it was known from all Antiquity, that the
Netherlanders accounted it as one of the greatest Mischiefs, to be subject to a
Woman, was an Act of great Rashness. Others wished, that in good earnest, the
Netherlanders might in this manner be freed from the Insolence of the
Spaniards; That, if the Council of War were removed: the difference of Parties
and Factions would easily be reconciled: But, alas, the old Hopes and Arts of
Philip were not so easily forgotten, as that he would denude both himself and
his Posterity of the Netherlands, which are the strength of the Spanish
Security, and serve him as a Castle against Germany, France, and Britain: But
that by laying them a little aside he might diminish his fear, he makes use of
his Daughters Name, to whom is given a precarious Right and a Titulary, but
naked Profession, under a Domestic Trust: That, by these very Covenants, he
has not sufficiently dissembled with these, since the Government must relapse
only to his Son, proceeding from this Marriage, and not to any other Children:
And although it were not perceived, yet it is not to be believed, that the
Spaniards would have suffered this Lady to come from him, after a continued
Virginity of 32 years, unless they had either b^lieved, or procured her, to
become barren: That it was a shameful thing, that the Netherlanders, being a
People having Privileges of their own, and by whose Wealth the Austri^n Family
has augmented its Greatness in Spain it self, and so many other Kingdoms, and,
in a manner, laid a Yoke upon the Neck of Mankind, should be publicly governed
by Foreign Laws, and delivered to the Dominion of such as are subject to the
Spanish Power.

Among all these Discourses, other Letters were brought, written now from
Isabella, as Lady Paramount therein, Commanding Albertus, in her Name, to take
possession, and mutually to take and give an Oath of Obedience, and to do all
other Things usual, in the like Cases, for Princes to do. This was against the
Laws, which will, That the Entrance into a Government shall be public:
Wherefore he not daring, according to ancient Custom, to call a Senate of the
Provinces, and with them freely to Consult; but as if he had had something in
private to have said to every one apart, on the 15th of August, he calls to
Bruxels only the Deputies. At the same time, there was gathered about the City
a great Multitude of Soldiers, to the number of 15000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, to
keep in awe all that would but seem to gainsay thi^ Design: And therefore
Richardot, in an Oration which he had prepared of purpose for Albertus, imputed
all the Evils that had befallen to the Netherlanders, and the cause thereof to
the Prince's Absence. Hereupon Masius answered for the Brabanters, beginning
first Rhetorically with such Things, as might win the Favor of the New
Princes: But when he came to the Matter, he disputed some Things, as if the
Ancient Commonwealth had yet been in Being, desiring such Things to be done, as
the present Necessity required. And it was submitted to by most, that
Conditions should be prescribed to their Obedience, viz. If within three
Months it appeared, that the Rites of Marriage were performed, and that he
himself did return into the Netherlands within the Month of May, in the
following Year; and that in the mean while, nothing was innovated by his
Governors or Commanders; And that he left, as his Deputy Governor, one allied
to him by Blood, all should be well. And hereupon he Elected, as his Deputy*
the Cardinal Andrew of Austria, whose Father was Ferdinand Earl of Tirol, the
Brother of Maximilian, the Father of Albertus: By the Mothers side, he was not
so Noble, She being Philippa Velsera and descended from a Consular Family in
Auspurge, a City of Germany. Besides all this, it was added, That all, both
private and public, Laws, and all things use, should remain firm by Oath to
Philip; That the lesser Governments, and the Guard and Custody of Castles and
Forts, and the several degrees of Judges, should be new chosen from among the
Netherlanders; That the King should testify, that in this yielding up of his
Right in Fee, he had no intent to entrap the Netherlanders; That they would
take care to pay the German, and their own Native Soldiers, as far as the
Treasury would hear; but for the residue, and the Foreign Soldiers, the King
should take the Charge thereof upon himself; That Albertus should be content
with the ancient Revenue of the Frinces, and should ease the People of their
extraordinary Taxes, and the constant Service they did in Garrisons, and the
Charge of quartering Garrison Soldiers; And that upon these Terms, they
should, for the time, be Obedient. But upon the Return of Albertus with his
Wife, a Solemn Oath should be taken on both sides, all the States of the
Netherlands being Assembled, with whom, in the interim, Albertus would deal, to
win them to come to some Conditions with the Hollanders. And because this was
very earnestly desired, and it was thought no absurd Thing, to compare like
with like, in making a Pacification: Albertus, before his departure, who did
not think fit out of his Grandezza, to send a Princely Embassy, writ Letters
to the States of Holland and Zeland, and their Colleagues; wherein he signified
unto them his Marriage, and the Right of Government translated from the
Spaniards to him, who was ever studious and willing to make Peace; and
therefore he hoped, there remained nothing on their part, which should cause
them, either to distrust him, or the Peace he offered them: They would
therefore do very well, and according to their Duty, if they would unite
themselves to the greater part of the Netherlands, having to this purpose left
Instructions with the States under his Authority.

In the same manner did the Prince of Aurange, Areschet, and Haurech, write to
Prince Maurice, That he would, by his Authority, prevail as much as he could
with the United States, to set an end (so much desired) to the War; That it
would be not only to his Renown at the present, but to the everlasting Honor,
and advancement of the House of Nassau for the future. At this time was heard
also one Daniel Molain, a private Merchant, but of great Repute; who, reported
himself incited thereto by his Brothers dissembled sickness, and came to
Antwerp, and from thence was brought to Bruxels, to the speech of Richardot,
Assonville, the Abbot of Marol, Haurech, and at last of Albertus himself: The
sum of all his Discourse was tending to Peace, so also were all their Counsels;
and there was nothing omitted, that might obtain Credit among the Hollanders.
All the Princes protesting, That their Religion should not be meddled with; that
the Government of the Commonwealth should remain in the hands of themselves,
and their Posterity; and that King Philip had such esteem of Prince Maurice his
Virtues, that he would detract nothing from his Honor, but destined for him
the chief Command of the Hungarian War. But the States, although before they
were resolved for War, yet grew more indurate and averse to Peace, by reason of
some Letters of Philip's by them intercepted; wherein the manifest contrary to
all these former Offers was discovered. And besides these, the Treason of Peter
Danny of Ipre was found out at the same time: He was a man of a slothful
Nature; but such are generally the most ready Instruments to put in practice
the most impious Attempts. This man being suspected by his looks, and taken,
related his Condition, That the Cruelty of his Creditors, to whom he was very
much indebted, was such, that nothing would content them, but to throw his Body
into the worst Prison they could find; of which, he endeavored with grief of
heart to have an end, but could not find any means to compass the same, in
which perplexity he fell among the Jesuits at Doway, and served them for Wages.
The President of whom, making a Speech, how great and meritorious a Work it
would be to the Christian World, out of so many Multitudes of men, to kill but
one, which raged with Cruelty, working the destruction of many: this presently
inflamed his Mind, overwhelmed before with Misery, to murder Prince Maurice;
And if he did it, himself (if he survived) or else his Son was to be rewarded:
But if he failed in the Attempt, yet they promised him to go to Heaven. He
added further, That by the Domestic Exhortation of his Wife, who being
restless, by reason of her Cares, and not able to endure a little misery, was
urged to put on a Man-like Resolution to act his Design: where with being
instigated, and confirmed therein by the same President, by the Sacred Tie of
Religion, and the Absolution of his Sins, he took his Journey, and came into
Zeland, and from thence to Leyden; where his Conscience beginning by little and
little to dislike the villainous horror of the Fact, together with the fear of
danger that would ensue, at last he began to repent, and alter his wirked
Intentions. After he had many Times by Intervals repeated these same Things,
being convict by his own Testimony, on the 23 of July he was put to death by
Command of the Magistrates of Leyden, whose Sentence was confirmed by the
Superior Judges. There were some on the adverse Party, who, ashamed of the
wickedness of the Fact, would have denied the whole substance of the matter.

As this Year was famous for great Alterations, so was it a long time very free
from Warlike Expeditions; only near N^m^eghen a few Foot Soldiers were worsted
by some of the King's Horse; and again, beyond the Maes, among many Troops of
the Hollanders, one belonging to Mansfeldt was slain, the Conquerours returning
not without Prey: Besides, a few other petty Attempts, and vain Endeavors to
have done greater: The reason of this Quiet might be, because the United States
spared their Provisions and Charges for Times of Necessity; and for that
Albertus laboring to add a great Terror to his offered Peace, had determined
not to proceed, before his Army was increased with the Regiments that came from
the Cities of France, that were to be delivered according to the Treaty. Which
Regiments denying to surrender the Garrisons they held, until they had received
their Pay, and a dreadful President beginning in the Town of Chastellet, by
Seditious Licentiousness; for that Money being raised for them, made other
places, more inward in the Country, to rage with unwonted Fury; and chiefly,
because he saw, that Count Heremberg was not able to appease the Tumult in
Gelders, without present Money, and immediate sending them away.

At this time, there were some grumbling Complaints, and contumacious
Behaviors: But when the Business of settling a new, was put in Agitation at
Antwerp, (as generally the Soldiery love to make Disturbances about the
Changes of Governments) Seditions broke out in several places at once, but
chiefly among them that kept the (...) a^ Antwerp, being 500 Spanish Foot, with
some Horse; who, being bent against the City, which they supposed obnoxious to
them, were provoked to take from thence the Price and Reward of their Crimes:
Wherefore, putting out their Old Commander Augustin^ ^ Mexia, they Elected into
his place a Sergeant, a Fellow of a Malapert and Saucy Tongue, but faithful to
his Companions, in their greatest Crimes. They reckoned due to them, as well
for their Belgike, as Italian Service in the Wars, the Remainders of 22 Months
Pay, which, while they were paid off, they compelled, in the interim, the Towns
People to allow a Floren a day to a Horseman, and half as much to a Footman:
Nor did their injurious proceedings rest here; for they set a Tax upon all
precious Garments and Household Stuff and all other Instruments of Luxury not
spating those Sinks of Iniquity, common Strumpets; and all this was done in
contumely of that, but late most flourishing City. Without doubt, there was
never any Action showed more arrogant Pride, than their manner of exacting:
They would shoot off their Muskets, and other Guns, until the People came
voluntarily, and asked them, Whether they would please to command any thing?
Soon after this, the Garrison Soldiers of Liere were observed to associate
Themselves in Counsels; and, in the Borders of Lutzenberge, Messengers brought
word, that the Walloon Regiments, having thrown off their Obedience, did
fortify themselv^, ^th many others flying out of the City: They who staid
there, either by reason of their Estates or Business, part of them compared
this Force with the Dissimulation of Requesene's formerly; others likened it to
the violent Irruption, Slaughter, and Devastations, made with Fire by Rhoda;
thus weighing their present Fear by their past Sufferings.

In all this hurli-burly, the Deputies of the Magistrates, brought no other
Comfort from Albertus, besides Excuses of the public Poverty; so that for want
of Remedy, this Mutinous Licentiousness continued until the Year following: the
Soldiers, in the Castle of Gaunt, were a little more modest; for being content
with their own Number, they would not receive any that came from other places,
which, in this time of common Disturbance, seemed a great part of Honesty. But,
in the City of Grave, there was not a Mutiny, but a Fight of the Soldiers
among Themselves; but when the Germans ran to Arms, in Assistance of the
Townsmen against the Spaniards, that Commotion quickly was appeased beyond
hope. After all which Disturbances, Albertus being thereby spurred up to Arms;
and, the rather, because he received no Answer to his Letters, either from
Prince Maurice, or the United States, he took away from the Soldiers, their
hope of continuing in their Garrisons: What Money could be scraped together,
either out of Spain, or upon Credit, He distributed among such as were going to
the Camp, as well old, as new raised Soldiers, which made a great Supply, and
consisted chiefly of Frenchmen, who fled from the late made Peace at Home.

Now upon Debate of the Matter in the Senate, and with the most skilful, and
understanding Colonels, it was though fit, that the Army should march beyond
the Rhine, either for the invading of the Hollanders, or else, that they might
undo what Prince Maurice had done; who, in the former years, in the settling of
Frizeland, had finished one part of the War for the United States; where the
Country being large and open, on the backside toward Germany, and but meanly
it engthned with Towns, he shew'd-many notable Examples of good Conduct and
Industry, in laying hold upon all convenient Opportunities.

Now, as this was in it self very prudent Counsel, to surround the Hollanders
on all sides with their Armies, to diminish and abate their Tributes, and to
disturb their Garrisons; so, at that time, there was nothing more fit, than
having retrenched the Treasury as much as they could, if yes with all their
Forces they could spend the Winter in the Enemies Country, they should destroy
the Hollanders by their own President. About the middle of Autumn, Army was
commanded to meet, at the Maes, over which Francisco Menusa was made General,
who was returned out of France, after the Confirmation of the Peace there.
Whereof, as soon as the Hollanders heard, Count Hohenlo being Commanded to look
to the Isle of Bommelerweart,, the greatest part of their Forces, under the
Prince's Conduct, met at Arnheyme.

In this interim, Albertus being about to go to perform his Mirriage, and
receive his Principality; yet, first by the Pope's License, laying down his
Honors of Cardinal, and Archbishop of Toledo he showed himself publicly in
his Archiducal Habit; He Dedicated his Cap and Sacred Robe at the Altar of the
Blessed Virgin, which is honored at Hall, a Free Town in H^valt. This was an
ancient Temple, famous for many Pilgrimages thither made, and Miracles there
wrought, where by the Inhabitants were persuaded, that the Deity testified
himself there present. For there might be seen many rich Gifts of Princes, and
great Multitudes of the Common People; who, having been delivered from Dangers,
or Diseases incurable by Physic, have here performed their Vows: Nay, some
Reports do not stick to tell, that at this place dead Bodies have been restored
to Life: Many Relations of this place, concerning Things some few Years before
done, are set forth by Justus Lipsius in the Latin Tongue; by which he denoted
to the World, the Truth of the Roman Catholic Religion, and the Reverence due
to Images: Although on the other side, some Dispute in their Writings,
alleging the known Fraud of Priests, and many other Stories feighed for Gain;
most of which being called Miracles, have either happened naturally, or by
accident: And yet those old Magitians of Egypt, and Tyaneus, and other Masters
of Condemnable Worship, because they confirmed their Opinions and Tenets by
stupendous Works, seeming preternatural, it must be brought at last, as an
Argument, to work upon our Faith to believe the like, who assign all our
Devotions only to God; not requiring the Patronage of others, not corrupting
our Piety with the forbidden Superstition of Images.

After, the Cardinal Audren, being sent for by hasty Letters, was come out of
Alsatia, whereof he then had the Government by Caesar's Authority, Albertus
giving him only some few Embraces, and leaving with him his Commands,
immediately went into Germany. To his Train were added some of the most Noble
Counts of the Netherlands, who were, in the Name of the Public, to give Thanks
to the King; and there certain select Matrones, and young Ladies, who went also
to attend the new Princess: Among the Noblemen that were selected, was the
Prince of Aurange; whom, many, ignorant of the Power of Custom, admired to see
returning into Spain: He, when he had received of his own in the Netherlands,
what the King's Exchequer had drained, and could procure his Fathers Goods
among the Hollanders, means of his Brother, and his Mothers, by the help of
Coure Hohenlo he was wholly bent to look after his Principality of Aurange;
which, although it had been always free, and ought no Obedience to any; yet, by
occasion of the Civil Wars, some of the French Governors having entered
therein did yet, though the War were ended, retain, or rather usu^p the same,
and now of late Prince Maurice had sent thither Allegond, in vain affecting by
Treaties, and other arcs, to have gotten the possession thereof. But he now
hoping, that the Spaniards might to him some kindness to the French King, by
their Recommendations of him, was the main Motive that induced him to the
taking of this Journey into Spain; which having begun, and when now he was gone
higher toward the Bank of the Rhine, he turned toward the Palatinate, to see
the Elector's Sister then first, and but newly married. But as the Archduke
was proceeding in his Journey to Prague that he might communicate some of his
secret Counsels with his Brother the Emperor; and, as it was believed, upon
the hopes of attaining the Name and Honor of King of the Romans, which is next
of all to the Emperor, he was overtaken by Messengers, who brought him the
News of King Philip's death. The Relation whereof, as it happened, was thus.

His weak and crazy Body was broken with old Age, but chiefly from the last
foregoing Spring, with sharp pains of the Joints, but in the Summer his
sickness began to incease: To whom, that he might have some ease, by the
Relaxation of his Mind, he commanded his Servant to tarry him in his
Horse-Litter to the Eseurial, a Palace which he had sumpruously builded with
extraordinary Cost; while, in the imeirm the Netherlandish Affairs languish'd,
and lay gasping for want of Money: This Palace is reckoned among the most
famous Instruments of this Age. Then being unable to endure the tossing of the
Litter, and the thickness of the Air, as soon as he was reposed, he fell into a
Fever, his Sinews being more contracted than ordinary, and at the same time
the Poison that lay hid in his Bowels broke cut; in which, and in his Legs,
being inflamed through pain, he was likewise afflicted with a stopping in his
Breast. These Things being removed by Physical Administrations, he fell into a
Frenzy and, at the same time, sad to tell, he was followed with an infinite
quantity of Lice; so that by the labor of many hands about him, he could
hardly be kept clean from the silth that proceeded from them: Upon after, when
his weak Body was not able to endure any longer such handling, as was necessary
to make him clean, his Bowels were eaten up with a filthy Contagion; but with
such an invincible Courage bore the Torments, that they perceived he was yet
alive, but retired himself to Meditations of his End: So commanding the Crown
to be laid close by him, and afterward showing his Lims to his Son and
Daughter, he instructed them in Humane Frailty; and particularly, read a
Lecture of his own Weakness, who had been of so great Esteem in the World. Then
he commended them to Brotherly Concord among Themselves, and to the
maintenance of the Roman Faith; with great seriousness advising Them, That
when he was dead and buried, they would remember those their Fathers dying
words. Then while Divine Prayers were singing, he received the extreme Unction;
and now drawing on to his Death, he embraced the same Crucifix, which his
Father before at his Death had also done. Then giving in Charge, what he had in
his Mind concerning Religion, and commending to them several Examples of
Clemency, on the 14. Day of September he dyed; which day he had foretold to be
fatal to him, from the Dictates of an Astronomer. This was the End of that most
potent Christian Prince, who was the richest in his Time: He was of the Age of
71 Years, and had Reigned 43. He was of a middle stature of Body, and well
composed, only his Forehead was somewhat high; his Lips were large, and
hanging down, after the manner of all who are related in Blood to the House of
Austria; His Countenance carried the Lineaments of a Netherlander, though his
Conditions were altogether Hispaniolized; you would have believed him to have
been of a mild Nature, for that he was, easy and affable in access, and did
not fall rashly into passion; but as often as he was acquiring, or looking
after Dominion, he did rather prefer his Fame, than his Clemency. He was not so
cunning and subtle as his Father, but Age and Diligence supplied that defect;
for being very moderate, both in Sleep and Recreations, he did more Personally,
than by his Servants and Ministers; which the Spaniards extolling to the
highest, equalled his Praise with Solomon: He so well knew the use of Money,
that he would renounce what Emperors or Popes he pleased almost, and with that
Key unlocked the Secrets of all Kingdoms, bearing both Prosperity and Adversity
with an equal Countenance and Courage; but being given much to Dissimulation,
he indulged to himself the Liberty both of Hatred and Jealousy; unsatiable in
his Hopes, and in his Ambition and desire of Rule, to be matched with any of
the Ancients; most observant of Religion, which he showed even in his outward
Actions: Concerning his Rules of Government excusable, as walking by the
Pattern of Princes; and in those Things wherein he offended as a private man,
laudably modest. He maintained Wars continually, even from his Childhood; yet
besides that in France, which he onelay saw when he was young, he was never
personally in any, but managed them all by his Deputies: He merited variously,
as to his Progenitors and Successors, whose Empire, as he augmented by the
American Treasures, and the Accession of the Crown of Portugal, so he lessened
it by the loss of the Kingdoms of Goleta and Tunis, and by his Tyranny over the
Dutch: At Times it was observed, that diverse Things happened untowardly in his
Paternal Dominions; but not in the Age of those men, by whom his Fortune was
upheld, but when he had Women, Children, or weak Emulators, or Enemies. These
were, for the most part, the Judgments of the wiser sort concerning him: But
others, who were offended at him as Enemies, say, That he on ertook Wars
rashly, and managed them persidiously: Nor do they less accuse him for the
Cruelties of his Peace, both in Spain and the Low Countries, his throwing
France into Troubles, by his Ambition and Thirst of Blood, and many other, as
well Public as Domestic Evils; making the soulness of his Death an Argument
against him: averring, The Justice of Heaven met him at last, and punished him
for the innocent Deaths of his Son, and Wife Isabella; this murdered by his
Father; that by her Husband: So that meritedly he dyed, as Herod, (with whom,
in regard of his Nature and Fortune, they compared him) or as Pheretino, Queen
of the Cerenians, and with them suffered the Vengeance of his Parricides; or,
that he meritedly perished, as being a most bitter Enemy of True Religion;
according as the most famous Antiochus, another Herod, Caesar Maximinus, or of
the Tyrant Cassander and Sylla, that were Oppressors of the Common Liberty,
whose Memories stink: Although, if it be true, that it is remembered in History,
that many men, famous for Wisdom, learned in the Laws, skilful in the Art of
Poetry, and others, have dyed of the same Disease.

Philip, the Son, had possession of all his Father's Kingdoms by Inheritance,
being the Third of that Name; and there was hardly ever any Change of
Government that carried along with it so great Weal^h^ But, among the
Hollanders, many men, in their ancient Simplicity, who had hitherto believed,
that they were perpetually bound to that Prince, to whom they had sworn
Obedience now, by the Kings Death, thought Themselves freed therefrom, both in
Conscience and Religion: And now in Spain they began to take very sharp
Counsels against the Hollanders, which did much fully the Fame and Repute of
the New King, as if he had been of an unfound Constitution. But many times it
appears by use, That Things are often better, and more safely, managed under a
Prince, who will fit his Ears and Commands of others, whom he finds knowing in
the State, than where a Confidence of his own Wisdom, makes him rash and
obstinate to his own Humor, and Will. But these Things will (in time) be made
more plainly appear.

Albertus going out of Bohemia into Italy, in the Venetian Territories finds
Margaret, who, about 14 Years ago, having been Betrothed to the King's Son, was
now upon her Way to King Philip, and was come from Graic, a City of Hungary,
through the Streights of the Alps near Trent, toward the River Athesis: The
Brother of this Lady, being named Ferdinand, to whom the Vicinity of the Turks
was hateful; and being desirous to change the Form of his Religion, (for most
in that Country had departed from the Roman Church) first entreated the House
of Austria to intercede, and afterward to fight in his Defense. This Lady had
also two other Sisters; the one, married to the King of Poland; the other, to
Sigismund Battor, Prince or Vayvod. of Transylvania, but both very unhappy in
their Husbands, both their Countries being afflicted with worse than Civil
Wars: For He of Poland, following the Jesuits Counsels, by means of his Uncle,
whose Name was Charles, was beaten out of the Kingdom of Sweden, the Ancient
Inheritance of his Fathers; And the other, persuaded by the same Authors, to
deny the payment of Tribute to the Turks, soon after, being unable to defend
his Territories, was forced to transfer his Principality to the Emperor, who
gave the Government to his Brother Maximilian.

That was He, who, when he possessed the Kingdom of Poland, made a Journey
against the Swede only for Forage sake; and being afterward taken Prisoner,
and quite forsaken by all, would yet retain the Name of a King. But Batler,
under the Name of Exchange, was sent into Silesia; and moreover, being Robbed
of his Wife, as if unable to get Children, being soon weary of his wandering
Life, and mean Fortune, he returned to his own Country, and at once received
both his Old Dominions, and his Wife, threatening all that durst resist with the
Turkish Power which would come in his Aid: The Mother of this Margaret was a
Bavarian, and being the Emperor Ferdinand's Niece, had married his Son
Charles, from which Marriage proceeded this Issue: So that having (...) Father,
and great Uncle, by the like Reason she might have a Husband, to whom the same
great Uncle might be Father.

Pope Clement being come to Ferrara, (for he claimed this City, the Family of
Atesti being extinct, and subjected the same rather by Threats and Devotion
than Arms, when one Caesar by Name, but the Offspring of an unlawful Bed,
challenged it) and the Proxies of King Philip, and his Sister Isabella, being
ready, by Solemn Rites of Marriage, he Conjoined two Leagues by one Nation.
Going thence to Mantua, and Millain, they met the Duke of Savoy, who also was
come to salute his Kindred. Thus was one whole Year spent in Italian
Complements; then they went to visit Sacred Monuments, passing frequently by
great and rich Cities; where; the Affections of Friends and Subjects
contesting, with great Cost and Art the Austrian Greatness was excellently
deciphered in shows, and Albertus his own Victories represented to him in
Effigy. But by reason of the Journey into strange parts, yet not absolutely
divided from us, I will make a short digression; and before I repeat the
Expedition to the Rhene, remember some Things about the Borders, which at this
time were more than usually troublesome, by some occasions of difference among
Themselves.

Edsard, Earl of Frizeland, beyond the Eemes, being offended with the Covenants
made at Delfeziel, as extorted by Force, had appealed to the Emperor. The
Emperor, who could neither approve Foreign Decisions in German Affairs, not saw
the Issue of them, which should be adjudged against the Will of a City, found
yet this Expedient, That abrogating the Delfezylian Laws, he himself would
command, in a manner, the self-same thing. The Earl being thus frustrate of his
hope, when now he had a great while expected an Augmentation of his Power, this
Year attempted to sow Intestine Discords in the City, already so exhausted by
Troubles and Charges, that it could not pay the Money owing by Covenant, and
other necessary Things, but by the Assessing of New Taxes: Wherefore, sending
two of his Sons into the City, to foment the Tumults, they sought out some
among the Vulgar, that should gather together more, who were offended at the
Assessments, (for of 19 Fraternities two refused) or else such as differed from
the Public Religion: with Directions, That they should, at the Gates, resist
the Soldiers that were to come in; and whom he had sent for to that very
purpose, though pretending other matters. But, the Conspiracy being set afoot,
the Magistrates, angry with the Earl's Sons, complained of the Father's
Treacherous Dealings; and putting to death those, whom they found guilty of
raising the Tumults, they banished the rest of the popular part of the Faction,
or else fined them. One of the principal Leaders, in this Sedition, was Gruny,
a man famous in his Family, and of great Alliance, being Kinsman, among others,
to Count William: He was of Kin, by the Father's side, to John Funquio, who
formerly had presided the Belgic Affairs for the Spaniard; and, not long
since, under pretense of private Business, had come among the Hollanders, But
being detected, to have brought Albertus his Commands to Edsard, and asked what
they were, answered, Nothing else, but to desire Passage for the Spanish Forces
through that Country: Although it was believed, and indeed more congruous to
received Judgments, that he came to treat of an Exchange, concerning the very
Right of that County with others in Burgundy, or else of Goods in Luizenburg.
For this cause, he being for a while diligently kept, at length he was let go,
upon payment of his Ransom, as a Prisoner of War, because he had violated the
Public Faith.

But, at this time, some of the Funquio's Letters to Edsard were found, wherein
he was advised, That he should not look after Germany, or other remote and
lingering hopes, wherewith he had been so often vainly eluded; for nothing but
the Spanish Power would ever restore him to his Government, but a Reward must
be given to the Society, that at the time appointed, they might have leave to
pitch their Camp in the Country; and that a Fleet should be brought into the
Mouth of the River, and the next Bay, with which he should sufficiently revenge
himself upon his Rebels. For which Causes, Count William, the Governor of
Frizeland, was desired, That he would have in readiness a strong Force to help
them in time of need, whereof he took Care accordingly: And, in the interim,
from the adjoining Parts, commands a Party of well-armed and disciplined
Soldiers, to take an Oath to he faithful to him; and then, as if they had bin
discharged by him, he causes them to go into the City, and then to learn what
more they could. But now the Concord of the Citizens being grown more firm,
because the Conspiracy was Reported to intend Fire and Slaughter, and they were
fearful, and not skilled in the use of Arms; and so wanting the help of a
Foreign Garrison, they Listed and took into Pay 300 men. But the Earl, as if he
had received, not given, an Injury, of his own accord, summons the City to
plead their Cause before the Imperial Senate, complaining there of many Things,
as particularly, That the Holland Soldiers wasted his Fields; that they had
inflicted extreme punishments upon innocent Persons. against whom they ought
not to make any Legal Process without him; that they had unworthily dealt with
his Children, and compelled the Youth to make New Promises, whereby they should
lay aside their Allegiance due to their Prince. Thus, in words, they seemed
only to mind Legal Proceedings; but, in deeds, they practiced all kinds of
Hostility.

But both the Earls Sons went to the King of Poland (from whose Aunt they were
descended) though to small purpose; and there they put the Embden Exiles into a
few ships, giving Command, That they should vindicate their own Right against
the Authors of that injurious Oppression. And the Polander, in honor of his
Kinsmen, went ^o far, as to threaten the City with an Interdiction of Traffike,
if it continued obstinate; to the same purpose, writing Letters to the United
States, stuffed with many proud Words, even to admiration; That although he
were deprived of his ancient Kingdom of Sweden, yet he could come with hazard,
and prescribe Laws to them, though so far distant. The Duke of Holsatia also,
whose Daughter was married to Enno the Son of Edsard, commanded a Restraint of
Trade with Embden, seizing all their Ships that were in his Coasts: The like
also was endeavored with the Dane and Spaniard.

The Dissentions of Aquisgrave continued longer between the Old Magistrates,
whom the Duke of Juliers helped, as being Patron of the City by Hereditary
Right; and Them who had obtained the Administration of the Commonwealth, by
the Expulsion of others, under pretense of giving Judgment against Them. Anon
after, at the public instance of the Spaniard by Mendosa and Clement,
Determinations only wont to be made in great Assemblies, were privately
hastened, and by the Judgment of Spire the Occupiers were condemned: And because
they would not perform the Judgment within the time limited, they were
proclaimed Enemies to the Empire: Concerning whom it was thus Decreed, viz.
That it should not be lawful or safe for any to help them; That to offend,
hurt, or kill them, shall be imputed to none for a fault, and that all their
Goods may be taken from them as lawful Booty. The Custom is within the Year, to
promulgate anew the same Proscription in harsher Terms. The Herald, after he
had proclaimed all Things in a solemn manner, commanded their next Neighbors of
Germany, the Duke of Ju^ers, the Archbishop of Colen and Triers, with all
their Powers, to defend the Authority of this Law. It seemed good to these to
take Albertus his Forces, that were as then ready, to assist Them: And now
Garrisons were put into all the Towns within the Territory of Aquisgrave, and
their Cattle, and whatever else was in the Fields, was taken away by the
Soldiers of Juliers, and Limburg: But this did not agree with Them, whose City
had been the Royal Court of Charl^main, and long continued the Metropolis of
all the Regions within the Alps; and, to this day, in all the Counsels of the
Empire, a Seat equal to Rome and Millain, that They should utterly be excluded
from all the Affairs of Germany. Thus the Governors being amazed, whom the
Favor and Promises of the Augustane Profession, had made unaware of such a
sudden Mischief; when on the one side they saw an Army coming under Mendosa;
and, on the other side, the choice Soldiers of the Hungarian War, and that
they could make no Defense, for the avoiding of Envy, they suffered the People
to have the Government of the City. And hereupon, the Archbishop of Colen,
being chosen Arbitrator and Intercessor, for the Restoration of Peace, by good
just Laws, They avoided the Ruin that was coming upon Them; but the Customs
which had prevailed among. Them, for the space of 40 years, were altered: For a
Garrison entering the City, all Offices, both high and low, were bestowed upon
Roman Catholics, all such being removed, as the Lutherant and Calvinists,
differing among Themselves, named as faulty. They who had born Offices, first
were committed into private Custody: Afterward, part of Them (accompanied with
many Netherlanders, (who being formerly Fugitives thither, because of their
Evil Discords, were even pursued at the heels with these Evils) that for fear
of more grievous punishments, their Adversaries conniving thereat) to the
Hollanders; and other part of them to other places: Among these Exiles, that
now returned, was Engelbert, who had formerly been a Captain of a Troop on the
part of the United States, known more by his Military Vices, than any Virtue;
and having, at the Council of Spire, obtained License to seize what he could,
because he said his Wages were unpaid him, he fell upon the Netherlandish
Merchants going to their Houses, with a Portsale Spear, and carrying with him
persons to buy their Goods: Afterward, he was chosen into the City Tribunal,
and this made him so much the more cruel; until by several Letters from the
States written against him, he was moderated and kept under: For they took it
ill, averring it a Thing intolerable, that public Causes should be handled by
private Persons, who were not able to distinguish among the Judges, between a
true and false Name; adding Threats, in case they were not obtained: And
forthwith it was so ordered, whereas before the Netherlanders could hardly be
secure from such Injuries in any Kingdoms. But it is in old and well-known
Rule, That at the Power and Strength of a Party is, so are the Rules they give
out obeyed.

In the Duchy of Cleves, the Counselors of the Duke as yet kept all the
Authority, they were of the Austrian Faction. Nor did the Princes, who were
concerned in the Inheritance, trouble themselves, that Berck was taken by the
Hollanders: The Nobles indeed of Cleves and Juliers, pretending the Guarding
and Safety of their Diseased Prince, consulted, as it were, with the States of
the Provinces, for the raising of Forces, to the number of 2000 Horse, and 6000
Foot, which should lie upon their Borders, for Defense of the Country; whereas
it was, in truth, to secure the Government of the Commonwealth to Themselves:
But when they began to think of a General, some praising John of Nassau;
Others, the Count Hohenlo: But not finding a ready means to raise Pay for them,
their long deliberation gave their Adversaries Opportunity of increasing their
Power. These, and many other Things, were nothing so much feared by the
Hollanders, as were those suspected Preparations made in Germany by Mendosa;
for he had drawn together 62 Companies of Spaniards, 19 of Italians, and two of
Irish. Besides, he had of Germans 4 Regiments, consisting of 10 Companies, as
many of Walloons, and one of Burgundians: So that the whole number of the
Infantry was esteemed 20000. Of Horse, he had 6 Troops of Epirot Laucters, two
of Spaniards, and two of Netherlanders, besides 5 smaller Troops, most of them
Netherlandish Harquebusiers, and eight greater of Spaniards and Italians, yet
all not much exceeding 2000 For the rest, to the number of 12 a Troops, were
left about, Brabant, to be a Guard against sudden Incursions of the Enemy.

Of a long time the King had not greater Forces, whose Number and Fame was
almost doubled by the vast Company of Slaves and Servants attending, and 1700
Carriages following the Army. Without doubt, the Face of the Netherlands, under
the Spanish Obedience, was never more pleasant; for their Towns and Fields
being eased of so great a Burden of Soldiers, especially upon the French
Borders, they had now a small breathing space from their long-continued
Miseries: The Enemy also being gone far from thence another Way, added
Confidence to their Security. Count Frederick Heremberg, by reason of Count
Mansfeldts great Age and Weakness, was Lieutenant General of the whole Army
under Mendosa; but was by Them entitled Camp-Master-General: The Horse passing
the River by Maestricht, some of them went to Venloo, others to Ruermunde;
Thence spreading themselves through Juliers, by the Territories of Colen, and
other parts of Germany, they lay among those naked People without fear, and so
came to the Bank of Rhene; Barlotte was sent before, who was a Captain
frequently made use of in Business, requiring either speed or audacity; for he
drawing together what Boats and Wherries he could possibly meet within the
River into one place, between Bo^e and Colen; and having with him 800 of his
Men, and a small Guns called Drakes, he drove away the Ships of Holland, which
had been left to keep Guard at Berck: Thus, many Souldier^ being taken, he
enjoyed the River free from Trouble, and all the further Bank of it. All this
while Mendosa lay heavy upon a quiet People, with an oppressive and licentious
Army; and because he could not remedy the Peoples Complaints, he abhorred to
intermeddle in the moderation of their Oppressions; whereof many every where
were conscious, that knew the Discords and Divulsions of Germany, and how much
it had lost of its ancient Renown gained by Arms: But to his Prince he was of a
Courageous Spirit, and bore great Faith, while, performing his Commands, he was
a Contemner of Foreign Fame, and valued not Hatred, that was not attended with
Power.

It will not be out of the way, since the matter it self has led us thither,
to describe those several Nations which lie about the Rhine next to the
Hollanders, and the Sites and Extents of the Countries, of the Princes and
Bishops, formerly under the Obedience of the Almain Empire. I can, with more
show of Learning, than Truth, compare the Names of Antiquity with those now in
use: For old Authors, no^ looking much into Germany, have hardly mentioned
them: But when the whole World was disturbed, by the frequent Transmigrations
of one Nation to another, then Writers following them increased the obscurity,
every one drawing the Antiquity of Fame to the Honor of his own People. This I
can almost assert that beyond the Hollanders, who possessed the Country next to
the French Coast without the Island, which part opens between the Rhine and the
Maes, and a few other places beyond both those Rivers; of Old, a Soil full of
Woods and Marshes, was the Ancient Seat of the Menapii, from whom came the
Eburones, and other Allied Nations; and this, at first, made the Germans to be
called Tungri, which People afterward attained the well-known River Moselle,
or the Maes, and the Country of Triers. The Neruii with their Partakers, lay at
the back of these, by the River Scheld; beyond whom, the Morini lay hedged in
by the Forest of Ardenne, which is now the Bounds of the Netherlands, but was
formerly under the Dukes of Burgundy, and divided them from the Kingdom of the
Franks or French. But after Agrippa Translated the Ubii out of the Region which
is against Triers, to another part; or had taken into his Protection, such as
had voluntarily transmi^rated, escially a Colony of the Romans being given him
by his Niece, and the Gugerni settled next to them, the Name of Menapii grew
obsolete; but that some of the Inhabitants being driven into the inner part of
the Country, first seemed to seat Themselves on this side the Maes and Wael,
afterward between the Scheld and the Morini. Hereupon all this Tract, from the
Hollanders beyond Triers, even as far as Mentz, was possessed and planted by
Roman Garrisons, and took the Name, partly of inferior, partly of Higher
Germany, because the Original of the Inhabitants came from beyond the Rhine, as
may easily be discerned by the Tone of their Speech to this day. On this side,
upon the Border of the River, stands Wagening, Grinnes, Duren and Arnheym, all
which were upon the French Bank, though formerly many were otherwise
erroneously persuaded: From thence one might have been seeen Burtuatium,
Drechshausen, and Acken, famous sometimes in the Dutch Wars; Emmerich also and
Culo, but now so lost in their own Ruins, that the most Learned can but
conjecture where they were situate: But N^ys, Colen, Bonne, Andernach, and
Coblentz, keep both their Names and Stations unaltered to this day. In
aftertimes, all this Region, and the Country that lies above it, was called
Austrasia, because that part bordering on the East Side of France, was held by
the Franks or French, who in most parts where they settled, gave new Names to
the places: But they, at length, being weakened by their own Discords, the
Almays Emperors, by bestowing larger Power and Liberties on the Prince's and
People than they had before, drew to Themselves the Superiority of Government;
and therefore they of Cleves, inhabiting on this side the Rhine, took that part
of Gelderland, which is now called Low-Holland, and contains in it the City of
Nimmeghen: With these is intermingled the Archbishop of Colen's Territories,
which extend a great way upon that Bank: Another part of Gelderland incompasses
the Duchy of Cleves, the Governors whereof were formerly called Guardians;
and herein is the Town of Gilders, from whom the People of that whole Province
take their Name: Behind these, the Old Maps and Descriptions would persuade us,
that the Gugerni inhabited; and there is yet a Village in those Parts, that
seems to speak something of their Name in its own, which is Gogen. At the
backside of Colen is Gulick, an ancient City, they have now the same Governors
with Cleves, but formerly their Government was the same with Gelderland; yet
more up into the Country are sited the Liegeo^s by the Maes, the Lutzenburgers
by the M^selle, and the People of Triers; which two Cities of Liege and Triers
are governed by Bishops, the rest are accounted among the Netherlands: But, on
the further Bank of the Rhine, which was the Ancient Seat of the Almains, and
Great Germany, Of Old, the Frizons were the first that met us, who, by reason
they possessed the lesser part of the Region, were called the Lesser Frizons;
from whence the Caninefates, (now People of Gorichom) coming into the Isle of
Holland, were, on another side, compassed with great Lakes, and the Estuary of
the ^llye, and from thence, by the Eemes, un^il you come to the Ocean: To these
are joining the Greater Bructeri hard by the same River, and now opposite to
the Menapii are the Remainders of the Sicambrians, after that People, either of
their own Accord, or by the Compulsion of Augustus his Arms, had settled
Themselves about the Wael. At Luppen we have the Lesser Bructeri again; which
River, some of the Ancients believed to run into the Sea: But others, more
truly, that it intermingles with the Rhine, or rather the Issel, into which
Drusus brought a part of the Rhine: But the incertainty of it, at present, is
so great, that a man may indeed name a River, whereof there is no sign, but
hardly show the true place of its passage: But whatever it was, the Bructeri,
both greater and less, were beaten out thence: yet not so, as that their Names
were utterly abolished. Soon after their Expulsion, the same place was
possessed by the Chamavi; and above them inhabited the People of Angermundo,
together with the Marsi, who were shut up on the backside, by the Chattuarii,
and the Dulgabini: Next to these were the Tubantes, but not the same that live
by the River Issel, and the Tencteri, who were opposite to Colen, before whom,
the Ubii possessed the same place: But these being expelled, the Alemans, a
sort of French People, came into their place about the Rhine: But further from
the River Bank, were seated the Catti; between whom, and the Ocean, the Cauchi
took up a large Continent of Land, all along from the Coast of Frizeland, to
the River Elbe; but the Vueser running in the middle between these People,
divided them one from another. Adjoining to these Cauchi, were the Saxons
toward the Sea, and from thence the Danes beyond the Elbe. Which River being
passed, if you would follow the Vueser farther from the Sea, you will find the
Cherusei bordering upon the Cauchi, Angrivarii, and Catti; round about whom,
the Suevi, with many other Nations, possessed both sides of the Elbe, and vast
Lands backward, in the Heroynian Wood: These Suevi were a long time a most
powerful Nation of Germany, so that oftentimes they drove away the People
inhabiting nearer the Rhine: But Time, and the Vicissitudes of War, has so
altered these places, that they scarcely resemble Themselves in any thing: For
as the Seacoasts belonging to the Cauchi, came to the Frizons, in probability,
by such Appeal as we now use; so it is plain, that of the more inland part,
which as we have said, was possessed by many of the French; some Nation or
Nations coming from other Parts, out of Affection to Liberty, uniting
Themselves in League and Name, took the possession: These first coming into the
remoter Parts of Germany, and afterward going forwards into France, made the
Saxons flourish; who also enjoying something on this side the Elbe, and near
the Rhine also, gave to this Western part the Name of Westphalia: This is the
Account of all these several Nations.

The Rhine mixeth and powers it self into Issell, in that part of Gelderland,
which is called Veluwe, to which we have elsewhere set forth Over-Issel to be
contiguous. There we meet with Tuente for Tubantes, the ancient name of a
People; Nor should we lose our selves, to find Tencteri in Drente, or
Tarantij. There are also in the County of Herenberg, which is part of the
Province of Zutphen, some glimmering of Sicambrian names; as also of the
Bructeri, called more lately Boructuarij, every where about the Fenny parts of
the Country: which things, though I know they please Learned Fancies, yet I
will not dissemble, that it appears out of the former demonstration, that most
of those Nations were very far distant thence, unless it be lawful for us to
conjecture, that they came hither, being by force of Arms, driven out of their
own Country.

The Duchy of Cleves, lying beyond the Rhine, joins to the Province of
Zutphen, even at the very edge of the Isle of Holland, and the Marquisate of
the Empire, compasses the said Duchy, lying in a long tract, each of them
being under one Authority: From hence we see small Principalities, amongst
whom, Nassau is opposite to Triers, at the River Lane, famous, either in its
Latitude, or in the numerous Issue of a noble Family sprung from thence. Next
to Over-Issel, is Frizeland along by the Sea; which name now continues, even
beyond the Eemes, as far as Embden, and behind, enclosed with Oldenburg: The
next that appears, is the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Breme, both within the
Vueser and the Elbe, after whom follows Holsatia, a part indeed of Germany,
and a Dukedom, and so is Jutel, and an adjoining Province of the Danes, but
their Princes acknowledging their Allegiance due to the present Kings of
Denmark; Now must we go through the inland part of the Country: the Duchy of
Cleves, and the Marquisate of the Empire, are bordered by Munster, a Country of
the same name with the City, under the Dominion of a Bishop. Nearer to
Over-Issell, is the County of Bentheym, from whence it is but an easy Journey,
to Lingen and Teclenborge: which are subject to Counts, and so to the
Bishopric of Osnaburg, and the County of Duphold, and end your further enquiry
at Oldenburg.

Another part of the Country contains three Earldoms, or Counties, the first of
Luppe, taking its name from a River therein, the second is Ravensporg, which
now belongs to the Duke of Cleves; and the third is Lemgow. After which, the
Territory of the Bishop of Minden, ends at Vueser. Hitherto Westfalia, above
which lies the County of Walda, and further off Hessen, under the Landgrave, by
the Rhine, and the Bishopric of Paterborn, by the Vueser. Which does not
acknowlenge the Archbishopric of Colen, spoken of before; but that of Mentz,
for her Metropolitan. Now, if we should go to the Palatinate of the Rhine,
Frankenland, Thuringen, and Brunswick, I shall interrupt the order of Affairs,
without any just or reasonable cause for the same, and therefore to return.

The first breach of peace, at present, was msde at Orseo. This Town lies upon
the Rhine, above Bercke, upon the side of the Bank, next to Cleves, which the
Enemy having formerly begun to fortify, by reason of the convenience of the
place, they had scarce laid the Foundations, but they were forced to leave off
again, the greatness of the charge, and their own dissentions hindering them;
And fear of infamy made the Hollanders, that they would neither undertake, nor
perform the same; But the Spanish General, when he had once resolved for the
Town, together with his Officers, debate of the right thereof against all
force, and he prepares to cut off the Bolts and Bars of the Gates, with an
Axe. And now some join together, and carry Scaling-ladders which they brought
in Carts, toward the Walls, when presently the trembling Townsmen set open the
Gates. The Castle was kept by a sort of Soldiers, that were half Clowns newly
listed, yet not so unexperienced in Rapine and plunder, is they were in matters
of War, whom the rest of the Soldiers laughed at for their more vile Apparel,
adorning their heads, not like their fellow Soldiers, but with parti-colored
Feathers of strange Birds; whereupon, they nicknamed them Cock-feather
Asinegoes.

Mendosa by using delays, drawing these fellows into a vain hope, at last,
showing them the Hangman, and a Halter, made them come and submit. And now
Count Bucquoy having transported his Regiment over the Rhine: as also two other
Spanish Regiments, and afterward, almost half the Horse, at one and the same
time.

Orseo and Malsem, a Village lying over against it, were both by Mendosa's
Command, begun to be fortified, though he had promised within five days to
depart from thence: sending forth into the by-ways, Soldiers to fetch Wood,
wholopping and topping Trees, though never so far distant, would hardly abstain
from taking Wood from the Houses: At first, it was thought safeguard enough,
for the Garrison to make a firm passage over the River, but afterward, they
receded from that Counsel: While these things were a doing, and Frederick
viewed all the Skirts of Germany, wherever he came, whether among Subjects, or
Enemies; the violence and cruelty of the Spanish Army, did not only cast a
great terror among the naked and unarmed People, but by various Reports of the
vulgar, as is usual in War, but much perplexed also the United States, so that
they mistrusted their Borders, and were unsatisfied of their more inward
Garrisons.

The Prince, who was preparing, as well to meet as prevent this terror, at the
first news of their motion, calling together his Soldiers, that were quartered
in the inner parts of the Country, especially the English and Scotch; to whom
likewise came part of the Garrison-Souldiers from the Brill, and Flushing: he
marched to Aynheym, whither also hastened those Regiments of Foot, and the
Horse, under the Conduct of Count William of Frizeland; But the Ships of War
that were to come thither, being hindered by cross Winds, were somewhat late ere
they arrived. Soon after, going to take a view of Gravewaert, from thence
passed to the Territory of Zutphen, and the Towns of Over-Issell, and to all of
them, being either afraid of the Enemy, or hoping, and desirous to defend
themselves against him, he imparted an addition of strength out of his own
Soldiers; But the rest of the places, were taken care of by their particular
Governors: But Doesburg, and Doetichem, from whence, was the next passage out
of Germany, to the Issell, on the right side of the Isle of Holland, the Prince
himself especially, minded going thither with some Horse; There was he met by
his Aunt, the Mother of the Counts Heremberge, who, with a great and Noble
Train of her Daughters, after Salutes past, and Complements ended, entreated
him by all the ties of blood and alliance, and by his own fortune, by which
alone he had seen his nearest Relations divided in the War, his Brother being
on one part, and her Husband on another, that he would as much at he could, by
the Laws and Rule of War, spare their Possessions. To which purpose, the works
about Herenberg, should be thrown down, and the Garrison withdrawn. (This
Herenberg is a Town of Zutphen, from whence the Family of the Counts Herenberg
take their Title) and by the same example, other Towns and Castles that were
likely to fall into the Enemies hands, were likewise dismantled, and so as was
hoped, redeemed from the miseries and mischiefs of War. They fell to
Consultation, where they should pitch their Camp; for in regard, it appeared
unsafe, to incamp about Bercks, least the Enemy interposing himself between
them and the adjacent Towns, to binder them from Provision, should cut off
their Army, which indeed was much inferior to the Enemy: Wherefore, the Prince
thought fit to possess himself of a little Island, that lay on the right hand
of the Hollanders, not far distant from the division of the River, and the
further Bank of the Rhine, where the Duchy of Cleves, winding about the Town
of Sevenaer, sets bounds to the Jurisdiction of Zutphen: On both sides, they
had Bridges made of Boats, for the more commodious passage over the River, as
well of their great Guns, as their Horse. And as soon as the danger was
gathered all together into one part, the rest of their fears vanished, so that
now the Soldiers were called from Ostend, Nimmeghen, and the furthest parts of
Holland and Zeland, to supply the want of those Forces, whereof the Army had
been drained by the Garrisons. These were brought to the Prince by Count
Hohenlo, whose diligence and labor was very remarkable, in furnishing all the
Cities of Over-Issell, while the Enemy lay every where scattered among them,
with great Guns, Engines of War, and all other necessary things for the
defensive part, and beating off an Assaylant near at hand, or at a distance.
Then the Prince supposing it necessary to be provided against all imminent
Occurrences, by knowing what number of men he had with him, upon muster of his
Army, he found, that he had fifteen hundred Horse, and scarce six thousand
Foot, too small a number publicly to meet the Enemy in the Field with, yet
sufficient to repel them, yea, and fight with them upon occasion, where they
might be helped by the Policy of the General, and advantage of time and place;
And therefore understanding by some Prisoners, that Mendosa's Provisions were
coming to the Town of Geldres, he made have back with some Troops, and the
chief Officers of the Army to the Maes, in hope of intercepting the Enemies
Relief, and Convey, between Venloo and Moers; But the River being passed, the
Spaniards first suspecting, afterward learned the design, and so escaped the
danger. Thus being disappointed, they every one went to follow their Commands
at their own Regiments: Now there began some Skirmishes upon the Rivers, by the
more then ordinary confidence of some few runawayes, who being brought in a
Carriage-Boat, should, as if it were by chance, strike against a long Boat of
the Hollanders, lying upon the watch at Rees, and so overwhelm it with Darts.

In this Interim, the Spanish Army every day increased more and more, by the
new coming of fresh forces, insomuch, that now their multitude became burdensome
to themselves, while they devoured all the Provision that could be brought to
them far and wide, besides what came from Colen, and the Neighboring Towns; by
which means, Provision grew very dear, which happened not through any want that
there was thereof, but from the Soldiers want of pay; and as evils seldom go
alone, this dearness of Provision in the Spanish Army, was waited on by a
plundering of the Fields and Villages about Ments, and other parts of Germany,
that border upon the Rhine, but their malice was chiefly vented upon those who
were averse, or seemed Enemies to the Roman Catholic Religion.

This was the beginning of Rapine and plundering, and if either the Soldiers
of the place, or the youth of the Country, offered to resist their injurious
extortions, there was no more then a word and a blow, which was the cause of
many promiscuous slaughters; yet could not the Soldiery be kept within their
obedience, for all this liberty they took to themselves; but sometimes falling
into extravagant demands of money, as if they had been weary of idleness, or
timorous blood, would turn their madness, either against their Captains or
Companions, so that Mendosa himself could hardly so interpose, as to pacific
the Walloons and Spaniards, fallen together by the ears, in a sudden tumult,
but that they would even before the Generals Tent, have encounters even to
bloodshed, and spoil their Captains, even in his sight: Besides, the Noblemen
differed in Counsel, out of envy one to another.

Lewis Velasco, General of the Ordnance, undertook to drive Prince Maurice, out
of his Station, and boasted, that after he had so done, he would harasse all
along the Rivers Issell and Rhine, and further, that he would magnificently,
and like a Soldier, pierce into the very bowels of the Hollanders Country.

Count Heremberg, passing to the right hand, marched a safer way as far as the
Eemes, taking easy possession of a Country, where there were no Forces to
resist him: or else, as if because he had known the Country, he had as it were,
come thither to challenge the Prince to fight; and because he did not mere him,
studied nothing but revenge in their daily spoils: And this might be believed
the Reason, why his Son being at that time in the Army, was called the
Transamatian Count. Of all which things, the Prince being informed as well by
intercepted Letters, as by Intelligence of some Soldiers that were come over
from them to him, admonished the City of Embden of the danger, wishing them to
be very vigilant in their own defense.

Now began grievous complaints every day to be made at the Duke of Cleves
Court, the Rulers of Moers envying the Spaniard, and with doleful outcryes,
beseeching the Governors or Officers of the Army, to entreat Mendosa on their
behalf, that he would let them have some ease and respite, though not in peace,
and the enjoyment of their own, which because they had lost by their
sluggishness and cowardice, they were ready forthwith to leave their Families,
desert their Country, and freely go with them, being stronger then themselves,
only they requested, that their Wives and Children might be permitted to leave
that ancient Seat of their Fathers, that they might not be slaves to the vilest
of the Spaniards, and be unworthily vexed with contumelious words, and scornful
behavior, whereas otherwise they would not enjoy their liberty, though to that
purpose they lived in banishment: which things were very grievously taken by
those that hoped better things, or else had been of Counsel with the Spaniards;
for they who had the chief Authority, being hated by the Protestants, did
voluntarily call in the Spanish Forces, to keep in awe the dissentors: They who
were more simply honest, would take a Journey to the Rhine, alleging, that in
a short time, those miseries would be over; and in the interim, they must be
excused, as being customary among Soldiers; for the revenging of small evils,
is but a provocation to greater; That in a short time, the whole World would be
inslamed into a general War: if they should run to Arms upon every slight
offense of their Neighbors, and some take part upon one side, and some on
another; Hereto were added Albertus his Letters, wherein he answered with much
humanity, Sybilla the Duke of Cleves. Sister, setting forth the necessity that
compelled him at the present, to do so many injuries, but for the future
protesting, that as soon as the Rebels were conquered, that peace and security
should be restored to the Duke her Brother, equally with himself. But
notwithstanding, all these fair speeches, his Soldiers growing every day worse
and worse, the Nobility, Governors, and Deputies of Cities, were commanded to
meet in the City of Cleves: The Dukes name was only used for a show, for as
well his own as others miseries, were concealed from him, least his disease
should be increased thereby.

But his Sister Sybilla, being a Woman of a Masculine Spirit and Prudence,
sometimes spoke to them all, otherwhiles, to some particular persons, not for
increasing the Princes Revenues, nor to dispute about settlement of their
Borders, but to stand up in defense of their liberty and Consciences, which
were at once in danger: wherefore they should awake, and, while they had time,
seek for remedies, they should go and consult together for the common good; and
thus oftentimes, with tears in her eyes, she wrought pity and compassion in her
hearers: Whereupon laying aside all private animosities and discords, it was
decreed, That the chief of the Cities being stengthened with Soldiers that
should be speedily raised, they should on all hands go to get what strength
they could together for their defense.

All Germany is divided into ten parts, which they call Circles, five
Superior, and five Inferior. The first of the three inferior contains three
Bishoprics, whose Bishops are three of the seven Electors of the Empire, and
have under their dominions, three free Cities, Mentz, Tryus, and Colen; within
this also is the Palatinate, whose Prince is another of the Electors, besides
diverse other less dominions. The second is Westfalia, which we have described
before, wherein are the Princes of Cleves, Frizeland beyond the Eemes, and
Walda, with many Bishoprics. The third and fourth contained Saxony: And in
that part that comprehends Misnia, and Lusatia, are the Duke of Saxony, and
Marquess of Brandenburgh, two more of the Electors: the Duke of Pomerania,
Anhalt, and many other Princes, and some Cities; herein are the Archbishops of
Breme, and Madgeb^rg, and five other lesser Bishops: Besides the Dukes of
Holsatia, Brunswick, Londari, and Luneburg, and many Cities by the Baltic Sea;
In the last, which is called Burgundy, is the Bishop of Besancon: And to his
Jurisdiction, Duke Charles appointed that part of the Netherlands under his
obedience. Every Division has a selected Governor who with some assistants
dispatcheth all affairs of inferior quality, but calls a Council to determine
the more weighty. At that time Simon Count of Luppe had the charge of
Westfalia, whom then the Lords of Cleves desired to demand Moers from Mendosa,
and in case it should be refused, that he would call a Council of the five
inferior divisions at Dortmund, and in the mean time retaining the Soldiers
that should go to Hungary with the Turkish tributes prevent a danger at home,
rather then a fear at so great a distance. Not were they that were sent to the
Emperor more backward to importune him with prayers; and in like manner were
solicited all the Bishops resident about the Rhine, as also the Count
Palatine, the Landgrave of Hessen, and the Duke of Brunswick, who all for fear
the same evil should at one time or another creep toward them, were ready to
be drawn into a league of defense: And the Colonians were dehorted, that they
should no more serve the Spaniards with provisions, least thereby they seemed
to encourage them in their design of common ruin. Some also were commanded to
go to Prince Maurice, and to return him thanks, that he had hitherto maintained
the war with so little damage to the borderers, and to desire him to proceed to
convince the enemies abominable villanyes with his valor and virtuous actions,
and that he would not take in ill part any injuryes that should be done to him
or his unwillingly, but rather that he would look upon them with an eye of pity
and mercy, hoping that he would rather revenge himself upon the authors and
causers of the injury, then the patience of a weak people; That they hoped it
would be acceptable, both to Himself and the States, because formerly they had
fought it; that since the Laws were in vain, and the Spaniards insolence was
increased by impunity, the Germans would now join in arms with him: and they
said, That since they were compelled to deliver all that they held in the
German soil, they were promised that the Spaniards should be forced to do the
same, if they would not do it voluntarily; which since it had not been
performed, and that rewards were given to injurious oppression, and modesty
used with con^^mely, so that Albertus, the author of so great mischiefs, was by
many designed to be heir of the Empire; that goodness of theirs which had been
so often eluded, should now one way or other compel the enemy to wish they had
rather have done equal kindness, then only to feed them with empty words: And
if the Germans would at last understand what they had so often by experience
found, after so many acts of hostility done by the Spaniards, they would never
find a more opportune season to join with their neighbors and friends, justly
to subvert their encroathing tyranny, then now, that old King Philip was dead,
and the Army was full of discord and poverty. But Mendosa returned answer to
those sent to him, That it was usual so to do, when rebels could not be
otherwise repressed, nor would be entreated to give a better answer. Nay, he
proceeded so far in the contempt of Justice, that he would not vouchsafe to
inquire what might be pretensively said, either from the Ancients, or at
present for the Austrians against them of Cleves. In the interim, the Spaniards
were daily more and more afflicted with fresh mischiefs, themselves suffering
what they endeavored to inflict upon others, for on this side the Rhine, by
continual Rapines, all the fruits of the ground were consumed, the husbandmen
driven away, and the woods felled, so that the Country far and wide was in a
manner left naked, nor did provisions come to the Camp as is usual, because
they that brought it, were so often pillaged, and hence proceeded great famines
among them, which made the Soldiers daily run away, not by one and one at a
time, but by whole Companies in a day, some of which intending to go to the
Moselle. Mendosa sent some horse after them to bring them back, whom they
saluted so discourteously, that they were glad to return without doing what
they were commanded. There was another accident also that increased their
penury, which was this, The Rhine being very rough with tempestuous winds, had
broken their bridge of Boats, the ignorance of the Smiths having not well
fastened them to the banks, so that by this means their commerce was cut off
from one another. Mendosa admonished by this inconvenience, certainly decreed
the Siege of Bergh, which before this time they had but threatened; and this he
did, because the Island there, the Blockhouses upon the River, the firm
passage; and the rest were not kept without loss and infamy, the possession of
all which might be more justly, and with less trouble retained by the title of
a victorious Conquest: and therefore it was much admired, that he deferred this
care above a month, while the enemies were weak and far distant, unless by
that delay he sought a more specious pretense to stay in those parts, for which
now a suitable occasion presented it self, because the States being often
required to redeliver Bergh, would neither surrender it as another, nor
fortify it as their own. At the beginning of the year, the Archbishop of Colen
reiterated his demands of restitution, by John of Nassaw, the son of John,
protesting the equity thereof in very friendly words; so answering the pretense
of charges, which was the States only Argument, that he said they were the
first that usurped upon the City, whose example the Spaniards followed, yet
they had often promised they would leave it, until at length they continued
their delays so long, that they were prevented from performance by a Siege;
but if they expected to be repaid their charges of the war, and their damages,
there is nothing more just, than that every one should vindicate and maintain
their own. And if he should be permitted to reckon nothing for Hay which he
returned, how much more unreasonable is it for any man to interpose his
authority in accounts of war? Besides, he showed that the town was only a
burden and charge to them that kept it, and would not be convenient for the
Enemy, for that the River could be passed more commodiously in other places;
which principally moved the United States, in a Council of the Provinces held
to that purpose, to weigh the great distance of the place, the poverty of the
Soldiers, and the extreme labor in fortifying it: And although they
discoursed no more of charges, yet it pleased them, being even out of hopes to
keep it, to think that by the surrender of it they should get somewhat more
then thanks: And therefore they answered, That they had often found, that
whatever they gratified their friends withal, had become a booty to the Enemy;
Wherefore they hoped it would be no injury, if they did faithfully promise,
that they would not in a hostile manner invade any part within the bounds of
Germany, nor do any act to disturb the trade or passage of or upon the Rhine:
And if any thing were done to the contrary, that the said Bishop of Colen, and
the other Electors about the Rhine, should appoint and order how, and what
satisfaction should be made for the same: He on the other side requiring
stricter conditions, when an Agreement was almost concluded, would proceed no
further, as knowing the Spaniards were preparing a revenge, whom he was
suspected to have stirred up to deal in other matters controverted between
himself and the Princes of Germany. By reason of this kind of treaty before
mentioned, the Hollanders had scarcely any time to prepare for a defense of the
Town, before the danger was ready to fall upon it. Therefore the enemies army
lying all about the Rhine, it was too ^^e to think of fortifying, and besides
the evils they were aware of, there was another happened whereof they never had
a thought; for the Pestilence beginning within the small compass of the place,
on a sudden, burst out more violently in a furious contagion and wonderful
slaughter. The cause of this sorrow was believed to proceed at that time from
the unusual dryness of the Rhine, for the very channel lying without water, had
infected the Air with thick vapors, which also by the unseasonableness of the
foregoing Autumn had been corrupted; from thence sprung so great an infection
among the people, that whoever was touched therewith, was forthwith shut up
from all humane society. And of the Soldiers left in the garrison, who had
scarcely any victuals, nor a safe place to hide their heads in, scarce six
hundred men remained alive of a far greater number: Nor were their bodies more
wasted by the Plague, then their minds were afflicted with the misery of so sad
a spectacle. The Governor of the place, by name Seafy, lying also sick of this
terrible disease, receiving Letters from Mendosa, only writ back this, That the
surrender of the Town was unseasonably mentioned, because the States had lately
made Articles for the delivery thereof to the Archbishop of Colen. By the
modesty of this answer, the Spanyard presently conceived rash hopes of
treachery; wherefore he sent other Messengers, and by them offered great
rewards both to him and his wife. In this interim, the Prince suddenly
commanded three Companyes of Foot to march by Land, because the winds had taken
away the use of the River, and their often being sent, and as frequent return,
though still to no purpose, had made the Enemy negligent; these three Companies
were to guard and keep the Island, that was hard by, but not to mingle with the
infected multitude of the town, unless upon fatal necessity. The Fortifications
of this Island were very weak, and the enemy prevented them in perfecting their
design, penetrating on every side the thin rampire with the bullets of the
Artillery which he had brought thither. And at the same time, some horse, where
the River ran more slow, got over at a ford, so that now danger was come even
to their posts, when by the command of the Governor, the new Soldiers being
brought over (some great Guns and small shot being disposed about the rampire
of the Town, by whose defense) the very last of them got safe into Bergh,
leaving behind some fire secretly to burn their huts. And now Mendosa, that the
Enemy might not be able to interrupt the siege, put garrisons into diverse Towns
of the Duchy of Cleves lying below Bergh. Many submitted voluntarily; but the
Inhabitants of Burick, dating at first to oppose the empty name of peace to the
violence of war, he quickly made submit by setting fire to their gate;
Soldiers also were thrust into Alpen and Moers, although this belonged to
Nienarius his Widow, and that to the Widow of the Palatine, to both whom,
Albertus had given his faith, That they should not be disturbed by the War: But
the like happened to more besides themselves* Covenants and Promises being of
no value, where all Laws are trodden under foot.

About this time, the Air was very Cloudy, which much forwarded the Besiegers,
so that in short time, they approached near the Town in three places; yet for
all that, were not come to the Trench. And now some Guns being planted, both in
the Island and Continent, threatened from thence a continual Battery. At which
time, Alfonso Avales, commanding the Horse, and Chief in managing the Siege,
according to the Military Custom, sent a Herald. The Townsmen advise'd, that
leave should be desired, of sending a Messenger to the Bishop, but the
Soldiers disliked of that, as being a palpable confession of fear, but sent
back a resolate answer, being angry also at this, that he should send to the
Governor, as inferior to him, because in greater Command. Soon after this, an
Assault was made by the Spaniard, upon the outward Bulwark; but they were
beaten off valianily, and that with so much the greater slaughter, by how much
they came on rashly, without any Advise or Conduct. But when the Coping of the
Wall began to be battered, (a strange thing to tell.) A Tower looking to the
Water, (wherein was a great quantity of Gunpowder sufficient to serve a long
time) which taking fire on a sudden (like a Clap of Thunder and Lightning) it
burst out with a horrible Crack, vemiting fire and smoke, overthrew all before
it; They that enquired into the cause thereof, report, that one of the Enemies
Bullets striking either against a stone, or another piece of Iron made fi^e fly
out, the sparks whereof, falling among the Gunpowder, caused that mischance; By
that violent ebullition of the fire the Air was wholly purified from its
Pestilential Infection; but more griev^us evils succeeded in the place: For by
the blow, many of the adjoining Houses were overthrown several People killed in
the ruins: part of the Bulwark utterly demolisht, which the battery of many
Cannons could not have effected; and if a Half Moon standing out beyond that
place, had not hindered the Enemy from seeing them: so much had that unexpected
Casualty taken away the use of their understanding that the Town might have
been entered by force, before they could have, been provided, either to make
resistance, or capitulate, Eor great quantities of Stones were violently hurled
up into the Air, and fell down into the Enemies Camp, killing and hurting
diverse therein; yea, and half (...) hour after the great blow, diverse Ships in
the Rhine were endangered by the furious concussion of the Waves, which made
the River seem white, as if it had been covered with Snow. But within the Town,
when as any one durst go into the vacuities, there they found, (what was enough
to astonish men's Ears in the hearing, and to make their Eyes drop tears in the
seeing) torn and dismembered Bodies, Heads, Arms, Legs, and other parts
scattered over the whole place.

But as often as the ruined Bulwarks went to be repaired, and the dust and
rubbish was carried away, what ever remained, let the difference be what it
would, every one thought it to be his own, if once it came to his hands; for
now they would be governed, neither by Counsel nor Command; for Luke Heddingen,
to whom the Government was devolved by the death of Scafius lay among others,
killed in the ruins of the collapsed Walls and Houses; by all which accidents,
the People were so possessed with fear, that the Enemy perceiving it, offered
them their lives, upon condition only, that they should not fight against them
within four months, although he was not ignorant, how little he wanted of the
Victory. And he was so much more favorable to them, and more obse^viert of his
promise, having a just cause of War against them, than he was toward those
whom he called friends: It was believed, that Avales retained this kindness, in
remembrance of the Battle of Knodsenburg, where he himself was taken prisoner
by the Hollanders, and generously used.

The fifth day, the Siege was ended, and Prince Maurice, being deceived of his
hope, for that he imagined, that Siege would have made the Enemy spend the
greatest part of the next Winter there, yet could not find justly any thing
Name-worthy, besides the multiplied mischances of unkind fortune, and his own
Forces, who would suffer him to attend nothing but the defense of the Borders.

While these things were transacting in these places, another part of the
Spanish Army, passing over the Rhine, sat down against Urseo, and with an
unprofitable pride, scorning the Redemption the Country offered for their
Lands, made clandestine incursions, more like Thieves than Soldiers, into the
furthest part of Zutphen, and some part of Over-Issel, wasting those places,
where although they committed no great spoil, but among the Germans, who lay
mingled thereabouts, though they got not much plunder, yet they lost good store
of blood, which made them rage without measure, or mercy, showing many examples
of their blood-thirstiness, against the Towns lying up the Luppe and Roer: But
all these promiscuous slaughters of the vulgar, and the infinite number of
their horrid villainies, were all darkened, obscured, and seemed as nothing, to
that one barbarous Murder committed upon a Person of Honor; It was Viricus
Falc^steyne, Count of Brucke (the name seems to hint to us the name of the
Bruckeri) who agreed with the Hollanders in point of Religion, and in the
Counsel of their Nation constantly opposed all such as spoke any thing in the
behalf of the Spanish faction. He had with him a hundred Soldiers, and as many
Boors, or rather more, with whom he undertook the defense of a weak Castle, and
many times drove away the Spaniards from their spoiling of the Country by the
fear of him, and sometimes with slaughter: Therefore being commanded to yield
up his Guard, when relying upon the validity of the German Laws be refused, and
one Lopez being sent to the Siege, his Soldiers were so wearied with the
length of their march, that they were unfit to fight, Which he noting,
prevented Extremity, by Articling for the preservation and safety of the Lives
and Fortunes of himself and all his, who had been Reported to have bin many
more in number, which it was thought was one Motive causing his death; for
contrary to the Covenants agreed, the Castle was demolished, his Wife taken
from him, his Soldiers all killed, and himself kept prisoner: where, having
bin detained some days, he was invited to go abroad and take the fresh Air: One
Peter Agayo had received the Command, to kill him; but to do it in such manner,
as his Death might be imputed to accident. In his Walk he passed by the Ground,
yet wet with the Blood of his Soldiers, when they that guarded him, following
behind as Waiters, the Executioners of Death first striking him with a Javelin,
afterward killed outright with their Swords, and they of his Familiars that
were with him, underwent the same Fate: The Order of this Murder being
published abroad, the Friends and Kindred of the Count were all moved to
Revenge; nay, and so bitter was the Peoples Indignation against it, that the
Council of Juliers, could not, or would not, pass it by in Silence. Whereto
Mendosa gave very careless Answers, as believing it enough to deny his
Knowledge or Command of the Fact, though he suffered it to go unpunished:
Adding moreover, That it had not happened, but by the Divine Providence, that he
fell by War, who ought long before to have suffered for his public Crimes of
Sedition and Impiety; and much upbraiding his Obstinacy, accounting this also
among his Faults, That he had as it were in Contempt, answered his Latin
Letters in the German Tongue, of which he knew his (viz. Mendosa 's) Ignorance:
And then if any more grievous Accident had happened, he commended to them
Patience; without which, he averred himself incapable of Ruling a Multitude
enraged with Poverty and Injury. But these Flouts, in Words, were attended with
seriousness of Action.

One of the Noblest Towns in those parts beyond the Rhine, is Wesel, famous
among the Dutch, both for Merchandise and Arts, which were brought thither by
the frequent Resort of Foreiners from other Countries, flying for their
difference in Religion: That City supposing her self more oppressed than the
rest, by having a Spanish Judge, had determined, by an Honorable Legation, and
some Gifts, to win upon the General's Mind; which he understanding, answered,
He was not such a one as could be induced or persuaded to let alone that, which
was necessary to be done, or that knew not to do kindnesses to good People,
unless moved thereto by the Allurements of Gifts; but indeed there was no other
way to merit his Favor, than by restoring the Public Worship of God to its
true and pristine condition, which would, in truth, be an act so lovely, and
pleasing to him, that he would esteem it beyond many Gifts. Which Things were
so spoken by him, because they of Wesel, having been often commanded by the
General's Council, to receive the Roman Rites within their Walls, had
obstinately refused it. And therefore the Spaniard, soon after passing the
Rhine with his whole Army, commanded them to receive a great Garrison both of
Horse and Foot, as their Neighbor Town of Burick had done; and withal to
beware, That nothing were innovated in those Parts by the Enemy. But the
Difference was easily understood; for their Obedience drew along with it an
alteration in the State; and if they denied, the Licentious Soldier, greedy of
Prey, would scarcely be contained from the Assault and Spoil of the City.
Wherefore, seeking some means to appease the General, and avoid the Fury of his
Anger, they sent him a great quantity of Corn, and, in Money, a Hundred
Thousand Dollers; which Sum, was not raised out of the Tributes, but paid out
of the Public Treasury: Concerning the value of which, there grew a great
Contention between the Soldiers and Citizens, which had almost renewed their
Danger; unless the Governors, on both sides, had moderated their enraged
Minds: With this Money, and what was gathered otherwise in the Neighboring
Towns, and came from Bruxels, Mendosa persuaded the Army, That though they had
refused it hitherto, that leaving some Garrisons on the hither Bank of the
Rhine, they would suffer themselves to be led beyond the Rhine: From thence
they passed the River Luppe, by a firm and strong Bridge, which they commanded
them of Wesel to make; for that which was formerly made, the Materials whereof
being Bundles of Hay bound up with Clay, and by the Artificers bestirring
themselves, placed upon New Boats; as many such seemed to do well, yet would
serve for no use, so though singly they were passable enough, yet by reason of
their inequality of Burden, many of them together were troublesome and
dangerous: There it was thought fit, by the Opinion of Velasco, rather to pass
the Issel, than to go so far from the Borders, now at the beginning of Winter,
where they were not certain of Provision, and to lie about the wet and marshy
Soil of Frizeland. In this March, they exacted from the People of Munster, both
Money and Instruments of War, though the United States admonished them
otherwise; assuring Them, That they should not expect any help or Peace from
them, if the Enemy were augmented, either by their Assistance, or Sluggishness.
From thence, Rees and Emmerie, two Towns lying close by the Rhine, for Fear,
accepted Garrisons; to whom Mendosa, at first, did not assign any great Number;
but afterward, utterly regardless of his Reputation, he daily violated his
Promise in sending in more; as if he had taken a delight not to perform, what
was in his own Power not to have promised. And the Townsmen of Rees could not
have Liberty granted them of departing, when they desired it. But a Germane
Captain, whom Mendosa had bound with an Oath to go into the Town of Emmeric
with 400 Soldiers; and sending Barlatte after him with a Regiment, because no
more should come into his Quarters, he valiantly kept him out, openly
protesting, That he would not yet break his Faith and Paroll, by the unhandsome
Example of his faithless General.

This so great Contempt was very ill resented by the Town, which had always
stuck close to the Roman Religion; and at the persuasions of the Jesuits, was,
underhand, the main Author of calling the Spaniards into those Parts, as
believing they should receive no damage by the War: And, as Witnesses of
Mendosa's Promise, when a Priest being sent out of the City, produced his
Letters under his hand, reproving him thereby for his breach of Promise, he
could get no other Answer, than that there was so much difference between the
Affairs of Princes, and those of Churchmen, that it was not possible always to
manage them by the same Counsels. To whom the Priest replied, We shall not
wonder hereafter why the Hollanders Rebelled, and that they are so averse to
make any Conditions with you, since measuring all Things for your own
Advantage; you violate that Justice and Right to your Friends, which should be
preserved unspotted even to your Enemies: Certainly, at last, those wicked
Actions and Studies will not only make you hated by Men, but draw upon your
Heads the Vengeance of Heaven. But the Spaniard was so far from being moved
with this freedom of speech, that immediately he went and broke into Iselburg by
force, with a great slaughter of the Citizens: The Town of Iselburg is situate
more inward upon the Old River Issel.

Among these Passages, the Prince, that he might stop the Enemy from coming to
him, commanded some Pioneers to go into a Ship, and by cutting through the Bank
near Emmeric, should let in the Rhine to overflow the whole Plain: And now all
the Country about began to become a great Pool, when the Spaniards (on a
sudden) came upon them; and first assaulting the Guard left with Count
Hohenlo, with their shot, afterward bringing their Artillery to the Bank, they
drove them from the place; Then making up the Breach, the Waters also of their
own accord abated. This Design thus failing, Prince Maurice thought it
necessary, to prevent the approaching Enemy, by seizing some places in the
Duchy of Cleves, which he had hitherto forborne, before the Enemy should take
them; (for he was now about the Mountain Aelten) and, to this purpose, he went
to Sevenaer, a Town in that part, and commanded the same to be delivered to him
using great Threats to the Governor, That he should deny to him, what he would
grant to the Enemy. In the same manner, were other Towns taken in the same
Dominion, although they stood within the Isle of Holland; but, probably, the
changing of the old course of the River, or mutual Agreements of Princes, might
alter the Bounds: These Towns were Huessen, and the Castle of Lobec, where all
the Tribute of Cleves is kept; which place, the Authors of that Age remarked
for the Name and impious Treachery of Herespich, by which Charles le Gross
killed Godfrey, the Norman then Ruling the Frizons. But Mendosa fearing some
Mauritian Stratagems from his Armies lying so near, kept his Soldiers under
very strict Command: Ten whole Nights and Days did the Army continue in the
open Field, without any other Coverture than the Canopy of Heaven; and taking
no rest, but in their Order in Arms, and upon the Naked Earth: Insomuch, that
what with Cold and want of rest; and, at last, for that all the Provision of
the Country round about was spent, and they durst not range abroad for Booty,
they were afflicted with most pinching Hunger.The Infantry was made up of good
Soldiers out of several Nations, aemulous among Themselves; but there was an
Evil Custom grown inveterate by use among the Commanders, on the King's side,
to put their main Confidence in the strength of their Horse; who, being at this
time broken with Wants, and weakened with Fear, took away the Courage of others:
So that oftentimes, a few of the Nassauians pu^ to flight three times as many
of their Enemies, getting very great Booties of Horses; yea, and the Common
Soldiers were so ordinarily beaten, that by reason of the Charge and Trouble
of the great Number of Prisoners taken, (for many came willingly into
Captivity, merely that they might be able to satisfy their Hunger, and would
not be Ransomed) it was at last Decreed, That (...) one, from that time, should
take any Prisoner alive: So that in all the time that the War remained about
the Rhine, when the Prince, with a small Party of Horse, had a mind to view the
States Enemies, or else in some select place would draw up his Army into
Battalia, or at other times sent out any of his Officers to allure Them to some
light Skirmishes of Horse, the Spaniard never either disturbed his Camp by
Assaults, or suffered himself to be drawn in, or involved into the Offer of a
Fight: For it was the General's Prudence not to put Confidence, either in their
Courage or Resolution, which were less corrupted by Licentiousness than
Poverty, and this Prudence of the General nursed up the Soldiers in Cowardice;
and if the Hollanders had not in all their Affairs looked upon their Dangers as
it were through a multiplying Glass, they had had a noble Opportunity of making
Attempts upon those great Forces of the Spaniards: But now when they were
observed to quit the Bank of the Rhine, and to march directly toward Issel,
Prince Maurice, at the very beginning, leaving the Guard of Holland, hasted
away with the Ships, to prevent sudden danger; and that he might the more
easily straiten the Enemy of Provisions, strengthening all the weaker places
thereabouts, brought to Doesburg Bridges, Guns, Engines, and all other
necessary Furniture for War. This Town lies within the Jurisdiction of Zutphen,
and has the River Issel coming out of Westfalia, brought thither by Ditches
begun at Arnheym, which was supposed to be the ancient Work of Drusus. In this
place intending to stop the Enemies passage into the Voluwe, he pitched and
fortified his Camp at the very meeting of the two Rivers. The Line that
encompassed his Camp was 8 Foot high, near 40 Foot broad.

At the Top it bore 24 Foot, besides a Coping higher than the rest 6 Foot, and
round about the whole was a deep Trench: Besides this, there was another Line
more inward, but nor erected according to the modern way of Fortification;
which, for hastening the Work, was to be a Second to the adjoining Bulwark.
While this was doing, Mendosa battered Doetechem, a Town also in Zutphen
Jurisdiction, which is an hours Journey from Doesburgh, and the 3d day he came
to the Trench, without sending any Summons, according to the Custom of War,
choosing rather to terrify the Besieged with Danger than Threats; as
confident, by that Example, after the first blood drawn, it would not be
refused: Yet it is believed, that the Interest of Frederick Count Hiremberg,
procured the Surrender of it; the Soldiers, upon delivery, being disarmed, and
commanded not to bear Arms, during the space of 6 Months, out of Holland or
Zeland; and the Townsmen having free Pardon and Impunity, after 20 years
continuing faithful to the States, were now first compelled to change their
Masters, with this one small Victory. After Bergh, the course of the King's.
Army was stopped, acknowledging their Error, That they had not at first,
without Delay, fallen upon Doesburg, which they thought would have yielded
presently, if Prince Maurice, taking time by the Fore-lock, had not come
thither himself, and by his Policy prevented them. And this was all worthy of
Note done by these great Forces, being hindered to proceed further, either by
the Season of the Year, or shortness of Time and Provisions; their Want being
so great, that many Runaways from them affirme^. They had not tasted a bit of
Bread in five days; by which Extremity of Hunger, and feeding on unwholesom
Victuals, Diseases did so increase, that in a short time above 7000 Men were
lost and dead. The News whereof coming to the Deputy Regent Cardinal Andrew of
Austria, and Commands from him received, They consult to go and Winter in
Germany with he whole Army.

The Spaniards had oftentimes done many things impiously, and without shame or
modesty; but they never before so highly contemned the Censures and Judgments
of Men, as that they would not endeavor to palliate their Wickedness with some
pretense: But this one Thing will excuse the Injury so openly done by public
Council, viz. They supposed no man so innocent, but that ought rather to
perish, than suffer his Affairs to be brought into hazard: For this is evident,
If so many Regiments of Foot, and Troops of Horse, or indeed more truly, so
great a Company of Seditious Persons, pinched with Poverty, should remain in
the Netherlands, it were much to be feared, that together with this New Empire,
they would introduce Old Examples of Defection and Rebellion: Wherefore Mendosa
leading back his Army, took the Castle of Sculenberg, which done, he took leave
of the States Borders. The Prince followed his departure upon the Track, not so
much glorying before in his Works, as he did then that he had defended his
Country, which Honor great Captains used to seek, before they looked for
Triumphs and Mural Crowns: It pleased him to view the Situation of their empty
Camp, and the unperfect Works of the starved Enemy: But it was a sad Spectacle
to behold in what Numbers the Sick and Wounded lay scattered every where, who
being deserted by the Army, were left to the pityless Injuries of the Air and
Weather, besides the want of all Things else.

These Enemies, of whom their own Friends took no pity, he caused to be
refreshed with Victuals; for Octayola, that was by Mendosa left at Doetichem,
being summoned by a Herald from the Prince, That he would assist those
miserable Wretches, and take them into Coverture, returned an Answer, more like
a Soldier than a Man, That within those Walls, there was room only for sound
and healthful Bodies. Then after some small Horse Fights, and the taking of
Count Bucquoy, in which Affairs, Lewis of Nassaw principally had the Conduct,
Prince Maurice came to Arnheym, laying up there all the Provisions of War for
the Year following, which showed him very judicious in his foresight, because
from thence he could easily supply all the Towns round about in time of Danger,
both with Victuals and Arms. But before he dismissed his Forces, understanding
that the City of Emmeric did very impatiently bear the Yoke of Spanish Slavery,
sent Count Hohenlo to regain the same by Force of Arms and Battery from
Mendosa, who then Wintered hard by in Rees, taking no Care to send any Relief
to his men in distress, because the Bank of the Rhine being dug through, had
so overflowed the Ways, that he believed they could not have passed; Emmeric
retaken, the Prince thought not sit to put a Garrison into it; but by the
Advice of his Council it was left, that by the Example thereof, he might cause
the Enemy to be more envyed. With the same hope Sevenaer, in the Duchy of
Cleves, was quitted by the Prince: From thence going to the Hague, together
with the Senate, according to Custom, he advised the States of each Province,
that there was need of a greater Army; wherefore he hoped they would provide in
greater measure Money for the Soldiers Pay, and other extraordinary Charges,
for that the Enemy lay now more heavy upon one part, and that they should
rescind all prejudicial Procrastinations: Accounting all other Necessities as
nothing, in regard of that one for their Defense.

At this time there were many famous Funerals celebrated in those Provinces:
Florence Palante Count of Culenburg, formerly accounted among the chief
Commanders of the Nobility, that conspired against the Inquisition; but
afterward being found unfit for that Charge, and of himself desirous to take
his ease, grew old, and almost unknown to those Factions, which he himself had
been the first Author of. But Philip Aldegunde led a more notable private Life,
whom, whoever had seen inseparable from the Prince of Aurange, and governing
Cities and People, would have admired to find him afterward retired to a
studious Repose, even to his death. But certainly, Elberte Leoninus at first
brought under the shadow of Learning, and before the Peace made at Gaunt, a
public Minister of the King's Party, then Chief Justice, and of the Public
Council of Gelders, in which Employment he dyed: A Man that attained by Nature,
what the Precepts of the Old Philosophers dictated, and was so free from all
passionate Fancy, that he followed Parties, not out of Affection, because they
were so, but because he found them so.

It Is a strange Thing to relate, with what Flagitious Acts Mendosa's Army
filled Germany, the Towns being assaulted and forced without any difference;
their readiness to resist being so gotten, in the Confidence they had of their
long-continued Peace. At the same time the Country People, in hope of getting
to a place of Refuge fled; but their collected Wealth made them become both a
more rich and easy Prey to those Russianly Plunderers. The Fields were wasted
enough in their very Passage, so that in some places they proved barren the
Year following, because they were worn out at that time, when they ought to
have been sowed. No less uncivil and Treacherous was their seizure of several
Castles held by the Noblemen, which till that time had been Fautors of the
Spaniards in all their wicked Actions. The beginning of their Rapines was
committed upon the People of Munster, and the Borders of Brentheym; which
places not being sufficient for the Support and Maintenance of their Forces,
Reclinhusen, a place belonging to the Bishop of Colen, situate between the
Rivers Luppe and Roer, was added, where Velasco took the City of Dorst, by a
violent Assault thereof, in a Warlike manner, with his Canon; which
Contumelious Act the Colonian Bishop taking no Notice of, made all his Subjects
imagine, that it was so done and suffered by private Agreement among Them.
Hence, the Evil spread further to the People of Mons and Marchia, until it
reached both sides of the Duchy of Cleves, and there oppressed many Cities,
which at their first coming they had not meddled with: Others were forced to
purchase Freedom at a great Rare, among which the City of Cleves it self, the
principal Seat of the infirm Duke: In which places, they got so great Booty,
that the very Common Soldiers Treated with Merchants of Colen, to return great
Sums of Money for them to Antwerp.

This their Covetousness at first, sprung from Pride, and was afterward
increased by Cruelty; insomuch, that contemning the parsimonious living of the
Boors, they commanded those ignorant People to provide for them dear, and
farfetched Dainties, and all other Provocatives of Luxury and Riot. And if any
were backward, in performing their unreasonable Commands, or seemed either to
hide or convey away their Wealth, they were beaten and tormented in that
barbarous manner, that sometimes they were maimed in their Lims; otherwhiles,
Incisions made into their Flesh; nay, and some were scorched and half burned
alive; not forbearing these frightful Terrors and Punishments to Women great
with Child, and young Infants: Of which Barbarisms, and innumerable Murders,
the Germans published diverse Examples, attested by the Credit of many worthy
and known Persons. And if the Villainy of these Wretches had stopped here, there
might yet have been some pretense made by them; but as if those forementioned
Crimes, had been too little, they spared not the Houses of Noble Persons but
violated also the Sacred Societies of Holy Virgins, who had wholly dedicated
Themselves to the Service of God: Raging moreover, with such an unrestrained
Lust, that they spared not immature and tender Virginity; and if the Women's
Chastity deluded their Hopes, their Husbands were produced and made a laughing
stock, to command their own dishonor; yea, and Mothers compelled to bring
forth and prostistitute their Daughters: These were the Deeds of a People
professing Peace, which the most enraged Victor hardly attempted, I am sure
never defended in the heat of War: And it is hardly to be believed, how
negligently and remissly that Nation (which had been the Conqueror of others)
and so earnest in the Defense of Liberty, took these Things: But besides a long
Peace, which usually effeminates the most Manly Minds, here was discovered the
imperfection of that Government, that is divided into many Hands; not only in
the Difficulty of their Meetings in Council, but in their Difference of
Affections, which is most frequent among Them, by reason of Emulation.

And this certainly was, that the Spaniards would have wished; nor was his
Endeavor therein wanting, that Matters should not be ended at One, but
deferred from Council to Council.

In the interim, not one scarcely daring to Repel an Injury done him because
the Public Management of War, for the General Vindication, was delayed, only
Count Oldenburg, the Bishops of Breme and Osnaburg, and Count John of Nassaw,
being a little further distant, slighted the Threats of the Tumultuary
Soldier, whereof they had Notice; whose Examples were afterward safely
followed by all those further Parts.

But for the Duchy of Cleves, and their Neighbors of Westfalia, there was no
other help, than those of Prayers and Letters: Which made Charles Nutselius,
whom the Emperor had sent to settle and order the Affairs of Cleves, to detest
the Persidy and dishonorable Dealings of the Austrians, because he saw, that
under the Protection and by the Connivence of King Philip, and the Archduke
Albertus, who pretended Themselves Vindicators of the Roman Religion, such
abominable and unparalled Villainies were committed, against the Laws of
Nature and Mankind, and against all Bonds and Covenants.

The Duke of Lorain said no less, whose Daughter was married to the Duke of
Cleves, and his Son to the King of France his Sister; protesting, That he would
not desert his Relations, nor would be deserted by them.

But from Rodolphus, being by Nature given to delay, and now either for fear or
grief hiding himself, that he could not be spoken with, other then by Letters;
although the Westfalians, and other Princes, living about the Rhine, at their
Request, daily solicited not only himself, but his Ministers of State
entrusted by him; yet could they obtain nothing but empty Words, and fruitless
Embassies: Hereupon Albertus then being at Millain, and Cardinal Andrew at
Bruxels, instead of answering, attributed the Causes of all these Evil,
together with the beginnings of the War, and the denial of making Peace to that
time, to the Rebels; and whenever any Exorbitancies were objected against
them, which they could not deny, they called it a short Extremity, whereto they
were compelled by Necessity.

But Mendosa was more insolent; who, the more plausibly to shun Obedience to
his Masters Command, denied, That he Warred for the King; and that he would
neither be danted with the Noise of great Names, or frighted with cruel
Threats, or driven out by any other means than force of Arms: Adding moreover,
That if either Caesar or Germany durst have confided in his Men, they might
have used them, when Bonne and Berck were held by the Hollanders. He often
boasted himself an Enemy to all Lutherans, and that he was sent into those
Parts from Heaven, to revenge the Impieties there so often and so long
perpetrated. And now had the Germans seen the Spanish Ensigns displayed in
their Country little less then four Months, when, at the very end of the Year,
one Decree was sent by the Emperor to Mendosa, another to the States. Against
him were objected many and grievous Things: To Them that they had occupied some
few places at the Division of the Rhine, and breaking into the Jurisdiction of
Munster, had led away certain Priests, Captive: and therefore they were both
commanded to depart out of the Jurisdiction of Germany, to make Reparation for
the Rapines, and other Damages there done, to release all Prisoners, and, for
the future, to abstain from oppressing others; and this under the Penalties
therein contained, as if they still offended in the like.

The Eighth BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
THE Spaniards Minds were so obdurated with daily Complaints, that at the same
time that the Emperor's Herald, and the Lorrain Ambassadors publicly accused
them for their former Crimes, they afresh battered; and by the Ruin of the
Gate, not without blood, took Calcar, a City of Cleves, professing the Roman
Religion, which had refused to admit Soldiers of its own Jurisdiction, but as
a Winter Garrison; Goch also, a Town in the same Jurisdiction, was subdued by
Force of Battery: But Gen^cy, and Santern, were permitted to redeem Themselves
from their Fear with Money. He boasted with so much pertinacy his Hatred to
Lutheranism, and Calvinism, That he commanded the Bishop of Patelborn, and
others, to purge their Lands from such noxious Vermin; and if they neglected
to do it, that his Soldiers should come thither, who would neither spare the
Lives of the Guilty, nor the Estates and Fortunes of the rest.

This was terrible at first, to them of Wesell, who were commanded to readmit
the Roman Rites, by the Counsel of the Duke of Cleves usurping the Princes
Right, who by the German Laws, have free power and authority tO settle Religion.

The United States had sent to the Senators, or Burgomasters, declaring, that
it was an unworthy thing, at the beck of a barbarous Nation, which had abjured
from their actions, all sense of piety, to change that Religion which was
settled by Law, and by them received from their Ancestors, admonishing the City,
that in this Cause of God, they should not fear the power of man, but should
courageously resolve against a storm that would continue but for a short space,
and that they would not be unmindful of the common Religion, nor of any
hospitable kindness; but their fear being at hand, and their hopes at a great
distance, had so unsettled their minds, that they durst not stand the Contest:
Whereupon, they prayed, that they might but enjoy the one half of the Churches,
but that absolutely denied, their Ministers ejected, and both the Churches and
Schools given to the Jesuits, a sort of men by that City generally hated; And
for the more exact completion thereof, Coriblanus Garzados^, the Popes Nuntio
in Lower Germany, made solemn Processions, sprinkling the Ground with Holy
Water, and cleansing the very Pulpits, as guilty of impiety, afterward, the
Commons of the City, for fifty years space, accustomed to more plain and simple
Rites, were enforced to behold long Ceremonies of the Mass, and all other
things fitted for States, which part of them beheld with rage, others with
laughter and contempt: The Priests continued in the large recesses of their
Temples, mutually hating and hated; for the People as violently required their
own, as they detested that strange Religion, which enmity continued, all the
time the Spanish Forces abode in those Quarters; but when once they were
departed, and they also that acted by their Authority, the City returned again
to her old Liberty and Customs.

At this time, all the Consultations of Germany, inclining to revenge, Mendosa,
although he had hitherto pretended, that it would be for the Kings profit, if
they should begin a War which they could not maintain, and that he being
ignorant of their Right, as Romans had rather deal with them, according to
Laws of War, though in truth, he was conscious, that all in general were his
Enemies; yet having by Spies, tried the affections and Authority of the most
eminent Princes, as what Allyances they had, what the manner of their Leagues,
he neither spared Gifts, nor any kind of Policy, to breed a distraction and
division among them at their meeting: And at last, it appeared worth his
labor, to inquire, who supported that so deplorable, with Counsel and Advice:
I know, some will admire, what they could at that time, offer as a pretense in
their own justification: Wherefore, I will in as sho^t a method as I can,
relate those things which Cardinal Andrews Envoy, spoke at the Assembly of the
Inhabitants about the Rhine, within the Jurisdiction of Colen.

These, after they had wasted much time, in the inquiring contrary to the
Custom of Ambassadors, of the Names and Instructions of those to whom they
came, at last, as it were enforced to make a sudden defense, they said; They
were much grieved, that the enemies of the true Religion, and the favorers of
Rebels, had so filled the Princes ears, and the public Assemblies, with false
and scandalous Reports, as if it was unjust in the common cause of Christendom,
which the King of Spain defended, to remit a few discommodities against
particular persons: For these Arms were not taken up for the Kings pleasure or
ambition, but for the repressing of Thieves and Robbers, who slighting all
power, both of God and Man, create and believe a right from their succesful
villainy. Where were then those Assemblies, and raisings of Soldiers in
Germany, and terrible decree, when the Prince of Aurange actually engaged in a
traiterous War, but one, but by example, undermined all the Princes of the
Empire. All Powers were Armed by God, that they might suppress growing evils,
and have often been punished justly for the neglect of their duty therein, but
they did not only dissemble others injuries, but their own, when the Germane
Fields were wasted, and their Castles and Cities held by Rebels, without any
account demanded for the same. That they needed no detractors, so bitterly to
incite them, if the Germans, mindful of their duty, (by whose advice the
Spaniard would have been advised) had compelled those perpetual Enemies of
peace at once to have laid down Arms, which are never used without the damage
of the Neighbors. For what has not been given by the Kings, either the Father
or the Son, for the peace of Christendom, who for the avoiding of envy, having
given the Netherlands from himself, and all the next Summer, a great Army at
his Command, yet had worn it out in the only hopes of Peace, until he
oppressed his own Soldiers, as well with want, as with Winter; for his
Treasury was most honestly employed in the freeing of France from War and
Garrisons: Then also, how great care he used in the settling a strict
Discipline, whoever comes to succeed Mendosa in that charge, will quickly be
sensible how great a care, and how difficult a work it was: There was no right
of Victory claimed in any of the places by them taken; they only desired
entertainment therein, and the Custody thereof, for a short time, with select
and choice Garrisons, that the Countries round about might be guarded from the
excursions of the Hollanders: As to those faults objected against the
Soldiers, which escaped either the providence, or punishment of the General,
notwithstanding the great noise, yet in themselves were but small, if compared
with the benefits heretofore done by the Emperor Charles, and King Philip: Let
them also call to mind the Leagues; for how should the Princes, Bishops Cities
say, that it was free for them to follow neither party in this War, who had
been ancient Allies and Companions of the Burgundians, and whom Charles had
obliged to himself, for a general assistance, in defense, and support of the
Roman Religion? How often, by that name, have the Kings Deputies interposed
denuntiations? how often have the People of Cleves been commanded, that they
should not give passage to the Enemy, contrary to the Articles made at Venlo?
and yet by their Cities, Arms and Traffic, the Enemies effrontery has been
increased, when at the same time, the Duke of Parma must restore Buricke, throw
down the Fort against Rees, and suffer them to be quiet in the midst of War, so
that the Isle of Gravewaert might be taken from the Hollander. And yet that was
not performed, which cost the King the loss of his possession beyond the Rhine,
so that he was fain afterward to take a longer Journey, to require his own,
and if it were with the damage of those by whose fault is happened, it was no
great matter: And certainly, the Bishop of Colen would be much to blame, if he
be too much moved at the complaints of the People of Munster, or any others;
but rather He, and every Bishop else, that yet enjoy their Ecclesiastical
Dignities, should give thanks to Philip, who (when Truxius made an impious War
against the Germane Decrees, not one Germane resisting him, from whence some
took occasion to assault the Priesthood) neglected all his Affairs at the
Bishops Request, and restored first Nuys, then B^nne, only desiring that his
might be reimbursed to him. The like he did by Bercke also, being taken from
the Rebels, and while Albertus was busied el^ewhere, lost again; yet lately,
while there was any hopes of restoring the City to its right Lord, without
force, he gave them a long time to treat thereof, in point of honor. If they
would rightly consider these things, they would be better advised, than by an
improvident commiseration of small inconveniences to stir up greater mischiefs,
of which perhaps, they would too late repent. And if the peace should be
disturbed, they who infringed the same, ought to make satisfaction with their
heads; but the King, the Archdukes, and Mendosa ought to be blameless.

The like defense was made by those that were sent to the Emperor, and
particular Princes to molifie them, with promise also, that the Soldiers
should depart before April. The United States, having so often in vain made
trial of Embassies, had hitherto abstained from any in this case, as supposing,
that it was permitted to the Spaniard, that he might with freedom do what he
list, and harrass Germany at his pleasure; yet they make some defenses for
themselves, being angry that they, who came to rip up matters, should compare
them in the balance with Enemies: calling to mind all the places they had
restored, and such as the Spaniard retained, that the offenses of the borders
were sought by those, by them tolerated, repeating all from the beginning of
the Commotions in Cleves, to Truxius his War. That their Justice was testified
by many who admired it, when not long since, they quitted Embden, and of later
time Emmeric: That it many times happened, that one place or other lying fit
for the Enemy, was to be first taken, which they esteemed no oppression, for
that it is absolutely necessary for the preservation of Subjects, against the
Spanish Insolences, not otherwise to be avoided, which also was done by a
modest Soldier, whose pay was certain, and Discipline strict. It might be
probable, some faults of a few ou^-runners, might be committed, and yet escape
both knowledge and punishment: But they never lead an Army into the Territories
of others, by public Conduct and Authority, they never made Seditions on
purpose to rob the Country, nor did they ever enforce a Form of Religion upon
People, with whom they had nothing to do; That they promised to take care of
Gravewaert, lest the Geldrians should refuse any arbiters. That there were many
other things, which either made their cause plausible, or detect the Spaniard
of covetousness under the false name of pretended piety; but having been spoken
of before, needed not to be here repeated; In brief, That they would no longer
suffer such a slavish sort of men, to insult over free Nations.

While these things were arguing pro and con, before the Deputies of the five
Countries, at the meeting of the Rhine and Moselle, the Counsels relating to
War, went but slowly on; nor were some wanting, that esteemed it convenient at
that time, to join their Forces with the Hollanders, being men well experienced
in Military Affairs. But the greater part thinking it sufficient to receive
back their own, refusing to engage Germany into a long War, many of whom so
dreading either the hatred or displeasure of the Emperor, and the great men's
power, that when there was any debate concerning the forementioned injuries
received, they solicitously avoided to mention the name of the Spanish King, or
People: But the States labored most earnestly, to gain to themselves
Associates, from whose dissentions, as they reaped disadvantage, so from their
good successes, they might gain the power of making peace at pleasure. The
principal Authors for bringing this Expedition to maturity, were, the Count
Palatine, one of the severe Electors, the Landgrave of Hessen, and the Duke of
Brunswicke, who undertaking the Affairs in their own Names, and with their own
Forces, which they had raised to a great number the last Winner; but a
contention arising between Hessen and Brunswicke, concerning the chief Command
in the War, hindered it, the Palatine also desirous of rest and peace, received
for himself the defense of the inner parts, and the charge of all public
Assemblies.

The Westfalian Romanists, making use of this division, nothing being more
hateful to them, then to see the Protestant Princes in Arms, by offering a
three months Tribute, equal to that given to the Turk, that their Governor
might be made General of the War, they obtained their aim, averting it to be
just and consonant to the Germane Customs, that whenever any injury is
suffered, in whatever Country a War is to be maintained for obtaining
satisfaction, the Command was always given to them for their aid.

The States passed this Winter in great care and fear, in regard the Rivers
were twice shut up with Frost, but yet, without loss or damage; for Prince
Maurice, and Count William, dividing their Forces, He took care of all on this
side Issell from Arnheym, and this resided at Meppell, for the Guard of the
further parts, continual Messengers with Intelligence passing between them; At
this time, several plots were detected against Breda, Nimmeghen, and Devinter,
Which did but increase the care and cost in the defense thereof; Now also were
the Mauribian Soldiers more then once Conquerours over their Enemies, and by
the slaughter and plunder of a certain Garrison, recompensed the honor of
those Soldiers that were hanged in the Territory of Juliers, or Gulicke; though
it is confessed, to be the worst Custom of all Martial Discipline, that for
neglect of the public execution of the Law, permits Captains to take their own
private revenge.

The Town of Emmeric, which we mentioned to be freed by Prince Maurice, was now
again surprised by the Spaniards, who under pretense of their marching away in
February, had brought thither Cannon, to the great terror of the Magistrates,
though both the Soldiery and the Citizens were courageous enough, and the
passage besides so difficult, by the increase of the Waters, that they were
forced to come in with Boats.

In the same place, soon after, the falling of the Jesuits House by the decay
of a Pillar, was by many looked upon as prodigiously ominous to them: And Count
Bucquoy, the Governor of the Garrison there, was taken prisoner, while he
followed a small party cunningly sent out to get booty, until he fell into the
Ambush, which Jews of Nassau had prepared for him; And the truth is, about
this time, the Kings Affairs suffered many and frequent damages, but none of
any great concernment; for at the approach of the Spring, the Horse being
Quartered in diverse places; Paulus Emilius Martinengo became a Prisoner;
Frederick Count Heremberge also narrowly escaping the danger, all his Friends
and Companions being taken: likewise the Guard of the Port at Antwerp was
forced, and great spoil carried away: and at Sea a Ship carrying Arms from
Hamburgh into Spain, was taken. As yet they had no money, but at last, three
hundred thousand Ducats, was taken up with the Merchants at excessive Usury,
merely to stop their mouths for the present. By which means, Antwerp and
Liereo, by the change of their Garrisons, were quitted of fear; from whence the
said Soldiers departing fearfully, they that remained were afterward thrust
out of the Borders by Edict, and every where fell into the hands of the
Germans, where they suffered as victimes to the public hatred; for all the
faults had been committed by others. At Gaunt, the Soldiers having behaved
themselves with more moderation, stayed; but a mutiny began in Bercke for the
same cause, which continued all the year: These things, together with their
want of money, and scarcity of all things else, made the supplies which had
been raised in Italy and Germany, to delay their march toward them, and
besides daily some or other ran over to the Hollanders, who had newly advanced
their pay.

Cardinal Andrew and Mendosa, that they might the better remedy these evils,
and also mollify the Germans, with a kind of a promise, in the beginning of
April, the Spring being dry, and more early than is usual for that Clymate, so
that Cattle were put out into the Pastures, they command their Army out of
their Winter Quarters, to descend on both sides the Rhine: which Army,
consisted of fifteen thousand men. But the Garrisons of Emeric and Rees, by
reason of the Commodity of the place, were left there; as also in Gennep by the
Maes, the rest of the Cities were compelled to give the Soldiers a testimonial
of their just and modest behavior, during the last Winter.

Mendosa in the mean while, not neglecting as a Gratuity for so long
Entertainment, to deduct a part of the Soldiers pay. A whole month was almost
spent in the march; but at last, the Army sat down on both sides the River
against Gravewaert; And this had been advised by Mendosa, not without hopes of
winning it, which, if it had happened, had been of great advantage to them. But
Richardot was of Opinion, that it could not be done, because the Duke of Parma
had formerly attempted it in vain; The Cardinal Andrew, preferred an Assault
upon the Isle of Bommell. And the chief labor was, to obscure and keep from
the Enemy this their design: But Prince Maurice was so much perplexed, as he
could neither rest by day, nor sleep by night, being distracted with
innumerable cares, because he wanted his well-known Companions in Arms, and was
destitute of a sufficient Army; for the chief of all his Captains, Count
William was forced to stay in Frizeland, to have an Eye to the Affairs of
Embden.

Vere was detained in England, others were in Germany, the raysers of the War
were scattered here and there, and they who were to serve therein, were absent;
besides, the foreign Regiments were not arrived, which the States had commanded
to be listed in several parts, that they might be the better able to defend
themselves against the greatest strength the Enemy should bring upon him. He
had only with him, Four Thousand men, wherewith he was to defend the passage
of Issell, the right and left side of the Rhine, and the superior and
inferior parts of the Country.

Therefore having received the Castle of Lovec, and other places, which he had
late before rendered to the people of Cleves, he once again pitched his station
in the Island of Geldre, where he found all the fortifications he had erected
there the last year, standing entire, and not at all defaced or demolished by
the Enemy. Part of the forces held the Isle of Holland it self; with these
orders, that what City or Fort soever Mendosa should assail, he would defend
the contrary side, and by Arms and Valor strengthen the weakness of the
Bulwarks, and for the more easy, accomplishing his purpose, upon the banks he
placed Watch-Towers, and on the Rivers Bridges, that his Scouts and aids might
with the less difficulty come at one another. When this was done, he made a
defense about Gravewaert, which he had before strengthened with a garrison,
that was too slender against the darts and shot of the Enemy on every side; and
into the River he put two rows of stakes, for the stopping of those Vessels,
that by the command of Mendosa were said to be preparing at Colen: His Cannon,
shot were aimed with that skill from a little rising, whose site they had
tried, that many of the Enemy being cut off therewith, they were forced to
remove part of their Can^ to another place. In this interim, the horse from
Nimmighen tired them with frequent excursions, nor did there want the
opportunity of obtaining a noble Victory upon the one part of their divided
Army, but his number was too small to ^ut it in execution, as the Prince did
afterward confess, not without a deep sense of grief.

At this time the Prince received intelligence, both from his Scouts, and some
Prisoners, but he feared, least if he should go away, the enemy would make his
entrance otherwhere, for he had endeavored by various and false reports to
make all things dubious, using to advantage their fires in stead of a
direction. Among all these ambiguities, nothing seemed more safe, then to stand
still, and to have all things in readiness for a march, to load the Wagons,
and keep the horses harnessed together both night and day. The Spaniards did
not without cause hope for many and great opportunities from the Isle of
Bommel, as from the enclosure thereof by the chief rivers, and that it has not
one passage into the bowels of the Enemies Country; That the Rhine which is now
called Waell, mingling it self also with the Maes, so ran into the Sea, is
every where declared in Romans writers. But it cannot be said, how great
mutations have happened in later times by frequent inundations, when as yet
there had not been such care taken for banks as at present, and when the Maes
run formerly another way, as is set ^^th in the antiquities of our fathers, the
name of the old ch^^nel beyond Hesdin sufficiently testifies: but now it runs
thus, That part of Gelderland which runs forth by Cleves between both the
Rivers, is by the Inhabitants properly called Maesland, and by little and
little growing narrower, ends at the conflux of the Rivers, which by their
doubly mixed waters in a short space, make the Island of Voorn, from whence
again dividing and growing distinct Rivers, each follows his own course,
keeping their names till they meet again, making a fair Island, belonging to
the Jurisdiction of Gildres, whose chief place is the Village Harwarden, and
its utmost bounds, the Castle of Lovesteine, which is the name of a Town hard
by the Isle of Bommel, encompassed almost round about with the Waell. This City
in the Duke of Alva's time, was one of the first that threw off servi^ude, and
from that instant has held a firm Alliance with the Hollanders, each to be a
mutual defense to the other. Not far from Harwarden are the bendings of the
River, and then the Isle is discovered aagain at the Village of Rossem famous
for the birth of Martin of Rossem, who at the command of the Emperor Charles
first came into the Netherlands with a band of spoylers, and afterward
changing his quarters, entered France, from hence these Rivers run separate and
divided a great space, but the Maes took a greater circuit, more largely
spotting it self in the fields of Brabant, tending Southerly, where in a strait
course it looks upon Boisledac, and so passes in the middle between the fort
of Creveceur, and the Castle Hely within the Island, afterward falls into
Holland, and in a small division of it self surrounding the Isle Hemert, and
washing the walls of Hoesden, finisheth his course in an entire body.

The Spaniards hopes and resolutions concerning the in^sion of these places,
was heightened by several guids sent to the tops of the Alps, who upon their
return, with one consent did declare, That the snows there being less than
usual, did promise small increase of the waters and Rivers. And it was thought
fit, not to go in a great body, but in several parties, that by the show of
keeping their Camp at Gravewaert, they might as long as possible make the Enemy
linger and delay to give timely assistance. Therefore they that had hitherto
staid at Gennep, now removed to Sapen, as if they intended it only for securing
their provisions; soon after were added Barlot and Stanley with their Regiments
of Spaniards, Walloons, and Irish, four hundred horse under the conduct of
Henry Count Heremberg first descending, suddenly to assault Voorne Island, if
it were slackly guarded. But perceiving it to be in vain, they stayed hard by,
until the boats that were to be brought in Carts from Boisleduc arrived to
their help, yet with their great Guns, for they had brought some thither, they
shot at a Ship of the Hollanders, which lay there to guard the River, and
passing the Maes not far from Rossem, drove the Enemies horse from off the
banks, while the Foot durst nor venture to resist, and so entered the Isle of
Bommel, wandering sometimes here, sometimes there, waiting either for orders, or
more additional forces, and the commanders themselves being equal in power,
fall at variance among themselves, loosing thereby that fair opportunity, the
Cardinal Andrew fearing reproof and expostulatious more then was requisite in
Martial Discipline: And as at other times, so here the goodness of God was
manifest toward the Hollanders, when for the most part all humane counsels
were deficient for the managing of these great and apparent hopes against them:
For the City of Bommel, a place of great esteem in the war, lay almost open to
any assailant the old Fortifications thereof being narrow and weak, and the new
begun three years before not perfect, while the State, being drawn to mind
other affairs, spared to lay out any moneys about this place, and the rather,
because the water on the one side, and the ^arshy wetness of the earth on the
other, seemed to be a defense to it against the Enemy. The Prince hearing of
these things, hasted speedily to march thither, yet did not arrive till the
second day after the Enemies passage; yet before they had attained the bank of
the Waell, he came into the City and restored courage to the Citizens that were
surprised with fear of the danger, and preparing to fly. For although he
confirmed as well the Isle of Hemart, as any other places he doubted, both by
his care and Soldiers, yet he was most intent for Bommell, where he himself
was for the most part present, to increase their garrison; and to help forward
their works. And at this time there was manifested excellent ways of d^fending
Towns, made use of frequently by the Prince afterward, and no less used by the
Spaniards, and the use thereof is likely to continue to perpetuity, as often as
any are in fe^r to be besieged, by meeting the Enemy with far extended
fortifications, which yield a great space to the Defendants, and keep off
danger a longer time from the inner parts of a place; for to the Forts which
were joined to the Breast-work, more and more great Rampires were added, which
being themselves environed with water, did contain whatever was necessary for
defense in their outermost line, having many strong defenses. While these
things were speeding forward, the Spanish forces, and they who marched away
from Emmeric, with other their associates, who then by chance had begun to
besiege Creveceur Fort, met all together, to whom the Fort was easily rendered,
as also what was opposite to the Fort in Hely Castle; There Mendosa made a
bridge of boats over the Maes, for the transporting of his Soldiers and
provisions, wherewith he was abundantly supplied from Boisleduc. That City
rejoicing that the Enemy was driven from being their neighbors, and being
very, diligent and careful in the rest, that they might with the less offense
refuse a garrison, they would admit Cardinal Andrew but with a certain number
of men to come within their walls. These strong attempts of the Enemy did not
terrify the Hollanders, but made them rather be more intent then before, with
courage to employ both their Wealth and Forces, for they were about for the
increasing their treasury, to set a tax or impost upon all sales, contentions
and Inheritances, which was taken very hardly; but the two hundredth penny was
more burdensome, and therefore continued but a short while, although the
custom thereof was of old much commended among free people for the equality
thereof. But the Riches of many were unknown, or else by reason of traffiquing
uncertain, and the suspected Faith of Professors hindered the same: And this
highly offended the common people, that the most wealthy men, if they gave two
thousand Florens for their two hundredth part, they were eased for any further
burden by reason of their Trade or Profession, which was given, partly for the
avoiding of envy, and partly for the ease of the Nobility, as the poo^er sort
did not stick to cry out; as if the equality of the tax had been laid aside in
favor of some few. Besides the Fleet sent into Spain, whereof we shall speak
in its proper place, then first of all began new Germane levyes, and Switzer
Footmen to be first used. Then also were Laws of Arms written; And Lanoue
raised a Regiment of two thousand French that could not endure to live in
peace; for which cause, when the Spaniards complained of violation of the
League, King Henry answered, That nothing was done by his command, yet he would
not hinder the carrying out of France to either party such as were willing to
go to war, that thereby the old names of factions might the sooner wear out.
And the States forces so pleased them, that part of their men, animated by
youthful vigor, and others weary of tedious expenses, desired a Battle. But
Prince Maurice showed them, That the Enemy might more safely be eluded
otherwise, and the matter coming to be disputed by a fight, would do no great
damage to the Spanish Soldiers, but among the people, the least wounds were
great causes of terror. Count William being present, applauded this prudence,
being always averse to rash and hotheaded Counsels. Afterward therefore,
Mendosa himself came to Bommel with all his strength, and then it was furiously
contested both by strength of Works, and shot of the Cannon, yet with no great
damage as to the main, only some loose straglers were sometimes killed. But
above two thousand men were in a short time lost in the Spanish Camp; among
which were two brothers, a long time absent from each other, and so unknown to
one another, especially the one of them going by his Mothers name, these
meeting accidentally, and by discourse knowing each other, while they were
embracing, both their heads were struck off with a great shot, by which means
they obtained this good, That after that joy, they should never have more cause
of grief. The like chance happened in Prince Maurice's Camp to a Man and his
Wife, lying together, their sleep being by a like shot, turned into a sudden
death.

There fell out sometimes light skirmishes between the Horse as they met abroad
in parties, but all more like the contests between two adverse Camps, then the
bickerings at a Siege. At last Mendosa returning back to Rossem, Prince Maurice
also, having sufficiently strengthened the Town, both above and below, which he
had made two Bridges for passing the Waell, he quartered his Soldiers in the
Isle of Voorne, (which he had fortified with new Works according to the manner
of that excellent platform) and all about the outer bank of the Waell.

The Spaniards with continual shooting (as much as ever is used against Walls)
endeavored to force his passage in the County of Tilen, which is from thence
beyond the Waell, but by the strong opposition of Count Ernest, to whom that
Region belonged, and a small Island in the Waell near Ross^m, he was hindered.
Nor was that Prince satisfied in having defended his own, but he proceeded
further, and voluntarily undertook to oppose and assail all that pretended to
be of their party; and first of all beyond the Maes, in the next part of
Brabant which looks back upon Voorne, he commanded his men to make light and
sudden incursions, on purpose thereby to weary out the Enemies Horse that lay
thereabouts to guard and oversee the Pastures and Provisions. And shortly after
being encouraged by success to attempt greater things, ea^ly in the morning he
commanded some well experienced in such matters, with three hundred Soldiers,
to go into the Isle of Bommel, in that part, where we said Harwarte stands, and
there to set up Pallisadoes or Stakes, in form of an Half Moon, and then
hastening it forward as fast as they could, to cover them with Earth. This space
of ground would have contained about six thousand men. And at once, both the
Work, and Forces, unwitting at first to the Enemy, increased; from whence arose
so great a confidence, that the Prince himself publicly came thither to view
it.

This daring Attempt was much furthered by the long Consultations of Mendosa,
while his Advisers differed in Opinion: For now the Work was raised twice the
height of a Man, when the Enemy drawing on, some chosen Spanish and Italian
Soldiers led by Sapena, to the Number of Two Thousand, incensed with Fury and
Religion, gave a sharp Assault; but the Monks that carried before them
Crucifixes, were slain or taken among the first. Some there were, whose Ardor
of Spirit was such, that having carried them beyond the Trench, they were
forced to come to Hand-strokes: Nor did the Defendants want equal Valor,
besides the goodness of their Counsel and Conduct, which keeping them in an
entire ^state, made both their Blows and Shot certain. Lanove commanded the
French, Horatio Vere the English, and one Edmunds the Scots; each of them
encouraging their Men both by Words and Example: But Prince Maurice's
Artillery, from the Isle of Voorne, and the Bank of the Waell, Levoll'd against
Them on every side, chiefly tired out the Enemy, who at length was glad to go
away, carrying with them many of their dead Bodies.

Some Reported, That in this Action there were Seven Hundred Men slain; surely,
then the Match was very unequal, when not many above Ten were slain on the
Defendants side. Among the slain Captains was found Paciotto, who having been
lately taken Prisoner, was not to be danted in this fair Assay, for Reparation
of his last Honor.

After this, the Fo^t went on, together with some smaller beyond the Maes;
although the forcible Attempt upon that the Enemy had made at Lutten proved in
vain: Without doubt, these Camps were an excellent Pattern for the future
Times, where an Army was divided by so many Islands and Banks; yet by Ships
possessing the River, and the Artificial Workmanship of five Bridges, moveable
whither soever they listed, they could by alternate Courses come one to another
as they pleased: Nor durst Mendosa offer any Assault to Prince Maurice's Works;
but a Fugitive showing a place he had taken above Rossem, where (as is formerly
related) the bending of the Rivers meet nearest; there following the Counsel,
that formerly Charles Mansfeldt had taken, and then revived by Colonel Charles
Colonna, (the same who has with very great Judgment ahd Fidelity delivered
these Things to Posterity) himself, with no small part of his men, Erected a
strong Fort from the Ground, which, from the Cardinal Andrew, was named
Fort-Andrew, lying on this hand upon the Waell, on that upon the Maes, stopped
up all Passage, as well by Water as by Land. Thus was the Summer spent, and
leaving here a Garrison, this was the only Issue remaining of all their
Labor: The rest of the Soldiers being dispersed in Brabant, returned to their
old Licentiousness.

After this Barlotte had very near taken Worcum, a Town of Holland, by a Night
Stratagem; and while he protracted time, in advising upon the very place of
Action, a Citizen being advertized thereof by a Sentinel, had scarce time
enough to get the Port before him.

While these Things were transacting with all earnestness among the Hollanders,
the Germans and Spaniards used on the one side Sloth, on the other ridiculous
Folly; for the Spaniards were not secured by their own Valor or Virtue, which
was of no esteem with their other Enemies, but the Germans Discords among
themselves, which made them so confident, as to despise a Nation long
unconquered, and feared on every side openly. For the Emperor, Bishops, and
others of the Roman Religion, were against the War. These Princes by
themselves, to wit, the Duke of Brunswic the Landgrave of Hessen, and Marquess
of Brandenburg, (for the Count Palatine had withdr^wn himself from the Quarrel,
pretending the Examples of the Bishops of Mentz and Triers) long esteemed all
kind of Military Men unprofitable to the Commonwealth, until in the middle of
Summer, they met about Berck, to the number of 2000 Horse, and 12000 Foot; the
chief Command whereof was entrusted in Simon Count of Luppen, at the desire of
the Westfalians, as is before related; but having obtained their desire, they
never sent the Aid they so strongly promised, but rather on the contrary, the
Spaniards received from the very City of Colen both Soldiers and other
Instruments of War: The General, not dissembling his small Experience in
Matters of War, did give all his Authority over the inferior Saxons to Count
Hohenlo, and of those about the Rhine to Count Solms, who, under pretense of
the Confederate States, had associated Themselves by Oath: Neither did these
Two want any Valor or Daring, but acted, as if They could not have been tired
with Labor. But both were better Soldiers than Counselors, and so distructed
the Affair by continual Contests; the Soldier also, ignorant of his Duty, gave
himself over to Sloth and Drunkenness, and if their Pay was not ready for them
as soon as it was due, they were apt to Mutiny, and fall into Sedition; yet
they took a Fort of the Spaniards at Berck, and came forward in the Cause with
great Slaughter and Cruelty.

At the same time they Garrisoned Viseo and Emm^ric; but when they came to
Berck, they were neither prepared for the Assault or Siege thereof with any
thing, saving a few Canon, and other Things sent to Them underhand by the
States, lest they should seem to own either Party, which the Emperor had
strictly forbidden. Moreover, the Army was not supplied with Provisions,
because the Neighbors refused rather by force than willingly, the Spaniard
sending to them continual Embassies, excusing thereby former Miscarriages, and,
for the future, promising better Things; whereby they grew so confident, that
when Berck was beleaguered round, Mendosa, as in Contempt, refused either to
augment the Garrison, or send the Soldiers (mutinying therein) their Pay.
Wherefore the Germans thought fit rather to reduce Rees, that so they might
have Supplies of Victuals from the Hollanders nearer hand, or any thing else
that they stood in need of. Thither was come Herman Count Heremberge, by
Command of Cardinal Andrew, he might lay the blame of his own men with the
Hollanders, spun out much time, with the hope of restoring cert in places; and
thereupon resolutely answered, That the States had rendered up many Towns, and
more Forts, without any Conditions, and that they should not, by an unequal
Comparison, seek to hide their Crimes: And being asked, If he had brought Money
wherewith to satisfy so many People of the Damage done to them; and what
Caution should be given, that the same Evils should not afterward be re-acted,
when the taking so many Towns, and the wasting so many Fields, made manifest,
that the King's Promise and Seal were but Feeble Pillars for them to trust to,
or rely on. But Deeds differed from Words; and therefore the Commanders, by
wasting Time in Disputes, and the Soldier growing effeminate more and more by
Idleness, began to commit Rapines, and other wicked Acts, doing nothing against
the Enemy, but daring to act over again those Villainies, which They were come
thither to punish and revenge.

At the very Siege of Rees there was no Hostility; but, as in Derision, the
Germans were invited to Drinking; and some there were that went, shook Hands
with them, and returned safe; until this private Collusion of the Soldiers,
was at last changed into a Truce for certain Days. Without all doubt, the
Confederate States expected many and great Things from this German Commotion,
which produced them no other benefit, unless that while so great an Army grew
stupid through Idleness, Count William being sent from Bommel with seven Troops
of Horse, and fifty Companies of Foot to Doetichem, taken by Mendosa the Year
before, and re-took it from the Enemy within three days, although the Season
were very wet, and the Besieged made strong Defense by shooting, and otherwise.

About the same time Lewis of Nassau, being sent toward Grave with some
Troops, though the Enemy over-matched him in Number, yet he pursued their
Party, and by provident Conduct, through the narrow Passages of the Journey,
and by the side of the Maes, brought back the Booty, which the Enemy had taken
in the Country. And by this time the Truce was ended at Rees, yet was no
progress made in the Siege; for the truth is, the Commanders were not skilled
in those Affairs. And the Pioneers of Holland that came thither, chose rather
continuance of small Wages, and long Work with Safety, than great Wages, and
short Work with Danger. There were scarce any show of Guards or Sentinels
throughout the Camp, so that their fresh Soldiers came into the Town with
Relief: And now Winter drawing on when, according to the Custom of War, a
Herald being sent too inconsiderately by the Besiegers with a Summons, the
Besieged retaining the Messenger, suddenly sallied out upon the unprovided and
unwary Enemy, of whom they slew near 200, and carried off with them some of
their Guns, which struck so great a Terror into their weak and Cowardly
Hearts, that they not only raised the Siege, but deserted their Camp, in an
unworthy and almost unparalled flight, leaving behind them both their Boats,
and all sorts of Provisions; part of which, the Spaniards carried away; other
part, the Germans themselves, who were on the Spaniard's Party. Thus, in a
short time, this Army mouldred to nothing, while some mutinyed for their Pay;
and others averred, they were entertained only for three Months Service. The
Duke of Brunswick punished many of his People with Death, for their vicious
Behavior and Negligence: The Soldiers also in the Fort near Berck fled, and
so did they that under Hohenlo had besieged Gennep, as soon as the Spaniards
had but drawn on their Garrison for the Relief of Rees: Scarcely were Orseo and
Emmerie preserved by a mean Party of Soldiers, before this shameful failing of
Germany, it had often been in Agitation; that throwing aside all dissembling
Vizors, they should publicly make a League with the States, and receive Aid
from them; or that the Charge and Command of the War should be given to Prince
Maurice, who was very expert and knowing in Warlike Affairs. But it was not fit
to send to the States, because their Care was taken up in the Defense of their
own Borders: Besides, the Terror of the Spanish Fleet, made them strengthen
their Seacoasts; and the English, possessed with the same Fear, required their
Men, in the States Pay, for their own Guard. Nor was the Prince, finding by
Count William, who was sent before, to see how the German Affairs stood,
overhasty to thrust himself into Dangers, and to take Soldiers under him,
that would neither learn Obedience, nor any other good Arts.

As long as the Enemy continued in the Field about Bommel, the Prince durst not
draw his Soldiers into Winter Quarters, although the States were almost tired
out with the vastness of the Charge, notwithstanding the help they had by the
Money which the King of France sent to them underhand: But when Mendosa,
Autumn now wasting apace, compelled thereto by nothing more than the Hunger and
Diseases of his men, sending his Soldiers into several Quarters, the better to
keep them from Sedition and Mutinies, himself went to the Borders of Germany;
Then did he also dissolve his Camp, first placing Forts and Guards along the
River, to keep in and repress any Excursions from Fort Andrew. He fortified
Emmerio also against Mendosa, and freed the Citizens from the fear of a hated
Garrison, by sending Soldiers thither in the Night. These Things being all
acted by Land, I have continued in an uninterrupted Order and Series, now Time
calls us to take a view of Naval Affairs.

We have elsewhere related, that while Philip the Second Reigned, he permitted
the Hollanders to Trade freely into Spain, even in the heat of the War, but
under the names of other People, yet so, as that it was apparent, to be a piece
of great prudence, to be willing to be deceived, whether the hopes of their
returning to their obedience, made him transfer that benefit to other Nations,
or that he had found by the event. It was not safe to cavil with People
prevalent at Sea, lest they should keep all that Commerce from Spain, Which
they would maintain free to all the rest of the World; But as for the most
part, those Counsels are irksome to a Successor, wherein before he was
unconcerned, so here, the Son of Philip disliked his Fathers notions, and as if
despairing of peace, turned all things to a pitch of severity. It was evident
enough to the whole World, that all the Hollanders Wealth, was drawn out of the
Sea, and raised by Merchandise, and that the greatest profit by them gotten,
was from the Spanish Trade, because they carried thither, not only their own
Wares and Commodities; but also Sarmatian fruits, and other things, and
bringing from thence Gold and Silver, whereof as there is plenty with them,
being Lords of the Indies: so there is great use among Merchants, and dealers
in Trading and Traffic; and therefore the Nerves and Sinews of the War, being
taken away, it was hoped, that the War it self would cease of its own accord:
To this purpose, all Holland Stamen found in Spain, were taken up and
apprehended, part of them being put to great torments, and punishments, and
others either thrown into prison, or condemned to the Galls.

In the Netherlands also, an Edict was set out in the Name of the New Princess
Isabella, stuffed with many railing Speeches against the Governors of Holland,
who, as ever before, so now, changing their Government, and being separated
from Spain, refused peace, when offered to them, and stirred up others to War,
their so great pride and arrogance proceeding from no other Fountain, then that
Trade and Merchandising, which her Fathers too much indulgence, had hitherto
allowed them.

Many of the Brabanders, and Flandrians, withstood this Decree, and would not
have the Netherlandish Exportations, Importations, or Transportations, taken
away, because of the great want they had of the Holland Commodities: But wrath
and spleen prevailed, and hopes of supplying their necessities out of France,
so that by the said Decree, all security was taken away, even from Fishermen,
whom they had till that time, spared in the heat of War: This matter did not a
little trouble the States, because hereby, two of the Peoples chief Supports
were taken away, from whence it was feared that the Seamen would have mutined,
and the Merchants have left them to have found out places of a better, and more
free Trade. Yet they did not degenerate from their Pristine Counsels; They had
learned from Society and Alliance of the English, that there was nothing in all
the Spanish Dominions, less to be feared than Spain it self; all its Kings
putting their chief confidence in this, that no peace should be left to any
other Nations within themselves; and they conceived it necessary for
themselves, to have some War at Sea, for the keeping at home their Mariners,
and that it would be very glorious, if they should bring upon Spain, denying
Traffic, that penury wherewith the Spaniard threatened them. Therefore by a
contrary Decree, repeating all the facinorous acts which formerly the Spaniards
committed in the Netherlands, and now of late in Germany, and all other things
that might make them be envyed and hated, they forbid all their People to carry
into Spain any Provisions or Merchandise; and if any should be found doing to
the contrary, they should be looked on as Enemies, and Factors, and Abettors of
their Enemies: the Fishermen also were prohibited, to purchase impunity, or
License, from the Enemy, adding, that they would take care to keep the Sea free
for them; and if any one suffered any damage, it should be lawful to them, to
take satisfaction by the wast and spoil of the Enemies Country. A Copy of this
Decree, was sent to several Kings and People, that none might pretend ignorance
thereof. Of which, the King of France took particular Cognizance, protesting,
That if any of his Subjects should within six months sail into Spain, the
State should incur no danger by their wilful breach, but it should wholly light
upon themselves, but all the rest passed it over in silence.

This done, they prepared a Fleet, raking together, whatever public money
could be raised by Tributes, or otherwise, undertaking a great hazardous
Affair, and scarce ever accomplished with any indifferent success, as is
manifest by diverse Examples of Antiquity; for when Hanniball was drawn out of
Italy, Scipio became Conqueror of Carthage, and Agathocles having wasted
Africa a long time, yet at last, the Athenian Wealth was overthrown by the
Scicilians Arms, And there was a fresh Example of the like nature, eleven years
before this time, in the great Fleet of King Philip, when it was plainly, as it
were, set out by fate, that the Hollanders and Spaniards should by turns find,
how uncertain the hopes of those things were, which are committed to the Winds
and Waves. At the beginning of Summer, they set out a Fleet of threescore and
thirteen Ships, carrying eight thousand Seamen and Soldiers, under the Command
of Peter Douse the Admiral, who was a Noble man; but as if he had had no
Honor from his Birth, attained to this height of Command, by long Service,
and many gradations: they received Command to destroy the Fleet, which the King
of Spain had been a great while in building, for want of Timber, Cordage, and
Mariners; and this was one cause that induced the States to make so much have,
that done, to spoil the American Ships, and wast all the Coasts of the said
Enemies Dominion.

This unusual and daring attempt, carried with it, great terror, so that the
Shores were left desolate, all flying from thence; for there were Letters sent
before out of Holland, that mentioned the coming of the Fleet into these parts,
as if it had been learned from some Captives.

The Fleet begun by King Philip, lay at Corunna: At first, the Hollanders came
and lay by them, but they not daring to trust the naked Fleet to their Enemies
mercy, got under the protection of a strong Castle; and then the Cannon
thundering from the Ships, Castle, and Fort, which was hard by, took away all
their hopes of assaulting, either at distance, or near at hand: Wherefore,
having seen enough here, that that Nation which boasted it self Lady of the
Ocean, had with their Fleet, sought a hole, and hid themselves in their Docks,
rather then to fight at Sea with Honor. When they came to the mouth of the
River Tagus, some were greedy and violent, for the taking of Lisbone, either
for Honors sake, or in hope of a prey, urging, the ancient discords of their
Neighborhood, the hated Dominion of the Castilians. And lastly, the City it
self, which in the Expedition of the English for Don Antonio, was found to be
but weak, though it were very large; and if that Nation took it then, that went
to manage a War, not to seek for Booty, without doubt, it will be as easily
done now. On the other side many were of Opinion, that in so long a Peace, the
King had repaired and made good all defects, and that it was not to be
expected, that a Fleet so long looked for should do any good against such great
Cities, wherein, as well the care, as the fear of the Governors, makes them
diligent. It would be a safer course, to steer to the Islands in the Atlantike
Ocean, bordering upon the Coast of Barbary, which the Ancients, either for the
Fecundity of the Soil, or because they so called and esteemed all unknown
things, named the Fortunate Islands; from whence the People came, that first
inhabited them, by reason of their far distance and Antiquity, is very
uncertain.

Of old, when they were yet unknown to Europe, they had several sorts of
Language: That of Tenariffe came near to African, and the People thereof,
called themselves Guanchus. Many of their Customs were common to them with the
Barbarians, particularly, like the Scithians, they used to expose, and give
their Wives to prostitution; with the Indians, they esteem their Sisters Sons,
as their Heirs, as being related to them by the surer tie of consanguinity.
Rapes violently committed, they punish with death, they account Divorces
infamous. It is lawful only for their Kings to marry their Sisters, as among
the Inchas of Peru: Private men may, if they will, have more Wives than one;
This also is a Scythian Custom, that the King, or chief Lord, should have the
Virginity of every new married Bride; The Gods they worship, are the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, above whom there is one Judge, they say, of good and evil actions;
and therefore, that there is another life after death: Infants are with solemn
Rites, purified with water. They give no public demonstrations of
Christianity, or Mahometisme, yet they live simply, unanimously, and
innocently, far beyond them that are called Christians, and practice nothing
but force, fraud, and other Vices, not of Religion, but the Age; The first that
came thither, were the Genoueses, in the Year, One Thousand Three Hundred:
Almost a hundred years after that, Bethineurt, a Nobleman of Picardy, came and
Inhabited there, teaching them good manners and Piety, affirming himself also
to be a King: But when his Fortune would not answer to so high a Title, the
right of the same was transferred to the Kings of Castile, whose Potency
destroyed their ancient Rites, Language and Orders, and made these Islands one
step to his further greatness.

One of these, named Ganaria (though now it is a common name to them all) but
to this, the head of the rest, it belongs peculiarly: the Castle wherein, being
excellently seated, the Hollanders Fleet subdued, and one Spanish Ship, in the
sharp fight sunk, and two others taken. The Horse and Foot of the Island
gathering together upon the shore, with some small Guns, hoped to hinder their
landing, for that the place it self was not very fit for that purpose. But the
Admiral D^use, commanded his Cannon to be shot off, and his long Boats to be
hastened, Himself first going off, when the Shelves would not suffer him to come
close to the shore, he leaped into the water, but the Enemy run to meet him,
himself received three wounds, and others of his Company many, by the casting
of Darts and Shot, being unexperienced, both in that old and new sort of Arms.
But the Barbarians being beaten, into the Town of Allagene, the Castle was
presently surrendered, with the Guns and Garrison: they that entered, wondered as
they set their Mauritian Ensigns up in a place so far distant, to see the
excellent, Fortifications of the place, and all other things necessary for
defense, unless that in all that Age, the seldom happening of mischances had
now in this suffering, so converted all into fear, that they had no use of
their Arms.

The Army being led to the Town, some days were spent by the Besiegers, in
drawing thither their Cannon. In which time, the Besieged did convey whatsoever
was dear and precious to them among the Rocks, which were in a manner,
unpassable; and shortly after, themselves followed, either into the same, or
other narrow places, that were easy to be defended, many of them being so
ignorant, who the Enemy was, that a runaway Negro offered to sell himself to
the Hollanders, and abjure Christian Religion. Besides this, two other smaller
Castles were deserted: Some that were sent out to find their lurking holes, and
to strike a terror into them, going further than was convenient, in places
known to the Enemies, but to them altogether unknown; and besides, being
wearied with labor and heat, were surrounded by the Barbarians, and slain.
Wherewith the Islanders being overjoyed, refused to redeem themselves, or their
goods; but making an excuse of poverty; whereupon, the Hollanders setting fire
both upon the Town and Castles, departed, their revenge being to them instead
of prey.

The success at Gomera was not much unlike; for there an empty Town lay open to
them, the Guns and other things which the People could not carry away with them
in their flight, being buried under ground, and some who for hope of prey, went
up into the Mountains, were slain to the number of fourscore, which was a great
Victory to the weak multitude; and according to the Custom of Barbarians, they
showed great cruelty upon the dead and conquered Bodies, which when they had
regained, they set all the Buildings they came to on fire. Douse seeing these
his first hopes fait, and knowing there would be no need of so great an Army to
wast the Coasts, he sent one part of the Fleet home with what prey was gotten,
who happily escaping the Enemies Fleet (for at the same time that had set Sail
from Corunna, and by and by separated by the boysterousness of the Weather: yet
at last, in the middle of Autumn, they attained the Harbor. Himself, with the
rest of the Forces, appointed to go to Brazil, a noble part of America, in
possession of the Portugueses, and aboun^ing with a rich sort of Wood and
Sugar. But choosing the Hesperides, and all Africa joining upon the Ocean, as a
safer Voyage, when he saw there many Novelties; particularly, money made of
Shells, he wandered from thence, increasing his number, with some Merchants
Ships, which he had taken coming from Spain, by some fatal Counsel, he chooses
the Island of St. Thomas, a Colony of the Portugalls, for the refreshing his
Men. They were invited to that place by the fresh waters, and Shellfish, called
a Tortoise, which is no unsavory meat; and besides, many times full of Eggs,
which have so hard a Shell, as is not easily broken: There is also, an infinite
store of Fish, which either for fear of other devourers, or through ignorance
of humane covetousness, because no Fishermen come thither, stick to the sides
of the Ships. There were moreover some fowl, which being weary of flying, sit
down of their own accords. This Island of Ethropia, which is called Guine, lies
in such a Climate, that the nights and days are equal, and tempers the heat of
the Sun, that is always perpendicular to them, and never so declining as to
make any Winter; which part of this wide World, Antiquity asserted neither to
bear Corn, Fruits, or Men, because those ages were ignorant of the Art of
Navigation. But as experience teaches, there is no part of Nature but is
useful some way or other, nor is the modesty of men such, as that they will
leave the most barren and unhealthful soil unsearched for gain.

The Circuit of the Island is almost round, where it is broadest, they reckon
it but twelve leagues, the middle part is mountainous, over which clouds
continually hanging with their dew, make abundance of Reeds or Canes to grow,
out of which Sugar is taken; the profit arising whereof is so great as
maintains the Portugueses, and imployes for each of them, a hundred or more
servants. Here likewise grows Ginger, and Trees whose juice exceeds the use
of Wine, both for pleasantness of taste, and quenching the thirst. Here no man
resisted them at their landing, the Town of Pavousa after a light ^ickering was
taken. Douse then gave notice to Francisco Menez that kept the Castle, That he
was not come to Sea like a Pirate, but that he was sent with a well furnished
Fleet, by the most noble Captain Prince Maurice and the States, to punish both
old and new injuries with a public War, That he would do well therefore, not
to make him (who had greater matters to look after) to stay there for one
Garrison, assuring mercy and clemency to such as yielded, but punishment or
death to them that continued stubborn; and so bringing thither some Artillery,
the surrender of the place quickly followed. But the Islanders who were fled,
making a great eruption, set fire on the Town, whose flames were suffered to
expatiate to the great ruin of others: for the Hollanders moved at the damage,
as if it had been their own, scattered the fire up and down the fields and
Villages. But Heaven it self fought most sharply for the Inhabitants, for an
incurable and violent disease seized the Hollanders in their Tents, and pursued
them with that malevolence and destruction as is hardly imaginable. Nor indeed
shall I excuse them, as being so ignorant in things of nature, that they did
not shun places lying directly under the stroke of the Suns heat and
pestilenti(...) Airs, which though if find fit bodies naturalized ther^to from
their very parents there, yet is not to be born by a people not used thereto,
and coming from parts much more North: for the Air there is neither cleansed,
cooled, not refreshed with any Winds, and so by means of the untemperateness,
grows foul and corrupted with a dusky vapor, endammages the earth, and this
makes the countenances of the Portugueses that dwell there, to be of a pale wan
color, and the continual recourse of Fevers does sufficiently argue, That even
they that were born in a warmer Climate, do draw in a more dangerous Air. At
first the Judges sent to inhabit this Island, only such as were condemned
persons in Portugal, but now covetousness does bring others thither
voluntarily: Although it has seldom been found, that any European born, ever
attained there to his middle age. But the Seamen, besides the heat of the Air,
being wearied with labor, were driven to remedies equal to the evils they
suffered, for a deadly sleepiness, very noxious to such as went to take the cool
Air at the rising of the Moon, and Sugar, and Indian Nuts, and other things
causing a flux, they eat unmeasurably. And now the drinking of water too
greedily, brought the disease full out among them, but whether it were
corrupted by the fraud of men, I may worthily doubt, since it agrees with the
malice of that Nation, and that not differing from reason. Another cause of
their ruin was, their use of Venereal sports with some of the Women N^tives
(the most of which are so libidinous, that they will endeavor to allure men
into their embraces) in such diversity, that Nature was not able to bear such a
traffic of bodies; thus they brought upon themselves several causes of death
on every hand. This Pestilential mortality was made more noted by the death of
D^use the Admiral, who being of a very gross corpulent body was not capable of
much motion in his natural climate, being, for two days rather languishing
than sick, he dyed, not by any disease, but only by the melting of his fat, as
was supposed. By whose death, all the common rabble were so troubled, that
their hopes began utterly to droop, and soon after, the cry of all was, to
leave that infectious place; and when consultation was had concerning revenge,
It was thought sufficient that they intermingled their Enemies deaths with
their own dangers. The body of their Admiral Douse, that it might not after
their departure be made a laughing stock, they buried very deep under ground,
all the ruins of the whole Town lying over him, they brought away their guns,
and some Merchandise, and presently went to Sea; but yet they had not lost the
infection, though they had left the place, for the Air changed very slowly,
and by degrees; and the poison of a disease, being once imbibed, will for a
long time follow the infected; nay, the contagion and pestilent stench of the
sick within the narrow compass of ships, made the disease more and more spread,
insomuch that in fifteen days they lost above a thousand men. After this, they
began to hasten their return, having got but small booty at Brasile, their
number decreasing daily by several kinds of death, for upon whomsoever this
evil fell, if it once touched their Midriff or Diaphragma, they were dead even
before they were sensible of the disease. Others were burnt up with continual
Fevers, wherewith if the head were once touched, presently they threw
themselves for madness headlong into the Sea. But now, as the Air grew more
temperate, and fresh hopes began to appear to these broken and sick men,
another contagion, nothing better then the other, seized them, before the
former was quite cured, by which the joints of their knees, and their teeth
were loosed, but it was not dreadful, because in long Navigations it is an
usual disease, yet to them it proved mortal at that time, because the joints
being yet very feeble, and they coming into more cold Climates of the Sea,
where there was winter according to the Season of the year, were contrarily as
much pinched with the Cold. Nor certainly of a long time had there been so
sharp a frost, as was evident by the Rivers among us, which were wholly
congealed although the Sea flowed in^o them, and by the violence of it, some
men were killed with cold. They were perplexed also with Tempests, which
brought them into more then ordinary danger, in regard all the persons
belonging to the Fleet were by reason of their weakness, unable to govern or
manage them. Of all the number of Captains, only two survived, and some Ships
did not bring home above six sound men apiece in them; not that there were so
many sick, but that the rest were either consumed with diseases, or thrown
overboard into the Sea. Part of the Ships came and gathered new forces in
England, others being dispersed, according as they were furnished with Sails,
Tackle, and Mariners, returned home almost at the end of Winter: one Ship was
utterly deserted for want of men, another being brought to Scluys, was taken by
the Enemies. And this was the event and Success of the Hollanders Fleet, that
had been so great a Charge to the Commonwealth for so long time, and at its
return, filled whole Families with lamentations. But King Philip first sent his
Fleet to the Fortunate Islands, for he had heard of the havoc the Hollanders
had made there, and commanded that they should not be suffered to continue
their possessions there; but when it was known, that they left them
voluntarily, it was ordered to go to Tercera, and there to be a Convoy for the
American Plate-Fleet; where arriving, they were quickly driven thence by the
raging of the winds, and not without some damage.

The Dunkirkers with great audacity robbing in our Sea, caused many complaints,
some accusing the unskilfulness of those that were to preside the Naval
Affairs, others the sloth and negligence of the Captains, and the unprofitable
Tribute that was raised on pretense for clearing and purging the Sea; but at
last, five of the Rovers Ships being taken, it was a comfort and satisfaction
to the people to see Execution done upon the Pirates. And many, either by force,
virtue, or policy, getting safe out of Spain, when they came, filled all places
with the terror and hatred of the Spanish name. Others returning happily and
with good success from the Indies, brought more gainful Commodities then were
usual. By the some and report of which things, the peoples hopes increasing,
the loss of the Spanish Trade was not so much missed; for Salt began to be
fetched from the Islands bordering upon America.

About this time, Frederick Spinola brought some new aid to King Philip
consisting of six great Ships, which were to be used against the Hollander,
Covenanting to have all the Spoil he could take from them to his own use: for
he was a man, Ambitious to equal in Warlike glory, his Name, and House, which
was famous among the Genoueses, and wealthy among his Countrymen of Orens, who
had increased both their Wealth and Honor by Arms. This part of the Spaniards
Fleet was to come against the Hollanders, if the English with great care and
high threats, which carried much ofterror, had not diverted them otherwhere;
Therefore they came apart, after a short stay in Pontoyse, a Port in France;
the weather exceedingly favoring them, for the Hollanders were forewarned of
them, and had sent some Ships into the British Narrow Sea toward Calais to
intercept them; but they passing by the shore, came safe to Flanders, being
favored both by the Winds, and their own Fortune; yet they were forbidden to go
into Dunkirk, and therefore they went to Scluys, having in them one thousand
six hundred Soldiers; from thence they threatened the Merchants and Coasts of
Zeland; and these new kind of Vessels, that in these countries had never been
seen before, did no small damage, first in their charge about stopping up all
passages, afterward by small losses striking so great a terror far and near,
that many fled out of Zeland, and sought new places to dwell in. But the event
abated the fear; for although soon after Spinola's Ships, making use of a
serene calm, and great silence, had taken one Ship of War belonging to Zeland,
they being fitted both with Native and hired Soldiers, that carrying scarcely
threescore Mariners, yet did for the space of two hours defend it self on
every side with that courage, that for twenty or thereabouts that were killed
or wounded, there were two hundred and fifty slain on the other side, which
cast a great fear on the Assailants part. And again setting upon some other
Ships of War, mistaking them for Merchants Ships, with continual shot for six
hours together, they were spoiled, and almost torn in pieces, which was a
joyful sight to Flushing (so near was the contest to them).

But Albertus the Archduke having finished his Nuptial Ceremonies in Spain, as
he returned through Italy, the Pope Presented to him a Consecrated Sword, by
virtue whereof he might the more boldly proceed against his Enemies on all
hands. Not long after entering his new Dominion which he had so lately received
as a Portion with his now Spouse Isabella, coming over the Alps, and through
Burgundy, while the War was in its heat, and his Affairs in no thriving
condition; in the beginning of Autumn he came and found Cardinal Andrew and
Mendosa at variance, and attributing each of the prosperous successes of that
year to himself, and the failings therein to the other; of whom, the Cardinal
was dismissed to his Ecclesiastical business, but Mendosa still retained in
favor, and continued in his command; besides, he saw Germany offended, and the
Soldiers ready to mutiny for want of their pay, which there was no visible
means at present to raise for them; for the Netherlanders were poor, and a
great Army together, with a prepared Fleet against the Hollanders and Germans,
out of a dubious fear of them, as Enemies, had pressed upon Philip, and drained
all his garrisons both in Spain, and the Islands. At Antwerp the Soldiers in
the Castle required money. At Hamond (a free Town in the Bishopric of Liege)
and the places about, some Troops of Horse, and Regiments of Foot gathered
Tribute both out of the Towns and Country, which was exacted from them with
the threats and terror of Fire and Sword. The Garrison of Fort- Andrew having
privately obtained a truce with Count Ernest of Nassaw, who kept the opposite
bank, sent great threats to Boisledue and the adjacent places, unless they
would pay them the Arrears of what was due to them for many years service. All
these mischiefs the Princes found a foot when they came into the Country, and
by their presence were so far from settling them, that new evils rather sprung
up. The Nobility being enraged, that both in countenance and habit, the Princes
were so Hispaniolized, and would be saluted by the Netherlanders with bending
of the knee. And now as the Court grew burdensome even in time of Peace by
Princely Revellings, and imperious Luxury; so its great expenses added much to
the increase of their penury, for remedy whereof the Deputies required great
Tributes of every Province (which was always very displeasing, but now first
of all grew odious) adding, That it was unjust that they should bear greater
burdens for their fidelity and reverence to their Princes, then the Rebels did
for maintenance of their injury. Nor would any thing else be hearkened to,
until the Solemnities of installing the Princes were over, though the
Brabanters urged Albertus his promise, That the Castles should be demolished*
and the Foreign Soldiers sent away.

But Isabella affirming, That she was wholly ignorant of any such Agreement,
was besides very angry; as if in those Demands, Liberty were sought against her
Self: Moreover, the Walloons prayed, That the Edicts might be taken away,
whereby the Hollanders Merchandises, so necessary for them, were forbidden: But
these Things were only spoken of, and so forgotten, with the Sense of their
imposed Servitude, and the Rites of State being performed, the married Princes
were received as Dukes and Counts; and, by chance, while according to ancient
Custom, the Oath for the Government of Brabant was administered without the
Walls of Louvayn, two Villages, in sight of them, were set on fire, by some
Horsemen of Holland, which was looked upon as an Evil Omen, as beginning their
Rule among Slaughters and Blood. And the United States were no less rejoiced at
the Evil Fortune of their Enemies, than they were troubled at their own; and
being debarred of Trade with Spain, and also the Hostile part of the
Netherlands, by the Edicts, and the French Peace, thereupon the flight of the
Artificers diminished the Revenues growing both by Sea and Land: Nor did the
Tributes of that Year suffice for the Expense, although they were very high;
and hereupon Moneys were forced to be taken up at Usury, sometimes equalling
the Principal, nor were the growing Burdens less, so that the whole Change of
the War was turned against them; England also, that had been wont to help them,
recalling their Soldiers, had summoned their Ships also; but by and by, the
Fear vanishing, Thanks were returned, and nothing else.

At this time a potent Army, commanded by the Earl of Essex, harassed the
Marshes and Boggs of Ireland, that were the last Subterfuges of their Liberty,
with a Success in all his Public Atchievments fortunate enough, but in his
private Undertakings not so happy: For being rather a fierce, than prudent
Young Man and politikely sent into a Rugged Country among Enemies, having
(through ignorance of the places) received many losses, at last making a Truce
with Tyrone, and returning Home without leave, found the Queen (from whom,
before his departure, in a Contest, he had received a Blow wi^h her Hand, which
he took with that Impatience, as if she had not sat in a Throne) during his
Absence, by the Insinuations of his Emulous Adversaries, and the unwary Praises
of his Friends, hardened against him with Suspicions and Fear; so that he was
immediately taken as a guilty person, and committed to Custody. Thus the
pretended Fautors of Peace, prevailed against the afflicted young Nobleman, who
had gotten Honor by War: That which showed the Queen's Inclination thereto
was, That the Spaniard was unmoved at Sea, and that the Trade of other Nations
coming thither were hindered: But the Queen pressed on that Counsel, as long as
she had any fear of the Enemies Fleet; although an Ambassador sent to her from
Bruxels, assured her of safety, though all was in vain with a suspicious and
incredulous Woman: Nor did, in a secret manner, give Notice of this to the
States, That both her Self, and the English her Subjects, had need of Peace to
advance their Trading, and that she might establish her Kingdom, against the
impious hopes of such, as laid Snares for her Old Age; yet, that they should
not fail in their Courage, but as they equally shunned the Dominion of the
Austrian and French* if they desired to keep her Friendship, they should retain
their Liberty, or else give the Government of the Commonwealth to a Prince of
their own; and that if she enjoyed Peace, she could easily supply them with
many things, which now she was compelled to require of them. It is not hard to
conjecture, how much many Men's Minds were moved at this decaying Alliance; and
there were some Temptations used by the Emperor, who once again intended to
send some to them to persuade to Peace. But They, by Resolute Advice, before
the Ambassadors were come to the Borders, wrote Letters, wherein They
admonished Them to spare their unprofitable Labor. Why They could not hope for
a safe or durable Peace, They had often declared, and they had at the present
no Reason to recede from their former Counsels or Resolutions, unless perhaps
the wickedness committed in Germany, and the Right of Trading broken off by
Treachery, and the Spaniards holding the Netherlands, under the pretended Names
of the Archdukes, should be taken as Incentives to Peace. Thus wisely were all
vain Discourses avoided, by the principal Authors of such daring Attempts to
the Hollanders, who the Year following, in the doubling of their Pole Money out
of their own Wealth, out went their Companions, who either partly refused, or
at best were very slow in following the Example. The Zelanders chiefly* refused
to advance their proper Charge, by reason of some new or late Losses; and among
those beyond the Rhine there were used many Evasive Circumlocutions, while part
study rather the Peoples Favor than the Public Good, and applaud those
Impositions, which they hoped would be easy for themselves, though they fell
heavy upon their Neighbors. Others there were who would not be silent, when
others being quiet, they had all the Care of the Commonwealth, although the
Hollanders winked at it, except it were seriously debated in Common Council,
they would leave the Care of the out-lying Parts, looking only to their own
nearer Necessities, and the possession of the Sea. Some Comfort was received
from the German Princes, who, as yet having a Suspicion and Jealousy of the
Spaniard, offered them continual Aid and Money. The Count Palatine excited the
rest of his Allies of the same Religion, both by Words and Example: Showing to
every one of them, what Alva had done of old, and what Mendosa now; and that
the Hollanders could not b^ overc^me without the destruction of their
Neighbors; but if they flourished, they would be a great help to many; to
this, for the Defense of Prussia; to these, of the Possession of the Duchy of
Cleves; and to all, against the Bishop of Rome and his Followers; by whose
cruel Hatred and Faction all are oppressed. But all this was little hearkened
to; for the Duke of Brunswic converted his Arms against a City that had assumed
too great a Liberty, the rest acknowledging themselves unable to maintain the
War: But Charles Duke of Sudermannia, Uncle of Sigismund King of Poland, who
taking little Care of his Ancient People of Sweden, and for his earnest
Affection against the Roman Religion, suspected of Innovation, first opposed
him in Arms, and afterward in a Public Assembly, when the Kingdom was taken
away from him; a long time shunning the Name of a King, yet usurping the
Authority by other Titles, when he voluntarily desired the Alliance of the
States, because he desired some present help, and that his hopes were
uncertain, his Kingdom poor, and Forces far distant, he was for a time put off
with Delays; yet because it was an offered Friendship, it was accepted, because
he seemed as it were to fight for Religion, making an Excuse, That some Holland
Ships, without any Public Command, had given Aid to Sigismund.

The Ninth BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
1600.
THE New Year, which closed up a Century, as it produced immediately great
Events, so it did seem to portend great Changes of Affairs for a long time: The
Affairs of the Netherlanders, under the Princes, were in a bad Condition, and
full of Trouble, and so wasted, as was hardly to be seen in other places: But
the Goodness of the Princes as New, They in Authority being present, and the
very greatness of the Distemper hastened to apply Remedies. The United States,
to whom but newly redeemed from Servitude, was accrewed an Ample Dominion, made
all their Dangers to be but stricter Bonds to connect them; being delivered by
successful Arms; although they had, since that, been reduced to no small
Necessity, out of their Old Discipline retrain'd their Courage against their
Enemy, but not equally their Concord and Modesty. On both Sides then were great
and strong Endeavors, while, for above the space of Thirty Years, they
contended to put an end to their Labor; with which hope they have prosusely
wasted their Forces even to Extremity; as if Victory had stood before their
Eyes, promising Reward to them that could hold our longest. And, first of all,
the Winter being Frosty, the Hollanders escaped great danger, by reason the
Rivers were all passable upon the Ice, from the Enemies seditious Mutinies,
which they turned to their Advantage: For Lewis of Nassau, marching with great
privacy out, with a select Party of Horse and Foot, broke into Wachtendone, a
Town not far from the Borders of the Duchy of Cleves, formerly taken by Count
Mansfeldt, after a Two Months Siege, when the Duke of Parma had drawn the
States Forces another way: The Horse, which had lately been added to that
Garrison, for the preserving thereof, were then, by chance, absent, forraging
about the Borders of the Bishopric of Colen; yet there were the^ein 800
Soldiers; but the Ice of the Trenches was not broke; and the Situation of the
Town far from an Enemy, and among Cities associated in Frienship, made them
more secure than usual; Therefore a few seizing the Rampire, with a small
slaughter, they opened the Gates to the rest: Then Geleno, both Lord and
Governor of the Town, fled with some few into the Castle, in hope of Aid,
which he had sent to entreat, and there endured the Terror both of Grenades
and Bullets, thundered upon him; until Lewis his whole Party approached, and
brought Scaling Ladders to the Works; and yet some resisted, and among them a
Woman well grown in Years, not without the hazard and Wounds of those that
opposed them: But, at last, overcome by Multitude, they yielded this place,
which was not of a contemptible Situation among the Marshes, and then was full
of good Booty, because many of the Boors had betook hither Themselves and their
Wealth, because the War raged all about those parts: After a few days the
Soldiers brought in sufficient of all Things, both as to Victuals and Defense.

Among the French, that fought for the Hollanders, was one Breautee, a
Gentleman of good Birth and Blood in Normandy, who, vaunting in his Youth, had
challenged to fight 20 of Grebendoncks Troop; the chief of whom were infamous,
for the Treacherous Delivery of Gertruydenberg; and therefore certainly, this
was an unbeseeming Contest for a Person of Honor: Each of them, with an equal
Number, came out into a Field not far from Shertogenbosch, the Grobbendonkians
being better Armed, but Breautee, more exact in his place and order: At the
first Charge, Breautee killed the Enemies Leader, who was named Abraham, but
was known in the Camp by the Nickname of Cook; and so sharp was the Fight, and
the Shot directed so rightly opposite, that in the first Conflict, on both
Sides, the one half of the Contenders fell; but, by the flight of the French,
whose Courage began to fail, in the continuance of the Danger, Breautee being
left alone, having oftentimes changed his Horse, and afterward fighting on
foot, at last overpressed with a multitude of Enemies, yielded himself: The
French affirm he articled for his Life; against which the Brab under say, That
by Agreement, the Conquered were to expect nothing but Death: But, certainly,
being Prisoner, he had prevailed much, when some, sent out of the City, killed
him with 30 Wounds, while he only begged they would let him dye Armed, and
like a Man. A Wickedness fit only to be committed by such ignominious Persons,
and yet a good Lesson for magnanimous Youth; That they should not, under the
false Title of Honor, affects those kind of Conflicts, from whence can arise
neither a profitable Victory to the Public, and among Wisemen Death, in such
a Quarrel, does hardly deserve a Pardon.

The Winter yet continuing, lest any occasion given by the Enemies Troubles
among Themselves might slip, Prince Maurice, suddenly providing a Fleet, and
dispersing otherwise several Rumors of War, within ^ days forced the Castle or
Fort of Crevecour, adjoining to the Maes and Dies, to surrender. The Enemies
Horse, that came thither too late to strengthen the Garrison, and were denied
Entrance at Shertogenbosh, that City always fearing Soldiers, were slain
almost to the Number of 5^0. The Work about the Fort, augmented by Mendosa,
were now finished by Prince Maurice: From thence he went to the Fort Andrew,
where the Germane and Walloon Soldiers, thrusting out their Captains, openly
acknowledged a Sedition; and sending Balotte, who, under pretense of an
Expedition, should allure them out, they escaped the Fraud, yet they held that
strong Fort, not without hope of pardon, as a Pledge for the Arrears of Three
Years Pay due to them; and for this they were more obstinate against the Enemy,
because a less price was offered them for their coming over, than they hoped to
get, and yet saved both their Oath and Honor. There were some great Guns left
there for resistance; the Rampire it self was like a Castle, wherein were two
Fortresses or Batteries upon the Maes, and two upon the Wael; the fifth looking
toward Harwarden: About the Trench, and beyond it, were continual Galleries,
and then again a Trench, within which the Rivers were contained: In the
strength of these Works, the Spaniards had so great Confidence, that Albertus,
in his Letters and Discourse, boasted, That he possessed the Mouth of the
Rivers, and that he had put a Yoke upon the Necks of the Hollanders. As long as
the S^yl overflowed by the Rivers, this Winter would not bear digging, being
solicited to come to Articles, they resolutely den^ed, and a Captive Soldier
being dismissed by Prince Maurice, to persuade them to a Surrender, was killed,
in detestation of the Treachery, nor would seem to send the Body into the Camp.
Whereupon, turning Counsel and Advice into Force, Prince Maurice thought
nothing so fit, as to begirt the Besieged with a Camp, and to fortify himself
against Enemies from abroad: Whereof dismissing the Horse, whereof there was no
use in those moist and wet Grounds, he places part of his Forces in Ships, and
upon Bridges, in the Fields of Tiel and Bom^^^ and other small Islands in the
Waell: The main of his strength he settled on the Edge of Brabant, and breaking
the Bank, lets in thither the Maes, that he might have the more free space for
Erecting his Works, and also stop the Enemies passage that Way: Besides, in six
places he built Forts, with other lesser Bulwarks intermixed, whereby all
passage to him was utterly cut off; and for increasing their Terror, the
Castle of Batenborg, situate at the Maes, and yet carrying some glimmering of
the Old Name of the Hollanders in its own, formerly as far as the French
Borders, was brought into subjection, by the Battery of great Guns, whose Noise
and Thunder the Besieged heard: And they were grievously wounded with Darts,
yet unevenly thrown, and at uncertainty, which the others returned to them
again; and many of them being consumed, they were forced to seek lurking places
under the Rampire: But the want of Wood and Medicines most afflicted them, the
moisture of the overflowed Ground being very prejudicial to the Health of their
Bodies.

The Soldiers in the Town of Shertogenbosch kept up their hopes, by giving
frequent Signs by Fire, and endeavoring to carry in ships, but in vain. The
Army also came under the Command of Velasco, threatening great Things; but they
could find no way to their Companions, the Fields being covered with Water, and
the Forts opposing them. And now much of the Mountain Snow being melted, by the
approach of the Spring, and after their Rivers returned to their bounds, the
Pioneers began to fall to work, especially, in the night, and when the Moon
grew old; At length, they came to the Gallery, which we mentioned to be
encompassed with a Rampire. When the Soldiers, though they had not suffered
the utmost extremity, yet being out of all hope of Relief, and Prince Maurice
hastening to redeem the time, they came to Conditions, and one hundred twenty
five thousand Florens were paid part of their pay due from the Enemy, which
they divided man by man; For this price was that famous and well-builded Fort,
bought, standing most conveniently for the defense of Holland, then the Cannon,
and whatever else was therein, and one thousand two hundred Soldiers coming
over to the Hollanders, who performing (according to Custom) all the Sign of
joy, even They Themselves, tryumphed over Themselves. These men afterward, did
very good service, when giving over their licentiousness, they returned to the
Discipline of War; yet they were for this thing proscribed as Traitors by the
Enemy, which together, with hatred, and fear of punishment, put them in an
excessive rage. If these things were not to be approved, before rigid Judges,
certainly, these are more excusable then the Gertruydenburgers; for they,
though defrauded of all their pay, for a long season, yet had stood out against
a Camp, and a two months Siege, they do not complain upon just Causes, since
they alter their obedience to good advantage.

About this time, the States set out an Edict, that no one should reproach
these new Soldiers for their transition, or coming over, as well
understanding, that even for smaller causes, an Army has sometimes fallen to
intestine discords, as of late during this Siege, two Soldiers, the one a
German, the other a Frenchman, quartelling at Dice, sell to fight, when of a
sudden, each of their Countrymen coming in to take parts, had like to have
been the cause of great slaughter and bloodshed; for scarcely could the
contest be ended, even by the interposition of the States. About this time, the
long pertinacy of the City of Groningen, having justly enraged those that
emulated it, made the rest of the States fall upon sharp resolves, such as is
scarcely usual among free people: the common people being in their own nature
fierce, and having gotten Governors, that were exiles, during the rule of the
Spaniards, and therefore be having themselves with the greater confidence
toward the people, disdained to live under severer Laws now, then those that
oppressed them under the King, by whose connivence, they had obtained to have
their Houses Tax-free, and some other things beneficial indeed to themselves,
but prejudicial to the Inhabitants: who remembering these things, by the Decree
of the United States, to whom they had subjected themselves, they would not
agree, that many of the Privileges they had nominally used, should be taken
away from them: Besides, they had neglected for three years together, to bring
their Tributes into the Treasury; and since, they could not without a most
pernicious example, suffer their Judgments to be contemned, and their
undertaken care to be depraved. Count William, though prone to mercy, is
commanded with a party of Soldiers, by force, to reduce the Townsmen to their
duty; but he moderated with prudence, the sharpness of this Command, by
restraining the Soldiers from doing injuries, and taking no notice of the
words of the incensed vulgar. Yet disarming the Citizens, lest while they
remained in their fury, they should as formerly, f^ll to acts of Hostility,
that he might not diminish his Forces, by leaving a great Garrison among them,
he bridled them with a Castle, wherewith their courages were quite lost, for
that from a City that had ever been free, they were now glad to receive a token
of extreme servitude. It Is true, these things are usual with such as rule by
force, nor could any thing more have been done to Enemies: It was time
certainly, to lay down the Arms which they had taken up against Castles, if the
Authors of liberty would rather choose to imitate, than revenge such things:
And they also desired, that part of the rest might be remitted to them; but the
remembrance of old faults, had banished their long offered Clemency, especially
considering at present, their contempt and disobedience; yet the event
mollified, and abated the envy of this action; for the movers of these
troubles, were afterward carried only to the Hague, without any other
punishment; and the Magistrates being translated to People of more peaceable
temper, their right of suffrage in the Council, was restored to them, and all
things afterward transacted with equity.

In Frizeland also, a great contention arose concerning Taxes laid upon Cattle
and Pastures, the Townsmen urging it, and the Country People that lived all
over Eastergoo, and Westergoo, gainsaying it, so that soon after, out of an
ambition of eminent Offices, which as is usual, nourished the differences, came
to that height, that part went to Faniker, while other part of them remain at
Liewert, and both under pretense of public Counsel, distracted the Common
wealth, and drained the Treasury: in which Affairs, Count William interposing
himself, and first calling the Authority of the Judges, and then taking Arms
against those that were departed, did not escape the envy of having affected
the Government, beyond the allowance of the Laws: At last, when the Associated
Provinces all interposed themselves, the matter by the appointment of the
Deputies, was re-setled in peace, according to the old form; as an addition to
those evils, a sorrowful Messenger arrived, bringing tidings of a Treaty of
Peace between the Archduke, (to whom the Spaniard had left the managery of the
Affair) and the Queen of England, whose Ambassadors were then met together at
Bulloyn. The truth is, both of them had cause enough to desire peace: the great
undertakings, and bold attempts of the English, both in Spain and America,
terrifying King Philip, so that he was forced to the vast expense of great
Fleets, to defend those far distant Navigations; and besides, it was hoped, the
Hollander would be more ready to hearken to peace, when their hopes of Aid from
England, was utterly quashed; But the English were forewarned of their danger,
by the successes of Tyrone, and new Rebellions and Commotions in Ireland,
springing from a late Edict of the Pope; and the Forts of Ulster and Munster,
being difficultyl regained, and with much labor, there yet remained severa^
lurking places in the Rebels hands.

After three months, it was perceived that the Ambassadors could not be drawn
to agree, the English refusing to be preceded, and the Spaniards hating to have
any equals; Nor was there any better progress by intercu^rent Messengers,
while those as much fear a peace, as these desire it. Thus they parted at that
time, and the Affair was left to be treated of in Writing, until the Queens
Death and Successor, as we shall show in its proper place, put an end thereto.
In the interim, Ambassadors came to the Hollanders, from the Emperor, because
the States had sent Letters to meet them by the way, as to their Resolve
concerning peace. These Ambassadors, being Herman Count Mansfeldt, and Charles
Nuisell, came notwithstanding, pretending they had other things in Command.
Their words seemed more to advance the Dignity of the Ancient Empire, then the
fortune of the former year merited: Namely That they should restore all places
they held in Germany, and give satisfaction for the damages done by the
Soldiers. That they should not defend themselves like their Enemies otherwise
as they were equally guilty of the fault, so they should equally suffer
punishment with their adversaries. That they would treat nothing of Peace, yet
they should know, that Treaties could not be always waved, without great
suspicion, and that they would no longer bear the Taxes laid upon Commerce,
which by pretense of the War should be continued; Hereto it was afterward
answered, and not without desert, That the losses should be imputed, and the
places taken for defense, be laid to the fault of them that first brought an
Army into a peaceable Country; and if that were to be pardoned in the Spaniard,
they hoped it would not make them more guilty, having been necessitated to do
the like: As to the Islands of Gravewaert, and concerning Peace, they gave the
same answer, which they had often before done; But because the Spaniard had
relinquished Rees, it seemed convenient to them, that Emmeric also should be
delivered, that so the Enemy might the more justly be blamed for the retaining
of Bercke; Some Discourse there was at this time, of matters of less moment, a
mention of a Truce being thrown in by the by, which the States gently denied,
as not suitable to the times. And a Trumpeter desiring a safe Conduct for
Deputies, which were sent by the States under Albertus his obedience to the
United States, concerning a Peace, being for some days retained, that they
might not discover the great preparations for War, that were then on foot, was
commanded soon after to carry back Letters, wherein, before they would speak of
Peace, they admonished them, first to free their Country from foreign force;
for after it was determined with the Soldiers in Fort-Andrew, it fell out,
that the rest in those parts, moved with no less madness, acted things no less
disadvantagious, so that the States of the United Provinces, supposing it
necessary to make use of the Enemies discord, bent their studies to greater
undertakings. The War now being transmitted into Flanders* was attended with
very great want, and scarcity of all things, which was both the cause and
nourishment of Seditions; for they knew nothing could more straiten the
Treasury, nor put their troublesome Affairs into a greater confusion, then to
possess that Country, which was most abundant in all products of the Field, and
in a manner, wholly belonged to the Enemy; it was also full of Ports and
Harbors, from whence the Sea might either be infested, or guarded, and
commerce, for the support of daily charges, secured; The Zelanders before all
the rest required, that they might not be left open to the dangerous
Neighborhood of the Enemy, more then they beyond the Rhine, and in Holland it
self; That Ostend might be freed, and those of Thieves, Newport, Dunkirk, and
Scluys taken: If they did but surprise one Town, while the Enemy was gathering
together his Forces, and while he could entreat them to action, they should
easily bring it to pass, that for the future, they might make the Enemies
Country the Seat of the War. And to this purpose, they hasted their
preparations with a great confidence, to be ready as soon as the Wind should
favor them; and while it continued North, which is directly against them, the
Forces from all parts, and the Provisions, did but slowly meet together, the
General Assembly being appointed at Zeburge, a Castle in Walcheren; There were
127 Companies of Foot, and 25. Troops of Horse, with a Train of Artillery, and
all other Warlike Furniture, together, with a Fleet of 800 Vessels: Here it was
debated between the Prince, and the Deputies of the Provinces, who being the
main motives of this Expedition, offered themselves to him, as Companions, and
Assistants of his Counsels and dangers, whether they should expect a prosperous
time to set Sail in, or while the Enemy was unprovided, lay hold on occasion:
which later opinion prevailed: But the Carriages, and other Provisions going by
Sea, only the Soldiers, with four great Guns, were wafted beyond Honte, the
furthest part of the Schelde, from whence they marched by Land, to Ostend, a
Town situate upon the Seacoast, and in the States power, but enclosed by the
Enemies, with even Forts, to prevent excursions, wherewith the Garrisons
therein had vexed the Country, in the exacting Tributes from them; nor were the
Soldiers by all those Forts so restrained, but that yet sometimes they would
break out.

Hither, that they might the more safely come, Count Ernest of Nassau was sent
before with some part of the Fleet, to assault the Philippines, a Fort in that
part, the Garrison whereof being forced to surrender, and marching out, when
Assened also was departed, the Prince so disposed his Army, that George Count
Solmes, Ernestus of Nassau, with part of the Fleet, and Vere General of the
English, all had distinct Forces, and Governed the Army by a Tripartite
Command, the Horse being distributed into 7 Bands, over which Lewis of Nassau
had the Chief Command; for he being designed to the chief Managery of the
Affair, had none to partake with him in his Authority. But the Countrymen,
being terrified with the Fame of the approaching Army, fled on all hands from
the scattered Villages, leaving them desolate; and so far were they forgetful
both of taking part, as formerly, in Defense of Liberty, that they took
prisoners all Soldiers they could meet with, at unawares, or by Treachery; and
upon such as were thus taken exercised all Acts of Barbarism: Whereby, the Fury
of the Army became so incensed, hat they burned the Do^ps and Villages, far and
wide, in their Passage and progress: Their Course was steered directly to
Bruges by Eckelo, Maldegem, and Malca, Villages of Note: Letters from the
States were sent to Bruges, and also to Gaunt, to put them in mind of their
Ancient League and Friendship, whereby they had jointly Covenanted against
Foreign Dominion and Tyranny: And unless they were willing to submit to their
present Slavery, They doubted not but They would assist them both with Forces
and Money. These Letters they received, but with so much disdain and rancour of
Mind, that, as it were in despite, they of Bruges accepted a Garrison from
Albertus at that time, which till then they had constantly refused; and with
their Cannon infested the Army as it passed by, though not to any great damage,
yet not daring with any Parties to come near to skirmish.

Prince Maurice passing thence to Jabec, was told that the fort of Oldenburg
was deserted by Albertus his men; the like also was reported of Plassendale,
Snaskerk, and Bredenede: In these places, as also in all other convenient for
passage, the Prince left Garrisons, such as should suffice to Repulse any small
Parties of the Enemy; and that the Enemies Counsels might be the more
diligently inquired into, and Intelligence received, being uncertain what to
prepare, since none could expect a well-ordered Army, among turbulent, and
disagreeing persons.

Count Solmes with one third part of the Army, was commanded to go before to
Ostend, and conduct in^o that Town the States Deputies, that they might with
the more safety consult of the surther manage of the War; which done, he
besieged Fort Albertus, which was distant from Ostend about an hours journey
toward Newport, among the Sand-hills upon the Sea shore. Passing hence to
Newport, he prepared all things for a Siege, having taken the Works at the
Port, which falls down to the Sea a great distance from the Town. In a short
time the Prince came thither with the rest of the Forces, intending to
incompass the Town as much as the nature of the place would bear. In all this
Journey the Soldiers had enough of all things but only drink, for the Cattle
where ever they were met with being taken away, was the cause that both Wine
and Beer was very sparin^ly brought to the Army; nor could they always get
water, insomuch that some not only looked for, but greedily drank foul and
dirty water; yet the damage of the Slaves and Servants waiting on the Army,
somewhat mitigated this penury, for Spinola's Ships had taken upon the Sea
twenty Vessels loaded with that sort of people, and by their own sloth and
negligence, while they might have waited for the Fleet that was to conduct
them, whereby to prevent being made a prey to there is: but this proved no great
damage to the Public, nor did the Enemy long keep the glory thereof, for the
whole Fleet afterward bring assembled under Admiral Warmonde, the Wind
immediately rising, those Ships being utterly useless, but in calm Weather,
were shattered with great loss and damage. At which time happened a new thing,
for one of the men that rowed, being a Turk by Nation, by the shot of a bullet,
was freed from his Chains without any hurt to his person, so that leaping into
the Sea, and swimming over to the Hollanders, by a happy temerity escaped a
perpetual misery. Among all these things, Albertus perceiving that this was no
tumultuary Band that came to Forage, but an orderly Army under command, and
that the whole burden and force of the War was now going into Flanders, and
there to devour the very bowels of the Government; casting away all other
hopes, he gathers together his Forces from all parts, as resolving to meet so
great a hazard of War with his whole Forces. Nor does he leave any thing undone
that might hasten forward his design, for first he called back the Regiments he
had sent into Gelderland, then gathered together all that lay about Antwerp in
a running Band, and all that were quartered in that part of Flanders and
Brabant, where the Schelde divides them. Care also was taken for appeasing
those seditious Spaniards in Hamount, who being translated thence to Die
under hopes of money to be there paid them, and having other provision made for
them, at length by little and little returned to their old obedience. And
though there was a necessity of associating as many as possible, for that
otherwise the number of the forces would be too small, yet still there remained
a fear of their seditious humors, but at last being won by prayers and
promises (which is often soen in War), that they would lend their helping band
to the repelling this common danger, they yet retained their discords, yet so
as that the Enemy should not rob them of their reward. But the Italians who
succeeded the Spaniards, both in Homant, and the cruelty of their redition,
would not slir thence, as suspecting that if they got the Victory, yet they
should be little advantaged thereby, but that by their deaths the Princes would
be great gainers.

The number of all they could gather into a body was but ten thousand Foot, and
sixteen hundred Horse; with these as fast as so great and heavy a Body could be
moved, the Archduke himself went, not relyihg on the Care or Fortunes of
others herein: In their Journey, they made a Halt it Gaunt, where the
Arch-Dutchess Isabella came to them, not affrighted with the Noise of War; and
beseeched them, That they would not leave her in this extremity of danger, and
frustrate her in the top of her hopes. But turning particularly to them of
Dressed, she said many Things, both concerning the time and matter in hand; and
that she might raise in them the greater Confidence, laying her Hands upon her
EarRings and Jewels she protested, She would first part with all those
principal Ornaments of her Fortune and Honor, than that the well-deserving
Soldier should want a Reward, much less go without his Pay.

At once the News of the Enemies approach, and the danger growing to them in
the next Forts thereby, arrived at Prince Maurice's Army; so that some stricken
with the force and Terror of this so sudden coming of the Enemy, fled from
the said Fort: For they that were to defend Plas^endale and Bredenede, being
but few in number, would not so much as see the Enemy: But they that held
Oldenburg part of them being gone out to Forage, and so the Garrison weakened,
yielded up their Charge: The same did they that were left at Snaskerk,
surrendering the place, upon Articles for Life: But the Fury of the Rout,
thinking it long till they embrued their hands in the Enemies blood, contemning
the Laws of Arms, and the Religion of their Chieftain, who had signed the
Articles, fell upon them, and killed them all.

The blame of this wicked Cruelty he cast off from himself upon the Seditious
Soldiers; and this was done, either to make them hated and odious, or else
these disobedient men really thought to make amends to their Prince, for their
dubious Fidelity, by their perfidious Treachery upon their Enemies: It was
Night, when the Report of this matter came to the Prince's Ears, and the
Terror thereof frighted the rest, who had foreseen nothing less: Nor do I
suppose them dis-ingenuous, who believe that the Hollanders Affairs, had not
for many years, been in the like danger: It Is true, there were Forces, which
were, without doubt, considerable to their Party; yet the gallantry of the
Captain was more than the greatness of the Forces: All the Country round about
was Hostile; and now the Enemy was at hand, it was too late to fortify the
Camp; nor indeed would it avail them, who were ready daily to be surprised with
Hunger: for Provisions could not be expected from Ostend when the Enemy would
lie between it and them: To fly into France, would be no less base and
cowardly, than doubtful and dangerous: And if they should stay for the Enemy
drawing nearer and nearer to them every minute, the Soldiers being dispersed
in the Siege, so that the very Port might be taken from them, it would rather
seem to be a Slaughter, than a Battle: Yet for all this, the Prince laid hold
on one hope, which only remained, by the Opinion of all the Commanders in
Chief, and other Officers, (the great and famous Day for Battle being not yet
come) sent Count Ernest with 10 Companies of Foot, 4 Troops of Horse, and 2
great Guns, that by taking the Bridge at Leffingen, which one single Passage
was stit open, the Enemies passage might be stopped toward them: but if that
could not be effected, they should yet make them for a while delay their
progress, until he prepared his Army, and took Counsel further what to do.

But Count Ernest, though speeding all he could, found the Enemy passed those
Streights, and out of hope only to wear out some time, with the two great Guns
he had brought with him, commodiously planted to that purpose, be assailed the
Enemy; who at first, doubting lest all Prince Maurice his Army were come to
give him Battle, but finding it otherwise, drawing his men into a more compact
Order, and considering how far his Forces excelled the Enemy in number, grew
very fierce and ardent to sight: Nor was the like Courage and Resolution
wanting in them on the other side; but by the inequality of Men, they seemed
rather to have taken Counsel to fight, than by fighting to have conceived an
hope of Victory: For, at first, with singular Testimonies of Eminent Valor,
they were compelled to Retreat, and soon after to fly; so that there were slain
800 Men, part of them fighting, part after they had Quarter given them, the
Victory growing to that height of Fury, that they would spare none.

This Slaughter (as it often happens) was the means that all the rest of the
Army were saved: For while the Enemy was busy in following the Chase, and
pillaging the Field, Prince Maurice got time, first to transpose his Horsemen,
and afterward his Carriages, into that part of the Seacoast, which looks
toward Ostend: During whose passage, if the Enemy had come upon them, there
must needs have followed a very great slaughter: But he being grown more slow
by his Security, and measuring the whole Event by the former Fight, sent
Messengers into the Neighboring Cities, that a great part of Prince Maurice's
Army was slain in the Fight, and himself, with the rest, enclosed by Them.
Which Letters being read, many of the same Cities, applauding their Fortune,
with an overhasty Joy, posted to make Solemn Orations in their Praise, and to
decl^^ their Exaltations, by all expressive Signs of rejoicing: In^^e into
(...), the Foot, and the Remainder of the Horse, so^^ B^^^ showing them a Ford
not far from the Sea, in two Bodies (...) over a Bridge made somewhat nearer
the Town, where the Haven is more narrow.

The Prince, as he carried any over, still placed them in Order of Battle, yet
hiding from the Soldiers the loss of the former Fight.

In the Vanguard was Sir Francis Vere, with a double Band of English and
Frizons, and two Ensigns more, the one belonging to the Prince, the other to
Count Hohenlo, who was absent, being to guard Holland; the Middle Ward, or
Battle, was made up of French, Switzers, and the New Soldiers from Fort
Andrew; and of this Count Solmes had the Leading. The Rereward consisted of
Hollanders and Germans: the last of which, was all that remained of Count
Ernestus his Forces: There was also a Bard of Utrechers, Commanded by Colonel
Vctrembrouch. The Horse were partly in the Front, other part attended the
Battle, and some waited upon the Rear-Guard. Thus the Prince ordered his Army,
according to the Ancient Policy of famous Captains. and then commanded the
Ships to depart, which by this time were in great Number come to him, and to
steet their Course to Ostend; That the danger being equal to all, so all hopes
or causes of flight should be utterly taken away; but they which had settled
themselves in the Haven before, could not presently obey that Order, until they
were assisted by the Tide: Besides, some Companies were left about Newport, to
keep in the Soldiers there, that they might not break out on the Bank of the
Prince's Men, when they were engaged to fight. And now the Morning being half
p^ssed, and Noon approaching, the Enemies Horsemen, going a great distance
before their Battle, came in sight; and after some short Skirmishes with
Pistols, being driven from the Shore, retreated to the Hills, where a Band of
Footmen tarryed for them; against whom, moving in a slow pace toward the Sea,
the Cannon on both sides played very fiercely. Some there were with Prince
Maurice, who advised, at that time, to meet the Enemy, for that would inflame
the Soldiers Valor, and increase their Courage and Alacrity. But others, with
more Wisdom, that it was more fit to abide in the same place, whereby they
might repel the more easily the Enemies Fury, after their long March over the
difficulties of the Sands; which when they had concluded, and the Horse
dispersed, which had taken away the Prospect, Prince Maurice, from the Tops of
the Hills, which he had possessed for his Advantage in the Battle, spyed the
Enemy drawing nearer, and in this manner ordered: There were Three Battles,
according to Custom, of which the Middleward being double filled the whole
breadth of the Shore, wherein were four great Bodies of Pikes; to each of which
were added as Wings both greater and lesser Shot, which we call Musketeers and
Bow-men: They of Die, under many Captains, having but one Standard, made the
first Battle, wherein Mendosa was present: The Right Wing of the second Battle,
which consisted all of Spaniards, was commanded by Monteregio and Villars; The
Left, made up partly of Italians, was ordered by Sapena and Avilos: Between
these Two Bodies, was a select Number of Horse, which were the Arch-Duke's
Lifeguard, appointed to stand: In the last place were the Netherlanders led by
Barlotte and Bucquoy, with Auxiliaries out of Ireland, whose Captain was
Bastuck. The General of the Horse, by reason of Landriano's infirmity, was
Peter Galen; only they of Diesl had their own Offiches, whose power was no
more over them than at pleasure: And as they differed in Language, or their
Arms, being either Lances, Guns, and Breast-Plates, so were they drawn our and
disposed into Troops. The Day decaying, as the Battles grew nearer each to
other, the wiser Spaniards thought fit to take Advice, Whether they should
engage in a general Battle and try the doubtful Chance of War: For they did not
find (as was believed) the Enemy hastening his slight into the Ships, or running
away, but standing with Resolution, to sell their Lives, and revenge their
Deaths.

Thus the Battles being prepared, and all the Soldiers on both sides,
encouraged to fight; That whoever was the Conqueror, could not but expect
great effusion of blood: They were to take care, that they did not drive him to
hope, who being unawares fallen into so great Dangers, was brought to such a
condition, that he could not fear or decline fighting: That they had better
besiege him, since all the Country was theirs, and the Enemy had no place of
Retreat: In the mean while, the Soldiers should rest themselves, being wearyed
with long Journeys, and one only Fight. But there were others of Opinion, That
they should make it their first care and business, to recover the Fort
Albertus, before spoken of. And besides, the Minds of the Soldiers were so
elate I with the success of the former Battle, that they believed they were
come thither rather to take Prey, than to fight; that old saying of the
Spaniards being frequent in the Mouths of most, The more are the Moors, the
more glorious the Victory: Nay, it was almost come to that, That they would not
go off without Battle, though the Enemy seemed to decline the same. And many of
the Commanders thought that Alacrity of the Army, and vehemence of their Minds,
was to be encouraged; wherefore, laying aside all further delay, which was
looked upon rather as specious, than advantageous, They thought fit, by
Exhortations, to raise the Soldiers Courage already inflamed, That they would
perfect the Victory already begun, increase the Spoils already gotten, and not
only slay the main Body, but the very Remains of that Army, begun to be
Conquered by them: That they themselves were men practiced in Fights, those
ignorant, and Rebels to God and their Prince till this time, having received so
great presumption as to pitch their Colors against Us, on purpose only to be
destroyed, and are at this time ready to fight, because they can find no means
ready to fly: Here are no Ditches to pass, no Rampires to scale, nor any
Defenses for Sloth or Cowardice; but as Outcasts they come out of their lurking
places, having nothing but Arms, and those depraved and made of no force by the
guilt of their Consciences: That it now lay in their (viz. the Spanish Armies)
hands, to make their Prince as great as they would have him, for this one day
would fully restore his Dominion to him, if they would strive for the Victory;
nor should there be any further occasion of War, for this would be the first
and last Battle: It Is true indeed at Turnholt, they killed some of the Spanish
Army; but, what were they? such as chose rather to run away, than to meet the
Enemy; neither, at that place, was there either a Battle, or an Army, or a
Prince; whereas, at this time, he, for them they fought, should be a Witness of
their Valor, whose great Victories at Calais, Hulst, and Amiens, they should
call to Mind, and each of them take Example from his Valor, Constancy, and
Industry.

These were the general Exhortations used by the Nobles to all; but to the
Spaniards they were more particular, repeating to them many famous Acts, both
of ancient and later Times; inciting them, by the Honor of their Ancestors,
who were not content with European Victories, but proceeded in their Conquests
to unknown Worlds, and made another part of Nature by their Arms, whereby their
Empire might become immense and boundless, by their Duty to their King, whom
they should believe present in person with all his Soldiers, to attest their
Deeds, and desire them not to relinquish his Sister, nor his Kinsman poor and
contemptible; but that they should go on cheerful, and filled with hopes; that
it might be made manifest, that there wanted not Courage, but Enemies, which
had caused the protracting of so long a War, against one single Province. Some
also there were that Vowed, That they would not spare one Enemy his Life,
besides Prince Maurice and his Brother, whom they thought worthy only to be
kept for a Triumph.

No less did Prince Maurices Commanders, with various speeches, as seemed to
each most convenient to encourage their men. To the English, was set forth the
common danger, and their constant alliance both in Arms and Religion; the
French were provoked by their natural hatred of the Spaniards, and the fresh
memory of the troubles wherewith their Country had by those been embroyled: to
the Switzers and Germans, the name and honor of their Nations, was a
sufficient incentive, that they would transmit to their Posterity, the same
Nobility for Valor and Virtue, which they received from their Ancestors, and
to remember, that in defending the liberty of others, they strengthened and
maintained their own; Here the Soldiers of Fort Andrew, were admonished to
give an experiment of their fidelity, there they stirred them up, by the
injurious Language of the Spaniards calling them Renegadoes, and affirming them
unworthy of any benefit from the Law of Arms: The Prince himself did not
refrain speaking to his Brother, (for he would always be inseparably with Him,
and at this time, could not be wrought upon by any Entreaties to retire to the
Ships) to whom he said, For you truly Brother, I grieve and pity, since the
event of War is uncertain, and this thy Age ought not to be more safe for its
own sake, than for thy Countries: I know not by what fate, you are engaged with
me in this danger, where the Commonwealth, which we equally defend with our
Arms, is at once endangered to be deprived of all her hope: But since it is
come to that, that there is no place for us to fly, if we be vanquished, and
that we see the Eyes of all those bent upon us, as expecting from our actions,
some remarkable evidence of Honor and Virtue. Let us go on to the Battle with
such a Courage, as may give us hope of Victory, but not to fear death in the
attaining thereof; This will become you and me, and all that belong to the
Noble Family of Nassau. A proof whereof, you see, is now required from your
self. Surely I rejoice, and so will your Country, to see the Courage and
Resolution, which makes you rather to cast your self upon your Fortune and
Valor, then the safe retirement of the Fleet: Here he ended, and then riding
up and down to all that were near him, and calling them by the sweet and
blandient Title of Sons, he beseeched God to be present, to take a just revenge
upon those who had by perjuries, so often contemned his Majesty. The Author of
the War, having with him the same Enemies, which destroyed the same Cause,
Religion, Laws and Faith, which they pretend to maintain; That, whatever the
Enemies Forces had, either of Valor or Discipline, they had it from him; for
they were generally without order, without experience in War, and no less hated
by their Friends, than their Enemies: at variance among themselves, mutually
suspecting each other, lest either of them should gain by the Conquest of
another. Nor are they at this time, brought ready to fight by any thing more
than an over-heady rashness, which being once spent, and repressed, continually
languisheth, till at last, it becomes nothing: Have we not found the very
people, in the ambiguity of Affairs, wavering, in adversity fearful, and in
prosperity neither to be kept in awe by Law or Justice. Wherefore now, let us
revenge our selves, if not for revenge sake, yet because there is a necessity
that exacts it; On this hand is the Ocean, whose Waves are merciless, and will
spare none: On the other, stands the Enemy, breathing forth cruelty and
perfidiousness; and therefore you must either overcome that Foe, or resolve to
perish: Lastly, coming to the Frizons and Hollanders, he exhorted them to
remember the Commonwealth, which had been built and cemented with the blood of
their Fathers and Kindred, and of late increased by so many great Victories: And
as the proud domineering of the Spaniards was obvious to their Eyes; how much
more intolerable would the slavery be to them, when conquered, than of old,
when they were yet unbridled. The Contest was not at this time for their own;
or their Ancestors glory (though there may be a Reason why valiant men should
set a light esteem thereon) but for safety; nay what was to be preferred before
safety or liberty; for now they fought for their Wives, their Parents, their
Children, their Country, their All; For at this time, were all these to be
vindicated Having thus spoken to the Soldiers on every part, he immediately
prepared to begin the Battle; and to that purpose, commanded two of his six
Cannon to be carried and planted upon a hilly Ground, which the Seamen, a
People used to labor, presently with great force applying themselves to,
brought to pass, notwithstanding their great weight, the troublesomness of the
Sea, and steepness Of the Cliff, lay for a platform under them Hurdles and
Planks: No less have, did the Enemy make to bring his Cannon which were eight
in number, and to plant them upon the shore: which done, at the Thunder of
their discharge on both sides, the Waves of the Sea danced, and the
Neighbour-shore trembled with the horror of the noise; The Bullets, which
could fall in no empty place, glutted themselves with a plentiful slaughter;
yet Prince Maurices Men suffered the least loss for the Enemies Artillery stood
upon plain ground, and had little benefit by their Carriages: The Holland Fleet
also offended the Enemy with their shot from the Sea, which when he perceived,
the shore now growing narrower, because the Tide of Flood came in, he drew his
Battle more inwards toward the Downs; all the whole Coast and Fields, are full
of little Sandhills, for a long space of Ground, which make the place uneven;
to which part, the heat of the Fight was transferred, which for a great while,
continued bloody and dubious, as either the advantage, or disadvantage of the
place, helped or hindered; but afterward* the Captains on both sides opened
their Battles as much as the ground would give leave: the Valleys and tops of
the Hills, were possessed by the Infantery, in the plainer part of the ground,
being somewhat more distant, was the Cavallery ranged: But Albertus that he
might extend his Forces, the middle Battle being commanded to march forward,
what before was the Vanguard, became now the Right Wing, and the Rere-ward the
left-Wing; For putting his greatest confidence chiefly in the Spaniards, and
next them the Italians, hoped the Enemy would not be able to sustain the Force
of that double Band; But the Prince opposed against the Enemy toward the Sea,
Sir Frances V^res men, and next to the Fields, the French, the rest he placed
behind as Reserves: And now the Enemy sent out from both Bands some small shot,
which as soon as it was perceived, four Companies of French were drawn forth,
three of which were to fall on the Enemies left Wing; for General Vere with
some Select men of his own, was set forward against the Right; protesting to
the Prince, either by life or death, to merit thanks that day: Nor was he
deceived; for he fighting among the thickest, and having beaten back the
Musketeers, and assayling a great stand of Pikes, he received two wounds, had
his. Horse killed under him, and was mounted on another; and upon the Arrival
of his Brother, Sir Horace Vere with fresh Forces, magnanimously brought his
men safe off. At this time, the Enemies Horse (which had been placed as Wings
for strengthening the Foot) violently falling into the Flank of the Statesmen,
made a great slaughter: whereby it happened, that the Spaniards Courages were
increased, and the Nassavians began to faint; upon which sight, the Enemy
falling on more violently, suddenly a Panick fear and flight, surprised all on
that part of the Army, with so inconsiderate trepidation, that many of them for
fear of the Enemies Sword, ran into the Sea, and there met a shameful and
certain death; But the constancy of the rest, and the Prince himself, who was
careful of all things, quickly restored that want of Courage. The French came
in opportunely, to supply those that were in distress; and for the better doing
thereof, were divided into two Bands, by the care of the Count Solmes, and the
Captains Ommerville and Saul. And these falling on at first at the push of
Pike, had good success by the help of the Musketeers, who standing in the
higher places, powered their Bullets uncessantly upon the Enemies Pikes standing
below, which wounded and galled them infinitely. And when an entire Body of
Netherlanders and Irish Soldiers advanced against them, Count Solmes commanded
the Switzers, and Soldiers of Fort-Andrew, to give on upon them, which they
did with great Courage, and while they were in the heat of Fight, he sent both
the Batavian Regiments, to wit, one of Utrecht, the other of Holland, to their
assistance, and last of all, the Germane Soldiers put themselves into the
Fight. For Prince Maurice thought it convenient to assault the Enemy with shot,
and to renew the Fight in as many places as they could, so as they that were
tired in the Fight, might have time and place to retreat, and fresh men still
come to supply their places, and this very thing broke the Enemies strength,
and made the other not to be Conquered; for there was room reserved for
recruiting the Forces in Fight, so that the Enemy still encountered with fresh
men, as often as he offered, unwarily to pursue any that fled; But among the
Hills, there was one continued Fight, especially where they grew less; and also
beyond, by intervals, the Fight was renewed: When the Foot met at first, Lewis
of Nassaw, with six Troops, which were followed by three others, fell in, and
routed the Enemies Horse: At which time, one Gentleman, who Commanded the
Princes Guards, persuing those that were routed, had passed all the Enemies
Forces; And three other Horse Commanders, led their Troops against the
Spaniards: Nor did Count Lewis, who was diligent to lay hold upon all occasions
to get advantage, neglect to take six Troops of Cuirassiers, and with them, to
charge the Enemy afresh.

In many Conflicts this day, did that great Commander show his Valor, until
the Spanish Horse Rallying, and com^g in on all sides, had almost enclosed him,
being followed at that time, by not above ten men of all his Company, but the
constancy of his own Resolution, and the Captain of a Troop (named Cloet) came
in season, and saved him from that imminent danger. In the mean time, they who
had formerly gone out of the Battle, to be refreshed and comforted, came in
again, and began the Fight anew, whose both appearance and Fortune, (the Battle
being in many places) was various and different. Sir Horace Vere in the Plain,
at the end of the Hills, with six Companies fighting the Spaniards, and others
in other places, as every one found, or could get an advantage; so that it
seemed, as if the Fight had been every where scattered, and as fresh Forces, or
a new Enemy, met on either side; so did the Victory as yet continue uncertain,
now inclining to one party, anon to the other.

But among the Horse, the quarrel was sooner decided, it easily appearing, that
the Mauritians would be Victors, even from the Courage of the Commanders, for
the Enemies best Soldiers were absent, as Contrera in Spain, Landriano by
reason of sickness; And now the Spanish Lancters, turning head, sled to
Newport, the Nassavians pursuing them in the Rear: yet for all this, the Foot
kept their ground, and fought successfully enough, even among the little Hills,
from whose tops they beat the Princes Men, coming even to their Cannon, which
were placed upon a little Hill not far off, as is before related: Three hours
did the Battle continue with equal Courage on both sides, during all which
time, there was nothing seen but death, represented in the most hideous shapes
of horror, great effusion of blood, and both near at hand, and far off,
nothing but terrible spectacles of horror and dying: And then at length, the
fury began to abate; and because at the beginning of the Fight, most of the
Soldiery was fighting, through extremity of labors their Bodies began to grow
faint, only the PRINCE infused Courage into his men, from the hopes of Victory.

Here he busied himself in rallying such as were out of order there, as often
as any Enemy appeared to be made ready, fresh Bands to encounter him; and in
another place, he was not wanting to incite all, undantedly to go through the
residue of the fight. At last, toward evening, he resolved to conclude the
Battle with the Horse, in that part of his Army being irresistible: to this
purpose, he sent two Troops, to stand upon the Seashore, near the great Guns;
one of these belonging to Sir Frances Vere, the other to Captain Bale: These he
directed to charge the Enemy, nor did his hopes fa^l him, because from hence,
according as he fore-judged, began the first appearance of Victory; for the
Enemy willing and earnestly desiring to put an end to the Fight, came directly
against them. But the great Guns thundered upon them with that fury, that they
were forced to retreat, with a great slaughter both of Horses and Men; yet
fetching a compass about the next Hills, and running further, returned to the
Seashore, until the Mauritians attending the Artillery with great fury again,
powered shot upon them as they advanced. By which means, the Enemies Horse being
utterly beaten off, presently the Foot-Regiments were set upon, and rou^ed, and
their Colonels Sapena and Villars, taken alive.

On the other side, the unwearied Valor and Virtue of the Prince, his present
Counsel; yea and his very countenance, made his Soldiers Conquerours, while he
would not suffer them to be overcome: which when the Spaniards saw, who fought
in the middle Battle, although they were yet equal, or rather more strong than
the other, being terrified with the fortune of heir friends, stood very
tremblingly: nor were they wearied out only with the common troubles of a
Fight; but by the provident care of Prince Maurice, had more than they could
bear. Their eagerness of spirit; by the abating of Courage, being wholly eaten
up by fear. For the Sun which was opposite to their faces, was made use of to
blind them; so was the Wind, which was higher than ordinary in Summer, to drive
into their faces, the smoke and the Sand: it is true, they endeavored to have
gotten that benefit of the Heavens to themselves; but Prince Maurice being
every where ready to prevent them, hindered their design, and by this means
also, their Guns were useless to them.

The Mauritians during the time of the Battle, had so bestirred themselves, and
lost so little time, that each of them had made thirty shots; and they which
were at the Planked battery, did as much harm as those that were upon the firm
ground: The Enemy had not the same advantage, and their Cannon being neither
raised nor well planted, by their own weight and force were fixed, until at
last the Sands giving way, they were removed. Besides Counsel and Policy,
Fortune also assisted the Nassavians, the Enemies Powder being blown up,
wherewith they should have charged their Guns: And Victory being cried out,
though before the time, yet was a good Omen to foretell a true one.

The Archduke Albertus, while any hope remained, riding through the whole
Army, was reported to advance with those of Die, against the Enemy, with his
Face uncovered, that so his example might be the more famed; in which action,
it is said, that his Ear was struck by the top of a Germane Soldiers Lance:
There was one who had laid hold of his Horse Bridle; but was immediately killed
by the diligent fidelity of those that guarded his Person. At length, doubting
the Fortune of the Field, he departed out of the Battle: It is believed he
might have been taken, if the Soldiers at Ostend had sallyed out upon them as
they fled; or they which were sent to Leffingen-Bridge, had durst to have
remained there; but part of them being such as escaped the mornings slaughter,
being mindful of what was past, and dreading what might happen in the future,
were timorous; but the Horse, whereupon the Archduke rid, being eminent for
his Color, (but changed, for that he was tired) became afterward a Prey.

The General being fled, they which till now had fought with equal Valor,
betook themselves to their Heels, yielding their Backs to be harryed by their
Persuers, till by little and little all had left the Field, but Four Thousand
Germans, who keeping their Orders, fairly Retreated with Honor: Nor did the
Victors delay to follow their flying Enemies, as they were scattered over the
Marishy and unpassable parts of the Country.

But the Prince, after Thanks given to God, the greatest part of the Day being
spent, he withdrew some choice Regiments and Troops from the Battle, to be a
Safeguard and Reserve against any sudden Chances of War; which done, in the
very place of the Fight, with the chief of the Captive Lords, he took his
Supper and Repose that Night, as the sole Support of the Victory.

All round about were scattered Arms, and dismembered Limbs, both the Hills and
Valleys were covered with blood, and the place a Receptacle of Dead Bodies:
Some found fault, that while the Victory was yet warm, they did not presently
prosecute the Relics of the Enemy. But the Slaughter before received, the
Soldiers being pinched with want, after so long a ^igh, and a great many of
them wounded, the Multitude of Prisoners, the Darkness of the present Night,
the uncertainty of the Ways through Ditches and Boggs, and the Forts and
Castles lying in the Way, deterred that Resolution. However, there was great
Honor gotten thereby; nor shall you easily find a famouser Action of many
years past. Some curious in Antiquity did observe, that almost Three Ages
before, Albertus of Austria met Adelphus of Nassaw, and took from him both his
Life and Government; and now the same day, being the 2d of August, the Face of
the same Families is changed.

There were slain in the very Battle near 3000 of the Enemies, the greatest
slaughter falling upon them of Die, and where they fled, all the Ways,
Fields, and Marshes, were strowed with their dead Bodies. There were almost
1000 killed in the Victorious Army, besides those lost with Ernestus; the
greatest part of the English, whose Valor was most active, with 8 of their
Captains, were slain in the Fight; the rest, all but two, were wounded: All the
Artillery, and above one hundred Colors were taken, many Prisoners, of whom
several were Noblemen.

Mendosa himself, while yet the Battle was uncertain, when he was beaten from
his Horse, and led aside as a Prisoner, Prince Maurice took great care for him,
in commiseration of the common Fortune, and remembrance of Affinity; for Henry
of Nassaw, being of Old very powerful in Spain, married a Wife out of that
Family. Sapena dyed of his Wounds, but giving infinite Applauses to Prince
Maurice's Providence. The Noble Young Men, that belonged to the Arch-Duke's
House, were presently, and without Ransom, set at Liberty: But the Legates of
the States, who were enclosed in Ostend, never passed any day with so much Care
and Solicitude; for they which came out of the Forts, delivered to Albertus,
as also, they that fled from the slaughter in the Morning, brought with them
into that Town very great Terror: And after, when both Armies were in sight
fighting, as Fortune inclined, either this way, or that way; so to them it
seemed that the Commonwealth reeled: Now falling to their Prayers, anon to the
consideration of the Fortune of War; and, as any one had been the Mover of more
venturous Counsels, so he seemed to be chiefly concerned in the danger: But
after the Event had freed them from their fear, and that early the next day,
the Prince bimself came with his Prisoners, and all other Ensigns of Victory,
then might you have seen the Joy of their Countenances, and superabundant and
festivous Gratulations. They had seen him often Victorious, often deserving the
highest Applauses; but more especially, famous was the Action of this Day,
wherein the safety of so many men, and in them of their Country, and the
Honors of so great a Triumph, they acknowledged only to be received from the
Goodness of Almighty God. But the Courtiers, who are a crafty sort of Men in
sowing Discord, chiefly from this very time began, as envying the Great Men's.
Authority, to object the Prince's Anger, and some Speeches of the Vulgar; as if
they, being valiant enough among safe Counsels, had, for their own sakes, only
engaged so many Armed Men, and the Prince himself in so great Dangers.

The three first days, after the Fight, were spent in deliberating concerning
Things of greatest moment on both Sides, while the Prince advises part of his
men to go and receive Oldenburg, that so a Passage might be opened into the
very Heart of Flanders, and other parts, to return to the Siege of Newport. Now
began the Weather to grow Turbulent, both with great Winds and Rain, which
caused a procrastinating Delay in the Transacting of many Affairs; besides, the
Soldiers began to be refractory to Command, either grown timorous, by the
Review of the great Dangers they had lately passed through, or else emboldened
by Victory; for they quarreled, and sometimes fought about the Prisoners, whom
some, out of Respect to the Law of Arms, or that they might not lose their
Ransom, endeavored to preserve: Others, especially the Scots, offended for
the loss of their Companions, or pretending the like Wickedness from the Enemy
in some Cases, without any Respect to their Officers commanding the contrary,
openly slew them. But, in the interim, Albertus having recollected his Courage
to bear his Loss, re-inforcing with strong Garrison's Oldenburg, and other
Forts thereabouts; and, not far off, at Bruges* prepared to raise a new Army,
out of those that survived the Fight, or could be sent for from all parts of
the Borders. Some also fled to Newport, whither afterward Prince Maurice came,
but could not perfect his Siege, by reason of the unseasonableness of the
Weather. At which time, first five hundred, then two thousand men, conducted by
Barlotte, got into the Town; by which means, they were so well able to defend
their Walls, that they could make frequent Sallies, and many times successfully
enough. Which Prince Maurice perceiving, the Twelfth Day after he came thither,
he led away his Army, and, with like difficulty, attempted to besiege one of
the Forts about Ostend, situate among the Meadows, and called by the Name of
Isabella. Hither also Claudius Barlotte came, and did his best and last
Endeavor, being there slain with a Bullet, He was a Man of a noble Courage, a
Lorrainer by Birth, and skilled in the Art of Chyrurgery, by which he got his
Living; but afterward, by some unworthy Act, reconciled to Count Mansfeldt,
whose Wife he was said to have attempted: But arising to Honor, he so behaved
himself, that he was esteemed worthy of greater Honor every Day; by which
means, his Death was much lamented by his General, and as much rejoiced at by
those who envyed his new and upstart Rising.

Prince Maurice being out of all hope of making War in Flanders, by reason of
the difficulty of the places, and the recruited strength of the Enemy, at
length hoysted Sail to Ostend, carrying no other benefit with him of his
hard-gained Victory, besides the Glory thereof: Before his departure, he
commanded Fort Albertus to be demolished, but the Enemy quickly repaired it.
And as the Fleet went away, the Weather, by chance, being Calm, Spinola's Ships
ventured to set upon some straglers thereof, as they lagged behind: But the
Winds on a sudden rising, they could scarce get safe away with all their Oars,
the Fleet pursuing them, until they were hindered by the Shallows: Some Attempts
of Count Lewis of Nassaw into Brabant, about this time, came to nothing: The
rest of the Year, being almost the half thereof, was spent in quiet, as if
equally divided between these two great Enemies; the one, contenting himself in
the happy Event of his successful Battle; the other, in the deserved Honor of
saving Flanders from Ruin.

While Flanders was thus involved in War, an Assembly of the States was
summoned at Bruxels, according to the old Custom, but of late omitted; being
persuaded hereto, because they understood the Disposition of the Netherlanders;
and he was advised also, to put on a moderate Carriage, and to use persuasive
Language; and, under pretense of asking Counsel, to require Money. [ He said,
he was very much grieved for the Evils, wherewith the People were oppressed,
nor would he augment them by Dissimulation; And if any Remedy for the same
could be obtained by Peace, he would be ready to further the same: But if the
Enemies Obstinacy gainsaid a Settlement, yet they should not despair, for that
their Cause was better: For their Benefit, the Spanish Wealth was consumed,
from whence had been drained, for many Months, to maintain their War, Two
Hundred and Fifty Thousand Scutes Monthly: But that Discipline might be
restored, the Soldiers employed without injurious Actions, it was just, that
the Netherlanders themselves should give their Assistance, that Pay might be
raised for the Soldiers, and for discharge and maintenance of the Garrisons.
And when the Revenues of the Prince's Patrimony was in the French Troubles laid
to Pledge, they ought now to be given to him and his Princely Spouse, for the
better Support of their Grandeur and Government.] While the rest of the Things
were in Debate, the business of Money was laid aside; by which means, Mutinies
and Seditions began every day more and more to spread; so that a new Design was
laid between the Remains of those of Die that escaped from the late Battle,
and the Soldiers of Hamante.

But the Netherlandish States, by this occasion, interesting Themselves more
nearly in the Commonwealths Affairs, fell to Inquiry, What was the Advantage
they received from the Spanish Aids, and what was fit to supply the Garrisons,
and maintain the War both at Sea and Land: But the main Thing they insisted
upon was Peace. But the Hollanders suspected many Things, and not without
Reason; as, That all the Castles in the Netherlands, and the chief Offices,
were in the Hands of Foreiners, contrary to the Laws; and that which is set
down in those very Instruments made of late, by which the Netherlands were
transferced to the Archdukes: For there was a Necessity imposed upon Religion,
the Indies shut up from them, and the Princes themselves obliged to the King of
Spain as Pensioners and Clients; which things they found fault with, partly as
grievous, partly as mischievous: But if King Philip would take away these
things, and, by the Princes leave, it might be lawful for them to make a League
with the Hollanders, that so there may the greater Credit be given to their
Covenants, they hoped, in short time, to reunite all the Provinces under one
Government.

The Archduke consented, that Deputies should be sent, in the Name of the
several States under his Command, to the United States, to try their
Intentions: And to this purpose came Gerard Horn, Count Bassigny, Philip
Bentingen, and Henry Code, a Burgo-Master of Ipre, to Berghen op-Z^me, after
Newport Fight, at the same time when the United States Deputies went out of
Flanders and were arrived there; They desired that a Meeting might be appointed
in that place, that so they might Treat of the Means conducing to Concord: Many
Things were spoken on both Sides, in derestation of War, and in commendation of
Peace, and for the general safety of the Netherlands. On the behalf of the
United States it was urged, That nothing could be more acceptable to them than
to purge the Netherlands from Foreign Slavery; for doing whereof, they promised
their best Assistance; And if they would resume their Ancient Liberty, there
should be no difference between them in point of Religion; but if they did not
think, fit of this Proposition, they could not imagine what success they could
hope from this Treaty; for what Peace could they expect from the Spaniards, who
broke Peace with them that had no thoughts of War? But the Archdukes are bound
to the Spaniard by Conditions dishonorable to the repute and fame of the
Netherlands. And the Brabanters, Flandrians, and other States are in like
manner obliged to them; of what validity therefore will any Agreement be that
is made with them, who live under Lords, commanded by Castles, and kept in awe
by Soldiers, so that they are not Masters of themselves. The Archdukes people
answered, That they came to Treat of Peace, not to make a defection, nor would
it be just that themselves should lay aside their Arms, while others keep
armed; but whatever was agreed between the States, the Princes would ratify.

These things being heard and spoken by the Archdukes people, and imagining
that they must utterly throw away all hopes of Peace with the Hollander so late
a Conqueror, fall to examine, the Charge of the War, and after a long debate
what every Province should pay, because the old form appointed in the French
Wars, by reason the Forces of the Provinces were altered, and Arms inferred on
other places, could not be observed; at last they agreed to lay certain Taxes
upon all Chimneyes and other things, and thereupon promised, thirty thousand
Florens Monthly for the next year, but it continued for the future. That every
of the Garrisons should pay their own Soldiers, and that no Citizen should be
compelled after that to give any Soldier a gratuity: That part of the Forces
should be commanded, and part of the places governed by Netherlanders, and that
the Treasury should be ordered by the States; part of which the Archduke denied
absolutely, other part he never performed, though he gave hopes thereof by
promise. Many also were much offended at certain Letters brought by Henrico
Gusman out of Spain, wherein the King called these States, His. The same
endeavored to make an inquiry in the Merchants Accounts, if there had been any
dealing with the Hollanders, (for this is usual in Spain) or if any money could
be spared from the India Companies, but by the denial of Antwerp, this project
came to nothing. The Dunkerkers raged no less against the Hollanders at Sea.
And Albertus himself commanded, That the Hollanders should be debarred as well
of their Fishing Trade, as their Traffic and Merchandising otherwise, on
purpose to drive them to penury, and consequently to sedition. And the
Dunkerkers being exasperated with the punishment of many of their accomplices,
added their own malicious fury to this command of the Archduke. And therefore
they punished this simple sort of men (for such generally is the Religion of
Fishermen, that they think it very unjust to repel force by force), sometimes
by burning, other times boring ho^^s in the bottoms of their boats, now by
driving nails through several parts of the men's bodies, and so putting them to
a long torment under both the sense and fear of death, and otherwise infested
the Sea with such cruelty, that sometimes the Ships of War that were to guard
the Fishermen, were assailed and taken. But when the Hollanders brought out
against them a considerable strength, diverse of these Pirates were taken, and
expiated their inhumane Villainies with their heads, and the rest were glad to
retire into their old dens and lurking holes. Their Chieftain himself, named
Wakeney, with some Ships escaped his pursuing Enemy through the Narrow Seas by
Bulloin, and got to Biscay in Spain, and afterward having committed several
Pyracies upon the Coast of Bretaign in France, at length hated by the
Spaniards, and the greatest part of his Seamen consumed with want, himself dyed
miserably. Against Spinola's Galleyes, that they might be able to fight them in
any weather, at Dort was built a great Ship (such as the Hollanders had none
before) and was furnished both with Men and Guns: the first men put into it
were hired with wages, afterward Malefactors were condemned to row therein,
because Christian piety would not suffer such as were Prisoners of War to be
put to that slavery. And the device very happily succeeded, for that alone
being put to Sea, made many of the Enemies fly, carrying only with it a smaller
boat. And in a short time, so great was their confidence, that adding only a
few Cockboats, and choosing a peculiar night, the Holland Galleyes silently
rowed up the Schelde, between the Forts of Brabant and Flanders, whence passing
to the very walls of Antwerp, at first unawares they took a ship with three
tire of Guns, and seven lesser Vessels, and afterward by force and slaughter
of the Defendants, carried them away. The City raised with the outery, and
running to the Walls, looked upon their own loss, and to their high disgrace,
suffered it to be carried away unrevenged, for the Conquerors went away safe,
and laden with spoil, after they had founded a well known tune in praise of
William Prince of Aurange, not without some affection of the Citizens,
remembering former occurrences.

Toward the end of this year, the Hollanders were filled with the hopes of a
French War to be made by King Henry against the Duke of Savoy, who being allied
to the Spaniard, as having Children by his Sister to whom he was married, was
believed would undertake nothing without his knowledge. The cause of the quarrel
was the Marquisate of Saluzza, which the Savoyard had taken from France while
it languished under intestine troubles. And the Pope, who by the Peace of
Verbin was appointed Arbiter in these and like cases, undertook the hearing of
the business, but delayed his Judgment, until the Savoyard at the instance of
the French King came personally to Paris, and having underhand bribed the chief
Ministers of State, appeased him also with fair promises and obsequiousness;
but the nonperformance at the day appointed, made Henry proclaim War, and by
force to assault several Cities and Castles of Savoy. In the mean time Fontaine
(who had sometime ruled in the Netherlands, and then governed Millain)
gathering very great Forces, wherewith all the people round about suspected the
Spaniard would make War in Italy, because also from hence sometimes designs
were laid against several Venetian Castles, otherwhile new plots were
discovered upon some Cities of Low Germany. But a sudden peace put a stop to
all the Alpine troubles, it being agreed. That for the Marquisate of Saluzza,
the County of Breseia in the borders of Lions, in which is, the bridge of Roan,
should he delivered to the French, adding an exception, That it should be
lawful to the Spaniard to lead over the said Bridge his Forces, either into the
Netherlands, or Burgundy.

And now King Henry, that after Peace abroad, and dissentions in Religion
settled at home, and ordered by good Laws, he might establish his Kingdom in a
right Heir, desires that the Pope would suffer him to be Divorced from Margaret
Valois, long since disaffected by him, having been of no good fame; and besides
that, for many years barren: which was soon granted, and he Married to Mary the
daughter of Francis late Prince of Etruria, a Lady of excellent disposition,
and which by her more mild temper should purge out of France all envy against
the Name of Melices. And the same Prince confirmed a League of Amity with
England by new Conditions, wherein was concluded, That the boldnese of Pirates
should be restrained by severe Judgments and Pledges.

The Tenth BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
IN this year one thousand six hundred and one, The Armies being recruited and
augmented, did threaten grievous and terrible things; for the great Captains
lay as it were at watch, and fixed in expectancy of the manifestation of each
others counsels. The whole Winter and Spring was spent in Stratagems and
Foraging, before the restrained violence of War burst out with greater Force.
And first of all a Soldier born in Brabant, urged by the persuasions of the
Jesuits and hired with money, that under the pretense of bringing in several
prisoners to Gertruydenbergh, he should open the Town to the Enemy, was
apprehended before his design could take effect. Soon after some Mauritian
Horsemen, suddenly forcing a certain Castle in Limburg, brought thence a great
prey, and many Prisoners. About the some time one Captain Cloet was sent to
take the Castle of Cracow, which is in the Jurisdiction of Meurs, and together,
with the City and Country by gift of the last Earl came to Prince Maurice, but
had been held by gran^ from the Duke of Parma to Salentine Count Isenborg, by
the said Count until that time; the same Cloet took beyond Wachtendone three
hundred Horse, and some Foot: which being understood, one Dulquio Governor of
Straten a Town hard by, marching out by the Archdukes command with above four
hundred Foot, and a few Horse, in the darkness of the night, fell upon the
Enemy ere they were aware of him. And now he had taken about thirty, and killed
some, before the rest awaked with the noise could make themselves ready, but as
he retreated through the narrow passages, Cloet going another way through the
open fields, met him, who being inferior to Cloet in Horse, the Village being
seized, he was forced to surrender. Thus being Conqueror, and hastening about
what he was sent, he found the trench of the Castle full of Ice, and not
broken, as his spies had brought him intelligence, so that easily coming to
the Gate, which he forced open with Gunpowder, he drove out the Garrison.

Albertus hitherto had Covenanted with the Soldiers in Hamont, that leaving
that more inferior fear, they should have the Town and Castle of Waert, from
whence both the Countries of Liege and Gulick were exposed to their plunder,
whereat the neighbors were grievously troubled. But all their frequent
Messages and Complaints were slightly passed over, because it was known of old
to be a kind of gain, under the pretense of sedition to maintain War at the
charge of others. So also were the people of Cleves vexed with the Garrisons of
Berck and Geldre, and the misery of that people who had deserved better, was
increased, in that the Hollander assessed as much money upon them as had been
withdrawn by others, saying, That it mattered not whether by force, or
voluntarily, they increased the Enemies Wealth, since they could not defend
themselves from it. And because they heard of a Fleet preparing in Spain, and
that the Du^k^kers infested the Sea with more then ordinary boldness, a greater
Navy of Ships was sent to Sea, yet for all that some Pirates appeared still, who
in the sight of Scheveling, (which is a Village upon the Seacoast of Holland
near the Hague) they exposed their Captives, and received their Ransom. But
soon after b^ing circumvented by some Fisherboats, wherein some Soldiers were
put, they gave satisfaction for their audacious attempt, by their usual and
deserved punishment. Some old Ships also were sent to Dunkirk Haven, where
being full of stones, they were sunk, on purpose to choke it up: But as often as
the Sea ebbed, the wood being cut away with Axes by the Townsmen, at the flood
by the violent beating of the Waves, the place was again cleared of all. And
some Merchants Ships going into England, were taken and made Prize by Spinola's
Galleys, the Ship of War which was to be their Convoy, after a long fight with
the Enemy, a great number of whom was slain, by some fire thrown into it,
utterly perished. The same also thought to have set upon Flushing, some within
the Town being corrupted to have set fire thereon: but one of the Conspirators
falling by chance sick, and by the terror of approaching death, repenting, and
making confession thereof to his ghostly Father, the whole Plot was detected
and punished.

In the interim, new Mutinies and Seditions arose among Albertus his Men: And
the Antwerpers pacified a Man of War that lay in the Schelde and made a
Mutiny, by giving them part of their pay. And the Walloons, that kept the Forts
about Ostend, raged even to the wounding and killing of their Officers, yet
were largely indulged, because by the Hollanders Promises they were like to be
d^awn off from their Obedience; and being persuaded to go from their Garrison,
they passed to Montz.

After these things, the United States, setting an Asse^sment upon all
Chimneys, and being assisted with Soldiers out of England, and Moneys out of
France, again fell in Debate upon another Expedition into Flanders; but for
that, all the hopes of that Design lay in the speedy execution thereof, and
therefore that it was necessary first to divert the Enemy to some other part,
it was thought sit to make a show of War in the furthermost Borders: To which
purpose, Prince Maurice sending before some Soldiers under pretense of a
Marriage between Count Lewis of Nassau, and Count Broakens Widow, himself came
to Arnheym, and then making no delay, he speeded to Bercke with above a hundred
Companies of Foot, and Thirty Troops of Horse, of which Place Jeronimo Lopez
had the Government by the Arch-Duke's Commission: wherein were of Walloons,
Italians, Germans, and Mariners, almost to the number of Three Thousand Men,
sufficient Provisions, Six and Thirty great Guns, and the Works well augmented,
over what they were, when Mendosa, assisted by the Plague, had taken the Town.
And while Prince Maurice with his wonted Prudence fortified himself against
Force from abroad, Lewis Bernardo Avila, not ignorant otherwise, but grown more
expert by late practice at Bommell, raised a Work without the Trench, and
comprehended therein a place for Pasture to feed Cattle, because Salt was
wanting for the preserving and powdering of Flesh, besides, he spoiled his own
Ships lest the Enemy should get them: But the Prince disposed the Fleet which
he brought, partly in the Rhine as far as Colen, and part of them he kept near
himself, The Island, which lay near the Town in the River, being strengthened
with a mean Fort, yet quitted at the first battery, was strengthened with more
Works, and joined by Bridges to both Banks: Then appointing several Quatters or
Leaguers, in every place where there was any likelihood of passage, pitched his
Camp in three parts, one of which himself was resident in, being situate in
the higher places next the Town: The Charge of the superior Bank he committed
to Count Ernest of Nassau: And the middle Camp to Colonel Gistell: Commanding
in two places Trenches to be made against the prominent Works without the Town,
with strong Guards all about, because the Works were often hindered by Sallyes.
The first of which was of about a Thousand or more Men, by the way that leads
to Cassells, this brunt was sustained and repelled by the French, whose
Commander in Chief, Castilion, a young man, vali^^tly fighting, brought back an
honorable wound. And yet the besieged not terrified herewith, made frequent
Irruptions on the same side, and also in the way toward Santem, not without
some loss, as they unwarily issued out, and presently beaten back to their next
places of refuge.

While these things were doings, News was brought, That Albertus had besieged
Ostend, which drove the States into no small difficulty: for it was
dishonorable to leave the undertaking they had begun; and on the other side to
maintain Works against so strong a Garrison as was within the Town, and to keep
the Pass^ges in all the Marshes and fallacious Fields, could not be done
without great Forces. And besides, General Vere, whom they had appointed to the
Government of Ostende, refused the Burden, unless he might have Twenty English
Companies (which would be a great weakening of the Army) to go along with him,
which was granted, and the Prince expecting Supplies, continued his Design. In
the Interim, the Besieged began to come to an allowance of Victuals, and they
requested Relief both by Messengers and Signs: the Mess^ngers were intercepted;
but some hopes was given them by fires from the Town of Geldre: And it is true,
the Archduke had sent Count Heremberge to raise the Siege, with no small
Forces, and to this purpose were the Carriages of the Neighborhood retained:
But this Resolve was altered, either because the Camp was impenetrable, by the
ingenious art of the G^neral, or else because they would keep the Enemies Army
there, that it might be the longer before they should come to Ostende: When the
Mines were fitted, the Prince showing his Army, and making a Battery as if he
intended a Storm, allured out the besieged, whom the violence of the Gunpowder
buried beneath, threw up into the Air in heaps: and some being ready, entered
the ruins and possessed the place, though the Enemy not long after valiantly
assaulted them. In short, all the rest of the Works being by the like art or
force taken, and part by fear deserted, they presently and directly by means of
Galleries, got beyond the Trench under the very Bull-work of the Town, which
the besieged fearing, and because they wanted Chyrurgions to dress many of
their wounded men, they came to conditions, and that the sooner, that they
might article for the safety and honorable marching away as well of the
Renegado's, whereof many were in the Town, as the rest: This accession was at
first very acceptable to the people of Over-Issell, who presently refused to
pay Tribute, which for fear of plunder they had hitherto done, the very Boors
being commanded to go to Arms and run to their Colors. This Siege was begun in
the middle of June, and finished toward the end of July, when at the same time
Ostend had been begirt by the Enemy Five and Twenty days: But before the
Prince would come from those parts with his whole Army, he reduced Moers, a
Town, as we have said, given to him into his own power, the weak Garrison being
ejected, which the Duke of Cleves had put therein, clayming the said dominion
in Fee, as returning unto him by the death of the right Heir. But he was
accused on the other hand, by Patronizing many Wickednesses, to have violated
the Laws.

Ostend, (whose Siege for many Ages will be famous, and which I shall
Commemorate as a peculiar War) is a chosen Seat for Fishermen, and situate
between Scluys and Newport, but possessing a small tract of Land on the
Seacoast of Flanders; yet begun to be strengthened with a Port and Palizadoes,
so that at the very beginning of the Civil War, it became an habitation for
Pirates, who had filled all places with great fear of them. And afterward when
the States Wealth began to increase, by the Peace made at Gaunt, this Town
joined it self to the League, to which it has constantly adhered ever since:
But soon after, the Duke of Parma having taken Newport and Dunkirk, was
disappointed here of the Terrible Siege he threatened; and afterward Lamot
having gotten into the Town, but beat out again, not only added to their Fame,
but increased their Care of fortifying themselves, which was augmented, for
that Scluys was lost, and nothing more remained on all the Coast of Flanders
besides Ostend.

The Front of the Town looking toward the North, was washed by the open Sea:
On the left hand, which is toward the East, runs the River Iperlede into the
Sea, which makes the Port or Haven, which is such (as the rest of Flanders) not
able to receive any Ships but at the Tide of Flood: Now they have, by great
Labor, cut off the River, yet the Haven remains entire: The East part of the
Town is full of Sand-Hills, and uneven; but of later time made much more even,
least those Neighboring Heighths should advantage the Enemy.

Thus all things being removed, that might hinder or damnifie them, and the
Sea, of its own accord, making a great Estuary of an hundred Foot wide, in the
Plain next to the Walls, whose deepness was daily increased, by the Recess of
the Sands, which, at the coming in of the Tide, was a vast Lake; but, when the
Water was at lowest, it exceeded two Pikes length in deepness, and being
somewhat more Fordable at the very Entrance, and beginning thereof: All the
Ground that lies backward toward the South, being full of Ditches is
ove^flowed by the Sea, which at the Tide of Flood covers the whole Surface of
the Land for a Thousand Paces, and sometimes more: With so great strengths of
Nature, were the Artificial Fortifications helped: Of old, indeed, there were
Formless Heaps; but now, by A^t, were reduced into as much perfection, as the
Nature of the place would bear; which Refinement began, when Albertus,
returning Conqueror from Calais, and Hulst threatened a Siege here, which had
been deferred till this time. That which is called the Old Town, was now
nothing, but a great Abyss of Waters, and empty Ground, looking toward the
Sea; but without the Line of Ostend, they had filled the Seashore with five
convenient Forts: From hence began a Trench compassing the New Town, into which
the Water could be let in or out at pleasure by Sluices: This place was divided
with two Walls, the inner of which had Eight Bulwarks, to which the outer
answered with as many: Where the Stream passed by, there was a more flight
Work; but at the Back thereof a strong Rampire, and, as it were, a Threefold
Line, with a New Trench intervening.

This is the Circuit of the Towns, of about half an hours Journey: Beyond, were
several distinct and separable Forts, and which, if Necessity required, could
be deserted without damage or prejudice to the Town: One compassed about with
Palizadoes, beyond the Estuary, at the end of the right side; and others in the
Fields, close to the backside of the Walls; or else not far divided from them,
by the interposition of some Marshes and Lakes.

The Flandrians growing weary of the Excursions of this Town whereby the whole
Country was wasted; and finding by Experience, that the Charges of Seventeen
Forts, wherewith Ostend was then enclosed, would be without end; that the
Licentiousness of the Soldiers waxed more grievous, and almost equal to the
damage received by the Enemy; and of late a new Mutiny bringing their Fidelity
in question, urged the Archduke, That he would no longer suffer this most
excellent Province of all his Dominion to be made unprofitable by one small
part thereof: Although there wanted not some Disswaders, who, from the strong
Fortifications about the Town, and the Sea being always open to it, said, it
would not be a Siege, but an unprofitable and long abode of the Army in one
place. But Hope overcame all these Difficulties, which also was much advanced
by the Flandrians Promises of large Sums of Money; and the Enemies Residence at
Berck made the occasion seem more fit to be embraced, especially since new
Forces were arrived both from Italy and Spain, under the several Commands of
Colonel Trivultio, and Colonel Braccamonte.

Therefore, the fifth day of July, Frederick Count Heremberg sat down on the
right side of the Town, and soon after Jeronimo Montiregio on the Left, at
first approaching very near; but the Cannon quickly commanded him to a greater
distance.

Charles Not then had Charge of the Town, which was furnished with sufficient
store of Victuals, and other Materials for War, besides One and Twenty
Companies of Soldiers; to whom, upon the first notice of the Siege, was added
another Regiment, sent by Colonel Ucterebrook: And now the Garrison quickly
began to show their Valor, in their first Salley slaying diverse Noblemen,
among whom Montiregio, and above five hundred Common Soldiers. Afterward,
when Sir Francis Vere came into the Town, not singly as Governor, but as
General, with his English Soldiers, whose Number was augmented by new Supplies
lately come out of England, forthwith it was seen, that he took care, with
strong Guards, to secure what ever was of any strength without the Town, and
also to extend his Works further out; one of which, for all that being scarce
finished, the Enemy took, notwithstanding it was defended by 40 men: But from
the back-parts of the Town, the Besiegers being Repulsed, with his greatest
Force came to the left side of the Town: In the places that were overflowed
with Water, he raised a Battery by a new kind of means, the praise whereof is
wholly due to himself, though most of the other late Inventions were found out
by the Devices and ingenuous Contrivances of Prince Maurice and the Hollanders;
and it was this, They bound together Faggots Twenty Foot long, and little less
in compass; wherein likewise were contained Planks and Boards, that they might
the more firmly, by their Weight, prevail against the Waters; they were called
Stuffing: These, by little and little, moved forward, and, by the strength and
weight of Engines, pressed down into the Old Haven, soon took away the use
thereof, that no Ships could come in that way: But out of the Estuary or
Gollet, which we said flowed on another part, by digging a little on the Shore,
a Channel was made, which presently emptied it self within the very Works, and
afterward became a better and more safe Haven.

This way there came in and out oftentime a hundred Vessels, to carry out
wounded men, and to bring in Guns, Wood, Victuals, and whatever else was
wanting, either to prevent the Injuries of the Weather, or the fear of
Diseases: Nor could the Enemies, though from the higher Ground, prevail any
thing against it, their Shot being aimed thither at such distance as made them
uncertain; insomuch, that because of its freeness from danger, a great number
of persons came thither only out of a desire to see it, to wit; Of Foreign
Noblemen, the Duke of Holsatia, Brother to the King of Denmark; and, out of
England, the Earl of Northumberland, who viewed, with admiration, the same
place, famous for all the Politic Devices of War: Wherefore, the Enemy finding
the Terror of his Cannon-Bullets to be of no force, left off shooting, and
fell to throwing in Bags of Sands, and great Stones, to choke up the Gollet;
but that Design also proved vain, the violence swiftness of the Waters being
too prevalent.

Now when they saw they had no hope of keeping out all kinds of Relief,
Colonel Catrick, who lay on the West part of the Town, making Approaches and
Batteries with great Violence, assailed and shot at the Work on that side, of
which there were three close together, which were named the Porcupine, Helmont,
and Sand-hill, formerly part of the Old Town, but now a great heap of Sand in
several little Risings; one whereof being more eminent then the rest, had on
the Top thereof two small Forts, one joining to another, besides other Works
round about, that those weak parts of the Town, might, from thence, be the
better defended. To this place were so many great Shot directed by the Enemy,
that it seemed wholly to be made of Iron, yet got they not any benefit thereby
equal to that vast Expense; for whatever was beat down, was easily repaired,
and as soon as they were killed or wounded, fresh men were sent into their
places: Among those killed here by the Enemies Shot, was young Castilion, the
French Colonel, and Nephew to that famous Captain Coligny, from whose Virtue
and Valor be no whit degenerated; General Vere himself was wounded, for the
Care whereof he was forced to go out of the Town into Zeland, from whence, not
long after, he returned safe and in health: Nor were the Besiegers free from
like hazards, for within a few days Catrick and Bracamont, both Colonels, were
killed.

In the Town, that the Bullets and Grenades might be the less feared, the
Ground was every where thrown up into thick Heaps like to Walls; and to hinder
the Enemies assaulting the Rampire toward the Sea was their chief Care,
because by their Approaches, they give cause to fear the same; therefore, the
Bank that was builded for keeping out the Sea, was with some hesitation and
danger thrown down, and the Event proved successful against the Spaniards,
whose Trenches, Huts, and Batteries, made of Osyers, were drowned at a great
distance, when the Winds made the Waters grow boisterous and Raging, so that
the Guards were forced to fly to the high Banks which they had raised
thereabouts, for the bringing their Carriages.

The Sea being thus let in, encompassed Ostend like an Island, which sometimes
was a little offensive to the Town, but with Palizado's, Stones, and other
Ingenuity of that Maritime People, the greatest force of the Waves was turned
upon the Enemy.

Four Months were spent, wherein the Besieged made successful Sallies, and the
Besiegers many fruitless Attempts against the Walls: Some Soldiers also
frequently running from one side to the other, and some prisoners taken filled
both Parties full of vain Rumors: And within that time a Traitor was
discovered, who had promised the Enemy to blow up the Town Magazine of
Gunpowder. The Archduke Albertus himself, and Isabella, were many times
Spectators of the slow progress of their Siege; both Officers and Soldiers, in
the presence of their Princes, showing great Alacrity, some binding together
more of those long Faggots and Planks, which they wrought into the Fashion of
Globes; and rolling these whither they listed, consolidated Moory places, and
added new Works to those before raised; others endeavored to connex and join
together Works and Ways far distant each from other; and some began to dig a
great Ditch, that all things might, with the more ease, be brought to them from
Bruges.

But the United States, having lost their Design of invading Flanders, after
the taking of Berck, weary of such vast Disbursements, and chiefly minding
Ostend, passed over the Summer, and much of Autumn, doing nothing at all: But
when they saw the Siege was like to be protracted, and that they did not so
much fear the Danger of Ostend, as the vast Charges they must needs be at in
Defense of the same, they proposed, either to make the Enemy draw off thence,
or if he would stay there, to fall upon those parts of the Country that were
unguarded.

A long time it was disputed, in what place they might probably get the easiest
Victory, and with the most Advantage to them: At length, Shertogenbosh was
Resolved on, which since its Defection from the League, had never been
attempted by open War: Neither was there, at this time, any greater Garrison,
than two Companies of Foot, and as many Troops of Horse, which were all
Commanded by Anthony Grobbendone, the City being always very sollicitous, that
they might not be ove^ powered by the Soldiery: It Is true, the City were of a
generous Resolution, so were the Magistrates and Clergy, of whom there was no
small Number very zealously affected: These, That their accustomed Religion,
Altars, Images, and beloved Saints, might not be forsaken, or contemtuously
violated. Those, Repeating the Heroical Actions of their Ancestors, whose
Valor had so often driven the Geld^ians from the Limits of Brabant: Adding
thereto, their own present Example: For every Night they set out Lights, and
took Order by Edict, that the Prices of Victuals should in no manner be
inhanced, and that all kind of Deaths should be taken notice of by proper
Marks, set forth at the door of the deceased. They Erected likewise a strong
Redoubt, for the safeguard of the Fuchten Gate.

On this side, Prince Maurice pitched his Tents; on the other, over against
him, the Counts William and Ernest of Nassaw: On both sides the Way, lying
through low Fields, made the Passage very easy, for Pioneers to come to the
Town.

This Convenience, and the Cities being no otherwise Fortifyed, or reinforced,
than ordinarily it was, gave hope of short Work about it; when otherwise, the
Month of November, and approach of Winter, would have been enough to deter
them from beginning such an Enterprise; besides, the number of the Besiegers,
were not sufficient to environ the vast Content of that City, being only 73
Companies of Foot, and about 30 Troops of Horse, Ostend requiring the best part
of the Army.

But they feared not any Sallies from the Enemy, who had enough to do to defend
their own, being not used to such business, and all the Plain round about being
Marshy, was shut up with Forts: They found also a Way to make the next Rivers
and Brooks overflow their Banks, by making Damms therein, the more fully to
drown the adjacent Parts: But this was not so well done, but that the Soldiers
for all that twice broke into the Town: And, at the Request of the Brabanders,
Frederick Count Heremberg, with some Foot, and a strong party of Horse, was
sent thither by Albertus, a Rumor being first spread over all the parts near,
and all things prepared, as if he intended to fortify the Village of Hellmont;
by which means, he sent into the Town at first almost Three Hundred, and soon
after a Thousand Men, the Besiegers knowing nothing of it; and when they came
to the knowledge thereof too late, they only killed a few straglers in the
Rear. Great was the Care and Diligence of the Magistrates and People in the
Town to prevent fire, which they greatly feared from the Red hot Bullets shot
into it; for they strowed the Floors with Sand, took away all Weapons from
strangers, and kept in readiness all things that were fit to quench fire: And
the more to encourage them, the Archduke sent and promised, That what Damage
soever they sustained in their private Estates, should be made good upon the
Public Account. In the interim, Prince Maurice hastened his Approaches, which
being brought to the Trench under the Walls, there wanted only Galleries, and
the last Extremities used toward Cities.

But the Frost cut off his hopes in the bud, being more early and sharp then
was expected; for it had turned the Water in the Fields to Ice, the Rivers were
frozen, so that Provision could not so easily be brought to them, although the
Besiegers way to the Town, proved more facile; but so violent was the cold,
that the Sentinels were not able to endure it: Whereupon, the seven and
twentieth day, the Siege was raised, Prince Maurice grieving, and often
wishing, that the Weather would grow more mild; But Count Herembergs approach
with his Forces, caused him to make the more have; for the Count had taken to
him the Soldiers, which after their departure from Die, we mentioned before,
to be translated to the Town of Wa^rt; as also those that then were at Die.
Nor did the Prince so much fear them in his Camp which was very strongly
fortified, as that they should make an incursion over the frozen Rivers into
Holland, which was then left unguarded, the Carriages, because they had no use
of their Ships, as many as could be, were sent away before to Hesden, and the
residue were set on fire: The Fortifications were all left standing, yielding
an ample Testimony of an Expert General, and an Industrious Soldier.

The rest of Autumn and Winter, was spent in light excursions, The Hollanders
forraging that part beyond the Rhine, which is opposite to Colen, under
pretense of what was due to the late deceased Count Moers, and on the other
sides, some parts of Brabant, under their obedience, being wasted by the
Archdukes Command, because they refused to pay Tribute.

The War yet continued about Ostend, with equal labor and toil, both to the
Besiegers, and Besieged, for the Winterly Sea, now shattered the Works of the
Town, anon those of the Camp; besides, the great moisture both of the Air, and
the Ground, bred infinite Diseases, whereof the English grew weary, as finding
their daily decay, desiring leave of General Vere, to return into their
Country; by these means' the number of Defendants in the Town was so lessened,
that of seven thousand, there scarce remained three, which was not unknown to
the Archduke, who when he saw the Gollet could not be choked up, either by
sinking Ships therein, nor any other great heaps of Wood or Stones, and that
his Work could not be forwarded that way, the Sea and policies of the Enemy
pressing much upon him, he resolved to bring the matter to the decision of true
Valor hand to hand.

And first of all, for a trial of his Forces, he commanded eight hundred chosen
men by night, to assayl the Walls of the Town that lie toward the Seashore,
which they valiantly put in execution, burning up the Palizadoes and consuming
all things of defense toward the Sea for a great space. But the Tide of Flood
in a short time beginning, caused them to depart, leaving behind them not a few
of their own number, which had been either killed or wounded before by the
shot; yet they resolved, having received new Supplies into the Camp at once,
with all their force to storm the Town on both sides, as well that part which
looks backward into the Fields, as that which abuts upon the Sea; as also the
Porcupine and Sandhill, the Principal Forts in that part. Of which, General
Vere having Intelligence by a Prisoner, and fearing the small number of his
men, without any advise of his Officers, but led by his own single Judgment,
very few knowing thereof, made a short Truce with the Enemy, and seeming, as if
he intended a Surrender, both received, and gave Pledges. But the Soldiers,
especially they of Rossem, mutinying thereat, as fearing they should be
betrayed to an implacable Enemy. Vere was forced to send back the Archdukes
Pledges, and to declare the Reasons of his actions to his Officers, which was
this, That under pretense of a Treaty, he might spin out that time of danger,
until his expected Relief came; which being understood, it seemed good to all,
That for the safety of those Gentlemen, which were then Hostages with the
Enemy, they should draw some eminent Persons among the Enemy into the Town,
with whom they would Treat very slowly, upon some unusual and unlikely Terms;
among which, this was one, That the Archduke should pay a great sum of Money
to the Soldiers, upon their marching out of the Town.

In this interim, a prosperous Gale brought out of Zeland, five Companies of
Men into the Town, when immediately, General Vere declared both to the
Archduke, and his Commissioners, that he had been driven by necessity, to
desire a Treaty; but now, in regard Supplies and Relief were come to him, he
could proceed no further, without breach of his Oath; yet that he hoped, if he
should in the future, be reduced to extremity, by the Archdukes Forces, the
Clemency of so great a Prince, would vouchsafe to hear him.

This Affront, (for so was it looked upon) highly enraged the Archduke,
because all Flanders were in a manner, come together, to see the delivery of
the Town; yea, and the same of this Treaty, was flown into Foreign Kingdoms:
Neither was this deceitful kind of Policy altogether excused by the States
themselves, who looked upon it as dishonorable in it self, and carrying with
it more of danger, than necessary convenience.

This year, some Foreign Affairs, brought no small disadvantage to the Dutch
Affairs; for in England, the Earl of Essex, the great Adversary to the Peace of
Spain, though he was not at first committed to Custody, yet was banished the
Court, and He that of late was so great in the Princes favor, supported with
many followers, and defended with Armies, now could not bear his life without
Honor, without Command, pondering in his Breast variety of Counsels, whether
he should assault the Court by water, or threaten it with War at a distance,
his Enemy prying into all his actions by the Queens directions, whose mind was
now much incensed against him for former faults, without any regard to his
Splendour of Body or Condition, was called to answer for his offenses. He
understanding his danger, followed only that Counsel, which at the present was
worst of all, being neither modest enough, or bold enough; for detaining at his
House, the Lords that the Queen had sent to him: Himself with a small Party,
hastening to London, and there endeavoring to pervert the minds of the common
people, he was prevented by a public Herald, that by the Queens Command,
proclaimed him guilty of High Treason, unless he presently submitted, with
which the People being stricken into an amaze, fearing themselves, easily put
off the care of another. Hereupon, the Gates are shut, his House Besieged, and
himself now devoyd of Counsel, surrendered himself, and was carried to prison by
the Earl of Southhampton. Judges according to the Custom of England, being
Assigned for his Trial, he was heard publicly, where he spoke much against his
Enemies, especially against the Lord Cecill, whom among the rest, he branded
with this Crime. That he promoted peace with the Spaniard, against whom he had
revenged them, but never altered his Faith and Allegiance to the Queen.

A great while, the expectation of all people, was held in suspense, whether
the Queens Clemency, and old affections, would forgive him, or the greatness of
his Crimes, his suspected popularity, and powerful Enemies, would deprive him
of all hopes of Pardon; at last, he was condemned, and privately beheaded,
giving great Testimonies, both of Piety and penitence, at the e^it of his
greatness, his Death being attended with many of his friends and followers.

The Report of a Fleet built in Spain, spread a great terror abroad, part
whereof was directed into the Hostile Coast of Africa, and beaten back with
Tempests, the other part carried a great Relief of six thousand men, to the
Irish Rebels, under the Command of Don John de Aquila, who setting forth a
proud Edict, boasted therein, that he came to deliver Ireland out of the Jaws
of the Devil: he Landed in the Southern part of that Kingdom, near the Town of
Kingsale, and vainly expecting great Forces of the Irish, was Besieged there by
the Lord Mountjoy, who Governed that Province for the English.

Tyrone, the Head of the Rebels, attempted to break through, leading a great
Company of men after him, over the frozen Moors; but being beaten back with a
great slaughter, he retired into his fastnesses, and lurking places. Then
Aquila, upon Articles, surrendering the Town, and whatever else the Spaniards
held in Ireland, was in English Ships, transported into Spain, with the Remains
of his Soldiers.

Not long after, followed an unfortunate Expedition of the Spaniards against
Caesaria, a City of Barbary, (now vulgarly, but corruptly called by an Arabian
Name, Algiere) wherein they reaped no other fruit, than the vast expense of a
great sum of money,

Now also, the Hollanders began boldly to undertake long Navigations; for they
passed the Streights of Magellan (so called from the first finder, Ferdinand
Magellan) afterward sailed through by Drake, and Cavendish, Englishmen; and
now by a fourth, upon their fame, to wit Oliver Vander N^ort of Roterdam: this
Straight being made narrow, with long turnings and windings between the bounds
of America, and the yet unknown World, he with much difficulty, went through
in^o the South Sea, and over against it, the Coast of Chili, of an unknown
Magnitude; where also, he found some enerayes to the Spaniards, and thence by a
reflex course, came to the Isle of Borneo. And so coming to the Cape of Good
Hope, having sailed round about the Earth, he brought back no Wealth, but only
great Honor to his Country, and the names of places not heard of before at
home; But other Ships endeavoring the same Voyage, having neither Men, nor
Victuals enough, part of them being cast upon those strange Coasts, were taken
by the Spaniards, others by the Barbarians: And after they were taken, were
ignominously tormented and murdered, which in the Salvages, was but ignorance;
but in the Spaniards, perfect Barbarism.

At this time, while the Hollanders strove to make advantage of all Reports
against King Philip, they were puffed up with great hope, by a rumor that Don
Sebastian, late King of Portugal, was alive, there being a man found, who had
marks upon his Body, such as the same King had, and being taught many private
particulars, by some crafty Portugueses, deluded the credulity of the rest of
that Nation, until being delivered to the Spaniard, by the Duke of Etruria, he
was condemned to the Galleys (having first been showed to the People) there to
expiate his impudence and subtlety of the worst sort, where he continued in
slavery, until at last, he was thence redeemed by the Kingly hand, of a more
gentle Death.

The Eleventh BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
AT Ostend, the Besiegers hope was yet a great way off; but the Arch Duke being
enraged at the late action of General Vere, he resolved to try if the valor of
his men could perform any thing against hope; and thereupon, shooting with
great impetuosity from a battery to that purpose raised against the Town-works,
upon that part where the old Town and the old Haven stood, and understanding
that there was a great breach made in the Works, the ninth of January in the
Evening, at the ebb of the Sea, he commanded the Town to be stormed on all
parts; but especially on that part. Two hundred Soldiers under two Captains,
were ordered point blank to fall upon Sand-Hill; as many more upon the left
side of the Bulwark, and the like number upon the Curtain running before it.
These were seconded by Durange, a Spanish Colonel, with four hundred men more,
whose directions were to put Garrisons of Men into all places, as soon as they
were taken, and to that purpose, they were furnished with Victuals and
Gunpowder, and what other things are necessary either for the new erecting, or
repairing of Fortifications.

Against the Porcupine, two hundred were appointed to the Storm, and near three
hundred more to defend, and reinforce what was taken under Gambalotti, an
Italian Commander, and under Don Augustino de Mexia, four hundred men, with a
strong Guard for such as should work in the defenses when taken: Afterward,
the whole Army being divided into several Battalia's, that they might be ready
to give assistance, when ever occasion should require: And Count Bucqury was
sent to the East part of the Town: At Sandhill there was a cruel and bloody
Fight, because General Vere having received Intelligence from a Fugitive of the
Enemies intent, had brought thither chiefly, as well great Guns, as all other
things fit to do damage to the Enemy, and every where kindled fires, that all
the Assaylants actions might the more clearly be discerned. And now the
Palisado's being cut down, the Scaling-Ladders were brought to the Works, where
between the prevalency of the Spanish Pikes, and the English Swords, was a very
hot Dispu^e; during which, Gen; Vere opening two Sluices, and the old Haven,
over whose shallows the Enemy was to pass, he drowned all thereabouts for a
great compass; by which means, not only the Gunpowder was spoiled, which
every Soldier carried for his own use, but many by force of the waters were
carried away into the Sea, and there drowned; besides, the Seconds not coming
on according to order, they who were in the first Assault, were compelled to
retreat, wherein they met with a twofold Death, the one from their Enemies
Weapons, the other from the force of the Waters. And Bucquoy, putting what he
was commanded to do, in execution too late, performed less; for while he
delayed the Tide of Flood increased, whereby his way was precluded. The
defenses on the backside of the Town, and other slight Works, General Vere took
no great thought for, while the Enemy made this Assault, knowing that some
threatening offers might be made on purpose only to divide the Defendants; for
it would be of small benefit to the Enemy, if he had them, in regard they could
with case be retaken: which the event proved true.

There lay scattered every where about the Rampires, Curtens, and Trenches, the
dead Bodies of Officers and Soldiers, some nearer, some at more distance, as
every man's Valor, or care had put him forward, or kept him behind; and many
were carried into the Sea, as is before related.

Upon account the Archduke wanted near eight hundred men, for the taking up
and burial of whose Bodies, a Truce was desired for four hours, and granted: In
the Town were near forty killed, but more wounded, among whom was the Generals
Brother, Sir Horace Vere, while he excellently performed the duty, both of a
good Leader and Soldier. Among the Bodies of the Spaniards, was found a Woman,
who had dissembled her Sex, both in courage and a military Habit, as if he
should have accused Nature, for not making Her a Man.

The unhappy success of this Storm, together with the impossibility of starving
Ostend, and the terror of lying all Winter in a wet Camp, moved many of the
Commanders to persuade Albertus, That he would leave off this unfortunate
design in time, before he suffered greater damage. But he was so sollicitous of
his own and the Kings honor, that he had rather obstinately persist in a
tedious and difficult labor, then let the World know he was unable to Master
one Town. Therefore raising a great Mount for battery in the Camp on the left
hand, on the right by little and little he made a bank to prevent the influx of
the Sea; and this was done by fixing in the ground pieces of Timber, with other
pieces overthwart, whereupon great Faggots bound together were placed like
Stacks of Wood, the planks lying sometimes divided or open, another time made
close like floors, great heaps of Sands were thrown thereon, that so the
greatness of the bulk being more compact and fi^m, might with the greater force
stand against the Waters. Which Work proved of such strength, that i^ not only
served as a Rampire for the Soldiers, but was a Mount from whence (Cannon
being planted thereon) they daily shot against the besieged. Nevertheless Ships
daily came into the Town with relief, without suffering any great damage or
hurt. By this time there were come to Albertus the most ingenious Engineers
from all parts of the World, who all aimed, even with emulation, to choke up
the Gollet; and when in the night some fixed a Cable with great Vessels and
Anchors under Water, from one Bank to the other; the Besieged likewise another
night would with little difficulty cut away all that fixed the same. About this
time one Pompey Targon invented a frame of Wood like a Castle, which being
placed in Ships, would carry Great Guns, but upon trial it quickly appeared too
weak to bear the concussion of the Waves, and that the sands would yield to the
weight that was underneath in the belly of the Foundation; by the same also
were made a kind of Boats, by the joining together of boards and bundles of
smaller Wood, which should altogether be carried by the Tide, but by the shot
of the Hollanders Artillery, these were more then once overthrown and
destroyed. The besieged likewise made provision, That if the Enemy should
hinder them of that entrance into the Town, which at present they enjoyed, to
have a New Haven between the Gollet and the old Haven by the old Town: for the
United States were mightily inflamed with a desire of Glory in defending that
part of the Sea, making a Decree, as if they foresaw the Siege would continue a
long time, that every six months the Garrison should be relieved and changed,
and accordingly* General Vere was sent for out, and one Frederick Dorp made to
succeed him, by whom the ruins of the Town were repaired, the Fortifications
augmented, and money continually provided to pay for the pains and labor
therein taken: When Albertus his Soldiers could not get their pay, which bred
the seeds of mutinies and sedition, which is for the most part the Mother of
disobedience; the very Government it self was full of fear, and hatred, the
Horse being appointed to drive on the Foot upon dangerous enterprises, or force
them back when they took themselves to flight, as if they had been bruits
without the light of reason to direct them. Moreover their promised largess of
the Flandrians fell infinitely short of the charge, and the Walloons, that they
might do the less help, pretended a Peace treacherously with the French. The
Brabanters had a just excuse from the sedition of the Soldiers that lay in
Waert, who by the conspiracy of others, wanted not much of surprising the
Castle of Antwerp, and the Town of Hulst; yet among these various crosses of
Fortune, some hopes was given to the Archduke, that Bredah might be surprised.
But Frederick Count Heremberg that was sent thither, mistaking the way, came
not thither till the daylight discovered him. And not long after some of Prince
Maurice's Horse took Prisoner his Brother Adolphus.

Till this time Don Francisco Mendosa, who had been taken Prisoner at Newport,
had been kept in Holland, sometimes in a more strict, otherwhile in a more
unrestrained custody, and although Count Brukells Widow, and the Deputies of
Cleves required, That he might be punished for his grievous Offenses, the
acting whereof, he defended, partly as done by necessity, partly by command.
And the States did not think it fit to proceed judicially against a Prisoner,
guarded by the Laws of War. But because there was a difference made between the
Ransom of Commanders and Private Soldiers; after long debate, it was agreed,
That whosoever of the People belonging to the United States were Prisoners,
either in the Netherlands, Spain, the Indies, America, or elsewhere under King
Philips obedience, should all be set at liberty for Mendosa; and either the
Kings respect to Mendosa, or future Generals, so prevailed with him, that he
agreed to the said Articles. And accordingly it was performed, for there
returned from all parts of the World, both Merchants and Mariners, whom the
Enemies rage for hope of gain, or the Priests hatred for difference of
Religion, had carried and kept there, part of whom had their very joints eaten
off with their Chains, and now with joy remembered the darkness and filth they
were wont to endure, others gratefully acknowledging their deliverance from the
bitter slavery of the Galleyes under most cruel Tyrants. And this was a matter
of great moment, to incite the common people against the Spaniards, by a fresh
memory of their old injuries, and for winning their love to the Lords, whose
clement and popular action was applauded with many exultations, because they
esteemed the liberty of their Subjects before great sums of Money which they
might have had. Thus the Agreements being in part performed, and Pledges being
given for the rest, Mendosa was set free, ever after giving a very good
Character of the Commonwealth of the Hollanders, which he now came to know by a
near converse, and from thence forward, became a perswader of Peace, rather
then War to both parties. And from these more certain Rules for the ransoming
of Prisoners were set down on both sides.

All this Spring the United States did spend in raising a greater Army then
ever they had before, their Minds and Resolutions being augmented with the
memory of Newport Battle, and the new seditions of the Enemy, from whence they
hoped, before the Soldiers expected out of Italy arrived in the Netherlands,
either to renew their Glory by the slaughter of the Enemies, or by a Land March
through Brabant into Flanders, to go to Ostend, and there raise the Siege. But
Prince Maurice, unmoved with all this noise, resolutely affirmed, That it was
safer to use wary and cautelous Counsels, then to run on in rash and
adventurous attempts. But the Queen of England, and the King of France approved
the Opinion of the States, persuading them to go on with greater Authority,
because they assisted them with men and money. Also a great strength of Germane
Horse was hired, and very well furnished, with other very great preparations:
And in the Month of June, Public Prayers being first made by command, though
later then was necessary, the Expedition was begun, at the same time when the
Italian Forces arrived at the Netherlandish borders. And Letters were sent into
diverse places, as Artois, Brabant, Flanders, and the Deputies of other parts.

The United States wrote magnificent things concerning their Affairs and
Assistance by Foreign Princes; they spoke also of the Soldiers sedition on
the adverse party, and of the wasting and spoiling of Cities, what was too much
truth, and what reward had they for all these miseries, but that which is the
last and greatest of all miseries, Servitude? for it was not unknown, what the
Spaniards formerly prepared, and that a false Pretense, or the bare Name of
Archduke might no longer deceive any body, they should see in whose hand was
the Government of the State, and the public Power of Peace and War. If they
desired the Glory of their Ancestors, or the Liberty of their Posterity, they
should then join with them, or at leastwise assist their strong endeavors by
some moderate Levyes. Let the Archdukes go and seek more peaceable Kingdoms.
That it was easy to drive out the few Spaniards that remained in Garrison in
several Castles, and then they might put the State both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, into what form they would, and that it would be no great pains
and labor to attain to the chiefest felicities of Peace and Liberty: This was
the effect of their Letters, which were quickly followed by Prince Maurice, who
divided his Army into three parts, which he commanded to March three several
ways; the whole number whereof, was Five Thousand Horse, and Eighteen Thousand
Foot, and almost Two Thousand Carriages; the middle Tertia was led by Count
William of Nassaw, That on the right hand by General Vere, and the last by
Count Ernest of Nassaw; yet at no greater distance, then that they could easily
meet and join upon occasion, however thus divided, they could proceed with more
ease and celerity. The whole rabble of Pedees, and other inferior people that
attended the Army with Mills, Furnaces and other necessaries that were usually
sent by Sea, now followed the Army by Land, with no small difficulty.

Passing the Maes at Nimmeghen, from thence the Army marched through the
Country of Liege, by the place where William Prince of Orange, Prince
Maurice's Father, held his Camp with his Army, which was conquered by Famine,
not the Duke of Alva's Arms; which mischief, because he would avoid, by
terrible threats he compelled the neighboring Towns, which of their own accord
were more inclinable to the Spaniard, to bring in Provisions daily to the Army,
and to sell it at a reasonable rate, and yet was scarcely Victuals enough
found, to give sufficient to so great Forces.

The fifteenth day the whole army sat down at Centron, a village in Liege, not
far from Tielmont, where Mendosa then lay: for the Archduke hearing of this
preparation of the States had sent him from Ostend with forces, having left
there Don John de Rivez to guard the Camp and fortify it round about. They that
lay at Waert, laying aside their sedition for a while, were persuaded to come
to Mendosa, and increase the number of his forces, so that now he had five
thousand foot and four thousand horse. Ambrose Count Spinola was sent to join
with these, with eight thousand Spaniards and Italians more, which he had new
brought into the Country, in hope of winning honor, and to assist his brother's
endeavors at Sea and the Spanish affairs at land, with this select band of
men. For he covenanted with King Philip to be reimbursed his charges, and
therefore at present he paid his men out of his own revenues; and although
Mendosa had the chief command as General, yet he directed and commanded his own
men; and as he kept them from the want which the rest suffered, so he would not
give a licentious liberty, but kept them in a strict discipline: by which means
it came to pass, that no soldiers ever behaved themselves with more quietness
and civility, yet seldom was there any severity used toward them. By which
example it was evident, that the strength of military government consisted in
money. Prince Maurice lying near them, drew his soldiers out of the Camp,
provoking and chalenging the Enemy to fight: But Mendosa kept his men within
their trenches, either because he was unequal in strength, or else broken by
his captivity, he yet feared his unlucky fortune, and having once received a
great blow, for the future it made him only fight by delay. These by all means
avoiding fight, and objecting to themselves the danger and terror of a battle,
made the Prince perceive that all these glorious and great beginnings would
come to nothing; for it was not possible for them to go into the inner parts
of that Country with so great an army, through so many narrow passages, among
all the Enemies towns, and where the Enemy himself was ready to attend them
upon all occasions: wherefore he thought meet the sooner to make his retreat
and get to the rivers, and the rather, because Victuals began to grow scarce,
and the harvest was not yet come; yet that the year might not pass away
ingloriously after such great designs and ostentations, turning his thoughts to
things of less moment, he presently sat down before Grave, a town within the
territories of Cuick, hard by the Maes, reasonably well fortified, having
therein a strong garrison and all other things for the enduring of a siege.
Hither being come the eighth day after a tedious march through the parching
heat of the Sun, the Prince pitched his Camp in three several parts, where many
of the new soldiers unaccustomed to such toil and labor died. On the upper
part of the river lay General Vere, on the lower himself, and on that part
where the fields grow marshy toward Brabant Count William of Nassau. That done
two bridges were built upon the river, one hundred and fifteen foot long, and
whatever was within the Camp, as also on the other side toward Gelderland, was
enclosed with one continued breast-work, before which were very deep and broad
trenches, for the clearing whereof several forts and sconces were erected that
were well furnished with Cannon. The great Bulwark which the Townsmen held
beyond the river being deserted, as not tenable against so great force as was
used about it, proved afterward a great assistance to the besiegers. In the
interim Mendosa, although the most active of his Colonels persuaded him to
pursue forthwith the Enemy marching away, and to intercept him in his designs,
fearing not only his fortune, but the blame of any miscarriage that should
happen, and besides being needy as well of money as of all things else almost,
he had rather advise with the Archduke, in this notable juncture of time. But
the Archduke returned no certain answer, only admonishing him to be careful,
left going too far with the army, the Hollanders should suddenly with their
Fleet invade Flanders. From which direction Mendosa fearing to recede, in all
his motions depended upon the Enemies counsels: yet however, preparing in
readiness at Roermund what he thought necessary, at length he also pitched his
Camp near the Maes below Grave and Prince Maurice. Many thought that he erred
therein, for that he ought rather to have chosen the superior part of the
country which is called Ravesteyn, by which means he might have forced all his
provisions from the Hollanders, and likewise have kept the like from coming
thence to the Prince, because he had lain in the Enemies country. But now his
Camp being fixed, it was very dangerous to pass by the Hollanders leaguer, and
too late to go round about, because Prince Maurice being diligent about his
work, had in many places made approches and galleries even to the Town-ditch,
by the commodity of the banks, which were placed on both sides the river to
guard the same, and yielded a secure and easy way to the Pioneers. Neither had
the Spaniards any hope now, but to break through the open places, which were
very large, between the Prince's and Count William's Camps, and so to get into
the Town. To this end ladders were prepared, together with shovells and
mattocks, either for the more easy climbing up of works, or demolishing them,
as occasion should present: these were conducted by Colonel Thomas Spine, being
a thousand choice foot, which were followed by many others. But the Guards and
Sentinells being very diligent and watchful, although they set forward in the
night, together with the breaking of the day, among the tedious passages of the
marshes, made their attempt, how daring soever, vain. Whereupon Mendosa, being
ashamed that he was thus beaten off from his hopes of relieving the Town,
withdrew both himself and his army, that they might not helplessely look on and
see the City taken, privately departing to Venlo. At this time the States
taking care for Berck, sent Count Ernest thither with supplies. But Antonio
Gonzales, Governor of Grave, with whom were in garrison fifteen hundred men of
several nations, having in the sight of their companions wearied the besiegers
with frequent fallies, would not yet desist by many valorous experiments to
protract the time to his advantage, although all hope of relief was utterly
taken away. After a two months siege, when the English drew near to the sluices,
which kept the water in the town-ditches, the Frisons also on another part
bringing a gallery even into the trench, and some of the Princes Pioneers being
ready to undermine the walls, after the loss almost of seven hundred men, the
garrison was surrendered upon honorable conditions, the soldiers marching
thence with their arms and baggage. This town of Grave at first belonged to
the Province of Geldre, but was afterward annexed to Brabant, and taken as a
pledge by Maximilian Count Buren, whose son-in-law William Prince of Aurange
bought it, and though lost in war, by the peace made at Gaunt the Garrison of
Germans being removed, had the same delivered to him. But about eighteen years
before the Duke of Parma having gotten it by the carelessness or cowardice of
the Governor, Prince Maurice now regained and took possession of this his
Patrimonial inheritance, as he had done before of Breda, Lingen and Moers,
which he made subject not for his own advantage only, but the good of the
Commonwealth; by which means he obtained a great dominion about the Maes, with
very great advantages.

While these things were doing, some soldiers enraged because they had but
very little or no pay, leaving Mendosa's army, betake themselves to Hamont. He,
to prevent the increasing of their number by impunity, hastens thither a
convenient strength; where having taken some great guns, he forced a few
foot-souldiers to surrender themselves, but the horse got away, not to be moved
with prayers or threats; and having in vain attempted other places, at last
they seize the Castle of Hochstraten by the consent of the Garrison, (this
place is not far from Breda,) wherein a short time being much augmented by a
continual resort of old soldiers, who required their arrears, and new
soldiers, that expected no other thing then a licentious freedom in villainy,
choosing themselves a Head, they elect a Senate and settle a Councel-house with
diverse laws, expressing therein more care and diligence then is usually found
in the meetings and assemblies of settled Cities. They would not suffer any
rapines or plunders to be committed, unless by public order and for the common
cause; and if any upon their own account durst do otherwise, they were
punished like thieves according to the laws and customs of other places.
Wherewith the Archduke being highly displeased, and fearing the example
because of his want, gathering together what money he could possibly get
together by any means, he persuaded those who yet remained in their obedience,
to punish the others rebellious persidy, and to that end prepared to besiege
them. They perceiving themselves not to be looked upon as mutineers, (which in
those parts is no new thing) but as absolute enemies, begin to tread unusual
paths, desiring and obtaining from the Hollanders Victuals, Arms and
Artillery. And this they did the more willingly, because these troubles of the
Enemy were very advantageous, and to make these differ among themselves, to a
great expense of their treasure, would secure them against the like evils. But
this resolution of Albertus was soon altered upon the arrival of the news that
Grave was taken, for that he began to be afraid of Prince Maurice's army: yet
for all this he would not hearken to the Netherlandish States, who about that
time being called together concerning the raising of tributes, persuaded him to
appease and win the offended Soldiery with money: But the Spanish Noblemen and
Commanders disliked thereof, averring it was more fit to take some new forces
into pay, but to punish those Rebels with all severity. And so at last
threatenings of actions being turned into words, an Edict was set forth, wherein
all that were in Hochstraten, unless they came in and desired pardon by a
certain day, were proscribed, and rewards promised to any that should kill
them, their goods confiscated, all that furnished them with provision should be
punished, and their wives and children banished: adding above all the rest of
their crimes, that their Sedition had been the cause that Grave had not been
relieved. But all this threatening served to little purpose, for so much were
they contemned, that they published an answer filled with many souldierly
taunts, objecting to Albertus his fear of a battle, and that Grave had been in
vain looked after long before their recess; and finding fault that while the
Army was ready to starve, he feasted and revelled at Court without any
moderation of charge; and repeating on the other hand the praises of such
Commanders as were courteous and affable to their soldiers. But what wonder
could it be, if, after so many others, they required what was due to them for
their service, or fled to such assistences for recovery thereof, which though
unseemly in themselves, yet were made just by the laws of a fatal necessity?
Subjoyning at last, that they were and would be safe against the punishments of
that cruel Edict, partly by their arms, and partly by their poverty.

Octavio Frangipane, the Pope's Legate, endeavored to appease this Sedition:
but they would hearken to no condition, until that ignominious Edict was
revoked and made null. And now the greatest part of Autumn being past and
Winter approaching, Prince Maurice having dismissed his German horse, disposed
the rest of his forces into Garrisons: the like did Albertus, whose Army was
grown thin by frequent runnings away to the other party, and the Italian
soldiers decay (being but freshmen) through the extremity of labor. Yet part
of the Army was sent into the Camp before Ostend; so were Spinola's ships in
part sent to those parts where either the Enemies forces or the mutineers
designs were feared; and the citizens of Venlo, who had hitherto with pertinacy
refused a garrison, now were persuaded to admit soldiers, because of the
near-adjoyning danger of Grave.

About this time Mendosa departed into Spain, where he was somewhat strangely
received, King Philip the father being dead, and the son prepossessed by
others, who accused him for his unfortunate managery of the war, and that he
had neither sufficiently taken care for Peace, nor undertaken or avoided
battles as the necessity or contingency of affairs required.

Upon the forces departing into winter quarters, it fortuned that fourteen
troops of the Hollanders fell upon eight of Albertus his troops, that were
without their officers, lying somewhat carelessely not far from M^estricht,
where they surprised and took most of the Horse in their beds, together with
five Corners or Horse-colours, which were hanged up in the Palace at the Hague,
and a great number of horses. At winter, when the seditious began to incroach
upon other parts, Count Lewis of Nassau was sent with three and thirty troops
of horse and twelve hundred foot, to wast all the farther parts of the enemies
country that denied to pay contribution; where he took the town of S. V^t, and
for a whole month together ranging all about, burning the Villages and
spoiling the Country, he did no small damage to the Province of Lutzenburg. At
this time also the Hollanders had very good success at Sea. Fredericks Spinola
was coming out of Spain with eight new galleys; and Martin Padilia being made
Admiral of the Sea was said to be preparing a great Fleet, which was suspected
to threaten England or Ireland: whereupon the Queen sent forth some ships, to
watch their actions and wait upon their motions, and, as occasion should offer
it self, either sink or take them: and accordingly they burned two of Spinola's
galleys, and utterly made them useless, at Sesymbra a town of Portugal, giving
to the slaves therein their liberty, and to the rest their lives. But for the
future to prevent the like damage, a great ship of Portugal, of the same sort
with those they call Carracks, was opposed against them, laden with precious
Merchandises, which while the English assaulted, and soon after took, the rest
escaped by flight. And Frederick Spinola, being long detained in Spain, until
he could have his covenants with the King confirmed, with his six remaining
galleys (wherein were nine hundred soldiers and fifteen hundred slaves that
rowed) in the month of October set forth toward Flanders: upon news whereof
the Queen ordered three Ships to wait upon the English coasts, and in the
narrow Seas; to which the Hollanders joined four of theirs, besides those which
guarded the coast of Flanders. The English first getting sight of these
Galleys, gave notice to their Companions; but the Galleys making use of the
cloudiness and calmness of the weather, went so near the English shore, that
some of the Slaves throwing off their chains leaped into the shallow waters:
but the Hollanders pursuing the vessels, sometimes by the shore, other times in
the narrow Sea, not far from Graveling with their great Guns sorely bruised
two of them, and twice or thrice being pressed with the vast bulk of their own
Ships, they were broken to pieces; the Masts, Oars, and residue of the Ships
being torn in pieces floated upon the Sea, but their main bulks were swallowed
up in the waves. Almost two hundred of the men were saved, and more of them
might have been, but that mercy was banished by fear, lest the conquered should
become more in number then the Conquerors. Besides, one other of them suffered
Ship-wreck at Calais by the unskilfulness of the Pilots; two others of them
were much shattered with bullets, and falling upon the shelves in that coast of
Flanders got into Newport; the sixth, wherein Spinola himself was, sailing up
and down in the Sea of Zeland, at last not without great hazard, and throwing
overboard much of their lading, the slaves being encouraged with hope of
liberty, arrived at Dunkerk. When then Frederick Spinola had joined these three
with the rest which he had before at Scluys, aiming to repair both his credit
and fortunes from the spoils of Walcheren, he was withheld by winterly and
contrary blasts of wind, and because the Archduke, being vexed both with
foreign and intestine War, refused to denude his Garrisons for the
refurnishing those Vessels.

At this time the Fame and Trade of the Hollanders increased in the Indies, to
the great detriment of the Portugueses, who of old having been the first
Finders, had now for one hundred years quietly enjoyed those Navigations, and
out of reverence of the Pope's Donation made to them had extorted and kept the
same from the beginning against both the Castilians and other Christian
Nations, defending themselves therein by force of Arms. These therefore make
address to King Philip, as the only column and support of that flourishing
Kingdom, that he would with an extraordinary Fleet defend those revenues which
belonged as well to himself as to the People. From hence it came to pass that
the War, which had hitherto been contained within the Netherlands, was now
passing into another World; for the managing and conduct whereof Don Andrew
Hurtado Mendosa was chosen, who then by chance had beaten Cunala, an Indian
Pirat about Malabar, having used those parts above fifty years, and was now
with great applause ennobled with a Royal Commission. This man being furnished
with diverse great Galeons and lesser Ships, to the number of twenty and
upwards, wherein were eight hundred Portugal Soldiers, besides a great number
ot above fifteen hundred Indians, he resolved to make exemplary according to
his Commission all such, whether Kings or Subjects, that had admitted the
Hollanders to trade freely, and Bantam a City of Java was the first destined to
this destruction. It fortuned by chance, that at the same time, being the
beginning of the year, five Holland Ships under the command of Wolfard Herman
were in those parts trading: they carried about three hundred men, and were
upon that account far unable to meet with the Portugal Fleet, whose Admiral
alone exceeded the whole Dutch Fleet both in largeness of bulk and number of
men: yet the fear of losing the Trade for the future, and the hopes of getting
honor and favor among those Eastern people, drew them not only to fight like
men hand to hand, but to undertake the Combat with their great Guns, wherewith
the Hollanders being very well accommodated did their Enemies very great
mischief, because being only driven by the wind, and able to retreat and draw
off as they listed, by their quickness of motion they frustrated all the
intended violence of the Portugueses. Thus they fought for some days even
without intermission, until some of the Enemies Ships being sunk, and two of
them taken, the Spaniard daunted with the novelty of such an unexpected
mischief departed, steering toward Amboyna, where without danger, there being
none to resist, they wasted the Town Iton, and whatever place else adhered to
the Hollanders, with fire and sword, and the cutting down of several
odoriferous plants. But the Conquerors in the City of Bantam, which they had
rescued from so imminent a danger, after a festivous reception there, soon
after went to Banda, whence come the best Nutmegs, and undertaking the defense
of that Island, made a league with the People, (for they have no settled
Government) That they should not sell their spices to any other people; That
they should not be injurious one to another concerning Religion, but should
leave the judgment thereof wholly to God; That every one of them should use
their own Laws, but neither of them should receive any fugitives from the
other. According to this form, in progress of time, they contracted friendship
and society with other Kings and People that stood in fear of the Spanish
tyranny. The chief of all the Cities of Sumatra is Achem, the King of which
place the Portugueses, four years before, that were most potent in the Court,
by bribes, gifts, and false accusations of the Hollanders, had drawn, partly
that he would kill all such of them in their Ships as under the show of
friendship admitted them into them, and partly that he would dispatch all such
as should come into the City: and according to this design, a great many were
slaughtered, the Ships that lay in the harbor knowing nothing thereof;
moreover, the drink of that Country so consternated their minds that they
seemed mad; nay, so far did the treachery proceed, that the Ships were hardly
preserved. But the King shortly after repenting the cruelty of the fact, the
Hollanders which afterward came thither making certain covenants concerning
the sale of spices, discovercd again that the Portugueses had been buying the
King's faith from them; whereupon, when they found the Agreements they had made
would not be observed, the Arabian Ships being gone out of the Harbor, in
revenge of the injuries received from the Indians, they sent ashore some
Forces; which thing being dissonant to the Laws of those Nations, afterward
gave the Enemies matter wherewith to recriminate the Hollanders. But the
Zelanders afterward returning, when the King was somewhat estranged from the
Portugueses, they cleared themselves from that objected crime, and beseeched
the King that he would send some of his people with them, that they might see
they were not a company of Pirates, (as they were aspersed among such as knew
them not) but that they were a people famous for wealth and fidelity, having no
enmity or war with any besides the Spaniards. This advice pleased the King,
that for the future he might be more certain whether he might with more safety
incline to the Spaniard or Hollander. In this voyage near the Isle of S. Helena
these Zelanders espying a great Portugal Carrack, loaded with Pearl and other
precious commodities, and putting themselves between it and the shore, after a
hot conflict they forced it to surrender itself, being first much battered with
the great Guns. The men that were in it they set ashore upon the coast of
Brasile. The chief of the Ambassadors from Sumatra (whose name was Abdutzamar)
died in Zeland, and was buried with a very decent funeral, having a Monument
exquisitely raised to his memory. The rest that survived went to salute Prince
Maurice then encamped at the siege of Grave, giving him Presents from their
King. When they saw the great number of the Horse and Foot, and the Works of
that bulk as was not only unknown to the Barbarians, but such as exceeded
those generally in use among us, they were even amazed with admiration. The
Treaty held with them was by the name of Arabians: And the report of these
things coming as it were into another World, made them not only shake off all
vain suspicions, but was prevalent with many rather to entertain the Hollanders
friendship, then to be kept in subjection to the Spanish tyranny. The King of
Ternate (which is one of the Molucca's) publicly owned the Hollanders, for at
his request Necken invaded the Portugueses in the next Island named Tidoris.
But when he was about to assault those in the Castle being ready to make
defense, some darts and shot being spent on both sides, being lamed by the loss
of his hand, and having lost some few of his men, he put off the fight. In
Patau also and the coasts of Cauchin-China and elsewhere, their coming was very
acceptable: but in Ceilon, one of the bigger Islands, where grows the best
Cinnamon, they found the King (who is called Fimala) a great enemy to the
Portugueses, by whom he had formerly been taken and carried away; and Spilberg
informing them of the Dutch affairs, perceived them very desirous both of
friendship and society. The King of Jora also (this is a Kingdom in the region
of Malacca) daring to rip up old injuries against the Portugueses, incited
Jacob Hemskerk, then having with him two Holland Ships, to set upon a Carrack
of an immense magnitude that lay in the Streights between Malacca a Portugal
colony and Sumatra; which he accordingly did, the said King being both the
author and witness of the Victory. The Hollanders contented with the booty,
which was very great, spared the lives of all the persons in it, (being near
seven hundred of all sexes and ages) although there yet appeared many fresh
examples of the Portugal cruelty. That Ship came from Macao, a Town in the
Empire of China which the Portugals possess by the courtesy of the Natives,
whither of late some Hollanders being driven, they were by the Portugueses
hanged and put to death, the Magistrates of the Chinois being persuaded that
they were no other then thieves and robbers. Now Macao stands upon the River
Canto, by which only strangers are admitted a passage into the Empire of
China; as to go out of the same Empire into foreign parts, there is no way but
by Cinceo, a Port in another part of the Country. Thus wealth being gotten from
the public Enemy, and great damage done both to the King and Portugueses,
great advantage was gotten with honor by the Hollanders both in private and
public: yet some were found in this industrious and gain-seeking Nation, who
would refuse part thereof as not convenient or fitting, being by force of War
taken from Merchants, and, as it many times happens such as least deserve it.
And the pretense that moved some to this conscienciousness was the ancient
amity with the Portugal, believed to be begun four Ages before, when the
Netherlanders going to Syria to the Holy War, conquered Lisbone, then the
Kingly seat of the Saracens. From thence great privileges were granted to the
Netherlanders in Portugal, and no less to the Portugueses in the Netherlands.
Besides, after the beginning of the War in the Low Countries, and the
Conquest of Portugal by King Philip, the Portugueses were invited by the
States, that as they were equally subject with them, so they should equally
enjoy all manner of commerce, and the same benefit with all their Citizens. In
answer of which desire, not a few of them, out of hatred to the Castilians, of
old their neighbors, now their Lords, or lest the power of the Inquisition
should grow high under pretense of Jewish or Arabian Superstition, came to the
Hollanders: but they that remained under the King of Spain's obedience, and
increased his wealth with their own, were by all Law accounted as Enemies,
(especially after so many injuries among the Indians) as without doubt they
might be. And that no man might pretend ignorance thereof, the States by a
public Edict declared the same. And here a doubt arising, whether the goods of
Italians in those Ships that were taken should be esteemed Prize, the matter
was decided by settling a moderation between equity and the practice of War.

Hitherto many Companies of Merchants frequented the Indies, whose emulations
since they enhanced the price of Commodities there, and here on the Contrary
brought them low, and being several were not able by all their strength and
endeavors to resist the Spaniards; the States taking this into serious
consideration, of many separate Bodies made one conjunct Society, appointing
Consuls and Factors in diverse Cities, that should sometimes meet together by
their Deputies, and publishing a Law, that no one separately, during the space
of twenty years, should sail beyond the Cape of good Hope, or go to the
Streights of Magellan. And now a day was set within which all should give in
their names that would be partakers both in the charge and revenue of that
Company, so that at the end of ten years new names should be received and
offers made. At this time there was collected threescore hundred thousand
pounds: And from this time, a new War as it were arising in the East, the
Indian Company began to be esteemed a great part of the Commonwealth, for that
not only a part of all booty came to the public Treasury, but also the common
Enemy was exhausted at the charge of private Citizens, that daily made spoil of
him, and made him be at infinite expenses in his defense. But now the long
wants of King Philip were at last in part supplied by the arrival of the
American Fleet toward the end of this year; when also his animosities against
the French, as if they had not before been violent enough, broke out more
clearly, Letters being dispersed over Brabant, accusing the Marriage of the
King with Medices as unlawful during the life of Margaret of Valois, and that
the issue arising therefrom was illegitimate, and so passionately reproving
the King's lust.

About this time also was convicted of Treason Gonthalde Duke de Biron, (King
Henry then warring about the Alps;) he having married the Duke of Savoy's
Daughter, and covenanted with the Spaniard to have Burgundy in Dowry, to the
hazard of the ruin of the King and his children. Being cited to the Court,
when he denied his fact to the King, who till then was inclinable to pardon
him, this was the first thing that aggravated the King's anger, although he
well knew Biron had with his own blood secured both the public and his reign.
This great Duke was of an immense spirit, ambitious of honor beyond hopes of
satisfaction; but in the arts of War and his merits toward his Country
giving place to no Frenchman that ever went before him, until he dishonored
the glory of his Mareschals staff by his unhappy exit. And thus within two
years Ambition brought to a miserable end two men, that under their Sovereigns
of England and France were great Princes. But as Essex's attempts were more
excusable, so was his death more serene and quiet: But Biron having conceived a
Treason in his mind, was so far followed by Divine revenge, that he
contaminated his end with a mixture both of impiety and madness.

Now also the people of Embden began to blow up the coals of new Commotions,
upon this occasion. Enno the son of Edsard succeeded his Father in his
Transamasian Principality, and being pressed with the complaints of all the
States, supposing that he might more safely act apart, he had easily wrought
upon his Nobility, that they would follow the Prince with all equal freedom
against the Subjects. With the City of Embden a Peace was made almost agreeable
to the Delphzilian conditions, only some obscure things fraudulently contrived
were implied. These being drawn to his Party, contemning the lesser Towns and
the Country, he laid upon them a grievous Tax: But the Town of Nordam resisting
his commands, he ran to Arms, and was not content to set upon them a mulct
only, but publicly erecting Gibbets, made Citizens pass under the yoke.
Whereupon, calling to mind old feuds with the Embdeners, he terrified other
places by the example of Nordam. He tears from the Magistrates the most active
and ingenious of the Vulgar, promising that when the Hollanders were excluded,
he would transfer the Spanish Trade to them; and it was true, that they were
friendly received that brought Enno's Letters. This was very terrible to the
United States, and so much the more, because Christopher the brother of Enno
was in pay under Albertus; and John, another of his brethren, being by the Pope
married to Enno's daughter, to whom he was Uncle, advanced the Roman Religion
in Paderborn. And on every side it evidently appeared that the Count labored
that he might open that large mouth of the Eems to the Spanish Ships. But at
first the Hollanders strength being employed elsewhere, only four Companies
were sent to assist Embden, which entered the City at the same time when Enno
drawing near with his Forces hoped to have been admitted by those of his
Faction; but now being kept out thence, he enters the Villages round about,
and erects several Forts for the shutting up of the City and the River. The
States being informed thereof, and now after the taking of Grave having some
leisure to consult about their neighbors affairs, at the request of the City,
sent Warner Dubois, a Colonel of Horse, thither with some Troops of Horse, and
almost nineteen Companies of Foot. He within a few days assaults and wins all
the Forts, and sets free the City from those rude and ignorant maintainers of
War. En^o, that he might remove this disgrace out of his sight, with as much
envy and bitterness of language as he could invent, disputed the Hollanders
encroachments upon the rights of another dominion: of which the States being
conscious, they published in Print the cause of that action of theirs, and the
danger that was like to have fallen not only upon themselves, but all Germany,
by the Count's deeds.

The Twelfth BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
1603.
THE Hollanders being oppressed with the French Peace, were attended with a
greater evil, which was the death of Queen Elizabeth about this time, whereby
they were more deeply plunged in a War, yet had lost that assistence which,
as it was the first, so had it continued unto the last. She died the third day
of April, being by the length of days arrived to the toils of life, from
whence she supposed her old age, which she had spun out even to the seventieth
year, now grew contemptible, and that the hopes and counsels of those in whom
she had put her greatest confidence were turned toward her successor. It was a
long reign for a Woman, and famous not only at home but abroad, which produced
many various censures; some conjecturing at the future according as they were
led by fear or hope; others, from the memory of former actions, reckoning what
prosperity and adversity she had seen during her long life. Here was remembered
the beheading of her Mother, and that for no small fault, but only the
supposed crime of Adultery; whence arose those many bitter taunts of her
Enemies, as if she had been the Issue of an unknown Father. Soon after, when
her Sister fate in the Throne, she was cast into Prison, Which was no small
affliction of so great a spirit, until by the means and intercessions of Philip
King of Spain, to whom she owed her Liberty, if not her Life, she was freed
from thence; though afterward she requited his kindness with a long and sharp
War. Besides, her Reign was accounted cruel by the execution of so many
Noblemen, for no other pretense but that they professed the Roman Catholic
Religion; and also in that no less novel then odious example to all Princes,
though indeed excusable enough from the necessity, that by the command of a
Woman, not only a Woman but a Kinswoman, and she a Suppliant, not as a common
person but a distressed Queen, was put to death. Also there were some that
stuck not to exprobrate the divulsions of Ireland, and seditions of the English
Soldiers in the Low Countries, as if they had been commanded. Certainly, it
was the greatest of her misery, that she lived so long without a Husband, from
whence came the incertainty of her Heir: and very various were the several
opinions concerning her; many objecting her love to the Earl of Leicester, and
after him her endearments of Essex, whose hot and overhasty youth, together
with his contempt of her decaying and aged beauty, was punished with the loss
of his head; though soon after her mind was more changed from hatred to
repentance, then before it had been from love to hatred, so that it was by many
judged to be the main cause of her sickness and death. On the other side it was
said, that the long continuance of her Government and life manifested the same
to be well-pleasing to God, and that instead of the customary evils of youth,
she had showed great prudence in her carriage and behavior in the enjoyment of
both good and bad fortune. Nor was it so great a wonder that her security was
established by the death of some Rebels and by Wars, as that a Woman's
Government after four and forty years had not only made England safe, but
flourishing; nor had she at any time taken Arms but for most just causes.
Religion was by her reformed to the example of King Edward, not by force, or
according to her own fancy, but upon debate of the matter in the great Council
of the Kingdom, and in a lawful manner. Nor did she rage with cruelty against
those that were of another judgment, unless it were when it was too late, when
by the doctrine and instruction of the Jesuits they had thrown off all
reverence and love to their Country and Government at once. By her help
Scotland was vindicated from the French, the Prince of Conde's Party from their
adverse faction, and much of the Netherlands from the Spaniards. And although
she had so many great allurements to increase her Dominion, yet she remained
content with her own, not desiring from all her victorious achievements any
other thing then the liberty of that Religion by her promoted, and to set
limits to power that was or might be defervedly suspected. Thus did she restore
the Towns which she possessed in France, preserved Scotland for a Child, and
rejected the desires of the Hollanders, entreating her to take the Dominion
over them. And now lately the old Garrisons in Ireland being taken, and new
ones fortified, some of the Nobles being taken here, some there, their faction
was so infeebled, and the very strength and pretense thereof so weakened, and
Tyrone himself so broken, that falling upon his knees before the Lord
Lieutenant he humbly requested pardon of all his offenses. (For that excess of
Honor happened to him a little before his fall.) She had been courted to
Marriage not by the English only, but by Charles of Austria, brother of the
Emperor, and by Henry and Francis brothers to the King of France; as also by
some Kings themselves, to wit, Philip of Spain, and Ericus of Sweden. That she
was thus sought was her happiness, but that she refused all was her prudence;
because as it was unfit for her Greatness to marry a Subject, so the Subjects
of England were afraid she should marry a Foreiner. The reproaches that were
spread concerning her took their beginning from her sex and the elegancy of her
beauty, together with the customary liberty of Princes, and could only be
refuted by manlike care and diligence. Nor was she only well skilled in the
arts of Government, but was learned in the ancient and modern languages; an
excellency rarely found in Women of a private fortune: which made her Name and
renown great and famous, and not only terrible to and admired by her
neighbors, but courted by Ambassadors even from the Moors and Sarmatians. No
man hitherto doubted, but that great Commotions would have arisen in England
upon the death of the Queen, who had never declared any certain Successor; for
it was believed that although James King of Scotland was the next in blood, yet
the ancient hatred of the inhabitants, and the private fear of those that had
consented to his Mother's death, would be an obstacle to him, there being
several ready in England who boasted themselves to be descended of Royal blood.
Then also the power of the English Catholics was feared, lest they should hope
for that by Troubles which they could never expect while the settled Authority
of the Queen remained; the Pope also instigating them, as unwilling that a King
of the new Religion should be admitted, although he were next in blood. Nor was
that hope only grown in the Spaniards, who lay at watch for the peoples
commotions, but the Hollanders also, although they had by many good offices
beforehand pre-engaged King James, upon the connection of Religion, yet by
tacit wishes did guess that the imputation of their alliance with him would
transfer part of the War into Britain. But it happened beyond hope and
expectation, that presently after the decease of Queen Elizabeth, the old
Council of the Queen, and as many of the Bishops and Magistrates of London as
were at present at hand and in readiness, proclaimed King James, not waiting
for the authority of a Parliament, for the danger of delay, and because
Interregnum's do many times in the future by new Laws and Covenants diminish
the grandeur and power of Authority. Thus without any contradiction the King of
Scotland got the possession of England, and was the first that within the known
Records of any Annals enjoyed the whole Island of Great Britain in one entire
and undivided Government.

The United States did not omit forthwith to send an Embassy to congratulate
him for his new access of magnitude, having first sent some gratulatory
Letters. The Ambassadors sent by them to the King were Count Henry of Nassau,
Prince Maurice's brother, then a Member of the Council of the States and
General of the Horse; next to him was Walrave Brederode, thirdly John Olden
Barneveldt, and lastly Jacob Valcken, who died before he returned from this
Embassy. When they were admitted to audience, they spoke in this manner.

We are come hither, Great King, divided in our selves between Grief And Joy:
for we have lost Her, whose goodness and benefits to us we are not able to
express in words; but we have found You, as the Heir of Her Kingdom, so the
Imitator of Her Virtues. That which formerly we desired, and since that by
public supplications decreed to the most happy Messengers of Your new-begun
Dominion, that now in Your own presence with hearts and voices we beseech and
beg of God, that this Your reign may be happy and prosperous to Your Self, to
Posterity, to Great Britain, and to Us. We beg of You, Sacred Sir, one thing,
That You would not suffer the insulting Spaniard to trample upon the necks of
the Netherlanders, and from thence by degrees to incroach upon the Dominions of
others his Neighbors. It suits with Your Religion, to save so many Assemblies
of pious men from that Kingdom of sanguinary Superstition: it agrees with Your
Justice, to defend a Cause allowed of by so many Kings: and it is an act
becoming Your Prudence, to drive away those underminers of Kingdoms, and
supporters of the Papacy, by whose judgment all that You now possess is given
to them as a Prey. Your Predecessor Queen Elizabeth did this, and so we hope
will You, and that with the greater ease, by how much You are in the prime of
Your age, have a more man-like Authority, a more ample Power, and a House well
settled upon the happy foundation of a hopeful Issue. Our fidelity shall in part
supply Your Work and Charge, by whose prosperity and adversity it has been
made evident that the Spaniards could be conquered. It Is true, Peace is a most
excellent Jewel, and worthy of high estimation among Christians; but that that
is made with Tyrants and treacherous people is little better then War. If all
they that are joined in the Cause would unite their wealth, he would be
deprived of the Netherlands: and if that punishment would not yet make him
wise, he should be driven out of the Sea, and all his maritime Dominions, which
would be no hard matter for the Hollanders and English to effect: and this
certainly would make him glad to come to a true Peace, the best maintainer
whereof was equality of Forces. Now is the siege of Ostend protracted unto the
third year, so that having endured so long a misery, we humbly entreat You to
aid us with supplies for relief thereof; for which purpose you may make use of
those ships which by the Queen 's command were furnished and instructed with
Arms and provisions by us, being eleven in number, and now wait for nothing
but your Royal command.

Hereto the King very courteously answered as to the matter of friendship, but
as to the rest he excused himself by the infancy of his Dominion, but in time
he would see what was best to be done, in the interim not concealing, that as
much as he could he would prefer all counsels tending to Peace: for hitherto
he had had no difference with the Spaniard, and also Philip had voluntarily
offered him his assistence, if any dispute should have arisen concerning his
Kingdom; and himself being of a mild disposition and well grounded in all kind
of Literature, had spent his time in studies rather inclinable to Peace then
War: And the Archduke being supposed to have made war with the Queen, not with
the Realm, had by Edict forbidden any damage to be done to the English, sending
home besides all Prisoners they had that were that Contrymen; and soon after
he sent Charles Prince of Arenberg Ambassador to the King, as also the Spaniard
sent Don John Baptista Taxis to the same, for the promoting a Peace, concerning
which the year following there was an agreement.

When the Ambassadors of Holland saw they could not prevent it, they endeavored
to delay it, and to give the King some hopes that they likewise might obtain
Peace together with their Liberty, if the King by procrastinations or delay
would suffer the Spanish counsels, which yet depended upon the event of a few
years, to grow toward perfection. And this was the discovery of Olden
Barneveldt, who was thoroughly versed in all the secrets of the United
Provinces, producing the Duke of Brunswick's hand, whom the Emperor Rudolphus
had acquainted with that affair. But King James his have was not at all
slackened in making that Peace: whereupon the Hollanders only contended, that
if they could not obtain a show of assistence, yet that they might not be
denied right. These their desires were seconded by the French King, who was
very sollicitous for the support of his allies, and to that end he had sent
into England Maximilian de Rohan his chief Treasurer and a Privycounsellor. At
last this Medium was found, That whatever moneys the French should lay out in
behalf of the Hollanders, the third part thereof should be charged to the
English, and all accounts to be discharged wherein France impoverished by her
Wars was indebted to Britain. The States were content herewith, although they
were offered by Sir Ralph Winwood, the King of great Britain's Orator, to be
comprehended in the Articles of the Treaty if they pleased; which they refused
with great thanks. The rest of the year King James spent in performing and
receiving the Solemnities of the Kingdom, and in viewing his new Dominion of
England, giving audience at Intervalls to the Ambassadors of other Kings and
the gratulations of his own subjects; Tyrone himself, the great Captain of the
Irish Rebels, coming, and upon his humble submission obtaining pardon.

Concerning Religion several complaints were offered by two sorts of people:
The one in England are called Puritans, being a people that do not esteem the
Ecclesiastical State or Church Government there to be sufficiently orthodox and
sincere, but requiring therein more purity, from whence sprung the original of
that hated name of Separation. These find fault with many Ceremonies retained
from custom and antiquity, as the Orders of Bishops, some Ceremonies added (as
they say) in the Sacrament of Baptism, and others things more tending to
Discipline then Doctrine: A change, or at least an amendment, of all which they
now hoped from hence, because the Scots had already rejected the same. On the
other side, the Catholics with high applauses magnifying the antiquity of
their Religion as well in Britain as elsewhere, and setting forth their
fidelity both to the King himself at present, and heretofore to his Mother,
petitioned, that if he would not give them public allowance, which yet in
France the King allowed to dissenters, that at least they might privately and
without fear of punishment worship God according to the custom of their
Fathers. But the King rejected both these suits, suspecting the Catholics for
no other cause, but that the Pope claims power over Kings: but the King was
offended at the Puritans, because by men of the same Faction, under pretense of
Ecclesiastical authority, he had irreverently been used in Scotland. Whereupon
also he accused their perverseness and obstinacy publicly set forth in Print:
for he would have each Nation be free to use their own Rites which were not
contradictory to the Divine Law, but the supreme Authority even in matters
Ecclesiastical should continue in the King. Yet something was settled according
to the desire of the Catholics, viz. That the Sacrament of Baptism should not
be administered by women or private persons; that many Ecclesiastical promotions
should not be accumulated upon one person; and that Church Censures should be
strict and severe, both in the inquisition and punishment of errors either in
the life or doctrine of the Priesthood. But the words of the Puritans became so
offensive, that many of their nonconforming Ministers were punished by
Imprisonments, Banishment and abjuration of the Realm. Notwithstanding which
some of the Romanists, associating others with them who were desirous of
novelty, conspired to set up to the Government the Lady Arabella, a Virgin
sprung from the blood Royal, dividing among themselves the chief places of
honor and preferment through the Kingdom. The authors of this Treason were
punished with the loss of their heads: the accessories thereto and such as had
concealed the same were cast into prison, and the fear of imminent death was
reckoned to them for a sufficient punishment; the King being prone to win
repute to his new Government by the fame of his Clemency.

While these things were doing in England, Enno Count of Friesland beyond Eems,
having really learned that he might easily obtain from the Emperor both words
and threats against the City, but that he could not give him a power to put the
same in execution, he resolved to try the favor of them that were most potent
among the Hollanders, and to that purpose he went to the Hague, urging many
things both privately and publicly in his own defense, and objecting many
things against the Embdoners, as being of a wavering temper in their fidelity,
not well knowing either to govern or be governed. At the same time were present
some Deputies from Embden, behaving themselves with much obstinacy and notable
irreverence toward their Prince then present. At length after many long
debates the United States, not doubting the fidelity of the City toward them,
bent all their resolutions for the security thereof; and it was concluded, that
the Delphzilian agreements should be observed: whereto besides were added, That
for the future there be an Edict of Indemnity and Oblivion for all things
already done, nor should the Count exact the Penalties set by the Emperor's
Decree: That both should be restored to their houses and lands, all prisoners
be released, and all instruments of war and other received profits be accounted
for: And that Enno should endeavor to set free all strangers, being really
such, nor should deny his safe conduct in writing to all Ships going from the
City: That the Tributes imposed upon the City the third and the fifth year
before should all be made null, and that there should be a consultation had in
the Senate of the Transamasians for the settlement of new; the right of
summoning which should be in the Count, but if he neglected to do it, then
they might meet by themselves, and consult of their common affairs: That it
should not be lawful to denounce a War or levy soldiers without the decree of
that Council; only the Count might retain as many as should be sufficient for
the guarding his Castles and strong holds, and likewise that the City might
raise seven hundred soldiers for the defense thereof and maintaining their
works: That the Transamasians should maintain the soldiers, the charge of the
works should be born by the Townsmen; and what goods were within a Town should
be equally distributed, and whatever was enclosed within any fortifications
should enjoy the same privileges with the City it self: That the Magistrates
of Embden should be created by the Senate of the City, and that the Count to
that creation should add his authority.

When therefore the Count and the Deputies of the City had agreed upon these
conditions, it remained that the whole Magistracy of the City and the States of
the Transamasians should allow of and ratify the same: which was very likely to
have been done, the Nobility being afraid of War, as that which would wast
their Lands, and some being sent by the United States to enforce force such as
should offer to delay the same; the greatest part of the garrison also was
withdrawn, that the fade of affairs might appear more peaceable. But new hopes
from the Emperor changed Enno absolutely, insomuch that it was publicly said
that those Covenants were of no force that should disannull the Emperor's
Edict, pardon Crimes, and grant a power of fortifying Towns, and all this
without the Emperor's consent, whose authority in that City was supreme. And
soon after Rudolphus, being not a little angry that the affairs of Embden
should be transacted by a foreign power, sent Maximilian Count of Cocheine to
the States, who grievously accusing the Embdeners, related the causes which had
moved the Emperor long since to declare both to others, and to them the United
States, that they should give no assistence to those Rebels; and that
nevertheless they had invaded the City with their soldiers, begun a War in the
Country, and taken booties: for the repressing and taking away of which
injuries, the Emperor had sent his Commands by him. Which done, he recited
particularly what things seemed unjust in that last Agreement. To these things
the United States, although they were more proudly reproved, yet returned this
modest answer. That Enno came of his own accord to them, and had voluntarily
entered into those Covenants: and that it is not usual to blame those that had
used their endeavors in the composing their neighbors differences: Also that
they had as little as possibly they could receded from the Delphzilian
Covenants, which they understood pleased the Emperor: and that they had sent
their soldiers into the City, not to offer an injury to the Emperor, but lest
the Spaniard, who by the Peace made at Verbin had taken to himself all the
right of Authority in the Country beyond the Eems, should seize it, being so
convenient to infest the Hollanders, and at once withdraw it from the German
Empire. Thus had he taken formerly Utrecht, Gelders, and other places beyond
the Rhine: Thus had he seized Millain, and some peculiar appurtenances of the
Empire, and at last Cambray; and all this without contradiction. Nor were the
Letters and Messengers sent by Enno to the King and other Spanish Commanders
without cause suspected by them. To these good words they added some gifts to
the Ambassador; however as yet all things at Embden were full of hatred and
dissension, every one being suspicious of another.

This also made the Hollanders more incensed against Enno, because his brother
John, as we said before, having obtained license from the Pope to marry with
Enno's Daughter, to whom he was Uncle, promoted the Roman Rites in the Country
of Paderborn, and did the Bishop's business there, breaking into the City upon
them who had kept it upon pretense of liberty, raging against them with most
exquisite torments, among whom the Consul of the Town was tormented, and
afterward cut in pieces.

The latter end of Winter the Spaniard suddenly took and lost Wachtendonck. For
a Fisherman being hired brought into the Castle fifteen soldiers under the
command of Matthew Dulken, (he was the Governor of Stralen not far off) which
were covered over with straw; and upon the approach of the Sentinel, that
stretched forth his hand to help him up, drawing his sword he thrust him
through; then all the soldiers leaped up, and strove to admit their companions
that were on the other side of the river Neeres, forcing the bridges that were
kept against them, which they did by that time their fellows who lay in ambush
not far off arrived. But the garrison of the Town, although the Castle and the
Governor Rihoven were taken, began to raise a mount and battery against it, and
with speed to bring thither Cannon. And by chance it happened, that two troops
of Hollanders that had been abroad foraging rode by, which hearing of the
Tumult, entered the Town; and presently soldiers being sent for to Berck and
Moers, they begirt the Castle, and the sixth day after recovered it being
sorely assaulted and withal wanting of provision.

Not long after Grobbendon^, laying some ambushes in the Champains of Brabant,
surprised five troops of Maurician horse, and though he were inferior to them
in number, killed near seventy of them: many men and horses were taken, and the
rest fled. But this damage suffered by the horse was doubly recompensed by a
more famous naval victory. For Frederick Spinola weary of an inglorious
idleness, and hastening out of the greatness of his spirit to purchase honor and
wealth by the wasting of Zeland, furnished eight galleys of the bigger sort and
four lesser with chosen soldiers out of the Camp before Ostend, besides a
great number of slaves that rowed; and going out of the Haven of Scluys, the
wind gently seconding his desires, he got over the Sands, and spying the
Enemie's Fleet, chose a place to fight with them in, upon the open Sea. Three
Zeland Ships of war had beset the Port, over which one Justus Moon had the
Command, besides two Galleys, one of Holland, the other of Zeland: four of
these (the fifth for want of wind being very far distant, and giving no other
assistence to the battle then with its great Guns) voluntarily setting forward,
Spinola set upon close at hand with a great outcry, compassing sometimes this,
sometimes the other, with more violence, as hope led him on, distressing them
with the multitude of his shot, and, indeed, over-powerfull for them, as well
by the help of the weather as the number of his Ships and soldiers: for in the
Hollanders Fleet were no more then six and thirty soldiers out of the Town of
Flushing, who were armed with Muskets; but the company of Seamen, being
naturally inclinable to war, skilled in the use of their Arms and Guns, both
near at hand and at distance, freely gave wounds to their Enemies both with
their Swords and Javelins. And now the fight grew so hot, that the very clouds
of smoke had eclipsed the light from their eyes, so that it seemed to be a
nocturnal fight, until Frederick himself, with great valor and confidence
assailing one of the Enemies Ships, was killed with several wounds, and with
him above three hundred others, beside many hurt: but the breaking of the Oars
was the first thing that took away all hope of Victory from the Italians:
hereupon they were surprised with fear, lest more Ships coming out of Zeland
should encompass them on every side, and so in time they retreated to the
Fleet. This victory of the Zelanders with so small loss, which happened because
the ribs of their Ships were more solid and compact, and less open to the
damage of the bullets, made that great terror of those at first unknown Vessels
come to nothing, for that it was experimentally found, that they might be
overcome, even in the most calm and serene weather.

There was no War any where until the midst of Summer, but before Ostend,
because the Hollanders not receiving those aids out of England and Scotland
which they hoped, had enough to do to defend their own; and the Archduke
minding to take Berck and to pass the Rhine, for the perfecting these new
designs, he procures new forces out of Spain and Italy, under the conduct of
Ambrose Spinola: besides he raised in Germany foot-souldiers, and in Lorrain
horsemen; and after they arrived, Spinola being left at Ostend, seven thousand
foot and three thousand horse were delivered to Frederick Count Heremberg, and
his first orders were, to drive out those who had violently seated themselves
in Hochstraten. This Philip had commanded as well for security sake at present,
as for example sake in the future, and lest while he turned his Arms to other
parts, they should invade the places left destitute of defense; for of late
they had spoiled the Province of Namur, taken the Town of Jedin and the
Governor of Carpen Castle, and yet returned safe and full of booty. At this
time they in Hochstraten held a most severe discipline, and worthy of imitation
by the best soldiers: their guards and watches were very diligently looked
after, neither was any permitted to go into a bed or put off his clothes while
he took his rest; no women were suffered to come within the Castle; to fight
among themselves, and to have any secret conferences or letters, was a capital
offense. These laws were established and confirmed by punishments of offenders
without pardon. These understanding that they were like to be besieged, sent to
the States and Prince Maurice, and beseech and beg their aid, promising upon
their faith, that they would jointly and unanimously fight against the Enemy;
but protesting that they would have all prisoners they should take at their own
dispose, because the laws of War were usually denied among Enemies to such as
were renegadoes. Eight hundred of them were shut up in the Castle; the rest,
being fifteen hundred foot and above a thousand horse, expect Prince Maurice,
who hearing that Count Heremberg was now come, and began to do all acts of
hostility against the Castle, draws together little less then ten thousand foot
and three thousand horse out of their Winter Quarters, and speeds with them to
Geertruydenberg. In which City happened a sad spectacle, the French and English
by mutual quarrels among themselves falling together by the ears, being
Nations always emulous of one another: insomuch that now there began a perfect
battle between the whole Regiments, some being killed, more wounded, and the
Colonel of the French, Monsieur Bethune, himself running in between them to
prohibit their fighting, was killed, which much incensed the minds of his men.
Scarcely could the sight or speech of the Nassavian Commanders or of the Prince
himself prevail to deter the further increase of this impious and increasing
slaughter. Here Prince Maurice's forces joining with those of the seditious,
they marched together, though soldiers of different obligations and
principles, by a new and strange kind of example. Between the fields and the
Enemies Camp was a little rivulet, the ground all about which is very moory:
this Count Heremberg either by error, or tot suspecting the coming of Prince
Maurice, had neglected to possess. The Prince having by prepared bridges
brought over his soldiers and artillery, on a sudden faces the Enemy with his
Army. But Count Heremberg kept himself within the safeguard of the place and
the defense of his carriages, which he had placed in form of a rampire, only
the horse were commanded to advance, which produced some light skirmishes. Nor
did Prince Maurice think meet to set upon the Enemies entire until he had
tried all places that might be advantageous to himself or the Enemy. Count
Heremberg fearing, as other things, so to be debarred of provisions, through
the help of the night withdrew first his Cannon, and afterward his soldiers,
toward Herentalls, in the mean while keeping watches against the Enemy, that
he might be the better able to deceive them. But when the appearance of
daylight had discovered their design, they which were in the Castle first fell
in their rear, where among others was slain Rosney (the son of a famous
Commander both in France and the Low Countries,) who at that time commanded the
Lorraign soldiers. But another small river hindered Prince Maurice from his
intended pursuit of the Enemy, for that it was fordable only with great
difficulty, besides the way was narrow and full of water; yet moving on forward
with the horse he found the Enemy newly passed the streights, and his Army
drawn into battalia in the open fields: and although the Hochstrateners were
very earnest to fight, as well in their own revenge, as in giving a proof of
their affection and valor to their new friends, yet it was not thought fit to
fight this Army thus drawn up, and ordered without the foot and Artillery,
which followed but slowly after over the difficulties of an uliginous way,
besides the toilsome grievousness of the weather, which was disturbed with
continual rain and tempests. Thus the siege being raised, Prince Maurice boldly
threw himself into the midst of the seditious soldiers, that by this great
confidence of them he might oblige them to him the more strictly. And now he
again resolved, while part of the Enemies forces were with him, to besiege 's
Hertogenbosch, which by the cruelty of the Winter the last year he was forced
to break off, his confidence resting only in celerity, if the City could be
surrounded void of a garrison, as it then was. But the matter being related to
the Council of the States, the Zelanders pressing to make war in Flanders, yet
at last the Prince was permitted to do what should seem most convenient to the
Commonwealth, but in the mean while eight days were spent. And although Count
Heremberg's forces were prepared and increased purposely to disturb all designs
of the Prince, yet he continued in his resolution, not so much out of any hopes
of attaining the City, as because he would keep the Enemy busied in trifling,
and himself not be compelled to the defense of his own elsewhere, and to depend
wholly upon uncertain events. Some were of opinion that the Townsmen, wearied
with the miseries of war, would either alter their fidelity, or at leastwise
do that as should make them seem so moderate to both parties, that they should
neither fear nor be feared. Therefore the Summer being now well entered, the
Prince sat down at the Village named Vuchten, and the Huhstrateners at Vlimen,
in the way to Hoesden, there being a great distance of ground between the two
Camps. The third day after Count Heremberg drew nigh, and in the woody places
toward that part where the City lay open, in the Village of Dalem, fortified
himself, casting up defenses against Prince Maurice. He, on the other side,
erected some Sconces and Batteries with great Guns, where the ground ceasing to
be plain swells up into little hills; and much time was carelessly spent in
light skirmishes and wasting of shot. At last Heremberg was advised to erect a
Fort without the City, near the way that leads from Vuchten to Vlimen, to this
intent, that the passage being stopped from Prince Maurice's Camp to that of
the Hochstrateners, a more hopeful opportunity might be expected against them
being divided, or that by a scarcity of Victuals, which were brought from
Hoesden to the Camp, the siege might be removed or broken up of necessity. The
charge of this business was: committed to the Marquess of Bella, Colonel of
the Italians, with two thousand soldiers, the flour of diverse Regiments; which
being carried round about the City in the night, had brought the designed work
to some perfection, the ground being thrown up and mingled with faggots to the
height of a man: whereof the Prince receiving intelligence, not till it was
very late in the night, he with the most active and valiant of his men flying
thither, excited every one to this no less difficult then necessary business.
The English valiantly made the first assault, and were no less courageously
repulsed; but the French strongly seconding them, soon made the place too hot
for the Enemy, and the gates of the Town being shut, they having no place of
refuge to fly to, nor any relief to assist them, were slain together with their
Commander, or drowned in the adjoining marshes: about one hundred and fifty
were taken prisoners. It happened by chance about the same time, that the
Archduke at Ostend striving to restrain the going in and out of the soldiers
by some sharp and severe punishments, getting a Ship which stuck upon the
Shallows, wherein were only twelve sick soldiers, he hanged them all,
pretending they were not taken at land, but upon the Sea, where there are no
laws of Arms to be observed: the news of which being brought to the Camp,
Prince Maurice esteeming it an act of great cruelty and wickedness, not having
any relation to a war at Sea, that he might make the Laws of Arms settled among
all Enemies to be of esteem, by a return of the like cruelty caused twelve,
chosen at hap-hazard out of the whole number of prisoners, to be hanged, yet
one of them out of pity to his tender age was spared; though some did not stick
to aver, that the known and well-approved law of covenants being infringed so
barbarously, ought to be expiated not only with the punishment of the like,
but rather of a double number. Certainly it was a sad sight, and not to be
forgotten among the many evils of war, when young men of good breeding and
ingenuity, and not deserving any such thing, with sorrowful countenances,
trembling hands, and between prayers and sighs, not so much fearing death as
the ignominious kind thereof, should draw and look upon their fates enclosed in
bits of paper, either of condemnation for another fault, or of pardon not for
innocencie's sake, but the chance of fortune. Yet there was one found of so
desperate a temerity, who by his own good luck set free, yet, hired by another,
once more put his life in jeopardy for the safeguard of the other. But the
Townsmen defended themselves only by shot: yet it fortuned that the Marquess
of Malaspina and one Oliver Tempel, passing from the Prince's to the Vlimian
Camp, had both their legs broken at one shot. Malaspina was a person much
knowing in all Albertus his counsels of war, and being lately taken prisoner
by the Hochstrateners survived, though in a very weak condition. But Oliver
died of his wound, having fought on the States behalf above twenty years, so
that now he was Judge-Advocate of the Army, and besides at that time was set
over the Hochstrateners, by his reason to keep in order their violence.
Afterward Albertus himself came to the City, and trying all things, observed
that there was a slight Sconce built by the Mauricians in a square form, not
far from the place where the Marquess of Bella was lately slain. Of this place
the Archduke saying, it was necessary to be taken, (and without doubt for the
future it would have been of great use to him) news thereof was privily
conveyed and brought to the Prince by the intelligence of a soldier that fled
from them to him. Some days being past, one night, a little before the break of
day, making as if they intended an assault in diverse places, their main
strength wholly aimed at the destined place. Nor did Prince Maurice being
forewarned of the danger omit at the same time to draw down thither the most
courageous both of his own men, and some of the choicest of the Hochstrateners,
putting out all the fires. The appearance of the day discovered a Battery of
nine great Guns opposite to the Fort, and others directed from the
Town-Bulwarks and other Fortresses, wherewith the Sconce being violently
battered on all hands was so shattered, that the soldiers hid themselves in
the hollow places of the ground; yet the Prince came to them, and threatened
severely to hang any that should desert the place. At the same time he placed a
circle of musketeers round the whole circumference of the Trench, and commanded
three Cannon to be brought out of the Camp, wherewith the Enemies strength
being repressed, and the assailants forced to become defendants, leaving the
Boats which they had brought for the more easy passing the interjacent
marshes, and scarcely saving their great Guns, the Mauricians took all the
Mattocks, Faggots, Hurdles and other things prepared for destruction, and
converted them all to the repairing and augmentation of their own Works. The
Archduke designing several attempts against the Enemy, (which indeed was the
main cause of his coming) commanded three thousand Soldiers, which he
pretended should only march through the Town, to remain there in Garrison;
which made the Citizens complain grievously of the breach of those Covenants
which for twenty years together had been inviolably preserved. But necessity
and the fear of punishment quickly made them silent; also there was a strong
Fortress raised close by the City, which might serve instead of a Castle,
though it had not the name of one. And at the beginning of Winter, the ground
being marishy and full of water, the Armies departed. When the seditious, whose
labors this year had been great and exemplary, desiring another place of
safety might be given them for Hochstraten, wherein they might have more room,
and that lay more convenient for forage; the matter hanging long in debate
before the States, Prince Maurice of his own accord admitted them into Grave, a
Town belonging to himself, that they might remain within the Walls, and have
the command of all the Bulwarks about it, but not to do any injury to the
Citizens. And the Covenants formerly made were renewed and confirmed,
concerning the dividing of the spoil, and that they should not infest or spoil
any of the Countries belonging either to the Germane Empire or the United
States: as long as they continued at difference with Albertus, they should not
spare their best pains and labor, yet so as they always should remain
separate in all marches, and be free from all servile works of digging and
assaults: that when they should be reconciled, they should restore Grave and
receive Hochstraten, for performance whereof they engaged their faith and gave
pledges.

These were the transactions in those parts, while in the interim about Ostend
the War greatly increased and therewith not the charge only, but the
political inventions and stratagems also. And now the Winter being past, that
had sometimes been offensive to these, other-while to those, as the force of
the wind drove the waters and made them more turbulent; in the middle of the
Spring a fierce assault was made from the Camp upon all the quarters of the
Town; and when the Defendants were not able to sustain so violent and spreading
a force, three Forts were taken by the Enemy, (which lying on the backside of
the Town, at the conflux of the waters, we mentioned before to be slightly
guarded) and some few days after the besieged making a sally upon the same
places, which wanted success, made the Enemy not only increase the number of
his Guards, but to put therein of his choicest men. But other small Forts
beyond the Gollet assaulted by Bucquoy were successfully maintained. Colonel
Dorpen was then Governor of the Town, whose time being spent, he was succeeded
by Colonel Notte. Toward the middle of Summer Ambrose Count Spinola came to
Ostend, promising an end to this hard (and by some esteemed desperate) work, if
he might have the chief command in the Camp. Nor did he undertake this out of
any vain temerity, but by the sound informations of those by whom both the
place and method of the War were well understood, especially after the way
was found through the water over great piles of wood, a work only of time and
diligence, whereby the Works of the Town might be taken from them as it were by
piecemeal. And this desire of Spinola was the more easily consented to by King
Philip, because besides many eminent virtues of a noble mind, whereof he had
given certain testimonies, he offered also out of his private wealth to
prescribe a remedy to the affairs of the Treasury at that time very much out of
order. He was at first very greatly envied, because being an Italian, and but
newly come into the War, among so many Netherlanders and Spaniards, he
commanded at once both the Soldiers and Treasury: but he diligently minding
all things, and following the most prudent, by little and little overcame it
And presently removed such as had made a gain of the Treasury, having prepared
his own provisions, because there was need of money to prevent mutinies and
running away. Besides, the hope of rewards had brought thither the most famous
Wits of Christendom, among whom there was great emulation in finding out new
ways of approaching, battering and assaulting Towns, and as any ones inventions
came to most perfection in the executive part, so was the care of the General
more ready to gratify him with a certain reward. No less valor or industry
was shown by the besieged, for they took care, lest their provisions should be
straightened, that all commanded allowances should be publicly delivered; and,
for their defense, were unwearied in their Watches yea, and sometimes were
confident enough to make Sallies; besides, what either the violence of the
Enemy or the Sea had thrown down, they employed skilful workmen to repair. To
believe so great a number of men shut up in so narrow a compass, and obnoxious
to so many dangers, wounds and labors, and yet to find no contagion bred
among them, next to the providence of God, must needs be attributed partly to
the extraordinary care of the Surgeons and Physicians, and partly to the
care of the States, which always caused the sick or wounded with all diligence
to be carried thence. Moreover, besides the harm they did by burning bullets
and hand-granadoes and the like new inventions, they did other great damage to
the Enemies materials being now through dry by the heat of the weather. The
chief labor of the Assailants was concerning some Boats that were built for
the carriage of great Guns, by the same Engineer which we mentioned before,
Targon a Roman, a man of a very subtle wit, but altogether unexperienced in
Martial affairs. Part of these were sent to the left hand of the Town, where
the Sea was not so boisterous, to the Forts that lay nearest to the Enmy; but
on the right hand, where the Gollet is, the shot being unequally levelled, they
did little or no harm, most of them being spoiled by the impetuousness of the
waters, because stones being bound up in great bundles of wood, the bands
thereof quickly breaking, the rest floated, having lost the weight that kept it
down. Yet was not Spinola dismayed thereat, but still added more Boats to the
former, learning new ways of Fortification, from the very experience they
gained from their losses: And the battery of Count Bucquoy being by little and
little advanced nearer the Town, it came to pass that Ships came in and out
with more difficulty to bring in Soldiers, Victuals, Guns, or Gunpowder, some
after that falling upon the Shallows, or being swallowed up in the Sea, when
they had in striving to enter endured the fury of the Enemies Artillery.
Against the shot from the Town the Besiegers partly chose the night, partly
used Works made of earth to keep out the water, wherein were transfixed several
rows of Piles and Faggots, where they had settled in places of more safety;
otherwise they sunk great Vessels filled with stuff underneath the water.

But in Spain with the King, who in the practice of his Affairs did most things
by the counsel ot Strangers, not his own judgment, sometimes new counsels were
preferred before old, other times the old regained their former repute, as the
authority of persuading or hope of the event led every one. Some averred that
it was a great error of State to forbid the Hollanders traffic with Spain,
they being a People potent at Sea, and seeking Merchandise from the farthest
parts of the earth, either by Arms or otherwise, and going to the Indies, to
the no small (though new and hitherto unheard of) damage of the Spaniards. With
how much more wisdom did his Father attain a hope of Peace from that custom
of the Provinces among themselves, having always a convenient number of Ships,
as often as occasion required made ready for him by his very Enemies? If a
remedy should be sought for present and future mischiefs, it must be by taking
away necessity from the Hollanders; for that very thing first showed them their
own strength. This counsel, in it self not absurd, was yet found fault with and
disallowed by covetousness: for though Trade was publicly confirmed by Edict,
yet there was so great a Tribute and Custom, besides what was formerly, laid
upon all Merchandise, that it amounted to little less then the third part of
the price of the commodity; to wit, thirty in the hundred was to be paid to the
King's Exchequer. And this was not laid upon the Hollanders only, but all
other Nations, lest otherwise the Hollanders should shelter themselves under
the names of others; and for some private causes of hatred against those by
whose assistence it was believed the War was supported. Only some immunity
was granted to those that lived within the Arch-duke's Territories, or should
impor any thing into his inland Sea. And this was added as a clause peculiar to
the Hollanders, that it should not be lawful to import any Merchandises made by
themselves, nor should any of those things be paid to their Pilots for wages,
which they either imported or exported. Besides, they were commanded to take
the Archduke's safe conduct with them. Which things being very grievous and
unjust, did not only not prevail against the United States, but much incensed
the King of France also: so that first, he laid the like Impositions upon the
Spaniard; and when that seemed not a sufficient revenge, he forbade all the
French to Trade into Spain so long as Philip's Edict remained in force, on pain
first to lose all their goods, and after that to receive corporal punishment.
Nor did the Archduke's dissembled clemency succeed any be^^r, when he
proclaimed safety of return to all living among or dealing with the Enemy, and
not blasted with any other crime, and that whatsoever they had formerly
possessed, and was now in the Exchequer, should be restored to them, only
debarring them of the power of alienation. The words of this Edict were filled
with many fraudulent deceits: for all kind of Religion was directed to be
punished thereby except the Roman; and the settlement of their Families
detained many in Holland, as well as the certainty of the gain they made there.
About this time the Hollanders suffered some small damages by the Dunkerkers;
among the rest, they took some Holland Ships, out of the very Thames, being
deceived by the Pirates bearing the same colors with their Companions.

On the other side the Indian Company sent thirteen Ships to the East Indies,
commanded by Stephen Van Hague: and the States sent out six others, under the
command of Paul Carden, to spoil the coast of Brasile. This Winter was sharp
and very tempestuous, by force whereof a Whale was driven up the Schelde, and
found not far from Antwerp, which, for the rarity of the thing, yielded the
Vulgar matter of discourse, drawing Omens of good or evil from the meanest of
creatures. Some a year before this vented threats against that City, which
proved far more vain then terrible, as the event afterward proved.

The Thirteenth BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
1604.
AMONG all these things, Albertus did not omit consultations of Peace, either
out of a real hope that he might attain the same, or that he might throw upon
the Enemy the envy* for the refusal thereof: to which intent the Count
Bassiguy, son of Boxtel, by the Archduke's command required a safe conduct from
the States. They returned Answer, That if be would treat by Letters, they would
he ready, but they could not consent that he should come to them. The Archduke
resolved for this cause, and by occasion of the late troubles of Embden, that
he would accuse the Hollanders as Enemies of his and their Neighbors peace at
the Germane Diet held at Ratisbone, whereof his brother Matthias was the
Moderator. And there were some who, out of affection to the House of Austria,
or for the difference of Religion, were very bitter in their Opinions, crying
out that there should be appointed Articles for settlement of Peace, and they
that refused to lay down Arms voluntarily should be compelled by force. The
more moderate were against the using of force, making only a decree for
sending an Embassy to the States; and while that was preparing, the Emperor in
the mean while sent Letters, wherein he recited all the evils done to the
neighbour-Princes, and what several Cities had suffered, commanding them to
make restitution of whatever they had taken away by violence. Moreover he laid
to their charge, not only what their own Soldiers had done, but also the
rapines committed by the Hochstrateners, in regard they had undertaken their
defense. Whereto the States, excusing what belonged to themselves, said that
the faults of the seditious Soldiers ought to be ascribed to them that with
the danger of others would defraud the Soldiers they hired of their pay. That
they had sought nothing but their own safety, and yet as much as they could
they had in all Covenants consulted the peace of Germany. But these injuries
were not so easily wiped off by good words, since that in the beginning of this
year (which we are now entering upon) the seditious left nothing undone toward
the Germans which is usual toward an Enemy, slighting all their threats, so
long as they proceeded no further then words. For that Winter after they had
sacked Eindhoven in Brabant, and Erkelen a Town in Gelderland, rich with the
prey there for many years heaped together by Albertus his Soldiers, they fell
upon a Troup going out of Gelderland, and besides took the Castle of Carpen
well and fitly seated for excursions, having in all these actions the
Hollanders Horse to accompany them; and as soon as they were departed, they fell
into West phalia, compelling the Towns and Country to redeem themselves from
fear by the payment of Tribute. They shot off their Guns at Colen, and killed
near four hundred, Paderbornians, for two Soldiers killed by the ^oors, while
they behaved themselves with great insolency. Moreover, they raged with all
kind of lust and cruelty, even to the burning of Towns; so that, if even those
unhappy people deserved pity, it was now, when for so many years they had been
afflicted with all the miseries of a foreign War, more grievously almost then
if they themselves had been engaged in the Quarrel.

The States, perceiving the danger of Ostend to draw right, resolved to drive
the Enemy from the siege, or draw him off, or to attempt another place, whereby
they right both preserve their honor, and keep a passage into Flanders;
wherefore gathering together money in time, and levying Soldiers on all hands,
they obtained a new Regiment of Scots under Colonel Barclay, and some recruits
of English, not, as formerly, by authority of the King, but only by his
permission. In the middle of the Spring, while part of the Horse with the
seditious of the Enemy fall into Brabant, and the report of the War spread
into every place amused the Enemy; the Prince, accompanied with the Senate and
Deputies of the Spares, carried out of Walcheren into Cazant his Army,
consisting of about twelve thousand. This Cazant is a Region in Flanders which
the Sea beats upon, and on that side toward the East is compassed with the
River Ateren, on the other with the large Haven of Scluys, and on the backside
with other waters, like an Island. From the River Ateren the Army was landed,
which certainly was a great oversight, that it was not carried into the Haven
of Scluys, which was the opinion of the Council of the States: from which if
the Prince had not been dissuaded by others, out of a fear of greater danger,
he might have taken the Town by force, having then a very little or no
Garrison; and had also come upon them at Ostend while they were full of fear,
and before they were aware, and dispersed far distant one from another; or
else he might if he pleased have fought them, or at least have stopped all
provision from the Enemy. In the mean while, Soldiers sent from the Camp at
Ostend and elsewhere had filled the farther bank of the Haven at Sclays,
Spinola taking care for it, who before had sent forth several Spies and Scouts,
that were to bring word of the coming of the Fleet. And although the Holland
Ships of War had compelled the Enemies Galleys to retreat to the Town; for
fear the mouth of the Haven should be stopped, they battered with their Cannon
a small ^ort situate on the opposite bank; for he could not put over thither
any Soldiers, having twice In vain attempted it; Pompey Justin^no making
resistance with two thousand men. This Gentleman was the chief of all the
Colonels in Spinola's counsels; and besides the honor of his knowledge in
Martial affairs, he mo^ed very well in his accurate writing thereof. And how
Prince Maurice inquiring what way he might best take to go into the inner part
of Flanders, by chance a Countryman, flying from thence to escape a small party
of the Enemy that was come thither and pursued also, showed him a Ford in that
channel which compasses Cazant behind, where a bank being raised, and the
adjoining Fort taken called Coxen, a Bridge and Garrison was placed, they
having time enough free from the Enemy, while Trio^lci and Justiniano differed
in counsel among themselves. There were two other Fortresses hard by called by
the names of Katharine and P^^, which yielded sooner then could be hoped or
imagined: for Katharine Sconce being sorely bruised with bullets, was deserted
by Trivulci, even when Prince Maurice despairing of the work had commanded his
Artillery to he drawn off; nor did Trivulci only go o^ with his Soldiers,
but the tumultuary band of Countrymen that were mixed with them; for they
hearing a noise, which was of the Enemie's marching away, which they
interpreted to be an increase of their Forces, and that they were coming to
shut up all the Avenues, fled to Fort Philip, nor staid they there, but p^sted
to Ysendike, leaving in Philips Fort threescore in number, who upon sight of
the Enemy with all speed delivered the place. Thence for the winning of Ysen^ke
(which is a Fort in the utmost coast of Flanders (...) the Hont) a siege was
thought necessary; for all the Enemy that were driven from other places had
here ^ed themselves, to the number of six hundred: and the seventh day after
the place was surrendered. Prince Maurice being busied there, the Enemy
approached in hope to recover Cazant, and in the night endeavored to have passed
in Boats to that purpose provided. And (...) six hundred were come thither
unobserved, others following them; but at last being spied by the Scots, who
had the charge of the place, these Enemies by their ^^lotons force were quickly
put to flight and killed. Behind Scluys lies Ardenburg, now showing only the
remains of a sometimes far more noble Town; this the Prince, finding the
Soldiers that were left for the defense thereof fled, entered, and commanded
the same to be fortified: and passing from Middleburg (which is a free City not
far off) and in the Castle, which is the only place of defense, placing
Soldiers, he now began to revolve in his mind the siege of Scluys. Because
the Enemy had preoccupied all the places lying between Ostend, he spread
himself to the two Rivers which from Damme and Bruges pass to Scluys, being
divided by a small limit, yet so different in taste, that from thence they have
attained the names of salt and fresh water: but where the Lake named Merkerk
streightens the way leading thither, (as indeed almost all that Country is full
of water) Lewis Velasco by the Arch-duke's command had fortified himself, and
going out with a strong Party, Fortune smiling upon the Enemies, in the attempt
they made upon those they first met, before the Horse that were added to him
could come in to his help, he with his whole number was overthrown; five
hundred almost were drowned, and three hundred taken: and thus they came to the
Rivers; and although the Enemy had planted himself between, on one part
dissembling, on the other side finding a passage, first went over at a Ford,
and afterward over Bridges to that purpose builded. Hence grew so great a
terror, that the Forts were deserted which lie to the Eastward from the Haven
of Scluys, excepting only one called S. George, which yet was quickly
delivered, more out of fear then necessity, upon sight of the Cannon drawn
before it. The Garrison going abroad, they found the deceit of an evil custom:
a lighted match being placed by the Barrels of Gunpowder, to have blown up the
same, and ruined all near thereabouts. Then the Prince pitched three Camps
between the Town and the Seashore, over which himself, Count William and Count
Ernest had the Command. That which was beyond the Rivers, lying every where
under water, he commanded Colonel Notte to keep, to that purpose giving him
some Boats, and from thence a Breast-work to be drawn as far as Ardenburg,
whereon frequent Guards to be kept. But before they were able perfectly to
surround the Town with their Works, the Soldiers twice broke into Scluys
through the Marshes, and in so great number, through the Governor's neglect,
that it was believed they were sufficient to have defended the Town against
him; for there was within but little Victuals, and the number of those that eat
it was increased; and that made Justiniano with a strong Guard bring provisions
into the parts near the Town, which they were to meet him and receive: but the
design being discovered, Prince Maurice, hastening with some Horse and
Artillery, drove away the Enemy, and took some Carts laden with Meal, and a
few men. Fifty of the Slaves belonging to Spinola, that with some others had
come forth of the City, fled over to the Prince, by whose intelligence he was
more certainly informed that there was Victuals in the Town only for a short
season; that they made a great show of many things, the better to deceive and
delude their Enemies. Hereupon a Fast was proclaimed in the Camp, which is
customary with them going to attempt any difficult and dangerous matter; after
which they planted their great Guns, and made a Bridge of a wonderful bigness,
as if therewith they would go beyond the broad and deep gulf of the Haven even
unto the Rampire: but indeed some despairing, they stayed only to pinch the
Enemy with Famine, and to that end they were more diligent in shutting up all
the Avenues, not would receive any more fugitives; in the interim the Horse
plundering Flanders.

Now was the Archduke pressed with many great discommodities at once, and the
fear of the seditious hindered him so, that he durst not leave one Army at
Ostend, and with another go toward the Enemy: for the seditions having at
this time covenanted with the Hollanders for one half of the prey they should
take, made incursions into Brubant, and were going into Henan^ therefore
supposing it necessary to gain these to himself, though with the loss of honor
and money, and the rather because others by their example beginning to threaten
the like, their number was like to be increased, he offered them terms of
reconciliation. And although they did not presently agree, because they would
not endure to hear that the prey which they had got should be owned as part of
their pay, yet their minds being molified by treaty and discourse, and for
purging their former crimes, they turned all their strength against the Country
of Liege, or where they had remained in the Arch-duke's lands, they exacted
their tributes; and in other things being indempnified, they were reconciled,
the Mauricians in vain urging their promises, whom they despised as being
inferior to them in number. Besides, the States were possessed with no small
fear, lest that unfaithful company should seek to regain the favor of their
old acquaintance by the delivery of Grave, to the high mockery of their easy
credullty. But either shame, or the fear of revenge from the Archduke, if they
should be destitute of a place of refuge in case of necessity, made them
restore the Town, receiving the Castles of Hochstrat^n and Carp^n, which they
let the Archduke enjoy: and while their pay was provided for them, Roer^nd was
delivered to them as a pledge, and several other noble Hostages. Yet,
notwithstanding all this, some of them absolutely came over to the Prince. Two
thousand of them by Albertus order came into Flanders, which being a good
recruit to his Forces, and the Garrisons of other Regions by that means with
the more safety being drained, he urged Spinola that he would think of the
relief of Scluys, which was no longer able to endure the Famine: And he,
although against as will, and with good reason judging that Ostend was now at
the last point of defense, obeyed his command. The first offer he made was with
Cannon planted not (...) from the Lake Merkerk, by the shot thereof to ^^ve
away the Guards: But a greater force of Artillery ^^ing brought by the
Soldiers of the Leaguer drove (...) away, and made that design of no effect.
Afterward ^e set upon Count William's Camp with some choice Re^ents of Foot
and Troops of Horse, and all other warlike preparation fit to destroy Bulwarks;
but he was beaten back also thence with great loss of blood. Coming back
thence, and forcing the two Forts called Katherine and Philip, (wherein were
but few Soldiers) ^e strove by night to enter that way into Cazant over the
Fords, while the water was low: that also was discovered, and fresh Soldiers
continually sent to defend the banks. That day gave an evident example of the
Spanish Soldiers constancy, who keeping their ranks undoutedly labored both
against a strong Bulwark and a thick cloud of bullets. No less was the valor
of the Defendents, especially of many of the French Nobility: And the Prince
himself was present, still adding supplies of fresh men to such as were tired.
Thus as the day increased, and the water grew higher by the ^loud, the Enemy
was beaten off not without the death of many, and those of the nobler sort,
among whom the Marquess of Renty, son to the Lord Montigny, formerly a famous
Commander of the King's Party among the Netherlanders. They that came forth of
the Town then first began to know what was violent hostility, being owned among
the dead by the fresh memory of their fellowship in War. The besieged, when
they saw no hope of relief, and that their hunger had consumed not only the
most vile and loathsome creatures, but also whatever they could find of skins
or tallow, at the end of the third month delivered the Town. There marched out
of it three thousand Soldiers, who had scarce left within them any remains of
life, part of whom died as they went away. Seventy great Guns were taken, ten
Galleys, and about fourteen hundred slaves, to whom their liberty was given:
Most of the Turks and Moors were sent home with Letters, thereby to purchase
favor and free trade among those Barbarians. Aurelius Spinola, the cousin of
Ambrose, was dismissed upon this condition, that the Holland Seamen which the
Archduke kept Prisoners should be released. Cazant, Yse^dike and Scluys with
the Haven were all new strengthened, and their Works repaired: The Forts named
Philip and Katharine the Enemy had levelled With the ground; and the Government
of Flanders was committed by the States to Count Henry of Nassau, under whom
Colonel Charles Notte was Deputy Governor.

Ostend yet held out, among all the labors and distresses suffered from the
Enemy, the Sea and Diseases, having at this time a small breathing space, while
the Enemie's care was divided for securing the Towns of Flanders. In the
Government of Ostend Colonel Notte was succeeded by Gistell, upon whose death
Lone came in place, whose successor was Daniel Marquette. Many of the Colonels
and Captains on both sides were dead. Many new inventions were at this Siege
found out by the besiegers: of which one was a Bridge, a structure of Targon's,
with brazen wheels, and was drawn by horses; one part of it was bound together
with Cables, that it might not be easily penetrated with shot: this by the
ejection of a beam was lifted up on high, so that it might fall down by loosing
the ropes that held it up. This they placed upon a platform, which, as we
related before, was in the form of a half moon beyond the Gollet. But this vast
and sumptuous work soon became ridiculous, one of the wheels being stricken off
with the bullets; afterward some Poles, as high as a Shipmast, being fixed in
the trench of the Bulwark, by them that massy Engine was broken and spoiled:
Therefore they turned all their force against the West part, and drew some
lines beyond the old Haven, and on the backside of the Town. And now the
outermost Work that joined to the Town was taken, for part of it being blown up
with gunpowder, it was in vain to defend the rest. Then the Porcupine and
Helmont by little and little decayed and were lost. And now was the whole face
of affairs full of horror, for the Enemy to get into the Town, and they on the
other side to keep him out, were unawares and in the dark entangled one among
another in caves and passages under ground, and by the uncertain signs of fire,
oftentimes those devices turning to the damages of their authors. The Spaniards
and Italians being worn out by long dangers, (for every one had his proper
station and business, that it might the more clearly be looked after, and
kindle emulation in each other) the Germans were enticed with rewards to
assault Sand-hill* and though the first of them were scattered by the force of
gunpowder out of a Mine, yet Barlaymont drove on the rest, until they attained
the top of the place. From hence they went by secret ways under ground into
the old Town; sometimes the besieged sallied, and in stead of the Works which
they had lost, they raised new ones more inwardly, which out of a vain humor
and conceit of the long continuing of the siege they named Troy. For the fresh
ground being in it self loose, and not sufficient to resist the shot, though it
was in the midst of Summer, as often as the wind blew off from the Sea, all
things were laid open to ruin. Insomuch that now the States themselves began
to consider the infinite charge, and the losses of the Soldiers not much
inferior to the greatest Battles, and that Ostend it self being so enclosed
with Forts could be of no use. Besides, whether they looked at honor or
profit, they had gotten more of either in three months in the winning of
Scluys, besides Berck and Grave, then Albertus would get by Ostend, which he
had contested for so many years. And now the greatest part of Autumn being
spent, time was past for the Enemy to undertake any thing else, and Winter was
coming, which was both dangerous and dreadful to the besieged. And if they
should go thither with an Army, first the way was full of water, and in the
middle was Dam^ and Blankenb^rg, Garrisons of the Enemy; besides, by length of
time the Camps were well settled, the Forces united, and both Commanders and
Soldiers were used to fight, all which threatened great hazards to such an
attempt. Therefore command was given to Colonel Marquette, that he should set
an end to that tedious conflict upon as honorable terms as he could; which was
accordingly done. And first of all the Ships and other Vessels were sent away
with part of the Artillery: Then Commissioners were sent, who desired that all
in the Town might freely march out with their Arms and four Cannon, and that
all Prisoners should be exchanged; which Spinola easily granted, either out of
an high estee^ of their approved valor, or to prevent other uncertain events
which time might produce. Three thousand, marching through the midst of the
Enemie's Camp, came to Scluys to the Prince, who received them not as overcome,
but gave them praises and thanks as Conquerors. The Archduke with his Princely
Spouse came to see the place, for which they had offered up so many vows, and
been at so infinite an expense of money, time and blood, (themselves protesting
the loss of fifty thousand men, and that a greater number of the besieged was
killed.) They found nothing but an empty and confused plat of ground; here full
of rude and misshapen heaps, there falling into great and uneven holes, with
such confused remains of Fortifications, that by looking thereon, one could
scarce imagine which were made for the defense, or which for the assailing the
Town. The Townsmen that lived there before went thence to Scluys; and although
the Archduke granted many Privileges to the place, yet of a long time none
would inhabit it, looking upon it as a place of horror, and defiled with the
blood and bones of dead men, which is generally repugnant to the nature of most
men.

Besides those Ambassadors which I mentioned before, King Philip and the
Archduke sent into England more: to wit, this sent Don John Richardot, and Don
Lewis Verrcikem; but he, Don Ferdinando Velasco Constable of Castile, and Don
Alexandro Roverti a Senator of Milla^n; both of them very desirous of Peace,
not so much out of fear of the English, as that they might draw the Hollanders
to reason, by taking away their props and supporters. Nor wanted there some in
that warlike Nation that persuaded to War, repeating in the English
Parliament (which was then met) the ancient alliances with the Hollanders, the
many leagues and marriages, long before Philip Duke of Burgundy unjustly drove
Jacoba married to a Britan out of her Principality: And the reason given for
this amity was, that without it the Sea could be safe to neither, and it would
grow from thence that Trading would be full and free. On the contrary, the
Spaniards had no need of Peace, for War was more beneficial to them. And it
was chiefly to be provided that the Hollanders should not by extremity be
compelled to join either with the French, the ancient Enemies of Great Britain,
or the Spaniards, Enemies for Religion sake and the thirst of Dominion. It has
been evident by too many examples, that who had the dominion of the Sea would
easily be Master of Britain. But the King not at all moved herewith, and
supposing there was strength enough both in Britain and Holland, for that, to
maintain Peace, and this, War; thereupon refusing the society of Arms offered
against the Spaniard, he agreed to a Peace. Besides the Articles usual in
Leagues, there were added certain concerning free Navigation, such as was
before the War, and upon payment of the same Customs. Nothing was spoken of
America or the Indies, because the English would not endure to be excluded, and
the Spaniard was obstinate to admit none; so that matter was left to the
decision of him that was most potent. Concerning Religion it was agreed, That
the English should not be compelled in Spain to go to their Churches: That
when they met the consecrated Host, they should do reverence thereto, unless
they chose rather to go out of the way. These that follow pertained to the
Hollanders: viz. That neither of them should help the others Enemies or Rebels,
nor should suffer them to be helped by any of their Subjects: That the facts of
private persons should be answered for by themselves, but the public Peace not
be hazarded thereby. But the Britans denied to deliver the Briel or Flushing to
the Spaniard, affirming it was contrary to the faith contained in their
Articles: in the interim the Soldiers that kept those Towns should be
unconcerned in the War, but should do their endeavors for pacifying the
Hollanders; and if that were delaied, yet that at least there should be an open
and free passage for the Netherlanders and English in point of trade: That
there should not reside at one time in the Ports of either above six or eight
of the others Ships of War: That the English should be forbidden to carry the
Hollanders Commodities into Spain, or the Spanish Merchandises into Holland.
Thus that War being ended, King James, that he might take away the cause of
all intestine discords, by obliterating the names of Scots and English, would
have both to be united and grow up into one Kingdom by communicative Laws, and
to be called Britain, undertaking herein a difficult matter, and which was
agitated with great contentions, while the yet fresh differences and emulations
would hardly allow thereof, as the foundation of a solid good to posterity.
Soon after, according to these agreements with Albertus, he requires the
Hollanders not to prohibit the Britans to come out of the Sea into the Scheld
to pass to Antwerp, paying Customs equal to their Subjects. But they excused
it, by showing that they had good reason for their Decree, that none should go
to the Enemy, unless they first changed their Ships, that so they might the
more certainly have knowledge of all things. Nor ought he to take it ill, that
they imposed Laws upon a River within their own Jurisdiction, when the
Spaniards durst deny the passage of the Seas even to their friends. And so that
he might convert the English, who were accused as infamous for Piracy, to
innocent gain, he forbad any to fight at Sea under a foreign command, but
conniving at any that went hither or thither to a land War.

By another Edict the Jesuits and all other Ecclesiastical persons that
received not sacred. Orders according to the custom of the Kingdom of Britain
were banished thence, setting out for cause, that that sort of men taught that
the Pope might absolve Subjects from their obedience to Kings of another
Religion, then which there is not any opinion more dangerous to Government. But
at the same time the same Jesuits were restored in France upon some
conditions, from whence they had formerly been banished, when by their
instructions a young man fought to murder the King. But now the monument was
destroyed which kept the memory of that fact fresh, together with the Jesuits
infamy; the Parliament of Paris crying out, that by that one work the authority
of the most honorable Order and the security of France were subverted
together. But the King, with his own great danger, as many ominously feared,
unterrified, merely to gratify the Pope, admitted and favored these stout
defenders of his power.

Between this King and the Spaniard arose some new causes of hatred upon old
discontents. Monsieur Villeroy, a person highly entrusted and favored by King
Henry, had a servant named Hostius, whose industry and ingenuity (himself being
much employed otherwise) he used in the decyphering and reading of Letters and
private Characters. This man, being hired, gave intelligence of all the
greatest affairs of State to one Monsieur Raffee a Frenchman, but banished and
living in Spain, who discovered them to King Philip's Counselors: by which
having such insight into all the private counsels of France, it was easy for
them to guess at all things else: Some things also being discovered to the King
of Britain, had engendered animosities and jealousies. This Treason being
detected by Raffee, Hostius first by flight, and afterward by a sudden death,
prevented further inquisition. There was also at this time another matter
stirred up by a Woman, which was this: Henrica, the daughter of Monsieur
Interaque, was esteemed among the first for her beauty and pleasantness of wit;
wherewith the King being allured, (to whom there was hardly any other crime to
be objected then these loose Affections) the better to compass the end of his
unlawful desires, had promised her marriage, if she bare him a Son; and this
promise he confirmed to her by writing. After Medices was preferred before her
in marriage, she was compelled, to pacify the Queen, to deliver up this
writing of the King's. Whereupon dissembling higher designs under the pretense
of solitude and Religion, she aimed to compass foreign wealth, wherewith she
might secure her Son against the Queen's anger and malice, and not only so, as
she publicly declared, (and as others interpreted it) but also that he might
therewith assert his right and claim to the Kingdom. The King of Britain
refused to give any ear to them for the disturbance of another's Kingdom; but
the Spaniard approved her cause, and promised largely to assist her therein.
When these things first became known, the Lady her self, her Father and
Brother, the Count of Auvergne, were taken; but King Henry pardoned them,
acknowledging his own misdemeanour in their crime. But Philip fearing, lest
Henry enraged with these things should from thence take a cause to make War,
he ended the quarrel begun about the Customs, which he had lately raised by
Edict; and turning his fury against the Hollanders, commanded all of that
Nation to depart out of his Dominions, and all Merchandise afterward brought
in to be forfeited.

This year was celebrated in the Netherlands a solemn Funeral pomp for Count
Peter Mansfelde, who for forty years had faithfully served the Spaniard in the
highest Commands, being then President of Lutzenburg, who, though all his life
conversant in War, had yet by rare fortune lived even to the extremity of old
age. And among the Hollanders died Lewis of Nassau, being but a young man, yet
emulous of the glory of his Ancestors, and in whom there appeared great hopes
of a noble and circumspect Virtue.

The Fourteenth BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
1605.
THE charges of the now superannuated War increasing every year, and that
great demonstration of their equal Forces appearing at Ostend, restored to some
that hope which they had a long time laid aside, to wit, that the extreme fury
of the War would at length conclude in a Peace; hence every one, as their
hopes or desires led them, delivered their opinions both in discourses and
Books. Such of the Netherlanders as affected the Austrian Government believed,
and so said, having great emulation to the Cities of Holland, and malicious
inclinations, that they would fall under the weight of that Greatness they had
drawn upon themselves, or else would become a prey to foreign Princes, unless
they returned to their old obedience, whereof for so many ages they had had
experience; only with these additions to the old Laws: That the Netherlandish
Government should not revolve to the Spaniard; That the right of Commerce
should be free and indefinite; That Religion should not be forcibly or with
punishments urged, in hope of making a more united Concord; That as well the
foreign Soldiers, as that plague of mankind, the Jesuits faction, should be
expelled; That the chief honors should remain in the Citizens, and all affairs
of greatest concernment should be handled in the General Council of the
Provinces; which liberty would continue more substantial if it were used with
moderation. On the other side, some in France persuaded the Netherlanders to
separate themselves from the House of Austria; That the name of Archduke was
but a vanity, without power, without authority, his Forces being consumed by
the Enemy, his Authority swallowed or devoured by the Spaniard: and when the
Netherlands should be exhausted and Spain impoverished, what hopes had they of
protracting the War? certainly, only this one, the wealth of the Indies,
which also in time would fail them, and become a propriety to him that is most
prevalent at Sea. That the twenty several Mutinies and Seditions of the
Soldiers have made Albertus his Government infamous; and if while those
jealousies and hatreds increased among them the French should have stirred,
they might have lain upon the Country and devoured the fields, which of
necessity must have produced desolation and poverty. Therefore they should
return and unite themselves to the Body of France voluntarily, and of their own
accord, rather then be compelled thereto by force; by which means they should
remain settled in the ancient and renowned seat of their Ancestors, which must
needs perish and be lost if the Hollanders should be victorious. That there are
nine Forts or Castles erected for a small resistance of all Invaders, from
whence the original of that Nation is extracted, of whom it is questioned
whether they exceed more in cruelty or pride, but afterward enclosed by the
Pyrenean Mountains, and the remote shore of their own Ocean. That the French
Empire, grown to a vast magnitude, would govern its Subjects with more
moderation, and for the future settle Peace by a settled and hereditary
succession, according to the Salick Law: That this should be to them no loss,
because they should enjoy in common all the advantages and benefits of France.
Some there were also in Germany who equally considered from hence the Spanish
greatness, on the other side the abstruse recesses of the Hollanders, whose
fortune was daily bettered by War; nor could they be concluded by conquering.
That it were both more honorable and easy for the Spaniard to repel the Turk
with those Arms he uses against these; or else he might compensate any small
damage of his Government by propagating and increasing his limits elsewhere.
That the Hollanders might buy their Liberty for money: for Empires have their
settled foundations and periods, so that when they are arrived to the highest
pitch of Greatness, they suddenly decrease. Of late the Spaniards neither
demanded Tunis nor Goleta, nor did the Austrian Family look after Switzerland.
So also must he loose these people; and as they chiefly withdraw themselves, so
were they to be suspected from the remembrance of the War, and by the discord
of Religion, working great prejudice even from their example: besides, part of
them were purchased from the Burgundians, so that he may with equal justice
sell what he had bought. These were the discourses abroad: but at home, besides
a few in whose hands lay the managery of the Commonwealth, and by whom all
counsels and advices were ordered, the rest, calling to mind how great the
Spaniard's pride was, how resolutely determined never to agree with the
Hollanders, threw aside all hopes, the Fates having yet kept in obscurity any
glimmering of an end of this so great and long a War.

And now the States, to Maximilian Cocheyne urging the Emperor's commands, as
also to the Legates of Mentz, Saxony and others desiring safe conduct, free
passage, and time and place for a Treaty, being all things of moment, and such
as usually work with the common people, returned this Answer.

That they were not unmindful what damages they had received by former
Treaties: Nor were Germany or the Emperor, although names highly reverenced by
them, of any power against the treacherous dealings of their Enemies. That the
Hollanders were desirous of nothing more then that, the fear of War being
laid aside, they might enjoy what they had attained with so many dangers, and
so persevering an industry; and therefore having so long entreated the aid of
their neighbors, to divert the Arms imminent over them by a moderate Peace,
and having afterward gotten to themselves a solid and well-setled liberty from
a fatal necessity, which was allowed and confirmed by Kings and Princes, they
would not change it for a deceitful Peace. That they had heretofore entered into
Covenants with the Netherlandish Lords, and were now ready to renew the same;
for it was evidently seen how small the authority of the Archdukes was, since
Spinola a Foreiner received his Command over the Netherlands by Commission from
Spain, They never refused a safe and well-grounded Peace, so as Religion might
be safe, and the Commonwealth not hazarded: But if that opinion remained, that
as there ought to be but one Pope for the ruling Ecclesiastical affairs, so for
the Government of Temporal matters there should be but one King, and that the
Monarch of Spain; Germany should see that the Hollanders would not be wanting
either to their own or the public safety. As to the business spoken of
concerning damages done by them, they would endeavor that their Justice and
Equity should not be blamed. That they should be reputed very rash and
inconsiderate, if they should deliver up any strong Holds while Spinola lay
about the Rhine: they knew Germany it self might thus be forewarned; if they
would consider Mendosa 's Army, and the contumelious injuries received by them.

About this time came forth a Book written by Francis Renes, a learned man and
of good repute in the Commonwealth, of which he had deserved well for writing
the Annals thereof in the native Language: this man, the Author, being dead,
the Book was set forth and published by his friends; discoursing of many things
as well ancient as novel, and relating the many tyrannies and oppressions of
the House of Austria and the Spaniards, and what treacherous Leagues those
Princes used toward other people, especially those whom the Pope absolved by a
Religious kind of perjury; and setting forth that from thence the danger was
equal both to the Catholics and Reformed people; and that there was no other
issue to be expected then by Conquest, since those ways which are absolutely
desperate to men are yet evident and well known to God.

While these things were minded discursively, the War in the mean time is
spurred on in good earnest. For those Forces that had been taken up at Ostend
made a great accession of strength to the Hollanders, besides some Regiments
came out of France to their aid, the King sending them advice that they should
first draw out into the Field, for it would be more for their advantage to be
beforehand with the Enemy, then to let him get the start of them. But in
England and Germany Forces were levied and raised for both parties with a
vendible faith, as they met Soldiers of Fortune, or else as Religion led any
man to one side or the other. Also the Hollanders hasted to raise money with
all speed; but the Netherlanders under the Archduke came to it with less
willingness and more delay, for that the War was maintained against their
will, and they were jealous of the ill managing of the Treasury: besides, the
United States had increased their displeasure, by writing to the Nobles of
affairs that concerned the common good; which things so terrified Albertus,
that he would not suffer a meeting of the Provinces under him, though often
before and at that time chiefly the same was desired, fearing lest by his
denial of many things he should become unable to resist their envy, or the
authority of the States being contemned, they should, according to their
neighbor example, fall to direct force; his Letters to his friends detecting
this his fear, which the Hollanders intercepting sent to the Netherlandish
Nobles. Therefore Albertus, notwithstanding the waving of his consent,
permitted the Provinces severally to meet, cherishing those that were
discontented in mind with the hope of money from the Indies, which the wealthy
and successful Spanish Fleet had brought, or else of an approaching Peace, if
the War were more eagerly followed for a little time.

The beginning of the year among the Spaniards was spent in idleness and repose
among the sweets and blandishments of mirth, while Don Ambrosio Spinola, having
now the whole command of the War, (he was but newly come from Spain, where he
had consulted with the King concerning the method of managing thereof) had
likewise bestowed on him the honor of the Golden Fleece, and before the King
of Great Britain's Ambassador was sworn to the peace with Albertus. Now also
was the settlement of the Kingdom of Spain upon the Male issue celebrated with
pompous Shows and public Prayers and Thanksgivings.

At the height of the Spring, and not before, Prince Maurice having gathered
together his Forces, by the direction of the States he undertakes a great work;
for he went to Antwerp, of old the most flourishing City of all the
Netherlands, and now, the general Trade being gone to the Hollanders, retaining
their formerly-gotten wealth and renown. A great hope of glory incited him to
the gaining thereof; for about twenty years before, in the Duke of Parma's
time, while the Affairs of the Union were wholly unsettled, by a long and
difficult Siege, scarcely grown into a full success, yet such was the Victor's
vainglorious ostentation, as made the World believe that in that one City he
had gained the possession of the whole Netherlands. It was serious and
considerate advice, to shut up this large and spacious City with small Forces,
by overflowing all the adjacent plain Fields with the River Scheld, and
pitching their Camps on the higher ground; but there appeared no sufficient
reason of seizing the opposite bank of the River on the edge of Flanders. Some
advised to send Soldiers through the Country by night-marches out of Cazant:
but Prince Maurice himself chose rather to go by Ship; which while it was
preparing with great endeavor, as fortuned, the Enemy immediately grew jealous,
and gave out in speeches that Antwerp should be attempted. This News was
received with various affections of the Townsmen: part of them rejoicing, as if
their Liberty was drawing nigh; others, imagining a scarcity would follow,
presently began to inhance the price of Victuals; and many, gathering together
their wealth and riches, thought to betake themselves to flight. But Spinola
sending thither some Horse encouraged such as were afraid, the same Horse
behaving themselves modestly, and without injury of the Citizens: then viewed
all the coast of Flanders, which situate over against Antwerp is called
Waesenland, and left there three thousand foot-Souldiers in Guard, that were to
wait upon the Enemie's motion; for he was not ignorant that the Enemy could not
possess the River, unless by drowning the Fields and placing Guards he made
that coast also his own. Wherefore, choosing a particular day, Prince Maurice
with a strong Party went to Bergen op Zoom, and Count Ernest of Nassau bringing
the rest of the Soldiers in the Fleet out of Zeland came into the Scheld, and
first of all passing with good success all the Hollanders Forts, when he came
near Antwerp among the Enemie's Sconces, although in the night, he could not
pass unseen, but was forced to assail the Flandrian banks through all the
Enemie's Shot; but they which kept Guard in those parts being stirred up by the
noise of the bullets, and covered by the interposition of the banks, following
the fails, Count Ernest, the wind beating back the Ships into Brabant, was
hindered to come and join his Forces where he was commanded, being otherwise
engaged to fight at disadvantage with a resolute and well-provided Enemy.
However, to try his fortune, in small boats he transports almost four hundred
men, that were easily routed by the first shock of the Enemy, and other part of
them were taken; Colonel Dorpen, by the violent pursuit of the Enemy, leaping
armed into the River, escaped one danger with another. Count Ernest being
driven back into Brabant, Prince Maurice, disappointed of his design, compells
the Castle of Woude, situate not far from Berck, within five days to
surrender; which was too mean a prize for so great an Army to look after, and
too small a reward for them that had before them so great hopes: yet some
satisfaction it yielded, for from thence the Enemy infested the Rivers with
Piracies.

But these great threats happened not only to be in vain, but to fall out
quite contrary, so that the Hollanders had not of a long time a more
unfortunate year. While Prince Maurice staid at Woude, Spinola, though at that
time the Court there was full of mirth concerning the English Ambassador, was
not slow to take into his thoughts more serious affairs among those pleasant
diversions, but made a Bridge over the Scheld, that went toward the Enemy
which way soever he should turn, by which means he was ready to pursue; and
therefore was the more severe to those that surrendered Woude, as guilty of an
overhasty and cowardly fear, so that he punished some of them with death. Nor
did the United States a little waver and grow afraid at the report of these
great Forces approaching with Spinola, not resolved whether they had best
assault or defend; but the Prince persuaded to remain about Rhine, lest the
Enemy that way should invade the undefended parts of their Dominion. And his
opinion prevailing, command was given to go into Flanders and to call a
Council at Scluys. And now they thought fit to besiege the t'Zas not far from
Gaunt, where the waters running from thence fall into the Hont, and so into the
Sea: which if they brought to pass with good success, they threatened some
Cities; but if not, yet they would retain there Spinola's strength threatening
the cruelty of a grievous War to other places.

Not far from Ysendike Prince Maurice sat down with his Army which he had
brought by Ship to Waterfleet, whom Spinola, sending some part of his Forces
before, immediately follows; and at a place called Bucholt, which was between
him and the t'Zas, settles himself, as a fit place either to oversee or repress
the Enemie's endeavors. Thus they remained a great while in view of each other,
without any thing done by either, save a few light skirmishes of the Horse. One
time Pompeio Justiniano by Spinola's command entered the marshes, in hope to
have burned the Sutlers Boats, which lay hard by Prince Maurice's Camp; but
being espied by the Sentinels he was soon met and repulsed. In that Region over
against Walcheren lies the Fort Patientia, in the assault whereof Prince
Maurice intended to drive away idleness: but Spinola took a little Fort that
lay in the middle of the way, and joined it to his Camp with a continued
Breastwork: but Prince Maurice's Camp lying in a wet and unwholesome soil, what
with diseases, and what with runnings away, was almost emptied. But Fortune
recompensed at Sea this slow and protracted War at Land; from whence, since
the first Commotions of the Hollanders until these very times that which was
reckoned among the great burdens of the Spaniard, (to wit, that his best and
choicest Soldiers must of necessity be brought afar off out of Italy by long
Marches into the Netherlands, being in the interim of no use, though they were
an extraordinary charge and burden) was now eased by Spinola; for he brought
by Sea out of Spain it self into the Ports of Flanders what Forces he had
occasion for. Twelve hundred Soldiers, trained up in the Irish Wars by
Colonel Pedro Sarmienti, were at Lisbone put aboard eight Ships and some little
Barks, the charge of all which was given to Pedro Cumiara, whose particular
instruction among others was this, That if he could not get in at Flanders,
avoiding the coast of France, he should go to the British shore, where by the
help of the Spanish Ambassador they might have safe harbor; and that he
should there receive such of the Britans as he had hired and purchased by
gifts. But the United States, that they might for the future restrain the like
bold attempts by terror, did command William Hauteene Admiral of Zeland to
meet the Spaniards in the narrow Sea toward Bulloyn, and without any pity to
drown all the Prisoners they took in the Sea. Now it is to be observed that the
Spaniards were not brought in Ships of War, but of burden, such as could
with most ease lurk upon either the British or German coasts. But Hauteene with
part of his Fleet coasting about Flanders, and with the residue going along the
shores of Britain, by this means met with whatever passed in the middle of the
Chanel. Thus passing along at last he met his Enemies about Dover; who when
they would not strike sail, but voluntarily stood in their own defense by
shooting, part of them were slain, the rest escaped either by swimming, or the
help of English Boats which came in to their succor and took them up. Another
Ship, coming even into the harbor, was so beset with two Ships of Zeland, that
at last they all struck upon the Flats and Quicksands: but the Zelanders as
they were less in bulk, so more light to avoid and escape a danger, not only
assaulted, but took and brought off the Enemie's Vessel. The Mariners,
according to command, were thrown into the Sea: the Soldiers and such as had
long been in service much complaining of Fortune, not that she deprived them of
their lives, which they knew was but short at the best, and whereof they could
not in regard of their age hope the long continuance; but that they, being a
people sworn to fight, should not die valiantly as Soldiers with their swords
in their hands, but should be helplessly swallowed up in the all-devouring
waves of the Sea. The next day some more Ships were taken, and one burned, all
the Soldiers suffering the like severe fate, being tied two together, which
upon a sign given were all at once thrown overboard. One saying he had no need
of the Enemie's hands to hasten on his death, voluntarily leaped into the Sea,
who though he was unknown among all that obscure company, yet was covetous of
honor even to his last. This slaughter consumed almost the one half of the men
and Ships; for four of them by the help of the wind got into the Haven, yet
were many of the men there wounded and slain even by the Enemie's shot. But the
Soldiers in Dover, while these Enemies fought at Sea, a great while looking
on, at last grew angry to have the War brought into their Jurisdiction, and
shot from the Castle in aid of their late Enemies against their old Friends.
The Britans recriminating the Hollanders for these attempts, were afterward
answered, that they did not seek for any Ships in the Rivers of England, which
yet the Dunkerkers without any notice taken thereof had done, but they looked
rather at their Enemy growing hot by the force of Victory, then either the
confines or boundaries of Sea and Land. But they could not so easily purge
themselves, because under pretense of searching the English who contrary to the
King's Proclamation made War at Sea, they had not long since drawn to their
shore the Spanish Ships, which were take as a prey by the Hollanders, and
vindicating King Philip's Ambassador, had under pretense of right eluded the
force of War. But the Spaniards that lately were driven thither by the
desperate storms of the Sea before Winter, remained there at great charge,
which was very grievous to their Masters; and in the interim, while in a
miserable condition they continued on the bare shore in poor little cottages by
them erected, either lived in great poverty, or died languishing: for not a few
of them died of sickness and wounds, among whom was Cumiara himself.

Now arrived out of Italy six strong Regiments by their usual way of marching
by Land, besides new levies made by the Archduke in the neighbor Kingdoms:
nor otherwise came the parties to so great strength: for Spinola when he was in
Spain with the King, replete with the honor and authority of taking Ostend, had
easily persuaded him, that this lingering War, advantageous to the Enemy, might
easily have an end set thereto, if the King would contract his long-continued
gifts; and to this purpose he gave for his word, and inscribed on all his
Ensigns this Motto, Jam aut nunquam, Now or never. Wherefore calling to mind
the frequent mischiefs that had arisen by Sedition, he required money and two
Armies; with the one of which he would defend his own limits, and with the
other would invade Frieseland; and to that purpose provided all things
necessary in plenty: for the Tributes beyond the Rhine being gotten by them
would be a great damage to the Enemy; besides, many Cities now possessed by the
Enemy, which at present the Rivers defended, would become a new bound, and
there would be need of a strong Army to scatter the Garrisons. And this with
the greater hope was to be undertaken, in regard from thence the very entrails
of the Hollanders would lie open to them both by Sea and Land. This was wise
counsel, as the first successes made it seem; but the rest being not followed
according to hope, I will proceed to remember.

The Generals yet remaining in Flanders, while the Prince at Scluys took care
to fortify Ysendike, and Spinola attempted him with false alarms, Count Bucquoy
having with a strong party not far from Colen driven the Hollanders Ships out
of the Rhine, (for he had carried with him great Guns) passed the River, to the
great terror of the German Cities round about, from whose remembrance the
Villainies of Mendosa's time, and the many indignities they had suffered, were
not yet banished. At the mustring of the forces, the Pope's Legate was present,
solemnly praying that their Arms might be victorious, and encouraging them to
go on cheerfully, and be deliverers to such as were orthodox, but to take
vengeance on the rest; That it was not so much their Prince's as God's cause
they maintained, whose Altars and Temples being defiled and sacrilegiously
converted to other uses, he would they should be restored by their hands.

When they were come to Keysersweert, (where some of old supposed a Trojane
Colony remained) they begin to erect a Fort on both banks of the River, to
secure the passage. The Bridge that lay over the Rhine was made at Colen,
whence also great store of Victuals was brought as long as the Spanish affairs
were in a thriving condition, the Senate of that City publicly therein
manifesting their affection. Which things being heard by Prince Maurice,
conjecturing from his own and Mendosa's former practices, that no man would go
into his Enemie's country that way and leave Berck behind him, thereupon he
sent his Brother Henry and Count Ernest with four thousand foot and two
thousand horse, to whom the States added Deputies from their own Assembly. Nor
did they delay to make it their first care to strengthen Berck, taking into
their Works (which they made exceeding strong) a great space of ground without
the Town, whereby the greater delay might be put upon the Enemy, and the
Garrison have the better room. Within these they kept the Soldiers, although
Over-Issell and the Cities of Frieseland, and Lingen especially, required fresh
supplies of Soldiers, and what other things are necessary in War. But the
care of the Public here was omitted by private fear; but at length five
companies were sent to Lingen. In the mean while the Nassavian horse twice met
the Enemy and beat him. And while the Summer was yet in its prime, the Marquess
Spinola, leaving in Flanders Frederick Count Heremberg, (who had the command of
six thousand foot and five hundred horse) himself hasted to Bucquoy's men and
the rest whom he had sent before; and privately observes Roeroort, a place
where the River Roer runs into the Rhine, fit to be fortified; which he does.
Then calling together all his chief Officers, who till this time were ignorant
to what use all these preparations were, he opens his mind to them, and tells
them he would first go to Lingen, the chief Fortress of all those parts, which
would easily be taken, if he made haste, because there were but few Soldiers
therein, and they unexperienced in War. But the chief point of all consisted
in this, that they might prevent the Enemie's supplies which were coming to
Lingen; and this might be done if they would diligently follow Berck. Groll and
other Towns, whose names were unknown to him. He was not ignorant how contrary
this was to the constant practice of former Captains, to throw himself into the
farthest part of his Enemie's Country, leaving the whole Country behind him
Hostile; but as matters proceeded, so were counsels to be altered, for no
precepts would ever serve at all times, and sometimes more advantage is gotten
by daring then by too much wariness. He had now chosen the best time, while
their fruit and corn was ripe and not yet carried away; and the Towns on the
edge of Westphalia would freely bring in Victuals, if they might be paid for
the same. This also he had taken care for. That although it were true that
Prince Maurice would come thither, yet it would be a great while first, for he
was not provided for a land-march, and he would go where neither a Fleet nor
the usual Rivers could bring him; and at last when he did come, there were the
plain fields which would afford room to fight, which was as earnestly desired
by his Soldiers, as it would be carefully avoided by the Enemy.

As to the Forts taken by Bucquoy, it was debated whether they should be
dismantled, or repaired at their return and defended. Most were of opinion that
it was dangerous to go into the Territories of others and with divided forces
to break both their strength and reputation. Spinola agreed with the fewer in
number, and commanded Bucquoy to take up the cool and shady places upon the
German bank of the Rhine, and for the increase and keeping his Works he gave
him six thousand men, which were chiefly new and raw Soldiers, and not able to
undergo a hard march. By this show of an Army, the care for Berck taken by the
Hollanders was a vain, and hindered them from sending their forces to prevent
real dangers, for fear lest the journey into Frieseland being but pretended,
Spinola, when the Soldiers were drawn away, should rather draw ^ his strength
thither. He conceived nine thousand foot and about two thousand horse were
enoUgh to go along with himself, as knowing Prince Maurice's forces were
tired, and part thereof were to remain in Flanders, to resist Count Heremberg.
The foot marched being divided into three Bodies, to every of which appertained
Cannon, to the number of eleven in all. The Flanks were secured by the
Carriages, wherein were brought the Victuals, Boats and Bridges for passing of
Rivers and Marshes, all which also had their guards: but the Front and Rear
was defended by the Horse. Spinola himself went in the Van, sending before him
Scouts and Pioneers to search the ways and level them: where the country grew
more Champain, for hastening the journey the first and middle Battle proceeded
on together, the ranks of the Carriages being doubled; and in the stead of a
Trench were Night-watches, which were defended by great Guns and troops of
horse. In the daytime the middle-ward succeeded the Van, and the Rear the
middle-ward in certain turns. And ^hen was it found by a great experiment, that
vices however having gotten to a head, yet are easily brought into order and
reformed, if there be but a persevering care: for the General quickly restored
that Discipline which for a long time had been corrupted by Sedition and
licenciousness; because as he was careful in giving the Soldiers their pay,
and bountiful in rewarding every good action they did, so he was inexorable to
offenders, and would not be observant to any ones humor; Not only thefts and
rapines, but without leave to depart from their Colors was a capital offense,
the Provost-marshall riding about, and with him the Hangman with a halter: by
which means, and the hanging of some few for small faults in the sight of the
Army, he cured all the rest. Philip Croy Count Solre was sent to the next
Cities of Germany, by taking away from them fear, to purchase favor: for they
did not as heretofore run on violently with disobedience and fury, for their
Officers were with them to keep them in awe, and the Soldiers themselves were
accustomed to obey, and such as could distinguish between Peace and War* they
were neither oppressive nor burdensome to the Towns or Country, all they
desired was but Victuals at a reasonable rate, and that they might have a free
passage through the Country. Nor did their actions in ought differ from their
words; so that all kinds of provisions were plentifully brought to them, and
they gained from their neighbors not only praise but thanks, comparing their
old injuries with the present security they enjoied. Beyond the Rivers Roer and
Luppe (although some Holland horsemen were sent to cut the Bridge over Luppe,
but they came too late) the fourth day they came to Oldenzul, a Town in
Over-Yssel, boasting the Fortification of former times, and not at all changed
from what it was seven years before when Prince Maurice took it. The Enemy
thought he might have taken it in his passage; yet although they made very
great have, the Garrison being timely increased, frequent sallies were made
thence, so that they put the Enemy in fear not only of his passage but of the
want of provisions. Within the Town were almost four hundred men, part horse,
the rest foot. The horse issued out first, and afterward the foot, doing good
exercution upon all they met with at first; but the approaching Army was too
strong for their small number, and, notwithstanding all their shot, in one
night in three places came up to the very Town-ditch; but yet Spinola not
surrounding the Town, with the death and wounding of a few men, he redeemed the
time, which is a chief point of War: contrary to which rule Prince Maurice
acts, whose custom is to follow on safely, though with less speed. In the
Morning, upon a small Battery made by those Guns he brought with him, the Town
was delivered: When understanding by some prisoners the state of Lingen, and
that more Soldiers were daily expected thither, commanding the horse to go
before, himself the next day pitched his Tents before the Town. This Lingen
being fit for a frontier Town, Prince Maurice, out of affection thereto,
because it was given to him, had begun to fortify at his own charge and with
his best skill, surrounding both the Town and Castle with a very deep and broad
Ditch and six strong Bulwarks and Mounts. But the work being new and in part
unperfect, and the Rampire not well settled, was the more easy for the
assailants to win. There was in the Town an indifferent number of Soldiers,
about six hundred, but such as neither durst make a sally nor fight at the
line, besides their Commanders were altogether unskilful and infinitely
timorous, nor had any one knowledge how to plant or level a Cannon. Therefore
while the great guns were preparing and the place viewed, the Enemy without any
hindrance or loss, helped by the Meanders of the Gardens, sooner then was
credible almost came to the brink of the Trench: And now four several nations,
from so many distinct places, hastened to pass over, each of them in emulation
and forwardness striving to outvie the other. Part of them, by drawing the
small Brooks in the old chanel of the little River, strove to deprive them of
water: others brought the Bridge and placed it upon Vessels, or else bound
together Faggots and Osiers, according to the invention first found out at
Ostend; which made them so secure, that some of them went unarmed even into the
Trench, and there promoted the work. It was now the ninth day of the siege, and
the Walloons had taken the Bulwark opposite to them; the Italians, Spaniards
and Germans were partly employed about the middle Trench, and part of them
nearer. The Governor of the Town, Colonel Martin Cobbe, being broken with old
age and feeble in going, calls all his Captains to counsel, and showing to them
besides other inconveniences the great want of Ball, asked them what was fit to
be done. They had no mind to raise new works, or repair those that were
battered, to oppose their bodies to the Enemies shot, or so much as defend the
Castle: but they rather admire, that in all that time the Enemy had not
summoned the Town: but others said that custom was grown out of date, being
used neither at Ostend nor Scluys. The Governor, as if this had been valiant
advice, admonished them to defer articling till the Evening, but if that were
too much, at least not to move it till noon. The rest were troubled hereat,
averring nothing of moment could be done within those few hours, and what they
demanded in ^ime would be easily granted. This their resolution they put in
execution with as much speed as they had agreed upon it: whereat Spinola
rejoiced, whose desires, though he were in great have, yet were prevented with
fear of the Enemy. In the mean while Prince Maurice hastening as much as he
could upon the report of this Expedition beyond the Rhine, gives the custody of
the Ports in Flanders and the Government of Scluys to Colonel Notte, and taking
from thence five and twenty Companies went to Deventer; besides he drew out
from about the Rhine ten others, and as many more out of the Garrisons, as also
eight that were newly raised in England: but the great Guns were kept back by
the cross winds. Two or three days after the surrender of Lingen, the Prince
was ready to have raised the Siege, to that purpose having drained the Cities
of their Soldiers, when a sorrowful messenger arrives with the news that the
Town was lost; for which not only the Governor Colonel Cobbe was ere he was
aware committed to prison, and there long kept, but also several of the
Captains, where they underwent as well the harsh censure of the people as the
judgment of their very relations, protesting them unworthy of favor. The heads
of their defense, which they sent in Letters to the Captains and the
neighboring Towns, were, that there were not Soldiers enough sent to them, or
other things either for the defense or freeing of the Town; and that the
Townsmen, though exceeding them in number, yet denying to watch and ward or do
any duty, had compelled them by threats and prayers to prevent imminent ruin
by a timely agreement and composition. At length, when time had mitigated the
envy of the fact, they, were degraded, without any farther punishment.

During this Siege, Thomas Filler, one of them who from the Hochstraten
Sedition remained with the Hollanders, being a courageous person and one that
would dare any thing to get booty, fell upon the Count Solre's quarters, and of
a hundred horsemen given him for a guard took thirty, and slew among the rest
the Baron Ciacci, Don Richardot's son-in-law: the Count himself was wounded,
and with much a do got away. But the United States, if perchance Spinola's
Camp had been afflicted with want of Provisions, by public Edict commanded,
that none should carry any Victuals into his Army, and whosoever should, be
found so doing, should be reputed as Enemies: Yet for all this there wanted no
provision, now out of hope of gain, anon by the terror of victory; insomuch
that some carried home from the Camp what they brought thither to sell, it
being so much more then could be spent. Spinola stayed a while at Lingen, and
there, as if amazed at so good fortune, he admired the strength and rare
structure of the Works, and yet for their defense he raised other Works beyond
the Trench. Which late design coming to the knowledge of Prince Maurice, he
followed thither, as if he had intended a present siege. But if he had chosen
rather to get more then to keep what he had gotten, the same force and the
fresh report of his approach had brought an equal terror upon all places. There
were but few Soldiers either at Coevoerden or the Fort in Bourtange, through
which places the Enemy must come into Frieseland: besides Groeningen trembled,
and Embden, though far off, yet ignorant a matters of War, was tired with
private discords; which Count Enno, being confident in this War of the States
affairs, increased. And now the Enemy lying still awhile, Prince Maurice had
some vacant time for his Pioneers to strengthen and repair the fortifications
of the Garrisons in Frieseland and beyond the Rhine: Himself with Count William
of Nassau having gathered together, nine thousand men, be marched to
Coevoerden, for defense of the interior parts, and that he might be the nearer
to follow the Enemy in the very track, adding to that place several new
Bulwarks. Among all these public actions some private and clandestine
Stratagems also were used, whereof one Terral a French fugitive was the
inventor. This man having tendered his service to the Hollanders and being
refused, because he seemed to ask too great honors and rewards, went over to
the Spaniard: he was of a confident spirit, and rarely skilled in all
Fireworks and other devices made with Gunpowder. To this man the Archduke, out
of the supernumerary Soldiers in other places, assigned fifteen hundred foot
and three hundred horse under the command, of Colonel Torricurte the Governor
of Hulst, in hopes therewith to have surprised Bergen op Zoom. These, in the
night at the ebb of the Sea, through the marshes got into the Haven, and
possessed two Forts, the one that defended the Haven, the other the Gate, the
Soldiers that kept them flying away. And if they had proceeded forward from
the Haven, the City would have been endangered, both the Soldiers and Townsmen
being unprovided, and so in the greater confusion. But they went to the
Watergate, and there with their Engines throwing down two Sluices that lay
between them and the Town, the Petard that they hung at the Gate, having in the
march caught wet, did no execution; no more did the Hand-granadoes, because
they were moistened with the dirt, Thus being frustrated of their hopes, and the
tide of Flood increasing, they hastened their return, deserting all the places
they had gotten: and now the multitude of defendants being come together, they
not only shot with bullets, but from above threw down upon them great stones,
wherewith thirty were killed and many hurt. Yet did not this unfortunate event
so terrify them, but that a month after they attempted the same thing again
with greater courage and more, force: when the contest was more sharp, because
their coming being foreknown by some Scouts, all things within were prepared
ready to receive them. The Enemy, knowing nothing of their intelligence in the
Town, came on. A little after midnight, the weather wet and clowdy, and by that
means exceeding dark, the sign being given, they assaulted three places at
once, in two of which they had placed Bridges by reason of the water; and
although they were not long enough, yet many scrambling with their hands and
feet got to the Rampire, to the top of which they were no sooner gotten, but
they were immediately beaten down again: for the Governor of the Town, Colonel
Paul Baxen, mingling the Townsmen and Soldiers together, had manned all the
Works round about the Town, himself riding from place to place, and keeping in
the Marketplace two Companies to be assisting in any place in case of
necessity. But on that side the Town toward Steenbergen, it seemed rather to
be downright force then any nocturnal Policy: for the Townsmen setting fire on
straw and pitched barrells, made so great a light, that they could see plainly
all that the Enemy did. There with Gunpowder they had beaten down two Gates and
a Drawbridge, insomuch that the Enemies beat up their Drums even within the
Town-walls; in like manner the horse sounded their Trumpets, as if at that very
instant they had been entering. There was one Sluice yet remaining, which the
Townsmen had stopped up with Carts and other great pieces of Timber: this, in
regard many of Terrall's workmen were killed and spoiled in the former places,
they endeavored to cut into pieces with their Swords and with Axes: But the
Townsmen seeing the approaching Enemy, threw down fire upon them from the walls,
and with their Muskets and great Guns not only gave them certain wounds but
reproachful language, so that at last the Soldiers refused to be led to the
slaughter by their Officers. There was no slothful person in the City at this
time, both the Magistrates and Ministers putting on Arms, and by their presence
giving others not only exhortations, but example: nay the very Citizens that
were of the Roman Religion, if any such were, knowing that a Victory gained in
the darkness of the night and height of fury would make no difference of
persons, acted with great resolution, lest they should seem to disunite
themselves from the common cause: the very Women did not spare any pains or
labor in bringing Calthrops, Bullets, Pitch and Stones in their childrens
cradles. (having first emptied them of all things else) and then in the more
retired and soft places, upon their bended knees, with eyes and hands lifted up
to Heaven, they beseeched God to assist the Defendants, and to turn the evil of
those cruel designs upon the authors thereof. After day was broken, the residue
of them returned to Antwerp. In the Town there was only one killed, and very
few wounded, for they were well saved by the height of their defenses.

In like manner also Grobbendonck attempted to assault Grave by night with
Bridges and scaling-Ladders; but understanding that the Townsmen prepared to
receive him, he desisted. And now Spinola had fortified Lingen, unresolved what
to do the remaining part, of the year, the Autumn being now beginning. To
refresh his Soldiers in Germany would be infamous and base: The Spies that
were sent to Berck returned, and brought intelligence that the Works were very
great and hard to be overcome. At length, leaving Garrisons both at Lingen and
Oldenziel, oftentimes removing his Camp, he sat down before Roeroort, and
making there a Bridge, he erected a Fort on each side of the Rhine, the Germans
desiring that at Keysersweert might be pulled down. But Roeroort being a Town
in the jurisdiction of Moers, in the Enemie's Country, and better situated,
upon consultation had about the same, it was thought that removal was
advantageous.

At this time a new Regiment came out of Italy into the Netherlands, and
another, consisting of part English, part Scots, and some Irish, but all
Catholics. These unobserved of the Hollunders passed the Sea to aid the
Spaniard, Britain also rejoicing to be rid of them. With this strength, and
what other supplies Spinola added out of his own Army, Bucquoy was sent to
besiege Wachtendonck But Prince Maurice fearing some treachery attended the
Enemie's motion, and kept hard by Yssel, lest he should carry the War thither.
When he saw Spinola settled, he also pitched his Camp a little lower not far
from the Town of Wesel: Nor did he suppose he had at any time a fairer
opportunity to dare the Enemy, or make some attempt upon him, then while one
part of the Enemy was in Flanders, another about Wachtendonck: and to this end
he resolved first to fall upon Spinola's horse and some Regiments that
quartered about and in Mullem; and if his success there answered his desire,
then he determined to invade the rest of the Army; hoping this laudable advice
would in one day yield him a great Victory, unless God thought fit to repel
the long-continued prosperity of the Hollanders, and the honor they had
attained in the War, by unfortunate and adverse successes: for I cannot with
reason ascribe their so fatal a fear to any other cause.

The Village of Mullem lies close by the River Roer, which, although it be
broad, yet is fordable in many places: only it was not passable for horse,
because the banks lay so high, except they were levelled by main strength. On
the contrary bank was situate the Castle of Burick, and all round about were
the Fields that lay somewhat higher. The Prince made haste with his horse,
carrying over some foot Regiments in Carts: with part of the Troops he
commanded his brother to go before, and likewise by another way with another
party Colonel Marcellus Baxen; this to go toward Roer, against the Castle of
Burick, to shut up all passages of flight from them being circumvented; that by
a narrow passage among the Enemies, whose enclosures were by chance open, as
not kept by the Enemy, through the Soldier's neglect to whom the charge
thereof was committed, that afterward expiated his fault with his head. Herein
was a great Error, that Count Henry of Nassau's horse did not presently come to
the Village of Mullem, but he stayed for the coming up of the foot, hoping to
find the Enemies scattered elsewhere; who in the interim gathered together at
the River, and the higher and more open places that were beyond it. And this
only thing made the Hollanders afraid that they found not the Enemy
unprovided, as they hoped, but without doubt stronger then themselves: hereupon
their courages being altogether abated, they betook themselves to an unworthy
flight, no body pursuing them. Scarce could the sight of Prince Maurice himself
and the rest of the Regiments restrain them from running over their very
Fellow Soldiers, nay the General himself, so much were they affrighted. In the
mean while Baxen breaking into the out-parts of the Castle of Burick (the inner
parts were held only by ten Soldiers) met with some Troops of the Enemy,
which by chance were going out to forage: But he being not affrighted
therewith, and moving forward, drove them back; and questionless they had fled,
but that both horse and foot coming from Mullem restrained them: and then the
Prince's men overpressed with number and wearied with long fight, were afresh
encouraged by the sight of Prince Henry, whom a few men recovered from flight
followed; some others also being reclaimed by mere shame. Therefore on both
sides they set upon the horse and horsemen entangled in the River: but Lewis
Velasco hearing of the danger of his men, speeding with some Troops out of
Spinola's Camp, reduced the Prince's men into a new fear, their courages and
countenances yet bearing in them the terror of their former flight. Thus once
more brought into an amaze, they fled absolutely, nor could Prince Maurice
standing publicly on the other bank withdraw them with all his Forces and
great Guns, intermingling exhortations and reproof: now he remembered them of
the honor they had formerly gotten, That they should not be the first to fully
the Victories gained at Tornhout and in Flanders, nor lose those merited
praises they had won in taking so much from the Enemy, and that had made them
renowned in so many fights; That they should not leave his brother, their
Leader, in the midst of his Enemies: Then calling upon the fearful Soldiers,
that trusted rather to the swiftness of their horses heels then the valor of
their own hands, Would they only be diligent in sorrage, and actively
oppressive to unarmed people? Then requesting them to stand and face about,
Where are those countenances, where are those courageous inquisitions so often
by you made to fight the Enemy? acquit your selves of this dishonor offered to
your Country and to Me: Be conquered rather when I am absent, but rather purge
your selves of this crime by some worthy act, that I may hereafter see you
otherwise behave your selves with valor in other things. But all these things
prevailed nothing, their minds being so fully possessed with fear. Count Henry
of Nassau, only accompanied with a few of his domestic train, as he was
retreating to Baxen, being eminent for his habit, was on all hands furiously
followed; and the Captain of a Troup of the Enemies riding near, that he might
not discharge his Carabine, being in great fear of a Pistol levelled against
him, by and by laid hold of the Scarf he wore upon his shoulders, which the
great Officers of horse wear for show, but is of great danger in the wearing;
yet at the instant was redeemed. Which was an act of high merit, whoever did
it, which till this time is questioned; though the memory thereof be yet fresh.
But Prince Maurice, not so sollicitous now for the Victory as the safety of his
Army, lest the begun terror should consternate all, sends part of the remaining
Regiments over the River: And first of all Sir Horace Vere with the English
foot beat back the Enemie's horse, compelled to draw his men into the form of
a wedge, and to fight at push of Pike. Omerville, the Colonel of the French,
followed next, who there honorably lost his life. Nor did the foot Regiments
sustain only the brunt of the horse, but some of them, following the example
of the horse, beat back many of the Enemies who fled into the Castle of Burick.
And now Fortune was come about: But Spinola eluded them a while by a noble
policy, beating up his Drums hard by, as if his whole Army had been drawing
near, which were indeed far enough distant. Then the Prince, doubting that this
false fear might prove true, as formerly he chiefly relied upon the valor of
his horse, so now in their cowardly running away reckoning the greatest
incertainty of the War, founded the retreat, placing his Musketeers on the
inner bank, and drawing his horse within safeguard of them. Of the Enemy was
slain Colonel Trivulci, an excellent Soldier and a good Captain. The
slaughter, wounds, prisoners and Ensigns taken on both sides were equal, only
with this equality the assailants reaped the most dishonor. Spinela, having
escaped this danger, for the future went more prudently to work, contracting
his forces into a narrower compass: Then going to see how affairs were managed
by Bucquoy, and finding all things to his satisfaction, he returned to Roeroort.

Bucquoy had the advantage of a dry Autumn, otherwise the soil would have been
very wet. But the besieged, though they were twelve hundred, commanded by
Richoven the Governor, and trusting in their multitude and the strength of
their Works promised mighty matters, yet never came out of their works, or
endeavored to delay the Enemy by any sallies, so that making a Bridge over the
River Niers, and the eighth day getting to the Town-ditch, they drew away the
water, by beating down the Sluice that kept it in. Being come to the great
Bulwarks, first terrifying the besieged with Mines, and after that by an
assault, the twentieth day Wachtendonck was delivered.

During this time Geldre was attempted by the Prince, but with as little
success as the rest, which Town was distant from the Camp four leagues, whither
going in the night, he drew his horse and part of his foot, some going before
that should make way for them by forcing the Gates with Gunpowder: but when
they came to the Drawbridge, the force of their instrument was too weak, and
another being set to, fell into the trench, which gave the Townsmen time to
draw together, who soon dispersed those that were near at hand with their shot,
among whom was Philip, the son of Philip Morney, Lord du Plessis, being
fearless of danger out of the earnestness of his desire to learn; he was the
worthy offspring of so worthy a Father, whom he followed in the very track, who
in his time was famous in a high measure as well for his noble and heroic
actions as Learning.

Nor did Spinola omit farther to prosecute the good fortune of this year; for
sending Bucquoy, he easily took the Castle of Cracow in the jurisdiction of
Moers: for the truth is, it wanted the main part of its strength, the marshy
soil being by the extraordinary drought of the weather void of water. But in
Flanders Frederick Count Heremberg erected a great Fort hard by Scluys, where
the two Rivers, known by the diversities of their salt and fresh waters, fall
into the Haven. This he did assisted by fraud, and a small party of the Enemies
in those parts; because they of Bruges pretending to make a Bank as it were for
the recovering of the ground, which by an Inundation was torn from humane use,
had desired leave to do the same from those of Scluys. At the end of Autumn,
which was very showry, Spinola, seeing the Fortifications about Roeroort were
perfected, first dismissed his Army: The same did Prince Maurice soon after,
and the horse returning to their winter quarters, meeting in the way
Grobbendouck's Troops, routed the same, carrying the greatest part of them away
prisoners, being now resolute to lay hold on all occasions whereby they might
abolish the memory not of their fight, but of their flight at Mullem. Nor was
there any thing more done at Land; but at Sea the relics of Sarmienti's men
by stealth getting through the boisterous Sea, while the wind had driven the
Hollanders otherwhere, arrived in Flanders. Soon after this one Lambert of
Roterdam, a Sea-Captain, setting upon one of the greatest of the Dunkerkers
Ships, that carried one hundred and twenty men, fought with all sorts of shot,
and though fewer in number, yet equal in courage, he would not give place to
his Enemies fighting for their lives, he himself only fighting for honor. But
when John Gerbrand Governor of Euchuisen brought also his Ship against the
Enemies, the Dunkerkers having lost among the rest their Captain, (who was
named Adrian Theodore, and famous for Piracies) and being tempted with the hope
of pardon, yield themselves. The Ship that was taken afterward served for War:
about threescore of the men were hanged, some few got pardon in pity of their
youth, some as they were led to punishment escaped and fled, no one offering to
stop them; for the long continuance of the^ miseries in prison had mollified
the peoples minds toward them.

Among those that returned this year from the Indies, were some that were left
by Hemskerk beyond the Cape of Good hope, by reason of a Leak sprung in their
Ship. This Ship being driven by the wind to the coast of Madagascar, staid
there eight months, in great want of all things, and the Seamen, some by
diseases, others by War among the Barbarians, and the rest by grief of mind,
were almost all of them consumed, there only remaining alive eighteen of a
great number. A like fate drove some other Holland Ships to the same Coasts,
which were bound for the Island of Swans: but at their meeting those first poor
men, they were even confounded between joy and tears; and to hear the narration
of the dangers they had passed, would make any one acknowledge the infinite
loving kindness of God toward them. Presently they began to repair the
breaches of other Ships with the fragments of their torn Vessel, and to
transpose their Merchandises; by which means at last they returned to their
Country, of which they had so long despaired, and the Factors received an
unexpected gain. Besides two Ships came from Ceilon bringing sad news of the
death of the Governor Sebalde Waert, who was killed by the treachery of the
Fimala whom we mentioned elsewhere to be the King of Candy, and seemingly
affectionate to the Hollanders; but his suspicious nature incited him, as is
usual with Barbarians, because Sebalde gave liberty to the Portugueses whom he
had taken prisoners in War, which he, being a stranger to the customs of the
Barbarians, doing, it was by them interpreted to be an argument of collusion
between themselves: and he was the rather incensed to believe this, because
among the treaties between him and (...) Barbarian about making War upon the
Portugueses, he advised him that he might diligently consider his Ships, and
from thence set an estimate upon his strength, urging this with more
earnestness then suited with the honor of a Prince. He under pretense of
officiousness, pretending his ruin to be sought, to prevent the imagined
wickedness, took off Sebalde: and his Associates, for fear of losing their
Trade, omitted to revenge the death of their Captain. But the King of Spain
fearing lest those far-distant and weak parts of his Empire should become known
to all, by a severe Edict forbad any foreiner to sail to the Indies, or any
other place under the jurisdiction of Portugal, and they who then were in that
other World should by a certain day return thence: which for all that did not
so hinder the Hollanders endeavors, but that they sent to the Indies twelve
Ships, under the conduct of Captain Matelifen, one of the Governors of the
Indian Company. In the interim, Carden, whom we mentioned before to be sent to
Brasile, returned with a very great booty.

Among the Neighbors, although the name of Peace yet continued, yet many fierce
commotions were believed to tend toward War: for the Citizens of Aquisgrane,
the City having always been coveted by the Dukes of Brabant, had new Governors
put upon them, Imperial Decrees made against them, and (which then was buried
in silence, but afterward was manifested, by the confidence of a private
League with Albertus, all) the Ceremonies of the Reformed Religion were both
publicly and privately forbidden; they who had before born the Office of
Magistrates were not only accused as guilty of Sedition, but as being
illegally chosen were contumeliously used and fined, their Accusers were of the
choicest sort, and whoever undertook their defense were joined with them in
punishment. The Bishop of Colen's Legates, to whom the Emperor had given that
in command, under pretext of Reconciliation, publicly declared that profession
faulty upon their bended knees, and afterward laid pecuniary mulcts upon all
they denounced guilty, in the name of costs and charges, and upon most the fine
exceeded their ability; yet if it were not paid, part were thrown into Prison,
others removed their habitations; whose Banishment was followed with care and
hatred of the Commons against the Great men, and pity toward the poor. But by
how much at the present they were oppressed, by so much the more violently they
would in the future break out.

In France, besides the rest of the Spaniard's treacheries, it was discovered,
that Monsieur Merarges, sent from Narbon, to exhibit the desires of that
Province to the King, had agreed with Don Balthazar Zunica King Philip's
Ambassador privately for the delivery of Marseilles, concerning which he and
one Brunelle, a Netherlander Secretary to the Ambassador, were apprehended, and
with them were taken palpable demonstrations of their Treason. When the
Ambassador required his servant, according to the Law of Nations, the King on
the other side set forth the unworthiness of the fact, and how the right
belonging to Ambassadors was by himself violated. The Ambassador replied, If
any thing had been done contrary to friendship, that ought not to be attributed
to him, for the French King, contrary to the Peace made at Verbin, had openly
given assistance to Rebels and the Enemies of the true Religion; nor had he
only tempted to corrupt the Counts Heremberg and others in the Netherlands,
but had stirred up the Moors to invade Spain. With which reproof the King being
more enraged, answered, That the Roman Religion was more indebted to him and
his ancestors then the Spaniard, that being untruly reported to be the cause of
the War in the Netherlands, because in truth that contest was about Dominion:
And if he either would pay what money was due to the Hollanders, or the French,
who are a people impatient of ease, would in these parts make War under a
famous General, as in the farther Hungary and with the Archduke, how much would
that resemble so many treacherous designs intended against Cities, and the
tempted fidelity of so many great men? Then he repeated particulars, protesting
those things spoken concerning the Moors to be false, and confessions extorted
by force: And if it were unlawful for him to allure the Count Heremberg and
others, who were not Low-country-men, but Germans, to unworthy actions, what
did they merit who by large promises had drawn away Terral, not only a
Subject, but a Member of his House and family? But these were small matters.
But if happily an Ambassador dived into the secrets of State Affairs by politic
means, it ought mutually to be dissembled and pardoned; but counsels of
cruelty and such as tended to the hazard of lives ought by him to be refelled.
Zunica praising the King of great Britain, that although he differed in
Religion, yet he observed the Peace with great reverence; the French King
answered, Their friendship with the Spaniards was but of a new date, but a
short time would make appear what it would come to. But at last the Ambassador
was glad to pacify the King's anger, which began to break out into threats,
saying there should be no need thereof, as well the virtues as the wisdom of
Henry the Fourth being generally known to most men. But at last Merarges being
brought to condign punishment, the Secretary was restored to the Ambassador
his Master; it being proved to the King, that it would be better to repay
subtlety with policy, then to seek to revenge it by War.

About this time a horrible Conspiracy was discovered in Britain, contrived by
some who valued their own safety and fidelity and all Laws both divine and
humane less then their Zeal to the Roman Religion: for because they could not
by Petition obtain liberty for the exercise of their Rites, hiding a great
quantity of Gunpowder under the Parliament House, they decreed at the first
assembling of the Parliament to blow up the King, the Prince and the Peers of
the Kingdom: And the chief Fathers of the Jesuits being consulted with by the
authors of the Plot, whether it were lawful in so great a number of guilty
persons to destroy some innocent ones, they answered, that for the great good
of the Church some wel-deserving persons might suffer, confirming their opinion
by an argument of besieged Cities. But one of the more conscientious of them
admonishing his friend, that he should not come to the Parliament at the
appointed day, the Letter of advice being mistakenly delivered, first gave
notice of the design; and afterward the place being found out, both the
Treason and the Traitor himself were found out. Upon knowledge whereof, the
Conspirators in the farthest parts of Britain broke out into open Rebellion,
one Oldcorne a Jesuit encouraging those that were afraid, lest they judged of
the goodness of the cause by one unprosperous event; That God did many times
deny success to undertakings well approved by himself, that he might make trial
by adversity of his servants constancy and perseverance. But at the very
beginning of the same they were apprehended, brought to trial and executed:
Father Garnet also, who had formerly attempted many things against Queen
Elizabeth, being wont highly to extol the Pope's authority over Kings and
Kingdoms, that no faith or obedience was due to Princes by him interdicted,
averring that subjects, if they were commanded, ought to oppose them with Arms
even to the hazard of their lives. From whence all in power and authority may
learn, who neither stand in awe of the Roman Religion, nor Fleets nor Armies,
that they are by Ecclesiastical authority most violent inciters of the common
people to Rebellion. They added also another pestilent opinion, That one might
answer to any questions proposed by the Magistrate evasively, ambiguously and
with mental reservations; to that purpose setting forth Books in print, which
in defense of a lie they inscribed with lying Titles: And whatsoever was
related to them in Confession, ought to be kept secret, and to disclose the
same was a sin; although it tended either to the destruction of Prince or
people: and in pursuance hereof they named all manner of conferences among
themselves, Confessions. It was not doubted but these hopes of Treason were
nourished by the Spanish wealth, and the rather, because long since some
Societies of English Jesuits were maintained by them purposely to disturb the
Peace of that Kingdom. But some that were knowing herein betrayed all those
forms of private counsels abroad, lest they should still continue unknown; but
they that continued faithful to Rome and Spain, wanted no convenient supplies
from thence upon all occasions. And it was told to the Constable of Castile
when he was Ambassador in England, that if the new King would not allow or
suffer the Roman Religion, he would find some ready to exact the same by force.
And the Archduke fomented jealousies and suspicions, denying to deliver to King
James requesting the same such Englishmen living in those parts, with whom the
Prisoners confessed they had participated counsels; the chief of them being
sent away into Spain. Yet did not King James take that either as an affront or
injury; publishing by Proclamation, that he was satisfied of the innocence of
foreign Princes in that business. Nor did King Philip omit to congratulate his
delivery from so great a danger by Don John de Mendosa, both in countenance and
serious forms of speech to that only purpose made.

The Fifteenth BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
1606.
THE Defense of Antwerp, one of the principal Cities of the Netherlands, the
taking Towns so strongly fortified, and carrying the War into the Enemie's
Country, while with less danger and more hope he might have fought elsewhere,
added very much to Spinola's honor and renown, he being the first that seemed
to put new life and courage into, and to restore the fortune and discipline of,
that side which for fifteen years before had been decaying. Therefore which way
soever he went among the Netherlanders, there were great exultations and
applauses attended him; and when he came into Spain, as his custom was every
year, he was privately envied by the Lords, but publicly and with great honor
favored by the King. But the many actions of the former year had so drained
the Treasury, that by the emptiness thereof the present Counsels of the War
were much retarded, and he but slowly obtained pay for both his Armies,
refusing to undertake the charge of the War without it; and if he had it,
boasting he had in a manner already obtained the Victory, determining, as
before he had passed the Rhine, so now he would go over the Wael and the
Yssell, and so penetrate into the very bowels of the Hollanders. Therefore he
consented to help the King's decayed credit with his own and his friends
wealth, which with what damage to himself it was done, will be commemorated
toward the end of the year.

On the other side the United States, long foreseeing the approaching evils
which Armies are wont to draw along with them, increasing their Forces that
were at distance, (and they were infinitely vexed with the vast charges of the
Garrisons) resolved the following year to give way to that violence which they
imagined would not endure long, being content to defend their Borders until the
fury thereof began to be assuaged: Beside, the new Levies intended were hindered
in France by the War of Sedan, and in Germany by the troubles of Brunswick.
Sedan is a City lying hard by the Maes in the confines of the French and
Belgic Dominions, and was a place of great concernment if at any time the
War came toward those parts: Of old it was possessed by the Family of Le
Marque; but Henry de Turre Viscount Turein marrying the Daughter and Heir of
the Bulionian Family, gained the inheritance of the Town, and took the name of
Bulion; and although his Wife was dead, retained it by virtue of her Testament,
but often undermined by the French greatness, while the affairs of the House of
Bourbon were yet but private. He was reckoned among the chief Captains during
the unsettled estate of that Kingdom: But after the King had changed his
Religion, and for defense of the Kingdom new Taxes were found our, which gave
cause of complaint, and the great multitude that professed the Reformed
Religion had their eyes chiefly upon Bulion, he being famous in War, and the
frequent author of resolute counsels, he was believed to have caused some
commotions. When he was called to answer his offense, at the same time as
Marshal Biron was put to death, excusing himself against the violent
animosities of his Enemies, and challenging many of his suspected Judges, he
departed into Germany: And the Prince Elector Palatine being asked that he
would remember his Affinity, (for both of them had married Prince Maurice's
Sisters) sent some Ambassadors to the King to appease his wrath: but it little
prevailed, it being always a thing detested by Kings, to have foreign Powers
interpose themselves for the reconciling their differences. Hereupon the matter
was undertaken by Prince William's Widow; and indeed the Woman's solicitation
proved most effectual: but the King required the custody of Sedan as a pledge
of his fidelity. Bulion offered to deliver both the Town and Castle to the
patronage of the Kingdom of France, and for performance of that agreement
consented that as well the Governor as the Soldiers therein should be bound
by Oath, and besides this he offered other things, while yet he was not removed
from the possession, and in the interim prepared all things for enduring a War,
if he should be compelled thereto by necessity. This boldness of his, together
with the potent Enemies which he had lately made himself, and besides being a
man greedy of honor and impatient to be excelled, forced the King, that
marching out that Spring with a great Army he came with his Camp as far as the
Maes. Thus did this great King threaten with the fury of a destructive War, not
the Spaniard nor the Burgundian, as heretofore, but his old friend, the Lord
only of one poor Town. But a means being found to make Peace. Bulion was
redeemed from that imminent danger, and the King freed from such an inglorious
contest. The King placed a Governor in Sedan for four years, and at the end of
that time the custody of the same was to be redelivered to Bulion. By that
agreement it was forbidden for any to inquire into his former actions; and if
hereafter he should change his allegiance, the Townsmen swore they would choose
them another Prince. This Peace being made, he was restored to his wonted favor
with the King, who as he was easily angered, so he was ready and free to pardon;
all men wondering to see him that lately was an Enemy, now be at the King's
elbow, and inseparable from him both in his cares and recesses. The Castle it
self within a month was restored to him. This was the amicable issue of that
business, which was very pleasing to both parties at War in the Netherlands:
For it was a grievous thing to the Hollanders, that one of the same Religion
and related to the house of Nassau should be afflicted; and the Archduke was
sorely afraid, lest those Arms pretended against Bulion should fall upon
himself; and therefore Lewis de Velasco, that was sent to defend the Borders,
offered help to them of Sedan, But the Brunswick Commotions began the former
year, the Duke having a spleen to the City, because having bought their
Privileges partly from his ancestors, and partly extorted them, they defended
them with more then ordinary confidence, relying upon the Hanseatick League. He
replete with hope that he could by his own power restore that Authority which
the carelessness of his Ancestors had lost, gathering together his Forces, as
if he had dreaded Spinola's coming over the Rhine, first by ambushes planting
some Soldiers, he invaded the more outward of the two Walls that encompassed
the City: but the assailants being repulsed, they fell to open hostility and a
Siege, which, though the King of Denmark, whose Sister was married to the Duke,
came with a notable strength to his assistance, the Winter broke off. The
United States being requested by the Duke to send Count Ernest of Nassau as
General with some Forces to his assistance, were in a great suspense, because
it appeared to them an unseemly thing to oppress the liberty of another, while
they so hotly contested for their own: and yet rather for the King of Denmark
and the Duke of Brunswick's sake then the Hanseatick Cities, who had not
assisted the Hollanders either by wealth or any other kindness whatsoever, it
was thus moderated; They would not send him, but that he might go with some
new Forces if he pleased: to whom some Colonels and Captains joined and
associated themselves, requesting that for that time their Oath might be
dispensed with, being covetous to gain those rewards which are more readily
given at the breaking out of a new War. But this high contest was ended in a
short time: for at the entrance of the Spring, the Leaguer about the Town being
anew begun, and the dam broken, by which the Duke hoped to bring the restrained
River upon the City, and by that means to shorten the Siege; the Hanseatick
Forces being collected, prevailed with him to desist from the War. To both
parties unable to bear the charge the Emperor's authority was interposed, which
commanded them, that they should voluntarily and out of reverence to the Laws
proceed judicially, since they seemed in honor thereto to lay down their Arms.
Besides these affairs which were common to the Hollanders and their Enemies,
there were certain peculiar causes which hindered the Enemies Levies of men both
in Britain and Italy. For in Britain the King being forewarned how dreadful
those Subjects were that acknowledged power superior to the King, conceived a
new form of an Oath to oblige all his Subjects, whereby they were ^ confess him
the true and lawful King of Britain, and that he could not be deposed by the
authority of the Church of Rome or the Pope: and if that should be attempted,
yet that they should bear unto him faith and ^legeance, and discover all things
that might tend to the King's damage; and that in the taking the said Oath they
had no other meaning then the common use of the words expressed, and that they
did not hope to be absolved from the same. From hence arose great discord even
among the Catholics themselves; while part of them, by the allowance of George
Blackwel an Archbishop of England, (for so the Pope had entitled him) took the
said Oath without fear, supposing a distinction between sacred and temporal
affairs; and as they ought to do their duty to God in point of Religion, so in
all things else by the command of God himself they were bound to obey their
Princes: On the other hand, some believed the Jesuits, that humane things
ought to be subservient to Divine, and so, that he who was the great Arbiter of
Religion, if necessity re^ited the same, might transfer Kingdoms, that being
a most sacred Order, that all things should be subject to one. In the interim
they that demurred at the taking of the Oath were forbidden to go out of the
Kingdom into any foreign service. And the Pope's authority in Italy made the
like, if not greater, troubles and delays: For the Venetians fearing the
wealth and potency of the Priesthood, and imitating the Decrees of other
Nations, forbad them to build Temples, or to give lands to Abbeys or
Monasteries, unless they were licensed thereto by Decree of the Senate, and
that the Revenues of Church Lands should at no time return to them: besides,
they commanded some Priests to be put into Prison, because they were accused of
Sorcery, Parricide, Incest, Falsehood and public Force.

Pope Paul the fifth, by the instigation chiefly of the Cardinals Bellarmine
and Baronius, interpreting these things to be done in despite of him, when
they were refused to be taken away, interdicted and excommunicated the City.
Cardinal Baronius, in some Letters by him sent to the Venetians, advised them
among other things to take heed lest God, being angry with them as he was once
with the Hebrews, should take away their Liberty, and make a Lord over them.
Many Books were written, wherein a long time it was disputed what was the power
of the Laws, or of any other Sentences, upon those that were wholly devoted to
Religion, or whether the Pope's unjust commands obliged their Consciences. The
greatest part of the Priests in the Venetian territories did not abstain from
performing all public services in the Church; and the Jesuits, when they
refused to do the same, were banished. While this matter was hoped to break
out into Arms, the Spaniard, who had received it from his Ancestors to augment
the Troubles of Italy, raised Soldiers there, boasting himself the Defender of
the Pope's Majesty. On the other side, the Hollanders, partly out of hatred to
the Pope, and partly out of love to a free City, promised the Venetians some
assistance by Sea, if they should be endangered: for which they returned them
great thanks by Letters with much candor of language. But that prudent Senate,
as they would stoutly defend the rights of their Dominion, so they studiously
avoided all things that might hinder Peace or the ceremonies of greater
affairs. However this was the beginning of friendship between those two most
potent people, who would never endure the Rule or name of a King.

While these things were doing in foreign parts, at the beginning of this year
the Hollanders send a Fleet into Spain, to increase the dearth and scarcity of
all things which was rumored to be there; and also for vindicating those losses
they had received by the violent assault of their Ships by Lewis Faizard, the
said Ships lying unprovided and unguarded at some American Islands seeking for
Salt, whose Mariners and Seamen he either drowned, hanged, or burned. But first
the States set out an Edict, that none of their Citizens nor any foreiner
should either carry Corn or other things into Spain: And it being found both
formerly and of late, several Ships in hope of commerce had been enticed
thither, and made use of for warre^^e purposes, they now would go to beset the
Enemie's Ports, whither whosoever would go, should have their share of what
booty should be taken. In this Fleet were four and twenty Ships at the public
charge, under the command of Mine Here William van Hauten, besides those that
were set out and armed by private men in great number, but very unapt to be
kept under command. Their Orders were to ^^tcept the Fleet coming out of
America, and to ^op the Portugal Ships that were going out to the Indies; to
which purpose the Indian Company had brought a great sum of money into the
Treasury, whereby, being freed both from their Enemie's Arms and all other
contestants, they might have the more gainful and safe returns of their
Merchandise.

Van Hauten had but a very slow passage, by reason of the crossness of the
winds, yet got abundance of booty, because he took all Merchants he mer, and
wasted the Coasts. The Portugal Ships were so long kept in their Harbors,
that, despairing to get out, they discharged their received lading again on
shore. Of the American Fleet news was brought, that one laden with the King's
Silver, being entangled with a Holland Ship, was together with it burned; three
suffered Shipwreck by Storm, four were empty in the Port Havana; for that was
added, that they might stay the time of their coming out. But now Van Hauten
began to want Victuals, and the wind hindered those fresh Ships that the
Hollanders sent to bring them new provisions: And for these causes at the
beginning of Summer he returned home, sooner by much then he was expected.

But although the Armies made a slow progress, yet there was no cessation of
taking care for the War: Terral being chiefly unsatisfied, and laying the
blame of the miscarriage of his design not upon himself, but his Soldiers,
afterward by accident lighted upon some Holland Horsemen, where being wounded,
and hardly escaping by flight, as he began to amend and gather strength, so he
grew more earnest and desirous of revenge. At his command therefore five
hundred Spanish Horse passed the Rhine, giving out in speeches that they came
to seek out the Hollanders Hors^^ who having conducted Count Ernest of Nassau
to the borders of Brunswick, returned through the Country of Paderborn taking
great booty. But Prince Maurice having intelligence by his Scouts that Terral
was in those parts, admonished all the Garrisons beyond the Rhine, that they
should take ^eed of receiving damage by too much security. But Terrall taking
Twelve hundred Foot out of Oldenzeel, and avoiding Groll in his March, fetching
a long compass by Night, ^e arrived at Breesfort. It was then by chance
Shrove-tide, a time of mirth, so that all as well Soldiers as Townsmen, had
taken to themselves a liberty of feasting and merriment: The Night-Watches were
at first deceived, they that were with Terrall of their own accord, crying out,
That they were Mauritians, and were necessitated, being overpressed by the
Enemy, to fly for shelter thither under the protection of their Friends. And
they scarcely began to suspect the fraud, when by application of their Engines,
they had forced two Gates, and were come to the innermost, there being very
little time spent in the doing these things, that a few only running to the
Works, they quickly found it was in vain to think of defending the Town; the
rest flying to the Castle, which had its peculiar Fortifications, and the
Bridge being broken down, was quite separated from the Town: The men that
remained in the Town were slain, so also were some women after they had been
lustfully abused; There were four Cannons in the Castle, and as many in the
Town, but they wanted Gunpowder; Nor did the Governor of the Castle omit to
send Messengers into the next Towns, desiring them to send him assistance, for
that he was resolved to endure the uttermost extremity, rather than quit the
place: Hereupon the Troops of Over-Issell being immediately drawn together by
their Commander Warmeloo, and placing the Foot behind the Horsemen, through the
Marshy Lands he brought them into the Castle, breaking through the Fort,
wherewith the Spaniards hoped to have shut up the passage. They also that held
the Town, sent for aid to Lewis de Velaseo; who had a strong Garrison in
Rooroorfe, from whence be presently sent Four hundred Foot laden with
Gunpowder: but hearing that the Hollanders were about the Town, they durst not
enter it, although the Mootiness of the places, and the darkness, together with
the paucity of the Enemy, gave them convenience and opportunity enough for
policy. In their return they were met with by Colonel Fillers Horse, and put to
flight, part of them being slain, and part taken: In the mean while however,
Prince Henry of Nassau going from the Hague, and gathering together as many
Foot as he could, and those Horse which we men^ioned to return out of
Patelborne, came thither, and perfected the Siege; which they in the Town were
not able to endure long, being with great fury vexed with shot from the Castle,
so that within Eight days they wanted above an hundred of their men; the rest
securing their Lives in Trenches and Caves under ground: At last it was agreed,
That the Enemy should go away safe, restoring what Prey they had taken, as also
the Prisoners, which they had sent to Oldenzeel while they remained in the
Town. This haste the Besiegers thought fit to make, because the Spanish Forces
were drawing together on all hands: But if he had persisted, Terrall being
taken, would have been an acceptable Present to the French King, and should
have been a Pattern, whereby they should have been punished for the Cruelty
they used in their Victory, the terror whereof should have been such to all
unfortunate attempts of that sort, as for the future should have rather made
them to seek their Conquests by fair War, than Treachery and Surprises.

But Terrall nothing terrified herewith, undertakes greater matters, and wanted
but little of doing as much in one Night, as deserved the labor of a whole
Year. He had received intelligence by some Run-aways, That on the East side of
Scluys, there were no Watches kept without the Town, the Guards being burned
heretofore, and not rebuilded. Therefore taking through the marshy Fields of
Cazant Twelve hundred Walloons and Irish with him, he came unobserved to a Fort
of the Enemies, whither he designed, it lying just in his way. It was agreed
also, That Frederick Count Heremberg should bring more and greater forces to
Damme, to assault the Castle as soon as the City should be taken: But as the
beginning of their Enterprise succeeded beyond hope, so the latter end proved
quite contrary. Two Draw-Bridges and one Gate being forced by the Engines
applied to them, the innermost that only remained, hitherto made a noise, which
forced them to apply two Petards, and now nothing withstood them, but that they
might go to the very Rampire, which was not very high, all within the Town
remaining secure. Colonel Notte having intelligence, that the Enemy intended
some Stratagem, advised all his Neighbor Covernors, That they should take heed
to their Charges: not once suspecting the Design to be intended against
himself, that the Enemy would invade the Town so difficult to come to by its
inward Situation, and compassed round about with so many Guards on every side,
and therefore he gave himself to ease; and by his example, so did others. At
first they that entered were afraid, because finding so great silence, and no
stirring, they believed they were discovered, and that there was some Plot laid
to entrap them: It fortuned, that part of the Soldiers, who were commanded to
set upon another part of the Town at an appointed time, not performing what was
commanded, because the Clock of the Town did not strike that Night, whereby the
hours were not discerned. While these delayed, to break in, where the way lay
open to them: Some few in the Town awaked, partly with the cracking of the
Gates, and partly with the noise of the Enemies Arms, half naked, and half
armed, as they leaped from their beds, shut up the inner Gate. And surely here
the assaylants were much too short, that they had placed Pikes in the Front,
and not Musketeers, the Pikes not being so ready to enter against Shot.
Hereupon the first being beaten off, fear possessed the rest, which made them
fly, but they were hindered by the confused Numbers, that stood crowded
together upon the Bridge: And now Colonel Notte the Governor having planted
some great Guns, made a great slaughter among them as they stood in heaps in
the narrow passages. Almost Five hundred were killed with shot, drowned and
overwhelmed in water and dirt: Nor did they return without the loss of blood,
for the Enemy now appearing in public, the Soldiers on all hands from the
Forts issued out, and fell on in the Rear, making great havoc. This terrible
danger being escaped, care was taken, (which ought to have been done before)
that a Redoubt should be made before the Gate; And by the Arch-Duke's Command,
some of the Officers, whose carelessness was principally accused, were punished
with great severity, being made an example to others, that they should rather
choose any honorable danger, then by neglect and disobedience of Commands, to
incur a certain and sordid punishment.

Now the hope of the Venetian War being deferred, by reason of the scarcity of
provisions in Italy, the Spanish Regiments came thence into the Netherlands. So
also did Spinola, though retarded by a Fever, and the report of his death had
much increased the Hollanders security, with no less joy, (though it proved
false) then if thereby they had hoped to have been delivered from foreign Arms.

Upon the disbanding of the French Army, some came to the States; but the
greatest part of the Duke of Brunswick's Forces went to Spinola, John Count
Ridberg, Brother to the Transamasian Earl, having suffered some damage by the
Hollanders Incursions, conducting to him also part of the Horse, but part of
the Money that was intended to the Marquess, was intercepted; And the
Hollanders wasted the Country about Mechelen, because they denied to pay
Contribution. And Spinola having determined at the middle of Summer, and going
into places, in his opinion, full of water, divided both his Cares and Forces
with Count Bucquoy. To whom he assigns Ten thousand Foot, and Twelve hundred
Horse, and Twelve pieces of Artillery, with command to go into that part of
Holland, which the Rhine divided into another channel called the Waell,
encompasseth; Himself, with Eleven thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse, and
but Eight Cannons, thinking of many things, yet steared his course chiefly to
Friezeland and the Veluwe, for so is that part of Gelderland called, which is
compassed with the Rivers Rhene and Issell, then he considered of Vtrecht, a
great City and strong, but apt to Seditions from the unstable vulgar. And that
he might proceed with the more expedition, he removed from the Camp all Women,
and filled the Carriages with Victuals, Boats, Bridges, and Mills: And if what
he designed had come to pass, and the Two Armies had met on both sides, the
very heart of the United Provinces, and all the places of less strength, lay
open to the sudden violence, and the outer and more fortified places had been
torn away from helping them either with Provisions or otherwise: But thick and
cloudy weather attended with much Rain, detained Spinola as he was entering the
Borders of the Tubantes: From thence the Soldiers contracting Sicknesses, and
growing weak, their passage lying altogether through marishy ways, that they
in the Rear could hardly reach them in the Van in a second days March: Thus had
the Marshes more than ordinarily wet, and lying scattered up and down, stopped
the passage into Frizeland: Besides the Issell, a River not contemptible at
other times, was so swelled with excess of Rain; that it was not fordable in
any place. By these delays, Prince Maurice having gained time to get his
Soldiers together (in number Ten thousand Foot, and Two thousand five hundred
Horse) those be appointed to lie by the River, and to re-enforce with Works and
Garrisons, Deuenter, Zutphen, and Doesburg, being principal Towns, and to leave
the rest to Fortune and the Event. But the Marquess revolving in his thoughts
various Consultations, while he tryes all things, while the weather grew more
serene, hating idleness, sent some to besiege Lochem, a Town in the
Jurisdiction of Zutphen, meanly fortified, but conveniently situate for any
that intended to stay in those Parts; It was only kept by Three hundred men,
the Garrison being but small, while the care was chiefly taken for greater
Cities: Deuenter being chiefly dissembled as if it had been aimed at, had drawn
Prince Maurice thither; therefore the next day having made approaches even to
the Trench; the Town was delivered and the Spaniards thought fit to fortify a
little Hill near hand.

At the same time Pompey Justiniano by Bucquoy's Command, leading Four thousand
Foot, Five hundred Horse, and two Canons, early in a morning came to a Village
named Spardage, on the left bank of the Wael, and put the most nimble of the
Soldiers into Boats, each of which carried Thirty, and himself afterward
carrying over the rest, commanding them at once in an excellent order to loose
from the Shore, and also to land at the appointed place; for it was not easy
to land every where: But Warner Dubois, to whom the Prince had given in Charge
the defense of that side of their Territories, being called from Nimmeghen by
hasty. Messengers, had filled the inner bank: which sight certified the
Mariners, who counterfeiting that they were carried away by force of the River,
that they might not attain the designed place, soon after returned back: But
Justiniano prepared once more to set his Soldiers over the Wael, but the
Hollanders overpowring them by multitude of Forces, prevented it.

Then Prince Maurice, careful lest the Enemy lying upon him in so many places,
and with so great Forces, he might receive some unexpected damage, fortified
all from the first division of the Rhine, unto the meeting of the same with the
Waell hard by Bommell, then Raising new Works on ^e other side from Arnheym to
Hattem within the Rhine and Issell, therewith he enclosed all that great space,
leaving no greater distance between Work and Work, than might be convenient for
the giving of Signs to each other, either by the eyes or ears: He commanded
also some Boats continually (...) pass to and fro in the Rivers to observe the
motions and endeavors of the Enemy, and to give intelligence. Below Hattem,
about four hours Journey, the River Issell falls into the Zuyderzee: And the
River Vecht coming by the Borders of Westfalia, and mingling with the Waters,
which passing the bituminous soil of Trent, take the name of the River A^er or
Black; making his bendings become Neighbor to Issell, until it imbosomes it
self into the same. The Country that lies between those Rivers and the Sea, is
called Masterbruick, not vainly conjectured from antiquity, that the name
thereof was extracted from the Mattiaci (which are now Zelanders). It was a
Peninsula, but now a Ditch, and other Works between the Rivers had reduced it
into the form of an Island, in which part is situate Swoll, a Town of
Over-Issell.

After the taking other places, Spinola conceived a hope to shut up Swoll: And
that he might delude their thoughts, choosing to go through the parts adjoining
to Zutphen, from whence sending some small shot, he sent Count Solre to assay
and found the Issell. But the wetness of the weather hindered the sudden
executing of that Design, until the report of their arrival was brought to
Swoll; and Warmelo being at that time Governor there, assisted by two Ships of
War, resisted the Enemy preparing to pass the River Vecht. Solre had brought
with him two great Guns, but by reason the Bullets were too big, and the Timber
wherewith they should be sustained, not fitted by the error of those that were
to make them ready, they were of no use. When this did not succeed, and all
that hope of passing the River coming to nothing, they turned thenceforward all
their intentions to the besieging of Towns: Spinola himself sitting down before
Groll, a Town in the Province of Zutphen: Bucquoy was commanded to attaque
Nimmeghen, that they might divert the Enemy from the defense of Issell, if they
could do nothing else. Wherefore Bucquoy first sending to know the Arch-Duke's
Pleasure, and being resolved thereof, he agreed in the same Judgment, and
pretended to spend the time in finding out other ways to get over the Waell,
and in studying other Policies, fearing lest he should prejudice his honor by
laboring in vain.

Groll is compassed with a double Rampire on all sides, but where it is washed
with the River Slingen, the Garrison which consisted of Thirteen hundred
Soldiers, was governed by Colonel Dorte, a young man sprung from Noble
Ancestors, but otherwise unknown: At first they made a Sally, but afterward
did nothing but shoot from their Works, which were not valued by the Enemy, to
whom the loss of time was more considerable than that of men. The outerparts
of the Works were neglected as not expecting a storm, whereat the Italians and
Spaniards the seventh day after entered, being helped by Bridges which they had
purposely made: but the Germans, to whom the third Quarter was designed, came
on more slowly. After this first the Italians filling up the Trench, took the
Bullwark, but the rest were either repulsed, or further distant. Then the
Townsmen fearing undermining and more near fights, go to the Governor, and
beseech him, That he would prevent extremity, and not provoke the General,
that was as well prodigal of his own men's Lives, as his Enemies. With which
desires he was overcome, though he had received Letters that assured him of
Relief within two days: for Prince Maurice had drawn the Garrisons out of all
the Cities of Over-Issell, and near the Wael, with an intent to raise the
Siege: This being told to Spinola, he offered honorable conditions to such as
would march away; but added great Threats to such as should continue obstinate.
And here give me leave to say, that there was not a greater Care taken for any
parts than for Groll, and the other Towns before taken, when they Articled for
Sur^er, almost all the Townsmen remained there content, with any kind of
Religion, and any Form of Government.

Thus Groll being taken, the Marquess, although the scarcity of Victuals,
together with abundance of Rain, had filled all the Country with Water,
Resolved to besiege Berck, situate in a more elevated Soil, and Provisions near
to be brought in the Camp: For after the Designs of higher Concernment proved
all Abortive, he supposed no place more worthy to ^rive for with all his
Forces, whether he minded the Honor of the Attempt, or Commodity of the place.
For Berck, according to the manner of building in former Ages, had Stone-Walls
roughly laid together, and a Trench adjoining to them. In this War, the
possession of that place had bin often altered: In which variety of Fortune, a
slight Bulwark, and another Trench, had bin made about it, partly by the
Spaniards, and partly by the Hollanders: But the Year last past Count Ernest,
sent thither to that purpose, had made a New Line about it, with Sconces and
Half-Moons, and in some places with Forts; land hereto was added a Trench, a
small Redoubt being made before it: And then, that the Garrison might have the
mo^e Room, Lodgings were made for the Soldiers under Ground in the Form of
Trenches; and every where about the Fields, where it was thought fit, were
little Works made foursquare, for the Soldiers to keep Guard in. And the
Island that lies before the Town, was fortified in like manner: From thence a
Bridge was made over the Rhine to the Bank, on the German side; and on the Bank
it self was a handsome Fort pretty large, and another less, and then again
Breast works. Bucquoy leaving Gelderland, came first to the Town, through the
Bishopric of Colen, taking, in his March, a Holland Ship that lay in the
Rhine, and burning others that were deserted by the Seamen. But before the
Passages were all shut up, Prince Maurice's Brother Henry came from his Camp
(which had continued at Dorsburg till that time) and brought into the Town a
great Ba^d of Horse, and 14 Companies of Foot: Wherewith the Garrison (being
great before) was so increased, that they were near 200 Horse, and above 3000
Foot: The rest of the Horse Prince Henry brought back to the Camp, neither
provoking the Enemy to fight, nor being provoked by them. At this time several
young Noblemen and Gentlemen of France, among whom was the Duke of Roan's
Brother, of their own free will entered into the Town, and were there besieged,
minding to make known their Valor, and to learn the Arts Military, Whether
relating to the Assaults of Towns, or the Defense thereof.

After a few days, Autumn now approaching, Spinola made Inroads into the Duchy
of Cleves, and undertook, in person, to break into some Forts beyond the Rhine,
and by that means Prince Maurice to follow if he duist. The Besieged at first
made a Sally that way, and had well-nigh taken the General himself, who was
abroad only with a few Attendants. The next Attempt they made was upon
Bucquoy's Camp, where the Baron of Flessie a French Nobleman, more valiantly,
than wa^ly, assaulting the Enemy, was taken Prisoner: And while Spinola, having
now joined the Leaguers with a Bridge, wearies out the Fort beyond the River,
and other Works, with Shot; Edmund Colonel of the Scots Regiment, dyed of a
Wound; and so much prevailed the death of this Valiant Man, and Expert Leader,
that they in the Garrison having lost the Bank, Retreated into the Island, the
Rhine defending those places of Safety against the Enemy. But on that side the
Town toward Colen, the Works were assaulted by Cannon, by Mines, and last of
all by Storm. But the Prince sending to the States, desiring by Letters, To
know what they thought fit to be done; and they returning Answer, That they
left all to his Discretion: So that he might, if he pleased, fight the Enemy,
making many public Offers, as ^ be intended to raise the Siege, whereby he
might put Courage into his own men, and give the longer delay to the Enemy, he
privately Resolved in his Mind, to spin out the rest of the Year with the loss
of Berck: And as he was not to be moved by Reports, so was he wary of
Accidents, being ^ without fear, lest, if by bringing away his Army, he should
leave those middle parts naked, Spinola, leaving the siege, should again
attempt to pass the Wael, and the Issel; and then the Enemy being gotten into
the Bowels of the Country, all would condemn that vainglorious Rashness, that
preferred specious shows before real safety. Therefore, Resolving to go no
further, and intending to attempt no other Towns, he concluded to lie upon the
Watch near the Wesel; now pretending, that the Bridges came too late; anon,
that the Enemy was drawn nearer; but still keeping the Soldiers in the Camp,
who burned with a desire of fighting; yet to keep the Soldiers in Action, he
brought them to a Fort begun by the Enemy, where the River L^ppe mingles with
the Rhine, which he compelled to surrender, and afterward perfected it; and
that nothing might hinder them, he steered his course whither soever occa^ion
required, by many Noble Attempts, making Spinola fortify his Camp, which
before lay open, seizing all the little adjoining Hills.

In this time, the Besieged ^^^lyed forth very often, and every time with a
greater number: nor was their Fortune or Success unlucky, the French-mens
Gallantry appearing in all places: But as the Enemies Force drew nearer, they
did them no small damage by Mines. But their Courages began to fail, when they
saw no hope of Relief, and the Enemy secured from the danger of their shot,
daily advanced their Works, sparing neither Powder, nor other kinds of
fighting. The Besieged had Gunpowder enough to have served them a long time;
but they were so prodigal thereof at first, that the want thereof was one of
the main causes that hastened the Surrender. Colonel Utenboven, the Governor
of Berck, seemed more willing to yield it, in favor to the French, lest be
should desperately cast away so much gallant Youth, which were the Hopes and
Pledges of so many great Families, into utter Ruin, without doing any good to
their Country. At last many of their Bulwarks being taken, and the inner Works
but very weak, the Town, Island, and such Ships as were there, were delivered
up. About 500 were slain in the Camp, but not so many in the Town, among whom
was Saintange^ a Frenchman, of great Parentage. The loss of this famous Town
much troubled the Hollanders, who hereupon considered what was the Fortune of
War, if no Army went against it, yet the Fortifications would subsist but for a
short time. This place was gotten with the immense Labor of Fortifying, that
it might be lost by a Siege, that held but a Month, and a few days over, while
Berck, six Years before, being out of Repair, and void of Works, contemned and
held out their Arms a far longer time.

The day before Berck was surrendered, Prince Henry of Nassaw taking part of the
Forces, by Night attempted to break into Vensoo, having forced the Gate with a
Retard, and some of the Soldiers, with great earne^ness, going by the Bulwark,
that lies close by the Maes: But another Gate hindered them, and before it could
be broken, the Townsmen, together with the Horse and Foot of the Garrison,
repelled the Assailants. In another part Designs were laid by some Swimmers and
Ships out of Zeland, upon some Maritime Towns of Flanders, but the Success was
not answerable to Hopes.

At this time, some unfortunate News out of America, grievously weakened
Spinola's Credit, already wavering with the Greatness of the Usury he paid;
some Merchants, whose Accounts with him were unsettled, being compelled to break
promise with him: Whereupon he wanted Money, and being wonted to give the
Soldier part of his Pay, out of his own Revenue, now he was not able to do
that. And lately the Governor of Wachtendenck punished some Seditious Threats,
by the death of one Soldier, and the punishment of two more: After this
continual marching, and laboring in the Camp renewed Discipline: But after
Berck was lost, and that the Hollanders had nothing in those parts besides
Moers, which it was feared Spinola would attaque, notwithstanding the Autumn
was so far spent, and it had a considerable Garrison: Nor did Poverty only,
and the want of Fodder pinch the Horsemen chiefly, but the Infirmities of
Diseases afflicted all the rest; so that many ^led to Prince Maurice, and part
went to other places: They that had more Courage, sh^nning Sloth, began to
mutiny, and employed themselves in making Bullets, and wandering about the
Fields, till at last they fell to choosing themselves a Head, and ordaining all
other Things, that use to set forth Seditions to belong and durable.

While their Paucity was contemptible, Spinola first proscribed them of their
Commands, and proceeded against them as Offenders against the Law: But when
they began to grow more powerful, he was glad to flatter them by Messengers:
But as his Threats were without Authority, so his Promises, with real
Performances, were little esteemed. Almost 600 of them went to Hochstraten, the
noted Receptacle for such Beginnings; but that place was not at this time
fortified, because it was lately agreed between the Archduke and the
Hollanders, That he should suffer that place, and they also Would, to be free
and exempt from War, to be enjoyed by the right Owners thereof: And by Albertus
his Order, they heard, that his Forces were coming to take Revenge upon them:
Therefore they drew toward Breda, and sent to the Governor Justine of Nassaw,
to inform him, That they, according to the Example of others their Companions,
were fled to Prince Maurice 's Protection, whom they knew to bear a respect to
valiantmen; That they did not esteem it so slight a matter to fight against
him, that they would do it without their Reward or Wages. These Desires of the
Seditious were answered, by sending them Provision and Arms, together with the
hopes of Assistance, in case they should be endangered. Spinola moved herewith,
that this Evil might not spread further, he sends the most Active and Cordial
of his Men into the Neighbor Towns, and disperseth the rest of the Army over
the whole Country of Colen, as Mendosa had formerly done; and likewise he
receives Money from some Cities, to keep the Soldiers from coming among them,
who (to say the truth) were not evilly inclined, as long as they were not
necessitated.

From these troubled Affairs of the Enemy, the United States conceived hopes of
recovering what they had lost this year beyond the Rhine, having a sufficient
Army by the addition of those that were come out of Berck, being near fifteen
thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse. No less did the Enemy make have, in
this juncture of time, while neither party much minded the future; that their
Forces (whose obedience for want of pay, had been exhausted) might be
reencouraged and brought again into one Body. Count Ernest of Nassaw being sent
to Lochem with part of the Soldiers, the fourth day after his Arrival gained
it, upon the same Terms that Spinola had late given it.

About the same time also did the Prince attaque Groll, Autumn then coming on
apace, which place was defended by Henry Count Heremberg, with six hundred
Foot, and his own Troop of Horse, and much Artillery. And by chance, a great
quantity of Rain having lately fallen, so that the Pioneers could not with
convenience come to work, not only delayed and protracted the Siege, but
brought many diseases into the Camp. And the Soldiers were spared, in hopes
that the Weather would become more seasonable, when at the instant arrived
News, That Spinolaes Forces that had been dispersed into Garrisons up and down
the Country, were collected together from thence. And then the Princes earnest
desire to continue the Siege, and Fortify the Camp against outward Force, made
the Soldiers work and Duty double, though in regard of the Enemies being so
near, it was too late; for Spinola himself, and his Officers, those Authority
with the Soldiers was of high esteem, ringling together Prayers and Promises,
incited them, That they would not refuse that short and easy undertaking, that
would let to them of so great advantage, and so much to their Honor. He had
gotten together seven thousand Foot, and twelve hundred Horse, a number much
unequal to Prince Maurice, yet he pressed on to Fight, either confident in his
own men's Valor, or knowing that the Enemy by all means endeavored to avoid a
Battle, in which conceit he was not deceived. He himself was in the Front with
twelve hundred men, the choicest Soldiers of all his Army, then two Regiments
of Spaniards and Italians, and last of all were placed the New levyes of
Germany; to each of these Divisions were assigned ten Cannons, the Horse were
drawn up on the Banks, being guarded by the Carriages, lest they should be
wer-run by Prince Maurice's Troops, for that part of their Enemies Army they
chiefly feared; and receiving Intelligence by their Scouts what part of the
Camp was fortified slightly only with Pallisadoes; he showed his Main Ba^tel on
the side, although it was a great way about, and his passage much hindered by
the Marshes. Prince Maurice, Although the States had given him order and power
to fight, and that his Soldiers were earnest thereto, but the French
especially cried out, That they must perpetually seek lurking places, and daily
fly from the Enemy, if now they should give place in a few, and they tired out
with wet, cold, and long Marches: yet he withdrew his men into the safety of
his Camp, which was the cause of the breeding Diseases among many of his men,
and striking a fear into those that remained healthful, Spinola accounted it a
great Victory to have raised the Siege, and to have elevated the courage of his
own men, and to have impaired the Enemies Glory. Soon after this, both parties
went into Winter Quarters. This year, the States dismissed Colonel Foxes German
Regiment, that had merited greater Honor and Rewards than the rest, which
example was taken in very evil part. In this posture stood the War at Land.

But in the Spanish Ocean, after the public Arms were departed thence, Private
Men of War did no small damage, and the Spanish great Ships pursued the
Hollanders, and their lesser were voluntarily set aside. At the end of this
Summer, Admiral Hauteen was again sent to intercept the Fleets coming out of
America and the Indies, he had with him four and twenty Vessels, but of these
six were beaten back by Tempests. And soon after Fiasciardo, with eight great
Galeons, having a prosperous gale, fell upon them unprovided, and ere they were
aware: but the Galleyes that were with him, not being driven by the Wind, kept
to the Shore. As the bulk of the Galeons, so, the terror thereof, to that time,
had been very formidable, and although the Hollanders remembered that some such
had formerly been spoiled by Tempests, or split upon the Rocks, yet they had no
president of any of them at any time worsted in fight. One of these being
grapled with a Ship of Zeland that was next the Admiral, so affrighted the
rest, as soon as they saw it, that at the very beginning of the night, they
retreated in all have. He thus left by his Companions, being a man of an
undaunted Resolution, yet for two whole days did not leave off the Fight,
though most of his men were in that time lost, but with his torn Ship, casting
aside all fear of danger, protracted their Victory. But after he saw no hopes
of relief, and that the Waves poured in upon him, that none of them might come
alive into the Enemies hands, at once they unanimously agreed upon a noble, but
terrible action, and of much advantage to their Country; for kneeling down
upon their knees, and Praying God, That he would please to pardon them, in that
they sought to shun the mockeries of the Spaniards, by that sad and (...)
death; they set fire upon the Gunpowder, by the force whereof, threescore men
were killed, two half dead, lived a little while, being taken by the Spaniards,
with wonder beholding their dreadful countenances and words, together with
their obstinacy even in death.

The Hollanders being dispersed hither and thither with Fleets, surprised some
ships coming out of the Indies to Lisbon, and from America to St. Lucar de
Barrameda. And they that came from the Indies free from the Enemies, were
miserably afflicted with Tempasts. Two Ships not far from the Cape of good
Hope, by throwing overboard their Merchandises, being empty, escaped the danger
of Wreck, and got to the Coasts of Mosambique. Also two at the very mouth of
the River Tagus sprung leaks, whereby the greatest part of their Merchandises
was spoiled with the Salt Water, but the Seamen and Pilots made a shift to
escape; But the American Fleet, to the number of Fifty Sail, with very good
Success, returned and brought, as well to the King as the Merchants, great
store of Silver, and other precious Commodities, the total product of a two
years Voyage, whereby the apparent poverty of Spain was in some measure
relieved, and the credit thereof suddenly repaired. But the Hollanders lost all
the cost and labor they had been at. However in the Indies, some of their
Affairs went on with more happy Fortune, for Stephen Verhagens Fleet, which we
mentioned to go out about three years ago, now returned, bringing home with it
the Honor of many Victories, samed through the World, and the amicable Leagues
of diverse Princes; for first of all they met a Portugal Carrack not far from
Mosambique, which they took and burned, that for the future it might be no more
troublesome to them. Another they seized upon the same Coasts, and a third
coming from Cale^^^. There Samorini King of Malabar, hating the Portugal,
name, from whom they had received much damage, and to whom they did all the
injury they could, voluntarily desired a League with the Hollanders, which was
afterward concluded, and confirmed with in Oath. This King had very numerous
Land Forces, but wanted Shipping exceedingly. The Letters which he sent to
Prince Maurice, declared, That he was well pleased the Hollanders should build
a Fort in his Land, and that having drawn Hidalcane a most Potent Neighbor
King into the same League (being both Mahometans), they would take all
opportunities of advantage against the chief Colonies of the Portugueses, both
in Cochin and Goa.

But the Ambassadors sent by the King of Achem, to the States and the Prince,
returning into their Country, fi^led Sumatra, and all the Neighbour-places,
with the report of famous Countries, and a Nation, that even at home maintained
great Wars: Afterward, another Ship came into their power, wherein was the
Spanish Governor of the Moluccaes: Not far from these Molucca Islands, is
Amboyna, which also as many other parts of that World, is possessed by the
Portugueses; but the Natives of the place, hating the Tyranny of their Lords,
greedily accepted the Hollanders friendship, as soon as they came thither; for
which cause, many indignities and injuries being done to them, made their
fidelity to these as constant, as their malice was obdurate against the other.

The Governor of the Castle, when he saw the Fleet come under the very
Fortifications, sent fiercely to ask them, who they were, and what they had to
do with the Garrison which was committed to his Charge. They answered, That they
came thither by the Command of the United States, and Prince Maurice, and that
they were public Enemies, both to the King and People of Spain, and also to
himself, and in a short time, he should find who they were, and immediately all
things were prepared to assault the place: But He, as he was fierce toward
those that were weak, or under his power; so trembling at the sight of an Armed
Enemy, without any assault, surrendered the Castle, that was furnished with
thirty Pieces of Cannon: from whence six hundred with himself, were transported
to the next Coasts in Ships, provided by the Hollanders for that purpose. But
forty six Portugueses, with their Families, stayed in their old places of
abode, and willingly took an Oath, to be faithful to the States and Prince
Maurice.

With the chief men of the Country (for they govern the Island) a League was
made, in effect, the same with that which we mentioned before to be concluded
with them of Banda. Only this was added, that every individual person, should
confirm their fidelity to the Hollanders with an Oath: Here a Garrison being
left, the Fleet was divided, and some sent to Banda, and five Ships under the
Conduct of Cornelius Sebastian, went to the Indies. But that it may thoroughly
be understood of what concern the Affair was, that was hotly contested for,
between two such powerful Nations at Sea; we must make a higher and more narrow
scrutiny.

Among the many thousand Islands contained in the Indian Sea, whose number till
this time has been unknown, five are more excellently eminent, for this one
thing chiefly, that they bear Cloves, a most fragrant Spice, and of very great
use in the seasoning of the most dainty Dishes. Their most known names at this
day are Ternata, Tideris, Motiel, Man, and Bacian: formerly there were some
other, to wit, Cape, Duce, Moutil, Mara, Seek. Each of these are much of the
same bigness with our Isle of Walcheren: the Air and Clymate, as it is most fit
for the producing and ripening fruits, so is it very tedious to humane Bodies,
by reason of the Vapors exhaled by the Sun, which is almost perpendicular to
them; for these Lands lying just under the Equator, having their very entrails
scorched, needs must the surface thereof be inflamed.

The Chinoys about the Year of Christ, One Thousand and Thirteen, being
scattered far and wide over the Indies, possessed these Islands, but not
without great expense and blood; whereof at last being weary, they retired
themselves more inwardly, leaving those places, whose Possession they had
enjoyed threescore years; after these, some out of the Country of Malucca, came
and seated there, who being driven away, the Arabians mixed with Persians,
succeeded them, who brought in with them Mahometisme, a long time mixed with
increasing superstitions, and by little and little also separated from them:
Nor from any other Fountain sprung their Name; for the Arabians called them the
Kingdom of the Moluccaes: From the same, they took the name of their Kings,
calling them Sultans, and several other words by them used: These Islands were
altogether unknown to the ancient Greeks and Romans, unless they may seem to be
included under the name of Chinoys, or among the Islands first found by
Jambulus, whom Diodorus Siculus commemorates: But the Merchandise of Cloves,
they enjoyed by the People of the East; and because being increased, it passed
with Egypt to the Ptolomean Kings, and afterward, to those that succeeded them
in their power and greatness, the Romans had their Tribute of the same. But the
Roman Empire decreasing, first the Genowayes, and after them the Venetians:
together with Cassa, obtained these. And when Constantinople fell to the Latin
or West Empire: and the Greekish envy chose among these Trebizond, for a new
Seat of another Empire, the Trade was drawn thither through the Caspian Sea, by
a way not so much used, as known to the Romans of old, as Pliny teaches us out
of Varro; and afterward, the Turks Power increasing thereabout, it was carried
thence by Camells, and Dromedaries to Aleppo: But the Sultans that possessed
Caire, restored it again to the Red Sea, and Alexandria: After this, the
Portugueses having searched many parts of Africa and Asia, and planted Colonies
in the Year One Thousand Five Hundred and Twelve, came to these Islands,
whereby force and Arms prevailing, partly by the differences of the Kings
there, and partly by the streng^h of their Shipping, easily made themselves
Lords of the Trade of Cloves, spoiling and destroying all Ships, that by chance
at any time came thither, either from Persia or Arabia, and stopping up all the
passages into Egypt. Thus did the Sultans love no less than the yearly Revenew
of fourscore Thousand Ducats.

At that time, the King of Ternata, was Boloif, the Son of ^rgeo, who was
looked upon among his Subjects, as a Prophet, the King of Tideris was Almansor;
these were at variance between themselves a long time, only out of a desire of
increasing Dominion, which was the Original, and cause of their slavery: The
Portugueses preferred the friendship of him of Ternata, as having the larger
Government; and as if they believed any thing lawful to be done against
Mahomitans, they poisoned Almansor, disobeying their Command; for which cause,
his Son and Heir Raxamira, submitted himself to the obedience of the
Castilians, who eight years after, publicly came into those parts, as if with
an intent to take possession thereof, averting, that their Ancestors and
Magellane, had discovered those places before the Portugueses; and besides,
they so interpreted the method of dividing the World, and the several positions
of places with such uncertain dimensions, that they would include these places
within the bounds of their Empire: Hence it came, that when those two distinct
People, Spaniards and Barbarians, were intermingled, they had sharp, but no
long conflicts: because the Emperor Charles the Fifth who Reigned in Castile,
wanting money, and not rightly understanding of what great concernment the
matter in agitation was: accepting from John the Third King of Portugal, Three
Hundred and Fifty Thousand Ducats, He pawned to Him, all His Right in the
Mollucca's: from whence the Portugueses have since claimed a free Trade there,
without interruption, sending all their Cloves to Goa, from whence the
Persians, Turks, Chinoys and Africans, fetched them; yet scarcely so much by a
third part, as is vended to the European Nations. Therefore it was no wonder,
that out of the Molucca Islands, and Amboyna, which is not far distant, and
brings forth the same Fruit and Banda, where the best Nutmegs grow, which bears
a Flower that is called Mace, the Kings of Portugalls had a yearly Revenew of
Two Hundred Thousand Ducats. Pepper^ and Ginger growing every where, are
esteemed vile to these; so also is Cinnamon.

Now as the Wealth of these barbarous Kings increased, so also did the injuries
offered to them: for that which at first was but an alliance, after became, and
was turned into public Tyranny; and what before was the Obligation to
Fidelity, now was converted into designs of Treachery.

After the Death of Bolcif, his Son Bajan, that succeeded Him in the Kingdom
was taken Prisoner, and after Him, his Brother, and King Dayall. These by some
means or other being dead, one Arrias took the Kingdom, who also was Himself
first Imprisoned, and afterward slain, for no cause, but out of envy to His
greatness; for He was unspotted in His Fidelity: insomuch, that many Islands
about, which had formerly been Governed by the Noblemen, in admiration of His
Virtues, submitted themselves to His Government: so that He had under His
Command, above seventy Isles, and no small parts of the Celebes Country,
Mindanao and Gilolo. His two Elder Sons were so terrified with that sad
Example, that they refused the Name of King, and so escaped the danger.

The Third named Babus, ventured to take the Crown, and promising to revenge
the former facts, it was admirable, to see how much Affection both His Subjects
and Neighbors showed to him: In His Reign, the English first came out of
Europe, under the Conduct of Captain Drake, in the Year, One Thousand Five
Hundred Seventy and Nine, and disturbed the Possession of the Portugueses:
Babus expected aid a long time from these; but being frustrate of His hopes,
and the Courages of the Barbarians beginning, as is usual, by little and little
to languish; and hearing that the Wealth both of Castile and Portugal, were
united in King Philip, He sent some to him, to excuse the revenge He had taken
for His Fathers murder; and promised for the future, Faith and Obedience: But
he was eluded with ambiguous Answers, ^^til soon after dying, together with the
Kingdom, He left to His Brother Zaida, instead of hopes of Par^on, His hatred
against the Spaniards, ready to burst out upon any occasion given.

There was also one Molee, who after Ra^amira, Succeeded His Father Guna,
(slain by Zaida) and his Brother G^apabaguna (uncertain by whom poisoned) in
the Government of Tyderis, who to oblige the Portugueses, by good Offices, was
envious of their adversaries: These were they the Hollanders found, when first,
as we have before related, they came into that World.

In the Year One Thousand Six Hundred, Zaida first with joy beheld the
Hollanders Arms, able to cope with the Portugal Power, against whom He joined
with the other, with so much Courage, that He not only defied the Spaniards as
Enemies; but slighted the English, who desired Commerce and Trade with them;
but calling the Hollanders his Allies, and Confederates, and the deliverers
both of Himself and the Sea, from tyrannous oppressions: On the other side, the
King of Tyderis permitted the Portugueses to Erect a Castle in their
Territories: And before Cornelius Sebastian came thither, the English once more
arrived there with their Ships, boasting to the Portugueses, That there was a
Peace between Spain and England; They that accounted all Foreigners Enemies,
yet then counterfeited Friendship to the English, although the fear of the
Hollanders was more prevalent; Nor was gain only diminished by these, and the
number of Merchants lessened; but the English resisted them that prepared for
War against Tyderis, that they might sell Gunpowder to the Portugalls, by the
scarcity whereof, they were much pinched; but by perseverance in Counsel, it
was agreed between Zaida and the Hollanders, that He should only make a show of
War, while they brought over their Army into the Island of Tyderis: That the
Hollanders only should perform the Assault of the Castle, because the
Barbarians are carried ^ rather by fury than advice; and being once broken off,
suddenly loose all their Courage; The Mariners therefore first of all climb up
and assault two Caracks lying near the Bay, then setting fire on some small
Villages. All the great Guns, both from the Ships at Land, were levelled at the
Castle; but afterward, Captain Molly, looking at the matter nearer hand,
reported, that there was a passage through the ruins; whereupon, they
violently run on, and though beaten back both by shot and fire thrown among
them yet they came on afresh; Then did Molly, seeing one Torry a Spaniard,
rushing upon him with a Javelin, gently avoiding the stroke, catch him in his
Arms, so that they both fell down together upon the ground: where as they lay
struggling, he called to his next Associate, bidding him to shoot the Spaniard
in the Head while he held him in his Arms striving, which was presently d^ne
yet, but seven being able to get into the Castle, they were forced to Retreat,
in which, Captain Molly being found with his Thigh broken, was by his
Companions carried off, though a long time he resisted it, crying out, that
they should again, and with greater valor, assayl their Enemies, their care of
him at present, being to no purpose: for if they took the Castle, they might
relieve and take him up at their pleasure; when by chance, a Tower, wherein was
a quantity of Gunpowder being shot with a Bullet, the Powder took fire, and
destroyed threescore Portugueses: In which affright, the Assaylants afresh
coming on, took the Castle^ The Women and Children fled into the Rocks, which
were unpasseable by Armed men; but all Victuals and Water being stopped from
them, they were forced to yield, and together with the men that survived the
taking of the Castle, were transported into the Philippines.

Thus were the Portugalls driven from their Dominion in the Molucca's, save
only they had yet one small Fort in the Island Timosa. The Hollanders gave not
only the King of Tideris his life, but granted him all his power, lead thereto
rather for their Honors, than Securities sake. But He, dissembling amity with
the Hollanders, made a League with the King of Ternata, having no other hopes,
and then continually laid plots, which in time he hoped to bring to pass,
desiring in the interim, as the best means to secure the liberty of the Island,
that the Castle might he demolished, which ought rather to have been kept up
and augmented.

At this time also, other Ships returned from the Indies, which had been sent
thither by several Merchants, before they were united into one Company: nor did
they come without good booty; for they had intercepted a Carack coming from
Machao, at the Island Patany, which then a Woman Governed, who maintaining,
that the spoils taken in Her Kingdom belonged to her, made the Hollanders
divide the prey with Her, which afterward they redeemed again.

Part of the Indian Commodities, especially Silk, is brought out of China, a
potent and flourishing Empire, where it has ever been esteemed a part of
Prudence, to forbid an entrance to strangers; and the Portugalls residing at
the utmost Borders thereof, by many Policies, affrighted that suspicious
People, advising them not to admit the Hollanders, who were valiant and
powerful at Sea, to come within their Borders: but while by the favor of
Neighbor Kings, a harmless Voyage was sued fot, in the interim, by the
Merchants of China, that frequented Java, and other places, they participated
of the same Commerce. Moreover, the Hollanders sent to the Indies, Paul Carden,
with Eight Ships, the Nin^h by chance, being burned before it went out: And
lest their Neighbors should seek to convert to their own uses, that Commerce
which they had gotten with so much labor, and defended in the uttermost parts
of Asia, the United States did by an Edict declare, That no Native of
Inhabitant should go into those parts, either from home, or out of other Lands,
except such as were Commanded by the Indian Company, lately erected in Holland,
wherein all Objections were answered by the necessity thereof, and the like
Example: and afterward, in following times, the same Company was much
augmented by new Cautions, and severe punishments against offenders, as any
deceitful practices were detected.

This Year were Celebrated some Solemn Funerals; as of Philip Hohenlo, one of
the Noble Persons among the Hollanders, who dyed among them, and of John of
Nassau, who deceased in Germany.

Hohenlo was a Man, well skilled in War, and of an undaunted Resolution; but of
no great foresight in Command, although during Prince Maurice's Youth, he was
wont to lead the Forces; but when he saw by the Princes maturity, that there
was no use of Him, at length, partly with grief and trouble of mind, and partly
by the Gout, caused by two much repletion, he had a slow and lingering death,
which is very grievous to a valiant mind.

But Nassau dyed of old Age, he was Brother to William Prince of Aurange, and
with Him shared the ancient Inheritance of his Predecessors: the Prince
enjoying all in France and the Netherlands, and He what belonged to their
Family in Germany.

He assisted his Brother with Money, while the necessity of his Affairs
required it; and in the greatest distraction of his business, he was not
wanting in Counsel. He was for a time, Governor of Gelderland, and the chief
Author of the Trajectine League, which was in its time, exceedingly necessary.
Afterward, returning to his own Patrimony, he was a continual Assistant to his
Sons, supporting by Arms, his Allies and Friends, of whom, Count William
Governing the Frizons, and Count Ernest, about that time, married to the Duke
of Brunswicks Daughter, only survived; the Counts, Philip and Lewis, dyed in
the War; nor was his Offspring at home, any whit less, of either Sex.

Now also dyed Justus Lipsius, a Man famons for Learning, among the Noblest
Wits, after he had obtained great Renown from the Precepts of Wisdom, and the
Roman Gravity; and also from a new and concise kind of writing, perpetuated the
same, in his public Narrations of Halle, and Aspricoll. And whether He
deferred, or contemned to answer those Books set out against him, his Death so
soon following, has left questionable: however, as well the Hollanders as the
Netherlanders, did not omit to Celebrate the memory of this worthy Person, both
in Verses, and public Orations.

About this time also, was a Marriage in the Nassavian Family, Solemnized,
between PHILIP Prince of AURANGE, and a Virgin Daughter of the Prince of CONDE,
of the BORBONIAN Stock, by which Affinity, the KING, as Obliged to Him,
restored the free Possession of the Town and Principality of AURANGE, although
the PARLIAMENT of DAUPHINE, averred part of the same to be subject to their
Jurisdiction, and part in general to the Kingdom.

Before I begin to enter a Work disagreeing to the former discourses, I will
declare how the Hollanders Affairs were turned from so sharp and long a War,
unto thoughts of Peace in this year; what part of Europe was at Peace, and what
at War, what private or public motions and inclinations of mind among
themselves or their Neighbors, when and how that time became every where as it
were fatal in so great mutations, and of what advantage Foreign Affairs were
to Ours, or Ours to them.

The whole North, which consisted of Kingdoms of old, replete with many
Privileges and Liberties, was broken out into Arms, almost for the same causes
that the Hollanders War began; for Sigismund, following the Dictates of the
Jesuits, had lost Sweden, with great difficulty retaining Poland: For in
Sweden, Charles laying aside he name of Duke, and by the Decree of his Nobles,
taking the name of King, and repairing his Forces, after the loss he had
received at the Siege of Riga, approached near the borders of Livonia. In
Poland, Amoseius, the Chancellor of that Kingdom while he lived, had by his
Wisdom, and the reverent esteem that was had of him, prevailed both with the
King and Nobles for the observation of Peace, and support of the Law. But when
he was dead, first discontents and hatred arose, which afterward broke out
into open Force. And some there were that said, The Nobles were advised soon
after his Funeral, that their Liberty had been attempted with many artisices,
That he had left the Commonwealth in as good a Condition to those that
survived, as it was when he first received the Charge of it; and therefore now
They should take care that nothing therein might go amiss, either out of
Ignorance, or Sluggishness. And in truth, not long after, the chief of the
Noblemen, that are there called Palatines, broke out into Arms, accusing the
King, That after the death of his first Wife, without the advice of the States
of Poland, he had married the Sister of his deceased Wife, thereby at once
polluting the Kingdom with Incest, and by a private League obliging himself to
the House of Austria, and that in the disposal of Honors, he carried not an
equal hand, but preferred Romanists before Protestants; they desired also that
the Jesuits might be expelled out of the Jurisdiction of Cra^ovia, and that the
contentions growing among Priests should be decided by Domestique Judges, and
not at Rome, whither they must make long Journies with vast charge. And
thereupon the Great Council of that Kingdom being summoned, they called the
King before them, to purge himself of his Crimes, adding threats, That unless
he appeared, they would transfer those Imperial Ensign of Majesty, the Crown
and Scepter, which by the Custom of the Country they had the keeping of, to
another. But the King, collecting his Army, and winning to him many by gifts,
although at first he was answered with diverse successes, yet preferring Peace,
a League was concluded at Sendomir, whereby the Old Laws were strengthened and
confirmed by New. But for all this, it might rather he called a laying down of
Arms, then a taking aw^y of Offenses; for as he contemned the Subjects as
Conquered, so their impunity made them again grow confident, so that the Peace
was neither safe nor durable. Besides these faults before mentioned, this also
was objected, That without the consent of the Public, he entangled Poland in a
war, by sending aid to Demetrius. This Demetrius (after Boris had invaded the
Dominion, sought to slay the Son of the most noted Basilides by cruelty, and
after him enjoyed Muscovy) professing himself the Brother of Theodore, another
being put into his place that should be killed while he was carried into
Poland, where he long dissembled the Nobility of his blood, but at last
prevailed in the over-perswading many by showing upon his body diverse private
marks. But he managed his Arms unfortunately against Boris, who was now grown
old and experienced both in the Arts of War, and Government. When he dyed, he
left a son named Theodore, whom we mentioned before in his tender age to be
left to his Mother, but a great part of the Russians, who equally hate the
Government of Women and Children, fell to Demetrius, and presently the common
people let him into Mosco the Principal City, slaying in favor of their new
Lord, both the Widow and Son of Boris. But the Fortune of his Kingdom was
short, for the Priests were offended at the Authority of the Jesuits, by whose
persuasions it was reported, That he had sent to the Pope with intent to change
the Greek Ceremonies for the Latin. Nor were the Noblemen less enraged,
because he chose for the Guards to his person, Foreiners, and made use of none
but Polanders, both in his Court, and Privy Counsels. But the common people,
who hate or love, not voluntarily, but as they are lead and instructed, were
provoked by common report, That he was not the Demetrius as was supposed, but a
Fugitive Monk, instructed by Magic Art, and but a slave sent by the Polanders
to disturb the Affairs of Russia. At the time of his Marriage, which he
celebrated with a young Polonian Lady, the daughter of the Palatine of
Sendomer, a great tumult arising, Demetrius, or whoever else he was (for even
after his death it remained a doubt) in vain striving to avoid his ruin, by
leaping from on high to the ground, being weakened by the fall, he was presently
killed. And his death was attended with a great slaughter of Polonians, while
one Scutskye, that had raised this commotion, seized the Empire, at first
indeed very unstable and tottering, while their minds were astonished with the
cruelty, and being very slowly drawn to consent to a new Prince, but afterward
it was soon settled by fear add punishments, as is usual among Barbarians.

Now also had the sedition of the Imperial Soldiers involved Transylvania, and
the parts adjoining upon Hungary in great troubles, which were also increased
by the Rapines of the Governors, and debarring the Protestants the liberty of
their Religion, the envy of the War here also being thrown upon the Jesuits, as
the daily fomenters of mischief. At this time also broke forth diverse long
concealed complaints, That they plainly saw they were slighted, for the Prince
violated that ancient Custom of his Predecessors, of being present in their
Assemblies, and hearing the Requests of his People. But Robolfus keeping
himself within the Court, kept the chief ma^agety both of Arms and Counsels in
the hands of Foreiners which is a thing very grievous, even to such as are
enslaved, and therefore the more intolerable to them, whose Laws and
Foundations of Government, are so confirmed to them by the Oaths of their
Kings, that it is accounted to them, neither disgrace of Crime to resist all
that would make an infringement thereupon. And thus on a sudden, they fell to
fighting and besieging of Cities, to the great rejoicing of the Turk, from whom
the Crown and Scepter of Hungary was sent to Steplxn Botscay, a chosen Captain
of the Malcontents, who was, besides the Public, inflamed with private
injuries, yet he persisted to refuse the same, contenting himself with
Transylvania, and the Title of Prince. But Peace set an end to this short War,
of which this was the third year.

The Turk being weakened by the Persians Victories, and a new Rebellion in Asia,
and Botscay endeavoring nothing further then the preservation of Liberty. The
Emperor Robolfus, being too weak for two Enemies, Granted Transylvania to
Botscay, and to the Hungarians, Native Governors of their own, appointing his
Brother Matthias, who had been heretofore concerned in the Low Country
Affairs, their Regent, and settling Laws, whereby the Jesuits Wealth should be
restrained, and agreeing the Turk should keep what he possessed. Thus Arms
being laid aside, Botscay not long after was poisoned by some about him, yet
even at his last gasp, when he despaired of life, taking care for the Public;
Commending to the Hungarians and Transylvanians, a strict Unity and Concord,
frequent Assemblies in Counsel, and while the Laws remained in force, to hold a
firm Peace with Caesar. But his dying without Issue, when by the Laws, the
Principality reverted to the Emperor, straight was Transylvania involved in
new troubles, impatient to be ruled by a Foreign Prince. Germany also was now
full of differences concerning Religion; and at Brunswick, Patelborn, Embden,
although they had not an absolute War, yet their differences came as near to a
War as might be, between those Princes and Cities, the former being too greedy
of Dominion, and the later unapt and unwilling to obey.

The Venetians yet defended themselves by Books, whose Authors at the
prescribed day, wont not to Rome, pretending many casualties in the Journey,
and that their nominated Judges were malicious against them, in the interim,
Commanders, Armies, and Fleets, were with all expedition hastened forward. Nor
did the Spaniard dissemble in promising the Pope aid, whereof the King of
France having notice, sent to Rome, to tell his Holiness, That his Ancestors
had so well merited of that See, that in all dangers the Church ought not to
seek redress from any other hands then those of the Kings of France; but if the
Pope should declare himself ambitious to dilate the Spanish Greatness, He ought
with great reason to suspect the same, and therefore in a manner should be
compelled to take part against him. With these threats the Italian was
terrified, whose Country was never pierced with Foreign Arms without great
damage, because the Body of the Country being divided into small Dominions,
would easily become a prey to the Conqueror. But the French, as he feared not
War too much, yet he rather chose Peace; Wherefore now He advised the
Venetians, then the Pope. That they would reconcile their Differences, which
otherwise would break out to the Public Ruin. Himself strengthening and
corroborating His Domestique quiet, both by Laws, Money, and League.

Britain, after the Discovery of that Horrid Conspiracy formerly mentioned,
was full of Jealousies and Suspicions, which the Pope increased, by setting
forth Bulls, Forbidding (...) to take the Oath prescribed by the King,
maintaining, that it was contrary to Religion, because they swore thereby to
continue faith and Allegiance to the King, though the Pope denied it, which the
Catholics themselves very hardly believed. And this Declaration of the Pope's,
was received with great variety of Opinion; as, Either the Love of the Country,
or the imbibed Principles of Religion prevailed with every one. The English
also made many Complaints, because Right was not equally administered to the
Merchants in Spain. But in Spain the Netherlanders there abiding, were with
great Cruelty persecuted, whose Trade with the Hollanders, and chiefly with the
late ^^rected Indian Company was connexed: The Treasury also was taken Care for
with great Diligence; all whose Fidelity, in managing the Affairs of Money, was
suspected, being apprehended and called to Question. But the Remedies were too
small for such overgrowing Evils; although the King was daily pressed with
Petitions of the Portugezes, That he would not please to set an end to their
Misery, For why would he suffer (...) near at hand to be exhausted and spoiled,
while he only ^ded the War with the Hollanders at a greater distance? Why
would he permit so many Ships, the only Wealth of that late flourishing
Kingdom, to be taken and burned? The Ports of Spain (...) to be beset, and now
the Molucca's to be torn from him: Besides the War made by the Castilians was
very burdensome, which ^ing the late Times, had cost the Spaniard no less than
Three Hundred Thousand Scutes Monthly, without any hope of an (...); and
especially, because the danger of the Ships coming from America grew greater
and greater? The Expenses moreover, had so far increased over the Annual
Income, that the Seditions of the Soldiers could not be avoided, even by the
exactest Care and Diligence of Spinola; and what was gotten by the War, did in
no wise tantamount; it being on the other side known by Experience, how firmly
the Enemies had fortified their Rivers, ^^d strengthened their Works; how secure
they keep their Sea, ^^d how uncertain and letigious the Passage of our
Soldiers has been through the Borders of other Dominions; so that if the
Venetian War should grow on, the Belgic not yet ended, it must needs reduce
Us, not only to Poverty, but to absolute Beggary.

The King was a young man, unexperienced in Matters of War, and who measured
rather the Greatness of his Kingly Dignity, by the Excess of his Pleasures,
than the Extents of his Dominions; unless he was drawn thereto by Advice, was
not very forward to engage in a War: Besides, He was possessed with great
Fears, by an addition and intermixture of Truth and Falsehood, not without great
Policy of those who had the chief Management of Affairs in Holland, that they
might drive Spain, of it self full of Procrastinations, into more speedy and
real Motions for Peace: For a Rumor was spread abroad, That the French King
strongly labored, to (...) the Hollanders to become Subjects to his Kingdom,
under s^^^ prescribed Laws, and that Flanders, being Conquered, should be the
Bounds between them. But it was more tolerable for the Spaniards to give the
Hollanders their Liberty, than by the Damage of his own Empire, to increase
that of another, and him especially his chief Emulator; and some hope yet
remained against them, when they should have nothing to do, either by
forgetfulness of Offenses, by Discord among themselves, or with the Kings, by
whose Wealth they flourished, which would for ever be lost, if they were
employed. Besides, Fortune favoring them in the Indies, a New Company was
prepared by the Hollanders and Zelanders, that should with a strong Fleet
carry, at once, both War and Merchandise into America, and should drive away
thence the Enemy both by Sea and Land, with hope of as great Booty, as would
make amends for the Charge of the War. Anon after, another Report was spread
abroad, That, as formerly, the Turk had passed the Hellespont, by the help of
the Genoways; so now the Moors were, by the Hollanders Assistance and Fleet,
^^gain Granado, and other places, possessed by their Ancestors. Albertus also,
and Isabella; this, as a Woman; that, as a Man, (...) up in Religious Studies,
began now to be weary of the War, (...) burthensom to them by its long
continuance: And the People Sighs and Tears, together with want, and the often
renewed Seditions of the Soldiers prevailed, that now they chose rather a
obtain and peaceable Government, than the hope of an enlarged Dominion attended
with continual Fear.

But Spinola was the chief Author of that Counsel, who a few years, having
archiev'd great Honor, feared, lest Fortune should turn Retrograde, both his
own, and the King's Credit, being at once shipwrack'd, if these vast Charges
should continue, or any Chance should intercept the Ameri^^ Revenues, without
any hope of recovering what he had ^^bursed; so that being overwhelmed in Debt,
in stead of a ^ear and honorable Fortune, he could see nothing but ^ame and
Poverty.

But, in the United Provinces, few durst hope for Peace, but rather most feared
it, being so instructed from their Parents, that all Treaties with a deceitful
Enemy were to be shun^ed, and that War was most safe under whatsoever
Qualification; and that the great Number of Men subject to them, (...) well
Soldiers, as the rest of the Common People, were advantaged by Arms, Engines,
Armies, and Fleets: Nor was it feared by a few, least, as formerly, at the
beginning of the War, so now at the restoring of Peace, Antwerp should be
chosen as the most commodious Seat for Merchandise and Traffic: And when all
fear of the Enemy should be taken away, the Dissentions of Cities, and other
Disturbances of the Commonwealth were dreaded. Nor were there some wanting,
especially among those that were more subject to Danger, as lying nearer the
Enemy; who, long since, while they saw Cities taken by force, and none to
contradict it; and that under a show of Prudence, their Limits were lessned,
fearing the like might happen to them, when it would be too late to seek a
Remedy, altogether bent their whole studies for Peace. But the more Moderate,
as they thought fit to avoid Treacheries, so they likewise agreed to try,
Whether Arms might be laid aside upon Honorable Terms, with the safety of the
Commonwealth, and preservation of Religion: Nor was this time to be omitted,
when the Enemies Affairs were decaying, the Authority of the States was grown
more firm by long Obedience, and there were two potent Princes as it were at
their sides; the one offended at the Spaniard; the other, for many just Reasons
displeased with the Pope, and therefore would consequently be more cordial to
the Hollanders.

The state of Affairs, both at Home and abroad, being in this condition, Herman
Wittenhorsten, by the Arch-Duke's Command, came to the Hagne about the end of
the year. The same also, before the Armies should march out, in the Spring had
passed through Gelderland and Holland, but with Command only to commune in
private, whereof there would be occasion enough given him, in regard he was
allied to several of the Holland Nobility, either by the Consanguinity of his
Ancestors, or other Collateral Affinity of Marriages. But now John Genard the
Secretary, coming to accompany him from Turnholt (where both of them lived, and
that place paying Tribute to both Parties, caused them to have the more free
admittance) He delivered to the chief of the States, what he had in Command
from Albertus and Isabella, which was to this effect: That nothing was more
desired by them than the Peoples Peace, and that an end might be put to their
long and bloody Troubles: That the Rights belonging to the Archdukes were not
unknown to the States, as also that they sought not anything that belonged to
others: They, on the other side, should consider, what they conceived fit for
confirming their Security, whether a Peace or a Truce only; and that it was
left to them, whether they would choose a public or a private Treaty; from
which all unjust and treacherous Dealings should be banished.

But the matter was deferred, because they brought no Letters from the
Archdukes to the States: We shall hereafter relate with care what gradations
and progress it had, and with what inclination it was managed, because this
will (...) far more expedient for the knowledge of Citizens, than the Arts of
Fortifications, or Excursions of Horse; and Foreign Nations at no time before
had spoken of the Hollanders with more Honor and Renown.

The Sixteenth BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
^^^7.
THE Winter growing more warm, yet very turbulent with high Winds, as it made
the Hollanders secure from their Enemies Incursions, yet hindered not the
flowing of the Rivers, as if the Heavens had been pleased with the overtures of
Peace, nevertheless, it did same harm in another part, by spoiling some Ships
near the Texell, because the Island was unsafe for Winter stations, which Ships
were thereby forced to delay the time of their going out into several parts of
the World: But the United States, that they might with the more certainty
settle domestic Peace, and vindicate their fame, after Time had cared their
late grown Troubles of Groeninge, taken off the necessity of imperious Command,
and reduced their minds (...) a conformity of obedience, commanded the Castle,
which they had built to keep the City in awe, to be demolished and pulled down,
which though formerly it was necessary, yet now if it should be continued,
would not at all suit with the Liberty which they pretended toward all. The
chief cause of this their so great security was, That the Magistrates of the
City were such, whose fidelity both to them and the public Religion was well
known, and a great Garrison was kept therein without charge, and without
regret. Yet for all this, had the Soldiers no time of leisure, for the
Spaniard broke into and burned a small Fort in the Isle of Bommell, the
Sentinel being hired by them to hold his peace. The Captain that Commanded the
place was slain, who was blamed for this, because in not changing his Watches,
he had given hopes to that Treacherous Design.

Also the Count Bruyke, a younger Brother, but in pay under the Hollanders, as
he rid to his Father's house with a small retinue, fell into an ambush of the
Enemies: his Secretary by chance going before, was shot, which was a sign of
what was following to his Master; yet he did not offer to fly, but valiantly
coped with the Enemy, not out of hope to escape, but because he was ashamed to
be taken. After he was slain, his body was barbarously wounded; the fortune and
hatred which they bore toward his Father, being executed upon the Son: for
with the like barbarism was his Father killed by Mendosa's Soldiers.

But Henry of Nassau going out with a strong Party of Horse to the spoil of
Spinola's men, that carelessly Wintered in the Country of Limburg, when they,
hearing of the danger, retired into the Cities. He took by force Erkelen, a
Town lying in his way, after he had beaten down the Gate with a Petard. This is
a small Town in Gelderland, which out of a sense of its own weakness, had of
old paid Tribute to both parties: But then by chance was become an Enemy to the
Hollanders, by receiving Count Henry of Heremberg, who had chosen that place as
a fit Seat to go a foraging. Fifty Horse were slain within, the rest of the
Garrison was absent: Count Heremberge himself was taken; what they could they
carried away, the rest they burned: The sury of the Soldiers was more fierce,
than could be restrained by the authority of their Captain; for that they
remembered the ^^d usage of some of their Companions in that place. But
Frederick Count Heremberg, to make amends for his Brother's more hard fortune,
resolved to invade Ardenburg in Flanders, a Town fortified by the Hollanders,
to which design of his, some of the Soldiers within were conscious. But part
of them being for some Crimes called in question and imprisoned, confessed the
unknown Plot, which was then ready to be put in execution; for Count Frederick
waited in a place hard by with a strong party, expecting a sign from the
Traitors.

Some long Voyages were jointly by the Hollanders and the English hastened
forward: for this Spring the Hollanders for Two Ships, and the English Three,
toward the Indies: At the present the English made the greater gain, but their
Honor was drawn in question: for of late, Edward Michel^^^ returning out of
that World, was reported to have indamaged Commerce by Slaughters and Rapines
committed upon the Barbarians, but he threw the fault upon the Indians, to man
gainsaying the Reasons he gave for the same. Nor did there want some, who
encouraged to the like audacious attempts, averring it was so directed by the
Customs and Laws of their Ancestors, because whatever was committed against
Foreiners, with whom no public League was made, was justified so far in
Britain, as there could be no compensation got for any injury done. At this
time, It was in agitation, that the Spaniard alone might not wholly possess
America: for the English a good while since claimed to themselves a part
thereof in the Thirty fourth degree from the Equinoctial, which they named
Virginia, in honor of Queen Elizabeth; which name it still retains. This they
claimed, because they were the first that had searched into the inner part of
the Country. Wherefore such assembling, whose Money being not employed at home,
yet hoped good advantage from abroad, erected Two Companies, to each of which
particular Colonies were designed in those parts: And King James settled Laws
and Rewards among them for the augmentation of the British glory: And it was
confidently affirmed, That there were Mines of Gold and Silver; which was
credulously believed, as men's covetousness wished the same. This great business
received its beginning from one Ship, whose Passengers having built a slight
Fort on the Bank of a River which they found, by whose Fish, and the Fruits of
the adjoining Country, they could well maintain themselves: They that were lost
there in Garrison, the Natives gathering against them, retreated more toward
the side of the Country: But another Spanish Ship falling into their hands,
they would not spare the Seamen, because leaving at home Peace and Justice,
they kept the vast possession of the New World, only by terror: Moreover, some
Britains lately went to Guyana, but a Sedition arising in the Voyage, and the
Ship being lost, part of the Company remained in the Island, where continually
vexing the Barbarians with injutious usage, they at last were set upon by War
as Enemies, by force of which, and the want of Victuals, they committed
themselves to the Sea in a Boat made only of an Hollowed Tree; there for the
space of ten days together, being tossed with continual Tempests, and thrown
upon the rocks, they very hardly got to the Land; where their danger was no
whit lessened, for they were taken by the Spaniard, who for all that pardoned
them, in regard they came not to those Parts of their own accord, but by the
stress of weather.

But the Hollanders Designs ran at a higher pitch, yet went but slowly on,
according to the custom of great Undertakings: Heretofore, there was a great
number of Merchants, a vast multitude of Seamen, and besides, then was there
so much money, as is scarcely to be believed, in private men's hands unimployed,
by the Loss of the Spanish Trade, (the East Indies not being sufficient) Only
America seemed to be able to give this satisfaction, which every where abounds
with Mines, besides Salt and Sugar, precious Wood, and Physical Drugs. But the
Spaniards prepossessing all the Principal Coasts, cut off all hope of Commerce
by Traffic, wherefore by the Public, strength and authority being added to
the Private wealth: And now the wealthiest, as well Merchants as others, who
out of a zeal to benefit their Country, had inquired into all things in that
New World, both from Books, and also the relations of Seamen, published a form
of Government and Laws for a new Society, that should continue for the space of
Six and Thirty Years: And it should not be lawful for any of their Citizens,
unless he became a Member of that Company, to go into those Parts, which extend
from Terra-Nova, well known to the French Fishermen, by a vast Tract of Land
all along the streights of Magellan, unto the Ocean on both sides, and whatever
lies opposite to the Coasts of Africa, between the Equinoctial and the Cape of
Good Hope. Five Months were limited for the bringing in of Money: And for the
first Six years, the United States would add Two hundred thousand Florens
yearly, and afterward as much more, as the Affairs of the Commonwealth would
permit; That the Accounts of War and Traffic should be reckoned separately:
That for the carrying on of War, there should be Sixteen stout Ships, and four
Barks, set out by Private Men; and the like number by the Commonwealth; But how
many soever were furnished with Soldiers by the Company, they together with
all the rest should be under one Command. That the Stock should be managed in
this manner by the Governors; Thirty of Amsterdam should have the disposal of
the one half thereof: Eighteen in Zeland of a Fourth part: In West-Friezeland,
and at the Mouth of the Maes, Fifteen should manage the rest. Nor was their
Power perpetual, but every Sixth year, the Third part of these Governors were
to give way to Successors: That none should be chosen to that Office, but such
as had been most liberal in bringing Money into the Stock.

In the judgment of these men lay the ordering of all Affairs, both as to
Merchandise, and War. The hundredth part was designed as the reward of the
labor of all that either Exported or Imported, and the gain arising from the
Improvement of the Stock, should be divided when it was equal to the tenth part
of the Stock. Whatever should be taken as Prize, was to be disposed according
to the determination of the Judges of the Admiralty, but for the first six
years the same should remain undivided, that the Charges of the War might be
sustained by the Profits gotten by it. And afterward the tenth part should be
brought to the Treasury of the United States, Prince Maurice should have a
thirtieth part, and the Merchants to enjoy the rest. That four being selected
out of the aforesaid numbers of Governors, should equally with the seventeen
have the managery of the Chief Affairs of State. The Governors and Commanders
sent by these, being sworn to the States, should do Justice, build Forts, and
make Leagues, as they should see convenient. That at their return home, they
should deliver to the United States, exact relations of all things done by
them; That all their Merchandises should be free from the Customs or Tributes
which were settled of Old, for ever, and from the other lately invented, and set
up by occasion of the Wars, during twenty years.

The Authors and drivers on of this notable Design and Policy, flattring
themselves, as every man's humor led him, (and hopes being once let loose, will
quickly spread themselves to an immensity that will hardly be circumscribed)
discoursed both in Speeches and Books, that hitherto that most potent part of
the Enemies Dominion, would, if it were attaqued by Arms, become the weakest.
And thus the War should be carried to Sea, in which kind of Fights, the
Hollanders were never overcome by all the strength of the Enemies ^ces, even
when they exceeded them very far in number; ^^ by how much the Voyage was
longer, by so much was the more difficult to them, whose tender joints would
not ^ able to endure the heat, in regard of whom, their Norther^^ habitations,
and Country lying in the Sea, had with spa^^ce undergone all the greatest
discommodities; That the uttermost parts of America, which extend to both the
Poles, has been so little frequented, as it is scarcely known; for ^ Trinity
Isle, even to the Equinoctial, the whole Coast avoid, and without a Lord. In
the rest of the Country at Spanish Garrisons scatteredly lying up and down,
but with such distances, that they can neither help one another, at defend any
that lay between them. Now if Arms were made use of, they would quickly become
Masters, and should him by experience, that there would be as many Enemies
against the Spaniard, as there were several people in those Countries, who
would be more faithful to them by the memory of their old cruelty, and the
continuance of their most terrible slavery, than if they were hired for money.
Now they durst promise themselves the same Greatness, which had made the
Spaniard formidable, and that the glory of that Warfare would certainly be
perpetual, because danger being removed from them, they would not fear by a
rare example to admit any Enemy that durst hazard the Peace of their Dominion.
Nor would this be a small kindness to Mankind in general, that they had
propagated Christian Religion among ignorant Nations, or such as at the best
had been led out of one error into another, with much more sincerity and
pureness.

On the other side, diverse affirmed. That the chance of War was various, That
the Sea would admit of all, yet there was no War more uncertain and dangerous
then one at Sea. If it liked to remember the Athenians, whose most flourishing
City had fallen by one such temerity, yet they should call to mind, the
unfortunate success of the Fleet they had lately sent out under the command of
Peter Douse. It Is true, they had conquered the Spaniards in diverse Naval Fights:
but the Hollanders themselves at the beginning of the War, were unexperienced
in Land-service, wherein, if by care and time they were grown more exact, why
may it not be feared, but that the Enemy might likewise grow more skilful in
Sea Affairs. Sometimes even the Conquered by frequent slaughters, have arrived
to such proficiency, that at last they learned to begin to Conquer, And though
the people of Spain chiefly that live upon the Seacoast, are incapable to
manage Ships, yet the English and Brittons of Armoric in France, and the
Saxons, are very apt and ready thereat. Nor was the confidence reasonable which
the Hollanders put in their men's bodies, which though they could endure the
extremity of cold, yet it is indubitate and experimentally known, that by the
perpetual untemperateness of the Equinoctial heat, they decay as well as
others. Would Forty Ships do that Work, and besiege that vaste and immense
Ocean, where the Islands, Havens, Stations, and all other places are shut up
against them, but open to the Enemy, and when there is no relief or provisions
near at hand: no not so much as a sufficient quantity of fresh water? It Is true,
All America is not fenced with continual Castles: But where any Wealth is
contained, where any Riches lie hid, where any certain Income or Commodity
attracts men, there are no sorts of Fortifications omitted. How easy will it
be to land Men among so many difficulties? Where will they find a Foot Army,
that should drive away the Spanish Regiments, which almost for a whole Age had
been naturalized in the possession of those places? And if they should think it
inconvenient to send thither such an Army, yet surely it would be very
necessary at the same time with another Fleet to shut up the Ports of Spain,
that they might not from thence send any aid into America: And this Office and
Charge should be committed to the Merchants Forces, for the Commonwealth cannot
undertake it, being hardly able with those Forces home to defend its own
Borders, or else by that means would run over head and ears in debt, or being
denuded of Garrisons, in all likelihood run the hazard rather of losing that
small Seat of their Native soil, then by victorious arms to have sought any
considerable part of that Other World: for it would be a sign of strange
madness to hope the wining of all; and what they shall take, they will not be
able to keep: the disposition of the air in most places being so ^ wholesome,
and breeding such a multitude of Diseases, that will be more contagious to the
Hollanders than the Spaniards, because these have learned with greater measure
to use meat and drink: That there is no such safety to be expected from the
Barbarians society, but that they must build Forts and Castles no less against
them than the Spaniards themselves: for they know no such thing as faith, nor
ever heard of those other names of Virtue: They hate all strange and foreign
things, Now maligning the Spaniard, and afterward whoever shall succeed them
in Power, shall be heir to their hatred: Their dispositions are not worthy of
liberty, being such as are enraged at a severe servitude, yet slight any thing
that is more mild or remiss. Are they ignorant, that among these people there
were and still are Men-Eaters, thinking humane flesh the greatest dainty, and
therefore every where killing all unknown persons, for no other causes of
hatred, but that they are Men? Surely, the Indians and people of Asia, have a
much more polite understanding, and yet even there are the Hollanders compelled
by many examples of treacherous dealing, to turn their Friendship into a kind
of Domination: Nor could any Peace or Leagues be hoped for in that New World,
which is divided from its better part not so much by Situation as Manners, and
secluded on every side by its own Ocean, as if condemned by Nature to the most
odious barbarism. These were at that time the Discourses concerning America.

Surely it concerned those who were desirous of finishing the War, that these
hopes should not be settled too deep in the Opinions of the people: Nor was it
a hard matter, to put a stop to the begun Project of the New Company, by the
emulation of the Cities earnestly drawing to themselves the ordering of the
Ships, and some interceding, that the Liberty of fetching Salt out of America,
should not be restrained by any Law. Therefore this debate being set apart, no
less difficulties were observed to hinder those that were desirous of making
peace: for although the Enemies Design might chiefly be discovered, yet the
Governors of the Confederate Cities, from a received Opinion in the Prince of
Aurange's time, abhorred the very name of Peace: And to men of this persuasion,
much appeared that would be lost, if the Enemy should openly profess himself
contented with a Peace, whereby he could not regain the dominion he lost by
War; for that which of old was accounted a part of Prudence to break off all
hope of reconciliation, had no other Basis than this, That only such a Peace
could be expected, as would bring along with it an insulting Lord. On the other
side, That it pertained both to the Security and Honor of the Commonwealth, if
the Enemy could be drawn to a confession of their Liberty: But the War yet
growing hot, and new Causes of Indignation daily arising, either Victory made
them fierce, or some slaughter drew them to the desire of revenge, so that
minds prepossessed, or biased with affection, could not considerately ponder
the Reasons that induced to peace: But if any Remission, or Cessation should be
granted of Arms, there would not be wanting some favorers of peace, which
being otherwise acceptable in it self, would agree principally with the mind of
the HOLLANDERS that were earnest of Traffic; and also the people that lay next
the ^nemy would not easily suffer themselves, having once tasted the Sweets of
Peace, to be carried back to Arms.

It is a very hard thing to find the beginning of so great a ^^ter in that
Commonwealth, wherein no Affair of any great Concern is undertaken, without the
Advice of the Provin^, (...), and a Relation of what is done, or to be done, to
the several Cities, which circuit that business; which, without doubt, was
involved in great Dissentions, could not bear. They that were in the General
Assembly of the United States, would not take upon them the Envy of so sudden
a Muta^, unless Prince Maurice, who was the General of the War, and famous as
well by his great Merits, as the Nobility of his Extract, should become the
great Author of Temporary Agreement. But He, having attained so much Honor by
War, that scarcely any ever attained the like, and not despising the most
effectual substance of Fame, and thinking with himself, that all Peace with the
Spaniard was mingled with Treachery, yet was persuaded by Oldenbarnevelt (whose
Authority underpropped by his Providence chiefly, and 30 years Fidelity,
supported these Consultations of Peace) that as would not refuse to Treat with
the Enemy: For the King of Britain would sit by only as a Spectator of so
great a War, and the French King, by their Alliance, aimed at greater Matters,
of which there were no obscure Demonstrations. If ^e Confederate States could
find a way to lie open for them (...) Peace, they that supposed it advantageous
to their Affairs, that the Spanish Forces should be wasted in the War of
Holland, might be brought to promise certain Aids, without any other account.

Therefore Wittenhorst and Gevard, having received Letters from Albertus and
Isabella, whereby it might appear they were entrusted, they were admitted into
the Assembly of the United States, where they publicly repeated, what they had
privately before spoken, highly extolling the Commodities of Peace, before the
uncertain Events of War: But because the Legates had mentioned the Archdukes
Right and Claim, The States thought fit to answer, That it was openly known to
all who had any insight in the Belgic Affairs, that the Archdukes could be
helped by no pretense of Right against the Confederate Provinces, but such as
must be hoped to be gained by Conquest. In truth, when of old diverse of the
Provinces, after the Confirmation of their Liberty by an inviolable Decree,
were united into one Body, they had sought to reduce them by Arms, being
Members separated from that Body by the best and highest Right, the Equity of
whose Cause, many Kings and Princes had approved by making Leagues with them.
Therefore they all Resolved to persist in that Opinion, which they had lately
declared to the Emperor, That a safe, pin^, and just Peace could not be
expected with them, who under the vain pretense of Right, would infringe the
Authority of a must Reverend Decree: The Mischiefs of War would fall on both
Parts, but ought to be imputed to them, that would unjustly seek what belonged
to others, not those that valiantly defended their own.

Wittenhorst being dismissed with this Answer, afterward writ to the States,
that he had found it to be the Arch Dukes pleasure, that in the making an
Agreement, they desired to gain nothing; but that all things should remain in
the same condition they were; But for the more ready carrying o^ of this
business, the Principal of the Order of Franciscans of that Country, by Name,
Francis Naya, born at Antwerp, but by Kindred, a Zelander, was made choice of,
his Father sometimes followed the Prince of Aurange, Himself was of a voluble
and fluent Tongue; and though he was not ignorant in Court-Affairs, for he had
been in Spain, and lived at Bruxells, conversant in matters of greatest
importance, being of an open and free disposition, like the Netherlanders, that
you will hardly suspect guilty of fraud, and by his Profession of life, armed
against bashfulness, neither greatly fearing a repulse, or contumely.

This Man being sent from Bruxells, came privately to Riswicke (the next
Village to the Hague) making trial by discreet Persons, what were the main
difficulties that ^ostructed the business: from thence being brought to the
Prince, he expounded some things as he saw convenient, in Wittenhorsts Letters;
and there understanding perfectly, that there was no hopes of beginning a
Treaty, unless the Arch Dukes did first really own and acknowledge their
Liberty, returning to Bruxells, soon after, he brought Letters from Albertus
and Isabella, Signed the thirteenth of March, to this effect.

That they were weary of the cruel War, and were ready to make a perpetual
Peace with the United States, as free People, whom they so accounted, and
against whom they would make no pretense of claym; but if they liked not such a
Peace, they would if they thought good, make a Truce for twelve, fifteen, or
twenty, years, or else would make a Cessation of Arms upon equal terms,
whereby as well a confident security as Commerce should be confirmed; with this
among the rest, that what they now possessed, they should for the future
retain, unless common utility induced them at any time, to exchange some Towns
or Regions: That the Legates they would send to this Treaty, should be
Netherlanders by Nation, to meet whom the States should send the like number;
(...) whose appointment, they left the nomination both of time and place, for
their meeting: And that these things might the more fairly proceed, They were
pleased, if they would consent thereto, that there should be a Cessation of
Arms, both by Sea and Land, as well among the Netherlanders as the Spaniards,
during eight months: desiring the States to declare their Resolution concerning
^e said Treaty before the first of September.

The bringing of these Letters, which they themselves a little before had
drawn, those things therein being changed, which in a former Copy brought by
the same Naya, had been disliked, could not but please the Hollanders: the
altered ^oints were these, That by the Truce, each should enjoy what they now
had; but if a peace were made, then each should retain what should be agreed.
Also that the Hollander should wholly abstain from going to, or Trading in the
Indies; but in regard they judged themselves wholly Masters at Sea, and at land
more powerful in their Cavallery, they thought not fit any further to forbid
Hostility for eight Months, then that during that time, no Cities should be
besieged or taken, no Countries invaded, nor any new Fortifications built: And
it was added, that the King of Spain, within three months, should ratify the
Covenants agreed to by the Arch Dukes, with the repeated recognition of the
Hollanders liberty. Nay, he Promised before the four and twentieth of April,
that he would bring it to pass, that those Covenants should be signed by the
Arch Dukes Albertus and Isabella; so as the States would do the same:
Concerning this sudden business, the Assembly of the States thought fit to
write to the several Provinces, that so the Commons might receive the same with
more acceptance, which they did to this effect. That they advise well of the
Judgment of the Prince and Senate, in that they had accepted the Condition,
which Albertus and Isabella had offered for a Cessation of Arms, that they
might have leisure to transact with the Kings of France and Britain, and other
Princes; and afterward, to consider among themselves, what was fit to be done,
as to the rest. What then remained, but that they should all give thanks to
God, that he had hitherto so prospered their War, and now had inclined their
Enemies minds, to the confession of the truth. But upon the appointed day of
Humiliation, when now the rumor growing common, made men's affections increase,
the Ministers that preached, as every ones fancy sed him, turned the whole
Series of their Sermons, either to the applause of peace, or despiteful railing
against the adverse parties. However, the States, about the four and twenty of
April, sent Instruments of those things lately agreed upon to Antwerp, by Did^^
Verdusio. And Naya produced the Writing, as it had been ^^ised at the Hague,
only with the addition of the Arch Dukes hands, commanding the same to be firm
and authentic: But Verdusio requiring a more solemn Instrument, that should be
equal to that he brought, Naya presently obeyed, and brought such a one from
Bruxells: together, with a gold Chain to Verdusio, entreating him at the same
time, that because some things contained in that Agreement, seemed to be of a
dubious interpretation, that he would suffer him a return with himself to the
States, to advise upon the ^^e.

The Arch Duke Albertus, was really so inclinable to peace, that he would not
suffer any Hostility to be begun on (...) part, insomuch, that He commanded all
his Governors, (which was clearly beyond the Agreements) that the Soldiers
sold be kept within their Garrisons; and that all ^^^men and Fishermen that
were prisoners at Dunkirk, should ^e set at liberty. And Verdusio having
written to the States concerning Raya's Request, and receiving no positive
answer, taking for granted what was not forbidden, returned to the Hague with
him in his company. And now, they that (...) not withstood the first motions of
peace, begun to repent themselves of their silence, fearing that would really
become (...), which they had hitherto supposed to be but fained. Therefore some
of them question, by whose order the Monk (...) his foot on their ground,
being enemies to him and his (...). Others accused Verdusio, that he had
undertaken an ^hit of so high concernment, by private advice: whereby (...)
plainly appeared, that Naya was not likely to obtain so ^^ily, what in his own
daring Imaginations he had already ^^^ceived granted.

While these things were doing in these parts: in the (...) while, the
Hollanders obtained a famous Victory at (...), which made the Enemies more
desirous of peace, and (...) more fervent to War. When the last year, the War
of Spain went more slowly on, not without some blemish of their ancient Navall
Honor, it was thought fit another Fleet should be sent thither, as well for
recovering their fame, as at the earnest Request of the Indian Company, who
were afraid lest the whole Strength of Spain, should at once fall upon their
Ships.

Jacob Hemskerke, a man well skilled in Sea Affairs, was chosen Admiral, who
had formerly accompanied William Barent in the like Voyage, when most froward
Fortune hindered them from making a more narrow Inquisition into the Secrets of
the North; besides, he had been twice at the Indies, from whence of late he
brought a most rich Ship which he had taken in War: At this time, six and
twenty Ships were committed to his charge, fitted for War, and four others for
carrying Provisions, with Command to do what should seem most beneficial. Nor
did he scruple to promise, that he would so behave himself, as to merit the
thanks of his Country, either by death or life, and how full fraught he went
out with confidence, may from hence easily be understood, that he would have no
other pay, than the eighth part of that booty, which should exceed the sum of
five hundred thousand florens. He was not so covetous of money, of which he had
enough, as of glory; but not discovering that his inclination by any
ostentation, because composing both his habit and countenance into a reserved
civility, he did under that mask, the greatness of a Military mind. At the
beginning of the Spring, a little before the first Covenants were made between
the Arch Dukes and the States, going to Sea, when he came to the Coasts of
Spain, he resolved to invade the mouth of the River Tagus, that the most Noble
City of Lisbone might be a witness of his Valor: but understanding by the
Spies, which he had sent under the pretense of Merchants, and by some French
and British Ships that he met, that the Ships which had been there, were most
of them departed to the Indies, and those that were to follow them, were not
ready, but that a great Fleet of Spaniards lay in the Bay of Gibraltar which
would take the Hollanders Ships passing out of the Mediterranean Sea, into the
Ocean, in that straight: thither he steered his course, sailing as the Wind
would give him leave, sometimes near the Coast of Barbary, and other whiles
nearer the Coast of Spain: for two very high Mountains generally known by the
names of Hercules Pillars, being the Mountains Abila in Barbary, and Calpe in
Spain, do make narrow the Straight of the Atlantike Ocean, winding it self
between those Lands. Fabulous Antiquity, reported these to be one Hill (and
indeed so it is, if you admit the strait to continue their union) but divided
by the labor of Hercules, on purpose to let in the Sea; whereupon, the last of
those separated Hills, are called as aforesaid, Hercules Pillars. To the one of
which, the old name Calpe remained, until the Arabian growing Victorious, gave
his own names to all things and places; for at what time the l^acens had joined
their Arms to the novelty of Mahome^^ Superstition: Moses, the chief of the
petty Kings possessing Africa, who was the Son of Nuzir of the Maravadine
Family, went over into Spain, accompanied with Tarica, the (...) of Abdalla,
who setting fire on his Ships, that his Soldiers might not be able to desert
him, when he was come within Calpe, he named the place Gebell Taric, which in
the Arabian Tongue, is as much as the Mount of Tarica, and ^^^ce by the
Spaniards, is corrupted into Gibraltar. Thus did (...) Mountain and City
Tarifa, of old Carteja, get their names. This City is situate at the bottom of
those Hills, where making a Haven in the manner of a Theater, for his Ships, on
the horn thereof, which stretches into the Atlantike Ocean, he built a strong
Castle: In this most safe recess of the Sea, within the bosom of that most
exquisite Rock, ^^d under the protection of the City and Castle, the Spanish
fleet lay at Anchor. It consisted of 9. Galeoones, the greatest of which,
carried the Commander in Chief, Don John Al^^rez de Avila, four other Ships of
War.

The great Vessel belonging to Lubeck, and four French Bottoms belonging to
private Merchants, but for a time, taken up for public use, besides three
Holland Merchants Ships, that had lately been taken as Prizes: In these, was a
great number of Mariners and great Guns, together with Soldiers for
Sea-service, whose strength was much increased by the accession of many noble
persons, who, upon news that the Enemies Ships were seen both at Cadiz, and St.
Lucas de Barramede, had flocked thither, to show their Valor and duty to the
King. In the Admiral, were seven hundred Soldiers, another a little less had
five hundred, Admiral Hemskerke, now entering the Straight, and not far from the
Bay of Gibraltar, calling together the Captains of his Ships to Counsel: He
said to them, Ye know Fellow Soldiers, for what cause ye are come hither: The
Honor gotten by our Ancestors, both at Sea and at home, is evident to the
whole World; They wasted Islands, and besieged Ports, others by chance
assisting them therein; We were the first who came even into Spain it self, to
assault the King of Spains Fleet, as intending to let the World know, how
falsely the Enemy in the length of his arrogant Titles, ascribes to himself the
Dominion of the Sea; A more noted place for Honor, could not be wished for.
God has appointed the Hollanders Forces to be tried and approved in the
Confines of Europe and Africa; so that here we shall see the Enemies
themselves, certain Witnesses of our Valor. and their own destruction. On the
one Shore, he the Turks and Moors, to whom, being hitherto scarcely heard of,
we ought not to be made publicly known, but by some great and honorable
action: Take now that Courage, which of old Berghen, Middleburgh, and the
Zuyderzee beheld: The same fortune follows you through the World: So that it is
a difficult matter for you not to Conquer at Sea; And let not the greatness of
the Enemies Ships affright you, for that very Bulk being unweldy to be moved
and turned, and lying open to shot, will be rather a cause of ruin, then
safety to them. And moreover, this is one chief thing that among us our very
Seamen fight, with them only the Soldiers, who appearing to me, as persons of
effeminacy, by the stinks of the Pump, and the tossing of the Waves being grown
heartless are hardly able to stand up to fight.

I require nothing of any man but what I shall give an example of my self: you,
Lambert, shall together with my self, set upon the Admiral, Brassen and
Alterhasen on the next, and so the rest on the remainder, two of you still
keeping together against one: the lighter Vessels shall go up and down
compassing the place of fight, the better to impede the Enemies flight. And as
soon as the Battle is begun, Remember that ye fight valiantly for your Ships,
wherein you are all either to be slain or taken, unless you get the Victory.
Let us forward the anxious and doubtful cares of the States in this great
Affair, for this day will yield a great and happy Omen to us, if forced to
return to the War, or else will make the Spaniard more seriously to desire
Peace: Then may the Conquering Hollander with freedom, deliberate whether it
will be more for his advantage, to lay aside Arms, or still to maintain War: We
however in the interim, shall begin to be esteemed happy in the Honor of this
Maritime triumph, or else shall be looked upon among the chief causes that lead
to peace; and for the benefit of Posterity, shall set a noble end to a War of
40 years continuance. Having spoken these things, he encouraged the Captains as
well by his eyes, and countenance, as his words, who promising largely their
best endeavors, likewise stirred up both themselves and others, by old and new
examples of Spanish cruelty: so passing about an encouraging Cup, and renewing
their Oath of fidelity, for that time they departed. Avilas the Governor,
finding Ships so much less than his, steering their course directly against
him, commanded a Holland Prisoner that he had with him, to be brought to him;
of whom he asked, What he thought was their Intentions? Who answered, Either I
know not my Country men, or else they are ready to give you Battle. The
Spaniards laughed, as thinking it a scorn, that their whole Fleet should be
compared with that only Galeoon that was his Admiral: But when the Holland
Fleet drew nearer, being compelled to believe, what he saw was true, he carried
his said Admiral Galeoon, which by chance lay outermost, nearer to the City,
cutting its Cables, that the Fortune of the Battle might first be tried by the
other Vessels: Notwithstanding which, Hemskerk keeping still to his first
purpose, passing by the rest, set upon that alone; and at the first Onset,
cried out, That all should be lawful Frize therein to whoever took it, and
appointing a Reward besides to him that should bring away the Enemies Topmast
Banner: Commanding, That they should not shoot, until they were very wear,
whereby the greater Terror might strike them on a sudden. Therefore the
Spaniard prevented him, in giving the first Volley of Shot, but he did no great
damage by it. Hemskerk, by this time, but a little way distant, began to shoot
from his Fore-Deck, and presently striking upon the Enemies Ship he cast
Anchor. He stood openly in sight, in the midst of the Ship, when the Spaniard
making thick and frequent shots, a Bullet (by chance) killing one, broke and
tore off his left Thigh, and threw him grovelling, being laden with Arms. He was
sensible of the approach of Death; and therefore, praying God, mercifully to
receive his departing Soul, he exhorted all about him, That they would not be
careless in following their business, but would seek to repair the loss of
their Captain with the Enemies Ruin. The death of the Admiral, being concealed
by Captain Nerhoeven, did spread over the Fleet until the Battle was ended. The
same endeavored, that the Cannon on the Right-side might be discharged: The
Spaniard now having lost the use of his great Guns, applied himself wholly to
fight with small Shot; but the Hollanders Shot did the greatest damage, in
regard the Enemy stood thicker, and more crowded together.

Lambert following, as he was commanded, at first shot at Avila's Ship at a
distance, but afterward came nearer, and lay side by side: so that now a most
furious Fight was begun, and all were involved in Clouds of Smoke; insomuch,
that at Noonday they had the Resemblance of a Nocturnal Conflict: The rest of
the Battle wa ordered by Fortune, not according to Command: For while Captain
Alterasen of Zeland, delayed to assault the Ship assigned to him, 3 others
invaded him, to whom a fourth soon after joined themselves: Which having taken
fire, by the perpetual vomiting of the Cannon, and that now danger drew near to
the Assailants, the Hollanders withdrew themselves, and quenched their Sails,
which had likewise caught fire: But the Spaniards, astonished with fear,
casting aside all care of the Ship, after all things in the Ship, and the Ship
it self, were seized by the Flame, forced also by the Enemies Shot, leaped head
long into the Sea, and so exchanged one kind of death for another: Captain
Henry Long a Hollander, with more Policy, assailing another Galeoon, was killed
with a Bullet, but that also was fired, and utterly burned. Again, another of
the same Magnitude, being shot between Wind and Water, by the coming in of the
Waves, and its own Burden, suddenly sunk. The rest of the Spanish Ships, as
also some of the Hollanders, not during to run the hazard of a close Fight,
contested at a distance, almost with equal damage to the Enemy and themselves.

There were many shot also thundered upon them from the Town and Castle of
Tariff; but sudden violence disheartened the Spaniards, one of their best Ships
being blown up and torn in pieces by its own Powder, or else set on fire by
themselves: After the horrible Crack had thundered all over the Bay, the torn
Ships Relics, setting fire on those Ships next to him, and they likewise
drawing others into the like Danger and Ruin: They that remained, before the
Mischief should reach to them, cutting their Cables, made have to the Shore;
only the Admiral prolonged the Issue of the Fight stoutly, making good her
part against two Ships, until at last a Third came: But then the Banner or
Ensign being pulled down, together with it they lost all their Courages; and
the Victors wholly entering, it was no longer a Fight, but a mere Slaughter. All
the Spaniards, as they leaped into the Sea-hoping to escape by swimming, were
killed either by Swords, Pikes, or Bullets: Not could one fix his Eye on any
part of the Bay, where the sad Spectacle of dead or dying People was not with
Horror represented.

Avilas not long survive Hemskerk; He was an Ancient Sea-Commander, for he had
accompanied Don John of Austria at the Battle of Lepanto: Among his Papers were
found King Philip's severe Instructions, not against the Hollanders only, but
all others, who had in any manner assisted them. The French, (whose Ships,
before surprised by the Spaniard, but now deserted in his flight) afforded a
safe Retreat to the Conquerours; They that were taken Prisoners, and kept
alive, after, by a rare chance of good Fortune, the Soldier sent by a Spanish
Captain to kill them, was by a Bullet intercepted; and a second (sent to put
the same Command in Execution) perished by the like means, at last had their
Bonds and Chains struck off by an accidental shot. After this Battle, the Night
continued quiet; and the next Morning it appeared, that the Spanish Admiral,
(which the Hollanders had neglected to keep, as supposing themselves to have
undertaken enough) yet floted entire, with some few Men in it; who, while the
Victors Fury raged, had hidden themselves in Holes; from whence creeping our,
and getting into the Town, the People voluntarily set fire thereon, that it
might not become a Prey to the Enemy: Two days the Holland Fleet continued in
the place of the Battle, esteeming the Victory rather honorable, than
advantageous or gainful.

During all the time of their stay there, Armed Men ran up and down; and, on
the other side, the Townsmen gathering together all their best and most
precious Things, prepared to fly: For all Things were now filled with fear, the
News of this Action being brought by like Messengers to Cadiz, which would
certainly have been a great cause of making Hamskerk much more confident, if he
had lived; but now all his Counsels fell to the ground with him.

Tittuan, a City of Barbary, not very ancient, situate at the Foot of the
Mount Atlas, near these Streights, is subject to the Turk: Hither the
Hollanders repaired to amend their ships, and get help and remedy for their
sick and wounded Men, of whom they had Threescore, besides almost one hundred
slain in the Fight. The Governor of the City, both hating, and hated of the
Spaniards, received the Conquerours with much Congratulations, and sending to
them also many Presents; And moreover, offered them a Supply of Foot Soldiers,
if they would please to assault Septa, a Town upon the same Coast, but situate
a little more inward, and possessed by the Spaniard. But they being more
desirous of Booty than War, so determined among themselves, that the greatest
part chose to Forage the Coasts of Portugal: Others went to the Azores; some to
the Fortunate Islands; and the rest coasted the Promontery of Antabria: Two
Ships, of those that had brought Provisions, were sent into Holland, to carry
home the wounded Men, and the Body of Hemskerk, which Admiral for the better
preserving thereof, was embalmed. The Report of this Battle at Gibralter, which
was fought the 25 day of April, was not yet arrived to the knowledge of the
Hollanders, but then supposed to have been brought by speedy Messengers out of
Spain into Brabant, when Naya, then Resident at the Hague, desired the Assembly
of the States, the 27 of April, setting forth to them, That he lately, at their
Request, promised the Archdukes should take care, that the King of Spain
should confirm the Articles, when he had no such thing, either in his Charge or
Instructions; And that the Archdukes, when they might have refused that
Authority, yet, out of love to Peace, by promising the same, had made good his
assurance to them: Now therefore it was but just, that as those Princes had by
an extraordinary belief omitted nothing, that might be conducible to Peace; so
the States, on the other side should remove all things that might be
Obstructions to the same intent; and consequently should recall their Fleet out
of Spain, which had lately been sent thither, to spoil all the Maritime Parts
of that Country. Moreover he desired, That those things which had lately been
agreed of late, concerning the forbearance of encamping, and invading each
others Country, might be declared in more express and plain terms, for that
the words, wherein they were expressed, were more ambiguous: And since many
Things might happen before the first of September, which ought to be published
by the States in the Arch-Duke's Names, He required Instruments of public
Credit, and safe Conduct; by virtue whereof, he might (without hazard) go up
and down between both Parties.

And now the greatness of the business in hand had wrought upon all Men's Minds,
insomuch, that some of the principal Persons of each Province, came and were
present at the daily Debates of the Council: At the first, there was much
hesitation, concerning the recalling of the Fleet, some Rumors of the Victory
at Gibraltar being scattered abroad. Whereupon some averred, That it was
convenient to prosecute their good fortune, and that Peace should not be
discoursed of, but in the heat of War. Others were of Opinion, That they ought
to show as well in words as reality, that their Minds were not averse from a
true Peace; which if it were not at that time brought to pass, not only the
Sea should be secured, but they would all unanimously resume their Arms, not so
much for Revenge of old Injuries, as of their delusive Peace. And it had almost
happened, that they who desired Peace, by making the Spaniard more secure; and
they that were against it, putting the Enemy in fear, and seeking after the
Causes, why Peace should be sought, that they had brought to nothing their own
Counsels.

Among these Transactions, Ambassadors came out of France, the chief of whom
was Mounsieur Peter Janine, of old a great Supporter of the Guisian League; but
returning to his Obedience toward the King, together with the Duke de Mayn;
and from thence forward, was a Minister of great Fidelity, and of great
Estimation and Authority among the chief Counselors, for his great and eminent
Experiments in points of Prudence, having a Wit rarely skilful in handling
Affairs of State; and not only knowing in the Theory and Practice of the Law,
but thoroughly instructed in all other good Arts: Besides, he was so prevailing,
both in Countenance and Words, that when he endeavored most to hide himself,
his Judgment would most evidently appear. With him were joined Mounsieur
Buzenvale, formerly the King's Agent with the States, and M^unsieur Elias
Playce, who was Commanded to succeed Buzenvale in that Dignity: It seems the
King took it ill, that they had begun to lay the Foundation of so great a
Matter, only by the Knowledge and Advice of a few, which he judged they ought
not to have begun without his Approbation, as well in regard of his Grandeur,
as the Benefits he had often done to the Hollanders. Therefore the Ambassadors,
according to the Directions given them, premising many Things, by which they
declared, how highly the King had deserved of that Commonwealth, They presently
fell to Complaints, first bitterly inveighing against them, who seeming to love
the Thing, yet spoke sharply of him, as being ambitious to get the Dominion
over them. Afterward, when they had involved Themselves in Treaties with the
Enemy, they made a Clandestine Application to the King, which also he could not
but take in very evil part: yet nevertheless, he would not forbear at this time
with Courtesy to set forth his Friendship, by this his Embassy; declaring,
That he would, for the future, assist them, if they were necessitated to make
War: Or, if they thought fit to make Peace, He would, by his Authority, make
the same to them just at the present, and permanent for the future; That some
might be chosen out of the Assembly of the States, that should before the
Ambassadors, weigh the Ability of the Treasury, and the ways and means
conducing to Peace.

And lest the French Kings Authority might offend other of the Hollanders
Allies, it was judged necessary to request the Kings of Great Britain and
Denmark, as also the Prince Palatine, and Marquess of Brandenburg, to be aiding
and assisting by their Counsels in these doubtful and ambiguous Affairs.

Upon Naya's demands, after long debate, that part prevailed who were for
Peace; Whereupon it was Decreed, That the Fleet should be recalled from Spain
as soon as king Philip should have confirmed the Articles granted by the
Archdukes; and that in the interim, neither any new ships should be sent
thither, nor any provisions; That in the Neighbor Sea, which is enclosed
within the Streights and narrow passage by Bulloin, from thence forward should
be a cessation of arms, but upon this condition, That none but Fishermen should
be permitted to go out of the Ports of Flanders. And as soon as Philips
Instruments of Confirmation came, the like cessation of Arms should be in all
that Sea that runs by France and Spain, as far as Cadiz, and from thence all
over the more inland Sea. They consulted also for the same nearer to them by
Land. And thus the United States enclosed their jurisdiction and security,
within the famous boundaries of the Eemes, the Vider, the Issel, the Rhine, the
Wael, and below Grave, the Maes, all great Rivers of note; but the Archdukes
Countries were bounded with less famous Rivers, such as Demmer, and Gatt, in
Brabant, Ley, and Amand, in Flanders. All that lay without these Borders was
subject to War, excepting only the Cities, Forts, and Castles; yet so as no
bounds should defend the Soldiers themselves, offering injuries one to the
other, either by Sea or Land. Thus before Naya departed, it appeared, how
little in vain be protracted his time among the Hollanders.

Notwithstanding all this, it would not be granted that he should stay at the
Hague, for that the minds of the States were possessed with fear and
suspicions, not without cause; but he had a residence appointed for him at
Delf, where both his going in and out, as all his actions were observed; the
reason and Author of which counsel he seemed by bis actions and carriage to
approve, for be invited Cornelius Arsen, Secretary to the States, to a private
Conference, who presaging to himself the intent of the Design, goes to Prince
Maurice, from whom he is commanded, That if any extraordinary gra^ity were
offered, to take the same, and withal, to detect the Enemies Treachery. When
they met, the Monk with great Eloquence gave him thanks, That by his
assistance, some glimmerings of Peace had been attained; for it is to be
understood, that when Naya came first among the Hollanders, by the Mediation of
one Craulen (who was nearly related in blood to Arsen) he found the first
access to him. Afterward he added, That he was not ignorant how great danger
Arsenius had hazarded by this Deed, if the matter had not succeeded according
to both their wishes, a popular or Aristocratical Government being always full
of envy, emulation, and jealousy. That the Archdukes did greatly love, and
highly esteem, this his willing inclination to the Peace of the Netherlands:
and that as they would for the future give greater rewards, so they would for
the present restore to him the house which he formerly possessed in Bruxells,
and that the Marquess Spinola, who was of the same mind and desire with them,
whether a Peace were concluded, or only a Truce for nine years, would promise
to give him fifty thousand Scutes: of which fifteen thousand, should be
forthwith paid to him where he would appoint, and for the same produced a
writing cautionary under the said Spinlaes hands. Afterward Naya in hit own
name presented to Arsens Wife a Diamond of great value: Arsen giving thanks for
the house, and seeming to believe himself obliged by the Covenant for the same,
when it should come to him from the City of Bruxells, for a while refused the
rest, as too hardly pressing upon his fidelity, yet at length he received both
the Jewel, and Spinola's writing, and so departing, he declared the whole
matter to the Prince, and the Prince again related the same to some few of the
States, The Prince supposing the matter fit to be concealed for a time, refused
the Custody of the Presents. But soon after Arsen being solicited by new
Letters from Naya to come, and receive his fifty thousand Scutes, and fearing
lest this doubtful and dangerous secret might break out to his disadvantage,
discovered the whole matter in all its circumstances, to the Council of the
States. They appointed George Debes a man of exemplary fidelity, and chief
overseer of the common Treasury, to keep both the Charter and Diamond: yet
could not Arsen by all this care, escape the hatred of the vulgar, who
interpreting the common report of the business to the worst sense, grew so
enraged, that he was compelled to set forth the truth of the matter in Print to
prevent further mischief that might ensue.

About this time, Admiral Hemskerks body was brought to Amsterdam, where it was
received with high honor and applause, and with no less grief and sorrow,
because having been the Author of so great a Victory, his Country was believed
to have received the greater prejudice in his loss: to him then first of all
was publicly given a Funeral, and a Monument, with an Inscription testifying,
with great honor, and eloquence, the famous Actions by him done. After which
they sent to the King of Great Britain, desirous to dive more narrowly into
the Affairs of Holland, John Berken, an assistant to the Magistrates of Dort,
and Jacob Maleree, a man in principal esteem in the Senate of Zeland; these set
before him the present strength and charge of the Commonwealth, and how much
the Treasury was judged unable both by the Prince and Senate, to maintain the
War in any hopeful condition. These were very gently received, by King James,
who promised to take a special care of the Affairs of his Allies, for he well
understood, That by the Hollanders Arms, as well his own, as the Peace of
Ireland was defended. And no less did he foresee, how unfit he was to persuade
to War, who till that time had never given any supply of money toward it,
(which was the greatest want of that War) nor had at the present any to help
them with. Not long after, there came from him to the Hague, Richard Spencer,
of an honorable Family in England; and Ralf Winwood, then returning out of
Britain, but otherwise Leiger Ambassador for the King with the States.

In the intetim, Spinola by Letters sent to the States, signifying the King of
Spains confirmation of the Archdukes Covenants, and desires a safe conduct for
Don Lewis Verreike, Albertus his Secretary, who should bring the Instrument,
and declare other things relating to the matter: which being granted, and He
come, immediately the Spanish subtilties appeared, for the words of the
Covenants were not confirmed by the Kings Authority according to the Custom of
a just League, but the Charters were written in the French Tongue, which is
generally spoken by the Duth Nobility, and bore date the eighth of May and
brought to them the first of June; which were subscribed by the King in no
other manner, then he used to do toward his Subjects, and so confirmed, That
he promised the Cessation of Arms should be ratified, calling Albertus and
Isabella, Princes and Lords of the Netherlands, but in the interim by no word
Himself acknowledged the Liberty of the States, according as was desired, nay
more, in the very foremost Covenant of Albertus, the words that declared their
Liberty, were totally left out, which Verreike called by a ridiculous pretext,
the Writers neglect. When he sent word to Bruxells of that objection, the
Archdukes said nothing, only John Richardot, the chief of the Cabinet Counsel
answered, That the States mistook the words, for so long as King Philip
rejected none of the Covenants, they ought to believe that He approved all. And
although though the Archdukes might protest the performance of all things they
had promised; yet that their candor and benignity might be the more evident,
they sent back again into Spain, for the mending of those things that were
found fault with. And the States did not delay to recall their Fleet out of
Spain, left while they professed to be desirous of Peace, their Actions should
go rancounter to their words.

But about this time arose many hot disputes among the United Provinces, many
furiously crying out, That they were publicly deluded by the Spaniard, who for
the better concealing their Treacheries, had only made an empty offer of
Liberty, but now their deceitful dealing bring manifest, he would only
endeavor this one thing, to denude them cunningly of their Arms. Besides, the
Enemy was said to be preparing a Fleet both in Spain and Flanders, the danger
whereof was the more suspected, in regard it was unknown what design they
intended. To all these were added the French Ambassadors, then very averse to
Peace, because they said it was evident to them, That the nature of the
Spaniards was never officious, but when they studied mischief; but they had
scarce resolved to consult of that matter, which before they began to agree to,
that they would neither send provisions nor supplies to the Fleet, by which
means it might be compelled to return by necessity, which is stronger then any
command. Thereupon matters were brought to that pass, that Olden-Barnevelde
should in the name of the States make answer, That the Instruments brought out
of Spain, were not congruous to what was promised, and therefore the States
drew up the same is the Latin and French Tongue, which were to be in like
manner perfected within two Months by the King, if he hoped any further to
continue the Treaty, which pattern he was to deliver at the same time. And
because some delay happened thereby, the States prorogued the space for
deliberation after the Instruments were anew confirmed, from that present time,
until the first of September; yet it was granted in honor of the Archdukes
(against whose will these neglects seemed to be committed), that the Fleet
should be recalled, and that after six weeks from that day, all things
whatsoever that were taken, should be free, and not taken as Prize. But they
would keep the Kings Letters till better were brought, chiefly for this
purpose, to maintain the cessation of Arms: Nor in the interim (faith he) can
we enough wonder, if this Affair be cordially and with uprightness managed, to
what purpose serve these great Rewards, Behold the Diamond! See the Chain! Look
upon Spinola's hand! (and here they were all produced) These cannot be so
without suspicion in the givers, but that they who received them by public
command, cannot yet be free from the undeserved envy of the people. Be not
deceived, for it is not here as in Kingdoms, where two or three rule all
things at their beck, and the rest of the people are slaves, but We Govern, and
are Governed by turns; And if this Council, this Senate, be not sufficiently
guarded against your bribes, We will increase their number: Carry back your
gifts to their Owners, which you need not give to obtain Peace, and would be a
high wickedness in Us to receive in prejudice of our Liberty. Verreike being on
a sudden surprised, had nothing to say, but that if any such thing were
offered, it was without the Archdukes knowledge; nor was it a wonder, if Monks
that are a covetous sort of men, look upon others to be such as themselves.

Now was the appointed time of six Weeks past, when the Fleet was recalled out
of Spain, and also Naya and Verreike having their desired safe conduct, are
come, and bring with them out of Spain, another Writing, which contained almost
the same words prescribed by the States, with this only difference, That the
King professed himself ready to Treat with them as a Free People in any place,
and that he would challenge nothing against them, adding, That he asserted
this, as well for maintaining the Credit and Promise of the Archdukes, as for
confirming a Peace or long Truce, which when it was agreed upon, He would fully
perform all other things that might be desired for the sanction thereof; but
that it should be Treated of and concluded in that League, as concerning other
desires of Parties, so also of the business of Religion Wherein if there were
no Settlement and Conclusion; then his Right should not be prejudiced in any
thing by this Writing, but all things to remain entire as before to both
parties. They that were more curious, observed, That a business of so high
concernment, was carelessly written in Paper, and not engrossed in Parchment for
the perpetuating thereof, and that the Name of Philip was not subscribed as to
Equals, but like a King, according to his Custom in writing to His Subjects.
The Odium of all these things, Naya foreseeing the same, attempted to mollify
with good words, declaring, That he himself, as best knowing the desires of the
Archdukes, and the States in relation to Peace, went into Spain, and informed
the King in what condition the state of Affairs on both sides was, and how
necessary Peace was to the Netherlands. There the matter was debated in
Council, That whatever was to be Treated of and concluded, might be more firm
and lasting, and that not only the King, who is mortal, but the Kingdom it
self, which cannot dye, should be bound by those Agreements. He protested also
with much earnestness and high asseverations, That the King was very desirous
of Peace, and that he intended to walk in the right and plain way to attain the
same, and therefore had so clearly declared his mind in writing, which he might
have concealed, if he had had any intention to deceive.

After him, Verreike highly applauding the Archdukes faithful dealing, he made
an excuse, That King Philips expressions were not Written in Latin or French,
but in the Spanish Tongue. In this Tongue he converseth with Christian Princes,
in this he Treats with Free People, nor was it equal for them to take from him
this Liberty, who had hearkened to the States speaking in what Tongue they
plea^^d.

At this time dissimilitude of thoughts began to discover great variety of
affections in the United Provinces, the Prince suspecting Treaties, and some
Cities both in Holland and Zeland, hoping a greater advantage from the War,
then they could expect from Peace; and therefore he most moderate and collected
minds and those that were unanimous in their desires, looked upon these things
with more then ordinary displeasure, for the acknowledgment of their Liberty,
with the only esteem whereof being filled, they began to ^^arken to those
dangerous discourses of Peace, might easily, be recalled, and indeed it seemed
very little, if any thing at all, unless the Faction of the Romanists should be
divided from the Commonwealth by the hope of some favor from the Enemy. But
Naya and Verreike, being showed what the States seemed to find fault with in
the Spanish Writing, openly professed. That it was but labor in vain to expect
any thing more, since if any thing remained dubious, either to the League of
Peace it self, or in the Truce, it might be ^^pounded and made manifest in more
clear and fitting at arms. So much confidence had they gotten, by observing
that a great part of the United Provinces were weary of the War; and knowing it
would be much more beneficial to the Spaniard, to make an Agreement with them
severally, then all United and conjunct. But the States taking the Prince's
Counsel, together with the advice of the French and British Ambassadors, at
length agreed in this Opinion, That they would declare to the Archdukes
Ambassadors, That the Letters brought out of Spain, were not answerable to the
first Promises, because the last words would seem to bear such an
Interpretation, that the former Grants might obliquely be avoided thereby; and
they being a Free People, and such over whom, neither King Philip, nor the
Archdukes, had any Authority, would of their own accord consult of their
Domestique Peace, and not suffer their Affairs to be ordered at the pleasure of
others. That there was now a fit occasion given them, not to enter into any
further Treaty; yet they would offer so much toward the desired concord, that
they would by Letters signify the whole matter to the particular Councels of
every Province, and desire their Judgments thereupon, only with this
Protestation, That they would admit of nothing that might be prejudicial to
their Liberty; And that the Archdukes should within six weeks time, know what
was their result, That if they thought fit to hearken to such Proposals of
Peace as they should offer, then within ten days after, such Ambassadors as
they heretofore promised to send, should come to the Hague, where also their
Deputies should be present, but upon this confidence nevertheless, That neither
the King, nor the Archdukes, should offer any Proposition, that might entrench
upon the States ordering their own Affairs within themselves. And the States
appointed the Hague for the place of meeting, left it should appear unseemly
for the Ambassadors of other Kings to remove from place to place, and also
because the power of managing the Affairs being divided amongst many, with more
ease and wisdom all things might be consulted of.

When Naya and Verreike doubted whether upon this answer they should leave the
Kings Letters with the States, or carry them away with them; the States
declaring they cared not whether of them they did; Naya went to Bruxells to be
advised, from whence he brought this answer, That the writing should remain
with them, so as they would give an acknowledgment that they had received the
same, for thereby the Archdukes would be free from their promise to the King;
and finally, that they should restore the same, if the League came to no
effect. Which things being absolutely refused by the States, and the Archdukes
once more advised with, Naya without any contract, soon after delivered the
Letters.

These deliberations being related to all the several Provincial Assemblies,
many doubted, that it was not safe to admit a treacherous Enemy into the very
bosom of their Dominions; what would he do there, but search into the
affections and strength of the People, and learn what was at^^imble, either by
money or Arms, by force or purchase?

They feared also, lest they among themselves who desired peace, running as it
were headlong, and without Counsel, (...) acquire the same, should, by little
and little, be drawn to accept of unjust and dishonorable Conditions:
Therefore when the Deputies returned into the Common Council, past of all, they
oblige themselves each to other, by mutual consent, that they would, if the
Treaty came on, in the very last Article, have their liberty established by fit
words, publicly attesting the same, in such manner as should be sufficient to
satisfy the Ambassadors of other Kings admitted into the Council: And that
they would not admit of any Conditions relating either to profane or sacred
matters, that ^ight undermine their liberty.

On the other side, if the Enemy should still persist, they would declare to
all mankind, that it was his fault, why Peace was not settled, and that
recollecting their Forces, and invoking the aid of their neighbor friends and
Princes, They would resume their Arms, from which they doubted not, but Justice
would give a successful Issue to their cause.

Prince Maurice and the Zelanders, further insisted, that the very words for
Confirmation of their liberty, should then be contrived, and forthwith sent to
Albertus, whereto if he would not consent, then to let him know, that they
would proceed no further in the Treaty: This sentence seemed very hard to some,
who desired the Enemy might be hearkened to.

At this time, a new year approached, at the beginning whereof, the time for
the Cessation of Arms was to expire, nor did the Arch Dukes desire its
prolongation, expecting to have had an Address made to them to that purpose:
whereupon, the States write that they trusted to the Arch Dukes Promises, with
the same Resolution they had engaged to Naya and Verreike, expecting a Treaty.
And to that purpose they were ready to send seven or eight from them, if they
would please to send the like number, or fewer of theirs, whom they would
endeavor equally to fit, as formerly had been discovered, with Command and
Instructions from them, as they hoped the Arch Dukes and King Philip would do
the like, to wit, that the said Commissioner should with all possible speed
expedite the business; and that they would consider, whether it were convenient
to the matter in hand, whether they would lengthen the Cessation of Arms for a
Month, or six weeks; That they would be pleased, it should be for the longer
time, if so, the Arch Dukes thought fit to consent; That the States would have
the Legates to be such as the Arch Dukes were for the future hoped to be. The
meaning whereof was, that only Netherlanders should be sent. For the Arch Dukes
first Letters, whereby the States were moved to a Treaty, clearly contained the
same: Nor was it a matter of small advantage to the Hollanders, that the
conclusions of peace should be weighed together by the principal men of their
so wearily allied Neighbors, among whom as there was less fraud and craft, and
one common design of interest equal with them, though not for liberty, yet
against foreign oppression and tyranny; which being foreseen by the Arch Dukes,
they on the other hand were as violent to the contrary, and from the very
beginning, the Netherlandish Nobles had privily fostered the same design, until
it should as of necessity seem to be thrown not only upon them, but the Commons
also; And lately, Naya and Verreike, when they were at the Hague, were delayed,
some speeches being cast abroad, whether the States would endure any foreign
Commissioners, when the Spaniards Affairs were no less in Agitation, than those
of the Arch Duke: But then their design failed of its effect; yet at this time,
the Governors of Holland, who were desirous of peace, when either by
conjecture, or some private intimation, that it was likely that Spinola himself
the General of the War, together with a Spanish Senator, should be sent, of
whom Spinola was by some private means known to be inclinable to peace; and
esteeming it of little advantage, by much discourse to the Counsel to breed
further jealousies in suspicious minds, they earnestly endeavored, that the
States Letters should be written to Naya and Verreike, wherein they should be
desired, That they would certainly inform them of the number and names of the
Commissioners, that so a fitting care might be taken for their Provisions and
Entertainment: In these Letters was a Schedule enclosed, carelessly, as if is
had been a matter of no moment, signifying, That they had desired one or
another might be admitted into the Legation, besides Natives: being well
pleased in that point, to submit to the Arch Dukes, however, the States did not
^^it to intercede, that no Spaniards, especially any of the principal Officers
of the War might come to the Treaty.

These words were ambiguously interpreted, for that as the Hollanders seemed
only to admit of one stranger, so the Arch Dukes supposed and so believed, that
two were not prohibited, and consequently, that the General of the War who was
no Spaniard, would not be refused; The name also of Natives, might be extended
to the Burgundians, who were adjoining to the Netherlands, and under the same
Government, left Richardotte should be excluded, who for his many Counsels, and
long continuance in the Court, was esteemed a principal Person, fit for the
managing this so great Affair, and therefore thought not to be absent.

At this time there returned out of Denmark, Jacob Bowls of Amsterdam,
Nicholas Jacob, Simon Horn, and James Groote of Middleburg, who had been sent
thither, to salute the King, and to request his Advice and Counsel. And not
long after, there came from Denmark as Ambassadors, James Utefeild, a Senator
sprung from a Noble Stock, and a Man of great prudence, and Jonas Charis; from
the Marquess of Brandenburg, came Hierome Discue; and soon after from the Count
Palatine, Hippolitus Mountain, famous for several Books by him set forth, and
honored for many well performed Embassies: But the Emperor Rodolphus, sent
Letters superscribed to the States of Holland, and Zeland, and other the United
Provinces, wherein he called to mind, the pains taken by himself and his
Father, in hearing their complaints, and endeavoring to procure their peace:
But now it was arrived to his ears, that they were about to make peace with
King Philip and Albertus, but that they would first have their Commonwealth
declared free; That he much admired he was not consulted with, in an Affair of
such consequence, in regard all the Netherlands were a Fee, and part of the
Germane Empire: They should therefore look to it, that they should not without
his License, begin any thing, that might be prohibited by the Laws of a
feodary. Whereto it seemed good to the States, to return this Answer, That they
could not conceive, that Albertus would have concealed his Counsels from his
Brother, or Philip from his Kinsman; nevertheless, they were not intended to do
any thing, of whose beginning they would not have given Caesar an account: yet
they had not forgotten those many Complaints, which being oppressed with a most
rigid and unjust Dominion, they had put up to the Emperor, and the Germane
Dyets: as well before the Arch Duke Matthias, had undertaken their Cause and
Government, as after the same was departed from the Netherlands; as also how
little or no Relief they obtained thereby: It Is true, anon after, there were
some Discourses of Peace in the City of Colen, before the Legates of the
Empire; but when the Enemy from that very occasion, took cause of making a more
sharp War, They were compelled to apply the last Remedy to that Disease, which
otherwise would become incurable, to wit, That by public Decree, they would
take from Philip, that Principality, which he having received well guarded with
Laws, which he swore to defend, had so many ways violated and infringed:
Having by this means obtained their liberty, and defended the same by Arms,
foreign Kings in no manner disputed their Right: That the shedding of blood,
and evils of War, wherewith they were frequently afflicted, might be
attributed to the Emperor, and those who being torn from them by a League,
were ruled by Albertus, The States having always concluded, that they could
hope for no good Issue, unless the Commonwealth still retained its present
Estate: And now at last, both the Arch Duke Albertus, and King Philip, were
drawn to give their consent to that point, that they would have their liberty
unquestioned: as might be seen by both their Letters, Copies whereof were
transmitted: And now they rested confident, that not only Caesar, but all
Germany out of their ancient good will toward them, would freely give their
assistance (...) these so pious endeavors of ending a War. Concerning their
being Feodary to the Emperor, it was passed over in silence, for that to
refell it, would have bred contention, and to confess it, had been
dishonorable.

King Philip and Albertus, to whom the Emperor had written in like manner,
concerning his Rights, returned a like Answer, protesting, that they
endeavored nothing in prejudice of another Right; but passing over in silence
the debate of right. However, indeed the Family of Egmond had, for a long time,
possessed Gelderland, in despite of the Emperors, yet the ancient Princes
thereof, had been accounted under the fealty and Patronage of the Empire, being
at first named Guardians, afterward Counts, and last of all Dukes: And the
Bishops of Vtrecht who also ruled Over-Issell, and to whom Charles the Fifth
succeeded in all their temporal Jurisdictions, took an Oath of Fealty to the
Emperors, as is evident from Antiquity: But the Frizons, with the Inhabitants
beyond the Lecke, at first, by the assistance of Arms, and some small Tributes,
were subject to the French, afterward to the German Emperors; but in all
things else, they retained their liberty; which they boast to be granted and
confirmed to them by Charlemayne, and since, often by others, and at length, by
Sigismund, as is evident; and that their Government has continued mixed, being
partly Aristocratical, partly Democratical, for the space of seven hundred
years: sometimes one being chosen, who under the name of Podestate, has the
perpetual Authority of a Prince, or else is limited to a certain time: After
this, the Emperor Maximilian, attempted to put upon them, Saxon Governors,
but they were never able to attain the entire Possession, although the
Commonwealth were torn with faction, until being wearied with the contest,
they turned over all their Right to Charles the Fifth, Prince of the Low
Countries.

Charles, the bald King of France, is believed to have set a Prince over
Holland, to whom Zeland was connexed; and that that Prince was sprung from the
Aquitain Race, or else was one of the chief among the Native Nobility. But the
Instruments that were the Authors of that Opinion, granted both the Dominion,
and all Right thereof to Thierry as Hereditary, without any mention of a
connected Fee; and this only in that part, which formerly belonged to the
Church of Egmond, according to the Evil Custom of that Age, enriching Princes,
out of Things consecrated to Divine Uses: Not long after, the Empire being
divided between France and Germany, the Germans prevailed about the Rhine: But
there is extant a Charter of Otho the Third, which grants to the Earl of
Holland, to possess as his own Freehold, what before he enjoyed but by a kind
of Tenant-Right: But in a short time after, Wars arose between the Emperors,
and Earls; the one demanding; the other denying Obedience: Yet there were some
Princes, who affecting the Favor of Germany, named themselves Vassals of the
Empire; yet with such Liberty, as that they were obliged to no other Duty, than
that of Reverence, among whom William became Emperor: Nor did the Bavarians,
being born under Emperors, think of any Change: But the Burgundians, and after
them the Austrians, refused to make any Oath of Allegiance, deriving their
Liberty from great Antiquity; as if the Emperor Frederick had released to
Philip Duke of Burgundy, all Right of Empire; Maximilian of Austria, the Son of
Frederick, being rather the Father, and Tutor of a Prince, than a Prince; and
making opposition against the Cities by Foreign Force, reckoned Holland, and
other people of the Burgundian Jurisdiction within the Body of the Empire, but
the States very eagerly opposed the same; and this, among all the rest of the
Causes, of the begun Commotions, was looked upon as one. But Charles the Fifth
affecting the Empire, endeavoring to expel the French as Foreiners, it was
objected by the very Germans themselves, that the Netherlanders belonged no
more to the Almain Empire, than the French did, being obliged neither to pay
Tributes to it, be subject to its Laws, not o^n its Decrees and Constitutions;
But He, the more effectually to attain the Honor he so earnestly thirsted
after, promised that he would bring it to pass, that by a firm League, the
Netherlanders should unite and grow together with the Germans; and soon after,
brought it to such perfection, that, what could be offered, either for the
privilege of Germany, or the liberty of the Netherlands, being heard and
understood, he confessed at length, that only Gelderland and Utrecht, were
Feodaries to the Empire; yet nevertheless, for the future, he required that the
rest of the Hollanders and Netherlanders, should jointly make one part of the
German Empire: not that they should receive Laws and Constitutions from thence,
but that he might confer unto the public necessities, as much as the two
Princes Electors; and also that they should be under the Protection of Germany,
and should have right of suffrage in their Dyets and Assemblies, in all things
else, they should keep their liberty entire.

Upon the account of this League, it was, that the Hollanders, at what time
they were subject to the Spaniard, implored the help of Germany, against the
Spanish injuries: And in the Treaty of Breda, the Prince of Aurange saying,
that Holland and Zeland belonged to the German Empire, (which he spoke merely
to win the favor of that Nation,) King Philips Ambassadors, with much
earnestness, denied the same: But being compelled to defend themselves, and
obtaining no help from thence, from that time they withdrew themselves from
bearing any share in those foreign burdens: Nor was it a new thing, that
Leagues were in this manner dissolved, since almost all Europe, withdrew it
self from the Constantinopolitan Emperors, being by them left undefended
against the Barbarians: and the Cities of Italy, by the same Right, obtained
their liberty against the Emperors: But it is not convenient for us any longer
to prosecute these things; for the order of our intended History, now recalls
us to proceed in the same, without further digression.

Therefore, after the violence of Arms was somewhat moderated by Covenants, yet
the Soldiers did not omit for the whole Year to make Invasions where it was
lawful, laying hold on that last opportunity of making War: For Albertus had
commanded a few Horsemen to go to Lingen, laden with Money for Pay. These being
by chance met by a stronger party of Hollanders, in the Country of Bentheym,
were surprised and taken: For when they had betaken themselves to the Town of
Steenfort, some of the Pursuers entered pell-mel with them, wile the Townsmen,
shutting up the Ports, kept others out. Both Parties fought valiantly within
the Gates: Those, to keep their Money; These, on the other side, greedy to win
it. They that were without, threatened to force the Gates, unless they were set
open, as well for them, as the Enemies. Then each of them send to their
Neighbor Friends in Garrisons, desiring them to send Assistance: Thus from the
small beginning of a Skirmish, was likely to ensue a sharp and great Battle:
But the Citizens of the Town, fearing lest they should become a Prey to the
Vict^^, persuaded both, That rather than for the only hope of Gold, they
should run the hazard of an uncertain Event by Fight, the Hollanders should
take three thousand Archidutal Angels, and have the Booty. The Governor of
Grave was taken by the Spaniard, while he was passing the Maes with too much
security; and Warner Dubois was killed, being Judge Advo^^te of the Army, in
the Country of Tiel, as he was taking the Air in his Coach, and with obstinacy
refused to surrender himself to the increasing Enemy.

At this time, both Parties relying upon the Covenants, dismissed part of their
Foreign Soldiers; the States doing it (...) of Prudence; the Archdukes out of
Necessity. For Seditio^s were ready to break forth on every side, if they had
not redeemed themselves from new Charges by that Temporary Peace: Nor had they
so eschewed the Evil, many of the Soldiers scattering up and down the Country,
to the grievous prejudice of the Husbandmen; and they that were planted at
D^est threatened, by entertaining others among them, to increase their number,
if their Pay were any longer delayed. Anon after some Money came from Spain,
and some was raised by the Netherlanders: whereupon Pay was sent to them at
Die, and at the same, time Pardon and Indemnity was proclaimed to them. Thus
the strength of the Confederates being broken, the Archdukes spent that time
of Rest which they had from the Enemy, for the encouraging and fortifying
Discipline by Examples of Severity, the Author thereof being Didaco Ibarra, one
sent from Spain, to overlook the Treasury and Militia; Therefore they declare
by an Edict, the flagitious wickedness of that Sedition at Die, and their
offenses against the Public; who, although they were pardoned their Crimes,
yet therefore they were not to be retained in Service as Soldiers, without
further License: And therefore all that were Associates in that Sedition, they
command, within one Night and Day, to depart, and never to return into, or set
foot upon any the Lands belonging to the Archdukes, and Spaniards; threatening
present justice to all that should remain in, or return to the Country; and
proposing great Rewards to all that apprehended any of them.

The wiser and more moderate sort of Men esteemed it not fit for that time to
publish their Belief and Opinion to the suspicious Hollander; and, by so subtle
an Interpretation, to elude (though never so deservedly) their Promises to the
Soldiers.

In this place, it is not fit to defraud Posterity, of that rare Example of the
Hollanders Wealth and Ingepuity, which effected Operations against Nature; for
some private Persons undertook, and fortunately brought to pass, the draining
of the Lake Bamestren, adjoining to Parmeren, seven hours Journey in compass,
and six Foot deep in Water; This they did with Engines driven by the Wind; and
against the outward Force of the Waters, they raised Banks: Indeed, the Isles
of the Hollanders, were for the most part of a very low Situation, but were
preserved from being overflowed, by exceeding great Labor and Industry: Nor
did the Ocean cease to vindicate it self, by Breaches upon, and Inundations of
the Fields and Towns; some whereof were long since by the same utterly
overthrown, and the Currents of Rivers being altered in such manner, that there
was hardly any where to be seen the like great Exchanges of Land and Water.

Gibrand Warwick returned out of India with two Ships, which he had repaired in
the Island of Swans, (which the Hollanders call Maurice's Island) placing
Anvils for shaping and forming their Iron-work, in a naked and desert Soil:
Captain Peter Verhoeven went thither with 13 others: He had formerly
accompanied Hemskerk and had a great share in the Honor and Victory of Calpe,
or Gibraltar: Beyond the E^mes Prince Enno, after Spinola's taking of Lingen
stood in lost awe of the power of the United States, and accordingly had given
their Legue^ more churlish Answer than ordinary: They of Embdon likewise took
that Opportunity, ^mplaining of many Things concerning him; as, That he had by
sinister means prohibited to be sent to the Overseers of the Treasury, any Pay
for the City-Garrison, or other Things, for support and managing the Public
Charge; That he alone, without any Decree of the Council, had settled Taxes;
That he suffer^ the Spanish Soldiers unpunished, to go about the Country and
(...) it. But the most heirous Fault objected against him, ^^s, That when
Seamen went into Spain, he had not given them letters all alike, but as he had
known them either follow his Part or stand for their Country: Whereupon it
followed, that whoever were taken, and cruelly used, (and they were not a
(...)) they accused the Prince Enno to have betrayed them by that underhand
dealing. But the United States, when they (...) Christopher and John Prince
Enno's Brothers, were resident in the Country beyond the Eemes, sent Soldiers
to ^^rd the Suburbs of Embden; And to Enno himself, not only Ambassadors but a
Trumpeter with Letters, whereby he was commanded within 8 days o^ To revoke all
Acts by him done* ^^^ary to the Covenants, and to do his endeavor, for setting
free all that were Prisoners in Spain: Which if he refused to do, They
protested, He would compel them to unwilling Arms; which they supposed would be
very grievous to him. He sends into Britain, to purchase the Favor of that
King, to whom he hoped, it would easily be proved, that a Prince might pick
what Quarrel he pleased with his Subjects. But at last he sent to ^^rge himself
with the States by his Ambassadors, especially concerning that Mischief done to
Seamen: Which had not happened by any Treacherous Dealing of his, but after
Embden had received a Garrison of the Hollanders, all going from ^nce into
Spain, were taken as Enemies. Thus the States advising them on both Sides to
Peace, dismissed them for the present.

After this, Audience was given to the Ambassadors of Charles King of Sweden;
and it was granted, that he might raise and list Soldiers in any the Cities of
Holland: For he prosecuted the War sharply, infesting the Lev^nians, while
Sigismund was vexed with a New Rebellion at Home: Besides these, and some
growing Commotions in the rest of Europe was quiet, or at least without War.

The French King bad reconciled the Vanetians to the Pope, upon these Terms;
That the New Laws made against Priests, should be of no force; and whoever of
them, at any time, should be apprehended, for any Crime, should be delivered up
to the Pope. Thus the Pope took off the Interdiction of Religion, which he had
laid upon them; and they, who by reason of th^se Dissentions had left the City,
returned thither again: Only the Venetians absolutely refused to re-admit the
Jesuits: Whereupon some Assassinates were hired, (notwithstanding Affairs were
thus composed) against Paulo Servita, a Man who had both by his Counsels and
Writings done faithful service to the Commonwealth; this Man was almost slain
with diverse Wounds: And as well they that did the Fact, as they that hired them
to do it, fled into the Pope's Dominions. The Senate declared, That the said
Paulo was under public Protection; and whoever could apprehend and deliver up,
or kill any that had been guilty of the same Crime, should have a great Reward
of Money: And the more to entice them, they should have the freedom to recall
any two other that had been banished for other Crimes.

When there was a Difference with Fontayn, Governor of Millayn, concerning the
Bounds of the Rhetians, which Controversy he had determined to follow nor
before Judges, nor by a public War, by a sudden surprise, retaining to that
purpose, the Forces raised in the time of the Vanetian Troubles: The Treason
being derected, and explained with the punishment of such as were guilty, made
the ^ans more wary. But the French and Venetians composed and settled the
Matter, being ready to be decided by open Arms.

In Germany, the Duke of Bavaria, seeking the Rights of his Ancestors, drew
also under his Jurisdiction by Arms, the City Danowert, situate near the River
Ister, being proscribed by the Emperor, for a Tumult raised against the
Priests, and the Roman Religion: And the Protestants of Germany, too late after
the Event, were angry, at what they had neglected to prevent; many of them that
were more slow to act, murmuring among themselves in Conventicles; and others,
exhibiting Complaints to the Emperor.

The King of Spain, while he was not troubled with any Enemy at Sea, receiving
safely his Indian and American Fleets; and besides, raising a great Sum of
Money in Spain, wholly inclined his Thoughts to this, That he might by little
and little free himself of his great Debts, as of mingling his public Power
with his private Credit, he lessned the Usury he was ^^nt to pay to his
Creditors, and prolonged his own Day.

France also was filled with the hopes of a long Peace, by the Birth of another
Male-Child; And the Rebellion of the Country People of Britain, against the
Covetousness of the Nobles, was in some short time repressed; and, at the
pre^ent, Peace there was settled, by granting them Pardon, and for the future,
guarded by well-setled Laws.

From Ireland two Earls, Tyrone and Tyr-Oneal, He, of (...), famous for his
Rebellion, but both Fugitives first into France, then into Brabant, preferred
the Love of the Roman Religion before any thing, choosing rather Banishment,
than to Revenge it; which King James esteeming injurious to himself, set forth
in a Book, That they, according to the received Custom of the Age, too much
pretended the Cause of Religion, to hide the scandal of their Crimes: For what
care (says he) could men so really barbarous take of Religion, to whom
Marriage was a thing unknown; by whom Murders were commended and with whom the
greatest Thief is most honorable? And how horrid is it in these, who obtained
their Honor, not by the Nobility of their Blood or Merits, but by his, or
Queen Elizabeth's Favor, to show such an Ingratitude of Mind, such a
Conscientiousness of their Treachery, that they would again attempt, what they
had bin once pardoned, soliciting a whole Province to Defection and Rebellion,
and contrive a Conspiracy to the slaughter of all the English: Nor were there
wanting Priests and Jesuits, the usual Authors and Promoters of such
wickedness, to foment their Designs: But the Assistance of Foreign Power, being
in vain implored by them, their impious Attempts left no safe Refuge but in
flight.

The Seventeenth BOOK of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
THat the Enemies Ambassadors delayed their coming, this Years most sharp
Frost, and worthy to be remembered among the Rarities of the Time, was a main
cause, or else it was a part of the Spanish Pride to be long expected: In the
interim, the States transacted with their Friends, That they might try what
might be hoped from them in Peace or War. Then did the Affection of the French
clearly appear eminent toward this Commonwealth, there being hardly any found,
that would imitate their Pattern: For they made a League, wherein it was
agreed, That the King should give Assistance against the Violaters thereof,
that either offered public Injuries to the Hollanders, or being warned had by
dissimulation done any private Offenses; and, to that end should send to their
Aid Ten Thousand Foot: If the King a Kingdom of France suffered any Hostility
from an Enemy.

The States were to help him either with 500 Foot, or so many Ships, as should
equiballance that Number. If either ^d any thing beyond this for the other, it
should be owed (...) till the end of the War, and then to be re-paid; That
either should make any Agreement with the Enemy, without as Allies Consent. And
in point of Commerce, the Hollanders should be free among the French as
Citizens, and the French equal to the Citizens of Holland.

But the Britains, that they might not make the like League, first of all
renewed the old Controversy, concerning the Trade of Clothing; which only one
Society among the English, would ^ave, and afterward they demanded, That
before all other things, the old Debt of the States should be more narrowly
treated (...).

The Germans a Nation full of delay, from whom, as also from the Landgrave of
Hessen, Ambassadors came, pretended, That their Princes desired nothing more,
than to confirm the League upon mutual Assistance each of other; yet that they
had received no certain Power and Authority to settle that Affair. In (...)
interim, these (in effect) were the Things which they ^ommended to the States,
if Peace were concluded: to wit, that Care might be taken for the Indemnity of
the House of Nassau; That the Spaniard should make satisfaction for the Dania^^
Mendosa had done in Germany; That no Liberty should be parted to any within the
States Jurisdiction, to use the Roman rites in matter of Religion; That in the
disbanding of Soldiers, ^^tion should be used, that no damage should accrue
thereby to the Neighbors; And that all Taxes upon Provision, should for the
future utterly cease.

At length, in the beginning of the Month of February, arrived the Ambassadors
from the Enemy, which were Spi^^la, and Mancicido a Spaniard, the King's
Secretary for Military Business: Afterward, Richardot, Verreik* and Naya,
being drawn in Sleds over the Frozen Waters, enter Holland then indeed open,
and not showing any of the natural strength and beauty of its Rivers: Where
ever they passed, they were courteously Treated by the Governors of Cities,
and were not far from the Hague, when Prince Maurice went out to meet them: On
every side was an infinite company of men, whom the greatness of that unusual
Sight had drawn together, and to behold a Thing the Year before believed by no
man, that the two chief Commanders of that great War, who lately had led such
Armies, mortally hating one another, now unarmed mutually embracing each other;
and instead of the Violence of Arms, and Stratagems of War, contesting only
who should most exceed in Humanity: Spinola passing in Prince Maurice's Coach,
and some Discourse begun, each of them received great Advantage from the others
Virtue, one expert Enemy giving a true Judgment of his Opposite: But after the
Italian General provided of Lodgings, according to his Dignity, began to set
forth his precious Household Stuff, and all other Things prepared for
Ostentation: It is wonderful to tell, what vast concourse of men daily flocked
thither from the utmost parts of Holland, merely to see the order of his
Service, the furnishing of his Table, and chiefly his Person. Indeed, many were
drawn thither with the desire only to satisfy and feed their Eye; but others
came thither, who not only owned but boasted their Affection to the Roman
Religion: Nor was He nice, in showing himself to all Comers; nay more then
that, he supposed it a becoming thing, sometimes to speak first to many by an
Interpreter; or else thereby he fancied to himself a hope of gaining the
affection of the Commons against the Nobles.

At the Request of the Enemies Ambassadors, a more solemn meeting than
ordinary, was granted, where before the Prince and the Senate, after Salute and
Complements passed, they declare to what purpose they were sent. And now some
were chosen that should treat apart with them: first, in the Name of the whole
Council of the United States, were appointed William of Nassau, and Walrave
Brederode, then ^ery single Province added one, as Gelderland, Cornelius (...),
Holland, John Olden Barneveldt, Zeland, Jacob Maleree* Vtrecht, Nicholas
Bercke, Friezeland, Gelly Hellaman, Over-^ssell, John Sleethen, and Groening,
Ab^l Cunderten.

The first days were spent, while each inspected and argued the others
Commands and Instructions: King Philip in his Letters, styled the Arch Dukes
the chief Princes of the Netherlands, and speaking of the liberty of the United
Provinces, he recited that clause, which formerly he had mentioned, that it
should be then of full force, when the Peace was concluded, wherein also there
were Instructions concerning Religion, and other matters in controversy.

The Arch Dukes in their Epistles, set forth the words; whereby Philip of late
had ratified whatever Agreements they should make, upon any the States Demands,
the States nevertheless, often averting and complaining of the contrary:
Besides, when Philip gave power to the Arch Dukes, of making Peace, either by
themselves, or those whom he had delegated to that business.

The Arch Dukes Instructions did not plainly enough speak and declare, the
right which they had received from King Philip, to be transferred by them to
their Ambassadors. To all which Objections, the Spaniards pl^usibly excusing
the rest, promised that they would take care, that nothing should be wanting in
the making perfect their Commission: yet on the other side they argued, that
the States Instructions to their Commissioners, by a new example, had bound and
tied them up by secret and private orders. To which it was answered, that that
should in no manner, hinder the business, in regard the States themselves were
present, who, as any one Head or Article of Peace was agreed on, should
immediately confirm the same by their Authority; for it was consented to by
both, that all things should not be proposed at once in general, but each thing
particularly, as the same was to be decided or debated.

The Hollanders insisted on this, that they might try the Enemies minds, at the
beginning, by the most difficult things whether they only desited a Treaty* or
really intended a Peace: But the Spaniards were for a more dilatory way, and
that they might avoid any concessions they should be forced to, as often as
they thought fit.

The Spaniard offered either a Peace or a Truce a long time keeping secret,
what at last almost too late was known that they could not endure a Peace upon
equal terms; but would consent to such a Truce: On the other side, the States
from the very beginning, professed, they desired to put an end to the War, and
not only to give an intermissive Cessation thereto; for it was manifest, that
the exhausted Forces of the Spaniard, would in time re^^^, and in the in^eri^^,
the Neighbor Kingdoms might grow evilly affected toward them: besides, many
other things were spoken against a Truce, which we shall hereafter commemorate.

Wherefore at this very time, they began to Treat about a Peace: the first
branch whereof was about the confession of the liberty of Holland: upon which
matter, the Debate being begun: Don Richardot said, In matters not to (...) if
they please to make themselves a Kingdom: (...) he desired them, that the
Covenants might be so made in such words, at might do least prejudice to the
Kings Honor. The Confederate States desired, that the King and Arch Dukes
should in their own Name, and the Name of their Heirs and Successors for ever,
desist from their Claym of the Seven Provinces, and Lingen and Trent, and
whatever else they possessed, so as for the future, they should not use either
their Arms or Titles: But the Spaniards grievously complained both to the
French and English, of this contumelious demand, as they pleased to call it;
protesting, that it was a devestable thing, that harder ^aws should be imposed
on them by that People, then Kings are wont to prescribe to Kings: The Kingdom
of Navarre is possessed by the Spaniard, yet the ancient Inhe^^tors thereof,
retain the Honor of the Title: The King of Great Britain entitles himself to
France, yet neither is the French offended with this, or the Spaniard with
that; for the Spaniard himself has nothing of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, but
the Name; whereto when the Hollanders replied, That Kingdoms were supported by
their Majesty: But free People could never be wary, or cautelous enough, and
that the loss of a few words, would be no great matter, in the great and
swelling Titles of the House of Austria; at last, the Spaniards did admit the
condition, so as all other things might be likewise concluded.

This easiness of the Spaniard, was suspected by wise men; not was it without
Reason at that time conjectured, that they had speciously consented to that
demand, being so popular, and pleasing to all because there remained other
things, which being within the words of their conceded liberty, would destroy
both their Power and Wealth: or else things not equally common with them and
the Confederates, would involve them in dissentions.

In the progress of the Treaty, the Solemnity usually in Leagues, concerning
the Oblivion of all acts of Hostility, and the prohibiting making of Seizures*
took up little or no debate; But when they came to the point of Commerce, the
Spaniards declared, that the Hollanders must abstain from going to the Indies,
and other long Voyages by Sea, as not used before the War, and that this was
the main Reason that moved Philip to hearken to Peace: Nor was their liberty of
so small concernment to them, as that they would refuse to give such a price
for it, especially no damage accruing thereby, since instead thereof, they
should have the benefit of the Spanish Trade, which is nearer to them, and more
safe, which while it formerly continued free to them, they never once thought
of the Indies: Adding further, that by the Treaty of Verbin, neither the French
nor the English; by the Treaty made at London, were admitted to go into those
parts, which the Castilians and Portugueses alone, had for so many years
challenged to themselves, as the first finders thereof. But the Ambassadors of
France and England, refelled this, affirming what was lawful by the privilege
of nature, and not prohibited by any League, they esteemed it unquestionably
permitted, and by that right they used it. But these things, during the time of
the Treaty, were debated in Books and Writings, wherein was set before them the
love of their Country, and the private gain from the Indies, to be preferred
before the Spanish Dominion that was unjust; how great therefore was the
necessity of the Hollander, who having nothing but a barren Soil, and full of
Marshes, gain Wealth and Glory from the Sea, wherein with their own strength,
they are able to cope with their most powerful Enemies? Nor would the adjoining
Seas, that lie near about them, be sufficient to maintain so great a multitude.
There being used in the Voyage to Guiny 20 good Ships, to the Islands of Salt
fourscore, to the rest of the Coast of America, almost twenty, and to India
only 40. wherein and whereby were employed no less then eight thousand Seamen,
from all whom, by such a League they would take away their Livelihood, or in
effect, command, or rather compel them to flight, a thing ignoble in every
Citizen, but odious and abominable toward them, who deserved so much, and so
well of the Commonwealth; As well private as public Utility, should be
something respected, it being well known, how mightily in a short time, the
gain of the Indian Trade was increased, and it might easily be collected by the
profit thereof, for these last fifteen years, what might be hoped for from them
in the future: there yet remained Cambaya, Malabar, Crilon, Narsinga,
Coro^iandell, and certain other places hitherto unknown, and but slightly
enquired after: Now what if that of China and America, opposite to the other
Ocean, should he looked after, and the yet undiscovered World, under the South
Pole, should wait to be made known by the Hollanders; let the Spanish and the
Indian Trade be divided between them, yet the last will not be admitted to be
lost hitherto, ^ince it has still been used by the French and English, this in
effect, is no other, then to seek the recovery which may be continually lost,
and in the mean time, certainly to loose what can never be recovered; for a
Society once dissolved, cannot by any means be reunited. Besides, the Indian
Ships are fit and ready for War, whereof some are always at home ^it for
sudden Service, and without any public charge, would be a public Fleet; But
what would the Spanish Fleet, nothing but at pleasure, take booty from their
Enemies. Let the gain thereof here, be shared with their Enemy; and let him
there also partake of their most plentiful advantage, and by that means, the
Spanish Wealth, now too great to let the World enjoy peace, will be lessened.

And that it may be the better discerned what ought to be denied to King
PHILIP, it is to be observed, what he most earnestly demands, which may be
imagined the cause of his desiring peace.

Those ancient LORDS of that poor Kingdom, are beholding to India and America,
for the great raising of their Fortune, which at this time has made them so
proud, as to despise Kings; for herein is concerned the cause of most neighbor
Princes, to whom by the loss of the Sea, the Hollander would be of no use.

If we look upon the Enemy aright, we shall find him bend all his endeavors
thither, that he may be able to do injuries, when and where he pleases.

The Hollanders labor for this only that they may not be compelled to suffer.
If either Justice or power be sought, they have on their side all Laws, both
Divine and Humane, who have given to all a right of Navigation and Merchandise
as Nature has disposed to all an equal share both of Air and Earth. Although
before the Wars the Hollanders did not sail to the Indies, yet that they had a
right, and might have done it, nor can the longest possession prevail against
the Authority of the Law of Nations. They that would shut up the Sea, and
challenge Merchandise to themselves alone, what other thing do they then
Pirates, and Ingroffers of Provision? Antiquity averred Arms to be justly taken
up against them who excluded any from their Harbors, how much more then against
them who would drive them from the Ports belonging to others? Peace without
Trade, is not Peace, but a perpetual hostility where the right of Defense is
utterly taken away. And now the hitherto unspotted fidelity of the Hollanders
could not be sullyed by a more no able example, then if they should leave and
betray the Indian Kings and People confederate with them to the Spanish
cruelty. If the Spaniards resolve to perform what shall be agreed on let the
business now be perfected (as it will be), when the Hollanders are declared
Free, and when they have agreed, then that each shall quietly enjoy what at the
present he shall possess; for nothing ought to be limited to Freemen, and
Traffic admitted in all places whereof they have Possession. But that they
should set so high an esteem upon Philip for yielding up a part of his
Dominion, there was little reason truly for the same, since it was not a gift,
but a confession of the truth, without which there was no hopes of concord. It
were more honorable for him to give or take Peace, then while his Affairs
succeeded so well, to sell it; which if he would not believe, he should
eft-soons experiment it. The fruit of forty years bloodshed would be utterly
lost, and in vain were Arms taken up for Liberty, and against that terrible
bugbear of Commerce, the tenth raised by Alva, if now as great a slavery should
be voluntarily admitted to, and they suffer themselves to be deprived of the
greater part of the World by their Enemies, which they ^ould never have endured
from any Prince. These things were urged by them.

A few on the other side averred, That this was private business, and ought not
to hinder the public Peace, at least^ise, that the cause of some Maritime
people ought not to be handled alone, when the evil of War extended to all.
Lastly, where the Spanish Negotiation was short and safe, it ^^ticed Seamen, by
their good will to avoid long Voyages, which are frequently obnoxious to
diseases.

Upon mature consideration of the matter by the United States, these things
seemed to them to be just causes, why they would not desert and quit the
Indies; yet that they ^ight not leave any thing untryed for the ending the War,
after much dispute, they offer the Spaniards their choice, either that they
would make a firm Peace with freedom of Navigation, or else according to the
example of France and Britain, all beyond the line should be left to the
decision of Arms, or else to conclude a Peace here, and only a Truce ^^ere. But
the Spaniards would neither permit that negotiation, saying, that Peace and War
mingled resembled a Prodigy; but at last they gave hopes of a Truce in the
Indies, if when the time thereof was elapsed, they would abstain from any
further Navigations to those parts. But the States, that abhorred those
conditions, revived the Counsels of the American society lately laid aside, if
perchance they could work upon the Enemy by fear. But they quickly understood
these were but threats; nor indeed did that matter proceed any further, while
they who were desirous of Peace among the Hollanders were afraid to be severe
toward dissenters.

Without doubt this state of Affairs was very prejudicial to the people of the
United Provinces, Arms being only forbidden, as uncertain whether there should
be Peace or War; whereupon many of the common people, who got their living by
War, were not apt to apply themselves to any other business, and so were
afflicted with two evils, idleness, and penury, and therefore the States
esteemed it more convenient to hasten the end of the Treaty; to this purpose
they advised the Spaniards, That they should on both sides propose the chief
heads of what was to be insisted on. They alleged it to be an unusual thing,
to make new Proposals before the former were concluded; yet at length they
consented, not that they would distinctly and plainly offer the particulars,
but only the chief points in general, and that in obscure terms; for they said
there remained yet to be treated of concerning their limits, the restitution of
goods, Foreign commerce, money, and those immunities which were granted to the
English or others in the Netherlands, as also of Religion, and Neighboring
Princes. Being asked, when they mentioned Religion, since the same was
contained in King Philips Letters, whether this were their meaning, That they
which passed up and down should not be infested under pretense of Religion, or
whether they would prescribe Laws to the Hollanders, whereby Divine matters
among them should be ordered? They answered, This was a matter concerning which
they would advise with their Prince, and after the other things were se^led,
when they came to that, they would more clearly procure and produce their
determination. On the other side, the States delivered not a few, and those
ambiguously contrived, but eight and twenty branches or heads, contained in
plain words, such as usual for the confirmation of Peace, or taking away the
injuries of War; nor did they omit private commodity, either of the House of
Nassau, or of Emmanuel, whose Father Don Antonio, for a short time possessed
the Kingdom of Portugal.

A conference being appointed concerning the chief controverted points,
immediately to the contest of the Indies, was added another about the European
Commerce, this also having no small difficulties, for the passage to Antwerp
being opened, the Hollanders, but chiefly the Zelanders feared a damage to
their Negotiations, whereupon Don Richardot ^^me to the States Commissioners,
beseeching them with (...), That they would not lose out of their hands a Peace
so much hoped for, by too pertinacious a defense of what pleased themselves.
Nor did he obscurely maintain, that nothing could be determined concerning
Trade, unless the pleasure of the King of Spain were first known therein, and
therefore the States should remember to contrive such a manner of Covenant, or
Article, as might be approved by a Prince, who is neither Conquered, nor a
Captive, but really desirous of Peace.

The Month of March being almost spent, the time limited for the Cessation of
Arms was almost expired; it was agreed therefore, That April, and May should be
added. And then the States offered this Condition concerning the Indies, That
it should be free for their Citizens during the space of nine years, from the
Conclusion of the Peace, to go to all those places, unless where the Spaniard
had Dominion. And that they should not at any time come thither, unless they
had permission from the Governors, or were compelled by necessity. And during
that time, all hostility should cease between them and their companions, and if
any should do the contrary, it should not be lawful to take vengeance for the
same in any other place, then where the injury was committed, or the doers of
the injuries lived, and then before the expiration of the said nine years,
there should be a more firm and lasting Agreement endeavored. The Spaniards
refused this, and plainly argued, That the Indian Negotiation should for the
present be limited, and for the future left off. But the freedom of home
Commerce, which the Hollanders seemed to suspect, they provided for the same by
these Articles: First, That all Taxes invented during the War should be
abolished, and only the ancient moderate Tributes remain. That the privilege of
drawing Merchandise to particular Markets, usurped by diverse Cities, as of
German^ Wines to Dort, French Wines to Middleburgh, should be prevalent against
the Citizens of other Nations and Countries. On the other side, the Hollanders
understanding whither this tended, declared it to please them, that no greater
charges should be laid upon Foreigners Merchandising, then upon Natives; but
the rights of Cities to continue in the same posture they were before the
Belgic troubles. Also they esteemed it just, that some caution should be given
to them, that the Ships that went from thence into Spain, should be free and
unmolested. Concelning these Controversies Naya was sent into Spain to speak
with the King, with promise to return within forty days; but the event
evidenced that promise either to be false or rash.

However the interval of time was not spent in vain: for first the States took
into consideration the money owing by them to the English; and soon after make
a League (likely enough to continue if Peace were concluded with Spain) almost
upon the same terms as they had done before with France, only but half the
number of supplies were promised. Then all that were assembled above the number
of the Commissioners returning to their own Provinces, they that were chosen to
preside this business of Peace, called to the Enemies Ambassadors, That they
would expedite their demands upon the rest of the Heads to be Treated on.

The debate being entered into concerning Limits, the Spaniards were not ashamed
to insist, That Brabant, Flanders, and all Gelderland beyond the Waell, should
be delivered up by the States, who in stead thereof, should receive Lingen,
Oldenzeel, and Groll, (which certainly would have been a very unequal
exchange). And when they condescended thus far, That for a short time the
States should have the custody of the Towns, yet so as the Sovereign power and
Jurisdiction should be vested in the Archdukes; they further said, That they
divided the Netherlands too liberally, leaving that part to their Neighbors,
which the Fortune of War had determined to be the strongest. The rumor of this
business being dispersed, the Brabanters under the States Jurisdiction, not
contented to obtain that they should not be delivered up to the Enemy, thought
they had a fit occasion given them, whereby to recover their right of having a
Vote in the public Council; for after the principal Cities, and the last of
them Antwerp, had yielded to the Duke of Parma the rest being less then could
govern themselves, received Laws, Tributes, and Magistrates, from the Authority
of the seven United Provinces, although Berghen op Zoome had ever continued
faithful to the States, yet Bredah and other places that were taken and retaken
by War, recovered their Liberty by the Trajectine League. But those were not
times wherein either the labor of Conjunction, or the multitude of Judges
ought to be increased.

Little was yet done with the Enemy, when even now the Month of May was
drawing to an end, when they among the Hollanders that were desirous of Peace,
faintly desired of the rest, That the residue of the passing year might be
added to the Cessation of Arms; but upon this Condition, That the Treaty should
no longer be continued than the end of July. Which being agreed, They fell to
discussing the matter concerning the restitution of goods, which gave new
matter of dissension, the former points not being fully concluded; about which
Verreike going to Bruxells, and returning with speed, reported what was the
intention of the Archdukes, That it was fit the burdens propagated by War,
should be thrown aside and buried by Peace* and for the Towns of Brabant and
Flanders, they would gratify them with the same, so as they might enjoy the
whole Country. That as all private persons were to have a restitution of their
goods, so likewise were to be restored to the Princes the goods their Ancestors
enjoyed, there being several sorts of profit of possessions due to the Majesty
of Dominion; not did it follow, because the Archdukes had denuded themselves of
this, that therefore he should be deprived of the rest.

The States contradicted, that a Government could not be deprived of its
Revenue, nor Cities of the ground belonging to them, without the Ruin and
destruction both of Government and Cities, and therefore unless they come to
more moderation, they would suddenly break off the Treaty. The others insisted,
That although they denied the Revenue, yet certainly there was no reason why
they should refuse to restore the private Patrimony of the Princes. But this
crafty difference and distinction was denied also, for that in these places,
there was no separate account of the Public Treasury, and the Princes
Patrimony. And although they delayed to discover, what they would have
comprehended under the name of Private Goods; yet it appeared, That under that
Cloak they would hide as well Towns as whole Countries purchased by Princes,
or otherwise gained by any peculiar Title. But when the Hollanders said, That a
great part of their future security consisted in this, That the Spanish
Garrisons should be drawn from the Borders of the Netherlands, the Spaniards
protested, That it was a dishonorable thing to be required by them, since they
were able to defend their Territories with French and British Soldiers. No
more did they hearken to the demand of restoring to Germany, the places they
possessed belonging to the Jurisdiction of Almayne; and therefore Verreike was
again sent to Bruxells, and after his return, they entered upon the debate
concerning the use of Privileges, the access of ships of War to the shores,
the right of Fortification, the choosing Magistrates for those Cities, which by
the Peace would fall to the share of private persons or Lords, the cautions and
assurances of Peace, and the not resuming or falling again to War for any
injuries, without public Proclamation. Nor did they well agree in these
things; but the chief thing that offended the Spaniards was, That the
Hollanders desired the League might be confirmed, not only by the allowance of
the Archdukes, but also by the consent of the Nobles and Cities under their
obedience. And when they were again spoken to concerning Religion, they said,
They must of necessity wait for Naya's coming out of Spain, whom the
procrastinating nature of that dilatory Nation in Affairs of concernment,
detained longer then ordinary. Under this pretense, they requested, That the
time limited for the Treaty being about the first of August, might be
lengthened unto the thirteenth of September.

In the mean time, Janinus went into France, that he might inform the King,
what was the condition of the Commonwealth in Holland, what the inclination of
their minds, what their ability for War, and what were their hopes of Peace: He
at the same time consulting within himself about a Truce, because both by the
public and private colloquies of the United States people, he knew many of
them werse to War, and was sensible the Spaniard would never endure an
indifferent Peace.

It was not a matter of small moment, that the States, if the War continued,
had desired of the Kings their Associates, a great supply, protesting, That
there remained to them no sort of Tribute untryed, and yet their Treasury was
unable to maintain those Forces, which Prince Maurice had formerly adjudged
necessary for the carrying on of the War. These were indeed the designs of
those that were willing to have Peace, which the Prince too late hoped to avoid
by contracting the charge of the War into a narrower compass.

At this time Don Pedro de Toledo was Ambassador in France, whom King Philip
had sent thither to King Henry, to entreat him, That he would so moderate the
Hollanders Proposal, that his Master might lose as little of his Royal dignity
as possible. Then also was King Philips daughter offered to be given in
Marriage to the French Kings son; but King Henry was not desirous of that
affinity, He himself formerly having sought a Marriage with the Family of
Medices, rather then with the House of Austria, that abounded in Women, This
Embassy was suspected by some of the Hollanders, but chiefly by the English:
And the Dowry to be given in Marriage, was reported to be a right of Dominion
over the Hollanders. But the Spaniard soon satisfied the King of Britain with
the like honor of an Embassy to him directed, and performed by Don Ferdinando
Giron, a man eminently famous and honorable among the chief, and greatest
Spanish Commanders. But the Danish Ambassadors departed home, wearied out with
the tediousness of delays, and not dissembling, protested, They would not sit
idle Spectators of that Play, whose Scene was wholly laid in France. And
another thing much increased the cares of the States, which was, That
Messengers coming out of France, England, and Germany, all agreed in this
point of News, That the Ministers of Spain had declared, That Philip never had
any intent to reject or lay aside his right of Dominion, but only for the
obtaining of a Treaty, he had given to the Hollanders, the short use of a
temporary Liberty; But now the very inward parts of those Provinces were so
well known to him, that he doubted not a good issue either in Peace or War: And
that of a truth, he would never consent to a Peace, unless they abstained from
the Indies, and license given to the Romanist for the exercise of their
Religion in their own Way.

Janinus returning to the Hague, reported the faithful intent of the King
toward them his Allies, and how he had refused Toledo's troublesome Requests
and Offers, but nothing further. After this the Enemies Legates (while Naya was
yet absent, but having received Letters out of Spain), give account, That the
King did bona fide grant them their Liberty, and therefore it was but just that
they on their part should submit to him in the matter of the Indies, and other
things ^ely demanded; Moreover, That the King desired out of h^ (...)
inclination, That it might be allowed to the Romanists to worship God according
to the dictates of their Conscience; They should grant this for their Kindreds
sake, they should grant it for their Ancestors sakes, lest they should with
greater cruelty hate the Religion by them approved, then that new Opinion of
the Anabaptists, born for the destruction of Empires; and lastly, They should
grant it for their Countries sake, lest they should drive from thence all the
Inhabitants, by debarring them from that which is most pleasant to mortals.

The States looked upon this as an Engine intended to subvert the Foundations
of the Commonwealth; the same was the Opinion of the Germans and English.
Janinus did not had fault with the Counsel, but with the Authors thereof, for
so great an Affair ought not to be made beneficial by the Enemy. At length, the
States finding that these delays were dangerous to their Affairs, and not
willing any longer to hearken to the Enemies unreasonable propositions, resolve
to set an end to the Treaty; and to that end a Decree being drawn up, wherein
was set forth, by how great and many experiments they had been terrified from
Treating of a Peace with the Spaniard, insomuch that when they were first sent
to about it, they immediately declared their minds, on the other side, how the
Enemy, and with what treachery he brought to effect his designs, how every of
their demands would destroy the right and power of their so often granted
Liberty; and lastly, they repeated the whole series of the Affair, as the same
had been transacted. The Spaniards, this Decree being delivered to them,
require a time to deliberate thereupon.

In the interim, the Ambassadors of France and Britain, the Germans being
rather present then approving, go unto the Assembly of the States, and there
produce their Masters Instructions to them, till that time concealed; namely,
That they would endeavor by all means possible to make Peace, but if that
could not be effected, they should at least persuade both parties to the making
of a Truce, yet such as should be safe and honorable for the Hollanders, and
by which their Libe^ty should remain without question, their right of
Navigation be preserved entire, and their possessions in no manner diminished.
That such a Truce might be brought to a Peace, if the Governors of the
Commonwealth behaved themselves with discretion; That they well knew what just
causes the Hollanders had of being enraged against their Enemies, but all
perturbations of mind are enemies to wholesome Counsel. They should consider
with themselves how unfit they were for War of themselves, and that Kings are
not wont to take Arms, unless upon just occasion or necessity. Here nothing
more could be expected from the War then mutual damage, and there could be no
pretense of necessity, as long as a Truce might be had. If they agreed, the
same assistance should be given for defense of the Truce, as was promised if a
Peace were concluded; but if the Spaniard, which was most of all to be feared,
should refuse a Truce, as he had done a Peace, then the Kings their Masters
would cordially support the safety of their Friends and Allies for the future.

As soon as same had blown abroad these things, immediately an unrestrayned
liberty of dispersing among the vulgar, books written, but without the Authors
Name, and this humor spread all about with great heat the whole year. Some
foretelling from such a League, solitude, sedition, and last of all slavery.
Others with much rancour ripped up all that ever the Spaniards had done in
America, their cruelties to the people of Granado and Arragon: And lastly,
their Their Treacheries and Barbarismes committed in the Netherlands: A third
sort produced Books that showed all the Articles prejudicial to the Roman
Religion, or that maintained it was not necessary to observe or perform
Covenants entered into between a Prince and his Subjects: Nor did they omit to
find fault, That they were not any Governors of Cities, nor any of the Native
Noblemen that were sent to Treat, but Italians, Spaniards, Monks, the most
cunning and deceitful sort of men, who if they could find any thing infirm, or
hurtful to the State, they would not leave it undone; nay, they would endeavor
by gifts to tempt the Ambassadors of Kings, but the most powerful of the
Nobility, to turn aside from the right, and walk with them in oblique and
indirect ways.

I esteem this none of the least evils of that Commonwealth, That so great
perverseness should be stirred up in the common people, which had often been
forbidden, and then was also by a new Edict, yet could not be repressed, while
a sharp and diligent search, and other more grievous punishments were not
permitted, as being contrary to Liberty. And now an unexpected accident
happened to the States, though in their General Assembly, and upon the
presumption and hope of Peace, they suffered themselves with difficulty to be
drawn to hearken to a Truce; yet that they might not seem to despise the advice
of the Kings, as it was the chief cause that induced them thereto; yet there
were other, to wit, that the Charge of the War, as it had been of late managed,
would every Month exceed the money raised by Tributes, above three hundred
thousand Florens, and that that sum would not yet be sufficient, unless for the
defense of the Rivers, there were added to the old Forces, six thousand
Footmen, whereby the whole Commonwealth of the UNITED STATES would be indebted,
nine thousand Millions of Flotens, and the single Provinces particularly, twice
as much: so that without the consent and help of the Kings their Allies, the
War could not be managed with any good hope; for to cut off any parts of the
Government, and only defend the more inward parts, would be an act of cruelty,
although there were some that advised it, and would be very dangerous if it
should be known abroad; and whereas some said, That the Commonwealth was so
constituted, that it could not be at Peace, though Arms were laid aside, That
was by others accounted an impious and infamous confession. It might more
justly be feared, Lest the Common People, understanding that just and fair
Terms were refused, growing displeased with their Governors, should deny to
bear the Charge and Burden of the War. And therefore at last they returned
answer, That they were ready to hearken to a Truce, so as their LIBERTY might
be confirmed, not under any Conditions, or for a certain time, but really, and
for ever.

But the Spaniards, when the Ambassadors of the said Kings came to them, gave
no hopes of any such Agreement, but offered another. Condition, which was, That
all Affairs should continue in the same posture they were at present, with a
Cessation of Arms for seven years, yet so as the Spaniard might choose within
two Months, whether he would admit the Indian Commerce, or would contest the
right thereof by Arms. But there was no cause why the Grant once already made
concerning Liberty, should be again reiterated, in regard it would be a
difficult thing to be obtained, because the Spaniard is of a more harsh nature,
nor will be drawn to imitate the Archdukes facility: And if the States were not
pleased with these offers, they desired they might have time given to them till
the Calends of October, to expect the more pleasing Orders of King Philip.

This when it was refused, both by the Ambassadors of Kings and Princes in the
Public Council, the States resolved to persist, and stand to their first
Decree; but as to the matter of time desired by the Ambassadors, they said they
were ready to consent. In the interim, the Deputies had time every one to
return to his own Province, to receive new Instructions concerning this new
Affair. And it was agitated with great contention: Nor did the People that lay
more open to the Oppressions of the Enemy only dissent from the Zelanders, who
were guarded by the Sea, but in Holland it self, several Cities were of several
minds, nor within the Cities were all men of one Opinion, but every one moved
as his proper hopes led him, or as they were drawn by more powerful Arguments
on either side.

In this wavering of men's minds, counsel was given to Prince Maurice, That he
should openly, and without dissimulation, make Himself the Author of the
stronger Opinion, which he did, not only with sharp words, but by Letters sent
to the Cities of Holland; At length (says he), The Arts feared by our
Ancestors are burst out: Those specious words, wherewith they purchased a
Treaty, were indeed nothing but words, nor was Peace desired by the Enemy, but
that he might make War more at his own, then our convenience; or that he might
trouble the Commonwealth more grievously by discords and bribes, then he could
do by War. In a short time his Wealth will increase anew, which lately was
exhausted, so that he will make his brass money of equal value with Gold and
Silver. But our burdens shall continue, for fear of Treachery. Merchandice and
whatever was nourished by War, will be scattered abroad, and the chief flower
of our Militia, especially the Horse, will go to other parts, to seek, and
gain, both Honor and Booty:

Sloth will not only seize our Bodies, but our Minds, when the Memory of former
Injuries shall grow obsolete; whereof, at present, there remains but a small
sign, such having succeeded in the places of former Senators, who only hear of
former Actions, and give little Credit to what they hear. Behave your selves
so, as it may never be hoped, that any one in the Commonwealth, should regard
any thing besides the Commonwealth. It Is true, the Motion of Kings are sudden,
while people often perish by their long Deliberations. Wherefore, call to mind
the Fortitude of your Ancestors, who many times avoided Embassies for Peace,
hoth from the Emperor, and other Princes, looking up on them not as Advice
from loving Friends, but as I reacherous Snares cast out by the Enemy to entrap
them: Remember those Decrees, which were formerly made, and since often
renewed, of settling your Liberty without any Controversy, admit of no
Articles, no Conditions, but such as shall absolutely debar the Enemy, not only
from the Right of Government, but from using or claiming any Title or Token
thereof: If there be no Fraud intended, why do they delay to express in plain
words, what is seriously intended. Certainly, it behooves you so to do, as
neither Foreign Princes may doubt of your Condition, nor the very Citizens and
Subjects begin to think of nominating among themselves a New Lord. There will be
some, that will cry up to you ambiguous Speeches, and such Language as
relisheth with the Spaniard, and will pretend a necessity of your admitting
thereof: But, be assured, honest and wholesome Counsels, need not the Patronage
of Necessity, such Curiosity is rash, and draws only to a Rendition of Liberty.

If my Counsel be followed, there shall be an absolute League or nothing; And
if I have not merited sufficiently, I am sure my Father did. The Business in
Agitation, concerns not me or mine singly; and if my Heart would have suffered
me to have private Interest, before public Advantage, there might formerly
have been, and may still be seen, a commodious and beneficial Issue by War. You
are the Princes and Heads of the Union give Example to your Inferiors, and let
the wavering people be settled by your Authority. Consult of what the Senate
lately proposed as necessary for the Commonwealth; Whoever you send to the
Assembly, be sure to bind them up by your Commands, that in the Articles
concerning Liberty, they may not alter one Tittle: Command them to communicate
Counsels with Us concerning the Commonwealth, as was formerly done toward
ancient Governors, and particularly toward my Father: Such your Care for the
public Safety, I shall gratefully accept, and with all kindness.

The Interpretation of these Letters was not alike in all places; some of the
Magistrates of Cities, that were wont to go to the General Assembly looking
upon the same, as if their Fidelity had bin traduced among their Colleagues, in
the performance of their Commands. About this time were produced also the
Letters of Justus Lipsius, elsewhere remembered by us; whereby, being a man
skilled in Civil Affairs, he became the Author of the Spaniards making a Truce
with the Hollander. Princes, by delay, many times gather strength; and, as
Hatred decays, Obedience returns. Sextus Pompeius of old fell by no other
policy, while he was Lord not only of an Island, but a strong Fleet.

Now was September, the time limited for the stay of the Spaniards, past; and
therefore they go to the King's Ambassadors, who declared, They had received
the Archdukes Instructions, whereby power was given to them of making a Truce
in Europe for 7 years, in this form, to wit, To agree with the States as free,
and over whom they arrogated no power; and they promised, that they would
endeavor to obtain King Philip's Consent to the same. But the said Ambassadors
denied to discourse with the States concerning a matter, which beforehand they
knew would not be acceptable; and it appeared, that the Spaniards were offended
with the Severity of the last Decree, whereby they were commanded to depart the
Borders of Holland, that they esteemed it contrary to their Honor and
Greatness to desire a longer stay; yet they would very willingly have continued
there, if the States had voluntarily, or by the persuasion of other Prince's
Ambassadors granted the same.

But it was more providently considered by the same Ambassadors, to satisfy
the States Anger, by the Enemies Departure, than to incur their Hatred
themselves, by so ill-resented a Desire. Wherefore, the Spaniards came into the
Council, to take their leave of the States, where Don Richardot, highly
applauding his Princes, who had pardoned the greatest Aff^onts for gaining of
Peace, he accused the obstinate perverseness of the States; by whom also, they
were at that time dishonourably driven out of their Borders. I am (says he) no
Prophet; but either I am vehemently deceived, or else I foresee the Day, when
you will in vain wish, that you might have those things which you now refuse:
By your neglect of Peace, you shall hereafter be accounted guilty of all the
Blood that shall be shed. Hereto Olden Barneveldt thus answered in the Name of
the States; That they had acted with all plainness and simplicity; for they
would not admit a Treaty, without an assurance, that their Liberty should be
absolutely confirmed to them: That the fault of not making a League lay at
their Doors, who either would not, or could not, perform their Promises: From
them the Blood would be required, whose Laws being more cruel and bloody than
War, had enforced a Necessity of using Arms; for that there remained fresh
Examples of their Barbarism against neak Seamen, and silly Fishermen.

During these Discourses, Spinola stood by with a Countenance, wherein might
easily be discovered the grief of a hopeless Peace. And soon after Richardot,
whether by Chance, or out of Design, is uncertain, left behind him in the Inn,
among some other Papers, the private Instructions of the Archdukes, of the
method of holding and managing the Treaty; which being found, were soon after
published to the Vulgar.

Herein all Things, which we have beforementioned, of the Transactions of
Peace, were set down in the same order as they were done; and among the rest,
That they should not at all contest the Article concerning Liberty: But if they
would not restore the Rights belonging to the Prince's Revenue, in been
thereof, they should demand a sum of Money to be paid yearly* and when they
had happily brought to pass the rest, then they should craftily insinuate to
the Hollanders, how potent the Body of the Netherlands would be, if it were
united; where as being divided and torn asunder, they might easily become a
Prey to some Foreiner: That therefore they would do well, if they would choose
the Archdukes for their Defenders, or at least would enter into such a
Society, that who offended either, should be taken as Enemy to both: And if
that could not be obtained, yet they should endeavor that it might be agreed,
That neither Party should assist the others Enemies, either by Counsel, or
otherwise, or suffer any of their Subjects to take Arms on their behalf.

And the Spaniards were Commanded to conceal these Instructions from the French
and English, yet in other Things to use their Help and Counsel; and especially
the Advice of Janinus, for obtaining a Toleration of the Roman Religion, and
part of the Goods heretofore belonging to the Priesthood. The Earl of
Frizelands Business also was commended to them, and some other private Matters.

They that would not believe this Writing was carelessly left behind by
Richardot, suspected this might be some Reason why he left them, to wit, that
the States thereby might be persuaded there was nothing acted concerning their
liberty, but what was serious, and should put into the Hollanders minds, the
thoughts of an Auxiliary League, which had been unreasonable to have spoken of.
They that published that Paper, desired that the Ambassadors of Frances
Counsels chiefly, might be suspected, or to make the Arch Dukes subject to the
more violent hatted of the Kings* however it was, Richardot by Letters, both
accused his own negligence, and complained, that the Laws of Hospitality, were
violated, in that a private Writing belonging to him, was published to all the
People: Nevertheless, the Ambassadors of France and England, (the Germans, to
whom that action was very displeasing, preparing for their departure) knowing
by some late speeches, and now by Don Richardots Letters, that a Truce for ten
years might be obtained from Albertus and Philip, but that no other words would
be granted touching their liberty, than those had been at first used at the
beginning of the Cessation of Arms, framed a League according to that method.

Concerning the Indies, it was admired, that King Philip might choose whether he
would have a Truce there, or War, but as to the Borders, and other controverted
points, they were reserved for the future, to a more peaceable Treaty; The
greatest Labor was, that this method of Agreement, might be approved by the
States, who were solicitous to confirm their liberty for ever; some also
willing to lay hold on this occasion, utterly to subvert the League, and
therefore the Ambassadors came into the Council, of whom Janinus, having settled
himself into a Senatorian Gravity, began thus to speak.

The Dignity and Virtue of them, who are displeased with our Counsels for a
Truce, merits, that their Arguments should be composed with ours whereby it may
appear to you, worthy Patriots, whether is more wholesome and sound Counsel: I
hear they find fault with words, which if they do, that their liberty may be
preserved, and a pretense is not sought, out of a desire of War, it is, that
they may be freed from a prayse-worthy perchance, yet an ^^pty fear* for
liberty is numbered among those things, which receive neither time nor
condition, and being once given, can never be recalled: Although if we rightly
consider the matter, you desire not your Liberty to be given to you but only to
be acknowledged: Neither indeed can he give it, It being denied, that a Prince
can transpose his Government, and it would be a shame for you, to receive that
as given, which by public Decree, you obtained long since; And it is not
possible to acknowledge it more plainly, than by calling you Free, and
professing, that they arrogate no Authority to themselves over you: This seems
enough to Us, for the settlement of peace in self; but because some thought
more might be obtained, we have not interposed: But to relinquish the Titles
and Ensigns of Honor, seemed even to us, reproachful and infamous, and
therefore well to be suspected by a King unconquered: But say they, If the
Enemy think so, why does he not declare himself freely? Why, it may be, he
thinks it unreasonable and unjust, to be compelled to use other words, then
such as were satisfactory to you before the Treaty: And now, who would you have
believe your liberty? Is it the Kings your Allies? Certainly, those words will
be satisfactory to them: Nor do you fear, I believe, that the Spaniard would
offer to lay his hand of Authority over you, and should require to be revenged
on you: But a Truce being finished, if he shall so think meet, he shall make
use of War, as a Judge: No caution can defend the Conquered, and the Reason
will easily appear, why Victorious Arms cannot be limited: Nor is it greatly to
be feared, that the Enemy can heap up any great store of Wealth: That is the
Custom of free People, and such as require nothing but their own, to look at
the future, whereas it is frequent with Kings only to mind the present, some
being destroyed with boundless desires of luxurious living, others wasted with
the ambition of wide extended Dominions.

King Philip is a young Man, and Governs a Nation, that cannot be taught
quietness: It is more easy for you to renew your Credit, having paid your
debts, where Garrisons only remaining the charge of Fortifications, which are
the greatest part of your burdens, will cease. You may now defer your Tributes
during the years of the Truce. The Enemies gifts and dissentions. I will easily
grant to those who say they fear those things whereof they ought to take heed:
I know you neither want Laws, nor Judicial Proceedings, and it will be but a
vain thing, to seek to corrupt a few, where the Government remains in the ^als
of many, and they not always the same. And the Enemy himself will shake off
shath, being of that nature that cannot so behave himself, as to continue long
unsuspected: Otherwise, if that Reason be admitted you must of necessity,
undertake a perpetual War. In Peace the vices of Security are much more to be
feared, nor want there in War peculiar dangers, especially, where any great
Calamity makes a breach upon obedience; Nor is that much to be feared, when the
public Revenues are so unable to begin a War, that they cannot keep it off,
that is, as to the averting the ru^ne. This Advantage you have, that it is in
your own power, to take heed of the discommodities of a Truce: Many times, the
wisest m^n cannot escape the sad events of War.

There lies upon us also the necessity of answering Lipsius his Letters, who
persuades the Enemy to a Truce, though but for a short time, and without the
mention of Liberty. If they require Examples, we have many, and those not of
former, but of the present Age: Holland and Zeland gained a new life from the
League made at Gaunt: The Switzers that took Arms for the like Causes, laid
them down upon a Truce, and have now for a long time retained their Liberty,
being defended by their Foot Soldiers chiefly, and the heights of their
Mountains; And wherein, I pray, are you less able to defend your selves, being
so powerful at Sea, and having the Ocean for a Guard: Some indeed fear, lest
you should return to your Arms more weak and effeminate, for the lives of
Princes that favor you, (say they) are uncertain; But let them know, that the
causes of Alliance and Friendship, does not decay with the Kings, but remain as
immortal as the Kingdoms themselves. This is that makes Allies live and
flourish, and let this prevail to stir you up, not to let slip so reasonable a
time to acquire peace: This Advice pr^ceeds from Kings your Friends, whose
careful providence, chiefly ayms at this, that you may be safe: More might be
said to this purpose, but I think it prudence to say no more: Let every one
answer for himself: only let not the Authors of the contrary Opinion overcome
us in the liberty of saying what they please.

The next day he sets upon them again, their minds being already moved with the
former Oration, and runs over the principal Heads of the League, one by one,
that he might convince them, that there was nothing couched therein, either
unjust or deceitful: and when he had so done, added, that They were the first
of all People, to whom that Honor had been granted, to confirm their liberty
by the Confession of the rejected and abjured Prince: The Switzers could not
obtain so much nor could the like be forced by the Victorious Danes, from their
King Christierne, though a Captive to them; and thereupon, he grievously blamed
them with accusations of ingratitude and falsity, because they had whispered,
that by the coming of Don Pedro de Toledo, into France, the King was become
averse to the Hollanders Commodity. But His Majesty's good will to them, was
more firmly settled, then to be changed by the desires of their Enemies, or any
thing else, save the contumely of such as dispersed abroad such falsities.

Winwood also thought it a part of his duty, to commend a Truce to the Senate,
whereof he himself was a member, affirming, that his Master the King of Great
Britain, would not persuade them to any thing, but what he himself would give
an Example of: Those Arms are just, that are necessary; and those not only
pious Kings, but God himself would favor: but they are not necessary, to which
there is a way open to an honorable end. If they subsisted by extraordinary
succor, yet they ought not to refuse the making of a League, since both their
Religion, Liberty and Commerce, might be preserved. But now it was to far
distant, to conjecture what would come to pass after a Truce, by how much they
could not discern the nearer dangers of War.

It was a wonder to see with what greatness of mind, the business was
transacted at every Assembly, and new Books were daily set forth as it were, to
sow and foment discords; for now they spared neither of the Kings: as if the
chief of their hopes had consisted in the miseries of the Confederate States.
But the chief of their envy was vented against Oldenbarneveldt, as the Inventor
of such things: He being grown odious to men of the greatest quality, and most
eminent degree by his excessive Authority, much less could his Equals endure
to see him so far in Honor above them, insomuch, that there were some Letters
found, wherein he was not obscurely destined to slaughter: Whereupon, He in the
Assembly of the States of Holland, protesting, that he had not feared to draw
upon himself, the malice of the most potent men, nor shunned any dangers, so as
He might serve his Country, being fraught with the Solace of a quiet Conscience
against all scandalous Rumors, and unlucky accidents; But when he saw a thing
in it self displeasing to him, yet nevertheless be aggravated to make him
odious, He beseeched them, that for expediting those things they should see fit
in the Commonwealth, they would appoint others to officiate, that were less
hated: which said, immediately he departed from the Assembly: Some of the Lords
were sent after him, to desire him, that he would not in this nice Juncture of
time, desert the Commonwealth, which he had hitherto assisted with his
faithful Counsels. Hereupon, returning to his accustomed charge, sometimes
extolling the benefits and Authority of the Kings, anon explicating, and laying
open the charge of the War, he confirmed such as wavered and refuted them
without anger, although they were very sharply contradicted, and Amsterdam it
self a long time resisted, at length, he brought all Holland to one mind; which
also five other of the Provinces soon after embraced. Only Zeland, out of some
peculiar Reasons of their own, and by the instigation of Prince Maurice,
resisted the consent of all the rest, denying to agree to a Truce, nor would
suffer the Decree to be revoked, urging the words of the Trajectine League,
that Arms should not be laid down, unless by the common consent of all, and
whatever difference should arise among the Provinces, should be left to the
decision of the Governors.

Others were angry, and said, the Question was not now concerning a Truce, but
whether Zeland alone, should give the Law to all the rest; And now the Contest
among them growing hot, the Ambassadors of the Kings interposed, endeavoring
to drive those by force of Arguments, whom they could not lead by persuasion.

And first Janinus, producing to the States, King Henrics Letters, wherein he
ratified whatever they should say or do, began to praise the good and benefit
of Concord; then mentioning diverse Opinions without frowardness, when he came
to the Trajectine League, he said, it belongs not to us, to interpret the Laws
of other People; but yet common Reason teaches, that at this time, the Debate
was upon a yielding not an indifferent League; and it any think otherwise, the
Law is either to be abrogated, or laid aside, the Public Weal so requiring,
which contains in it the Sanctimony of all Laws; for what other event will
produce, if these do not refuse the decision of the Kings their Allies, more
justly than those the determination of the Governors, but that upon this
Consultation, both must needs run into factious parties, it remains therefore,
that the fewer in number should yield to the greater; for by this means alone,
stands the Government of People, which otherwise would decay, and fall to ruin.

Thus among the Switzers, the Decrees of the greater Party are obeyed by those
who contradicted the same; But the Acheans and Aetolians, though valiant
people, yet were destroyed by dissension, while each of them would not agree to
consult with the other; for too much liberty is the ready way to Servitude:
Besides, that no man may feed himself with a vain hope, I now by Command
declare, that the King has no such need of you, as to give assistance to those
that despise his Counsels.

Spencer also in the name of his Master the King of Great Britain, spoke to
the same purpose, adding, that the Commonwealth, wherein the right of many
Opinions does not prevail, is like to a Virgin, which as old Authors remember,
was pulled in pieces by the hands of many other rival Lovers contending among
themselves, and so elegantly set forth, how much the Tribunitial Power
prejudiced the Romans.

The same Ambassadors also persuaded them for the future, to settle a more
certain Method of raising their Tributes; as also if any thing were distempered
in the Commonwealth, or disfigured by War, that it might be amended, whereby
they might become more unanimous among themselves, and more formidable to their
Enemies.

The like Advice they gave to the Citizens, who esteemed their own Government
best, to wit, that they should leave the chief Matters to their Provincces and
their Deputies; but all sudden and quotidian Business should be in the
ordering of the Governors and Senate, who were to look after, not any
particular part alone, but the whole Body: But it was not convenient to abolish
a Custom approved of by the space of Twenty Years, with Success fortunate
enough; whereby it easily appeared, that it would be profitable for all, that
all Things should remain as at present; lest, while the Debate of the Truce
depended, they should involve and entangle one Business in another.

In these Verbal Contentions, this Transient Year was almost expired, and a
Rumor was frequently spread abroad, That the Truce endeavored by the
Ambassadors, did no whit please the Spaniards: And the Truth is, Richardot had
written to Janinus, That King Philip was grown more averse than before; but he
assigned the fault thereof to the King of Great Britain, as if he had given
some hope, that nothing more should be spoken of Liberty.

And now the sweetness of Peace had so far allured some among the United
States, that they could digest that, but the more discreet sort w^thstood it;
and the Ambassadors of the Kings sent to the Archdukes, demanding, Whether
they should give Credit to those things, which of late had been begun to be
transacted with their Ministers: Upon Return of their Messenger, being
certified, That the Archdukes had given Command, and likewise had from the
King a power of making an Agreement, they showed the same to the States, and
admonish them, That the Cessation of Arms being near a conclusion, should be
prolonged for one Month, in hope of making a League: Yet lest they should
expect other Articles, than what had bin of late prescribed by them. They said.
They would only do their Endeavor, that the Truce might continue for 7 years
longer, and that there might rather be a peaceable than a Warlike Trade in the
Indies. In the mean while, the Archdukes well understanding, that there wanted
not some in Spain, who either desirous of War, or striving for the honor of
the Kingdom, would dispute those Words concerning the Liberty of the
Hollanders; especially, because the Hollanders would not leave the Trade of the
Indies, nor would suffer any thing to be Decreed in favor of the Romanists:
Therefore they sent thither Inicus, a Priest of Bruxels, of a Noble Spanish
Family, and Father Confessor to Albertus: and which is of necessary
consequence with the same, intimate and privy to all his Counsels. This Man was
commanded to show, what Commodities would, by a Truce, accrue to the Ports of
Flanders, the passage to which was stopped up by War; as also, that some
increase of the Roman Religion was to be hoped, by as much as Hatred and
Animosities decreased, they being a People covetous of Novelty, and discordant
in Matters of Divinity. Neither were those Words much to be feared, that were
ambiguously employed, the Ambassadors of the Kings not only averting, They would
take nothing away from the Spaniard, but that many of the Hollanders had showed
them to be fruitless by subtly cavilling: That these Arguments might prevail
against all contrary Attempts and Endeavors, they were strengthened by the
Authority of the Duke of Lerma, a Man most eminent in the Favor of King
Philip; and therefore drawing after him, not only the Respect of the Court,
but the whole Source of Counsel; he delighted much in the pleasures of Peace,
and therefore feared, lest others should overtop him by Honor and Renown
gained in War.

This Year came Philip William Prince of Aurange, and Elder Brother to Prince
Maurice, first of all into Holland, remaining other where during the time of
War, but now using the common freedom taken by all: The causes of his coming
thither he pretended, That by the Truce, he might take a Care to mind the
benefit of his own Affairs; as also, that being honored with the French
Affinity, he hoped he might the better bring it about by means of the present
French Ambassadors, those Things which were in dispute between him and his
Brothers, concerning his Paternal Inheritance: But others interpreted it in
another manner, as if he had appeared there as a Fautor of Peace, contrary to
the Counsels of his Brother: However it was, this is certain, That by his
means, Emanuel of Portugal, against whom we elsewhere mentioned Prince Maurice
to be highly enraged, for his Marriage with his Sister, was reconciled to the
House of Nassau.

During all this time, nothing was done by the Soldiery, but only near
Ardenburg some were slain, that lay in wait to take away the Townsmens Cattle:
Likewise in Germany, the Hollanders Horse, with more than ordinary
Licentiousness, foraging the Country, were met with and punished; for some
being sent out of the Garrison at Berck, slew some of them as they were
scattered abroad in the Night, among whom was killed Adolphus of Nassau, a
Young Man of great Courage, but too indulgent to the Soldiery: But the Victors
Joy continued but a while; for the Troops gathering together from all parts,
repai'd the slaughter of their Companions, with the Death of many more of their
Enemies.

This Year also there appeared the Seeds of a Mischief that was not
contemptible; for Arms were scarce laid aside, before there began a Difference
in Religion; the beginnings whereof are not known, nor more of it, but as it
broke out by little and little, which happened thus: At Leyden, two famously
learned Men; the one, named Gomarus; the other, Arminius, publicly read
Lectures upon the Holy Scriptures; of whom this maintained, That by God's
Eternal Decree, it was appointed, who should be saved, and who should be
damned; and thereupon, that some are drawn to Piety, and being so drawn, are
preserved, that they shall not fall away, while others are left to perpetrate
the common Vices of Mankind, and lie totally involved in their own sins. This,
on the other side, maintained, That God would not be altogether a severe Judge,
but was also a loving Father; and made this difference of Sinners, That to such
as were weary of sinning, and could put their Confidence in Christ, he would
give Pardon and Life; but to the Obstinate Punishment; and that it was
well-pleasing to God, that all should repent; and having learned better things,
should be held up from falling back; but that no man was to be compelled.

These Two accused each other sharply; Arminius blaming Gomarus, that he
ascribed to God the Causes of Sin, and by a strong persuasion made Men's Minds
obstinue: And Gomarus finding fault with Arminius, that he filled men with
Arrogance, far more than the Decrees of the Romanists, and would not suffer a
good Conscience, which is a Man's greatest Concern, to be acceptable to God.

It appears by those, who have with Care perused Ancient Authors, that the
Primitive Christians granted, That Man had Free Will, as well in receiving, as
in retaining Discipline: from whence proceeds the Equity both of Rewards and
Punishments: Neither yet did they omit to refer all things to the Divine
Goodness, by whose Gift the wholesome Seed of Goodness came to us, and of whose
singular Assistance, all our Dangers have need.

Augustine first of all (from whence arose a sharp Dispute between him and
Pelagius, with those that followed him, and he himself also formerly had
thought otherwise) so Relinquished that Name of Liberty, that he preferred
before it certain of God's Decrees, which seemed utterly to overthrow the same;
But all over Greece and Asia, the ancient and more plain Opinion was, retained.

In the Western part of the World, the great and famous Name of Augustine drew
many to consent to him, though some were found in France, and elsewhere, that
opposed the same. In after-Ages, when the School hardly made use of any other
Doctor than Augustine, it was disputed between the Franciscans and Dominicans,
what was his sense, what was the right way of reconciling those Things that
seemed so repugnant; and the most Learned of the Jesuits labored with more
curious Subtilty, to unty the Knot; till being accused at Rome, they hardly
escaped punishment.

But Luther, the Father of the Protestants, going out of a Monastery, that as
well bore the Name of Augustine, as followed his Opinion, taking up the
Bucklers in the same Cause, began to hew down, what remained of the Name of
Free Will: Which seemed so abominable to Erasmus, that having either approved,
or at least passed over with silence the rest of his Doctrines, he opposed
himself to this: By whose Arguments Philip Melancthon, an Assistant to Luther,
being moved, recanted what he had formerly written; and was the Author, why
Luther (as many believe, and is certainly evident to the Lutherans) deserted
his Rigid Decrees, that would admit of no Condition; yet so, that they rather
abhorred the Name of Free Will, than the Thing it self.

But in another party of the Protestants, their Leader Calvin, adhering to the
first Opinions of Luther in this Controversy, strengthened and upheld the same
with new Arguments, and added to Augustine, what had never been touched on
before, That a true and saving Faith was perpetual, and could not be lost;
whereof, whoever was Conscious to himself, that he possessed the same, he might
even then assure himself of Eternal Felicity; yet did not deny, but that in the
interim, they might fall into grievous sins.

The Rigor of this Opinion was increased at Geneva, by Beza; in Germany by
Zanchius, Ursinus, Piscator; who oftentimes lanched out so far, that sometime
they would publicly deliver, what others had so carefully avoided; to wit,
That the Necessity of sinning, did depend from the first cause: which gave the
Lutherans an ample occasion of Quarrel, and especially a new occasion of
Contention arising about the Euchacharist.

At the beginning it was to some purpose, to contend upon these Differences of
disturbed Religion among the Hollanders, although it was easy, among so many
people differing in Opinions, that it might be argued with equal Justice: But
when many young Folks coming from being taught by Geneva, Palatine and
Nassauian Doctors, began to collect themselves together, and get the ordering
of several Churches, they supposed it time, to bro^ch that which they had
learned, and maintain the same as infallible, striving either not to admit any
public Dissenters into their Congregation, or to participate of the Divine
Ordinances; or else, being admitted, to exclude them at pleasure: Whereupon
many Complaints were made to the States by diverse, protesting, That theso
Doctrines were openly, and without any questioning, taught in Gelderland by
Anastatius Welauseu; in Frizeland, by Gellius Suecanus; at Utrecht, by
Hubertus; among the Hollanders, by Hiltam, Cleracus Martius, Herman Herbert,
and others. Thus these Matters proceeded, until the two great Champions
mentioned before, Gomarus on one side and Arminius on the there, met in the
Schools at Leyden, each to confirm his own Opinion, and subvert the others.

The Dissentions of the Masters broke out among the Scholars, so that now other
Ministers and Divines in Holland were called to take parties: The States
thought fit that they should meet, and commanded the Supreme Session of the
Judges to hear the two Professors: After a long Contest, it seemed convenient,
that all the Acts of the Dispute should be buried in silence: yet both Parties
nevertheless published all, and that pleased the Ministers as the most
customary; this, the Magistrates, as the most popular Opinion: And from hence
arose a new Contention, when these averted, That the Judgment and settling of
Religion, was a part of Supreme Magistracy or Government: Those, That Divine
Things ought only to be Debuted in Sacred Assemblies. This brought forth two
Books; one, appointing a way for Instruction of Youth in the Netherlands, in
Matters of Piety, according to the Example of the Palatina^e: The other,
wherein the Profession of the Reformed Churches, while the King of Spain Ruled
heretofore, was declared; and these added new matter of Controversy.

And the United States, upon Request made to them, That out of the Seven
Provinces, the several Ministers might be called into an Assembly, consented,
upon this condition, That in that Assembly, the said two Books might be
examined, according to the Rule of the Holy Text. This, They that took part
with Gomatus, attributed to the Policy of those that dissented from them, as if
they would, that should be a sign to all that desired Novelty: Themselves
praising that Custom approved in all Ages, that the Bonds of Consent should not
rashly be dissolved; for otherwise, the Minds of the common People would be
divided, according as any one would teach his Fantasies; and therefore it was
fit, some we should attend Ecclesiastical Matters, unless being concerned in
those Books, they judged it unjust and dangerous. But they that held with
Arminius, said, It was no fault to doubt of Humane Writings; that in so great a
Matter, it was not so lawful a deliberation that was Tumultuary, as that which
is done by the Governors of a Commonwealth; And that it did better consist
with Christianity, either to use none, or at leastwise shorter Forms.

Moreover, about this time a small Book came forth at Gonde, containing Matters
to be believed by few, yet in the same Words which are prescribed in Holy Writ:
Presently there appeared some from another Company, who publicly detested
this, saying, There was no so portentous and horrid Opinion, which might not be
hidden under such Words: That the simplicity of the Primitive Times was
praiseworthy, when yet unknown Evils wanted no Remedies; but soon after, as
every Age was more fertile in Error, so there were found certain manners of
speaking, that might drive all that went astray from their lurking places: By
which means they became servile, while these enjoyed Peace and Quiet, which
they nicknamed Liberty, these truly called Perturbation and Faction: until on
both sides, by famous Names, the differences were increased, which afterward
gave both name and nourishment to greater feuds.

From the East this year also came Capt. Mateliseu, all things there being in a
happy condition, which without doubt might be some reason, why the Spaniard
would not the decision of the Indian Trade to War. He went out three years and
three Months before, when the Spring was too far spent, to suffer him to
escape those annual Southerly blasts under the Equinoctial, driving him to the
Coasts of Africa. He had many and great commands for War; But the Seamen
resisted his Authority, murmuring that they were not to perform the Duties of
Soldiers.

The Captain himself being ambitious of honor, allured the most potent in the
society, with the hope of renown, and the Commons with the hope of prey, now
speaking to all in general, anon to particular men, as occasion offered it
self, and giving exhortations to every one according to his disposition. When
he came to the Indies, they took some Portugal Ships, and other that assisted
them in Merchandising; but the Barbarians in them were all set at Liberty, that
they might the better acquire their good will. Malacca is seated upon the right
Angle of the gulf of Bengala, where Sumatra shadows the Indian Continent, it is
a great Island divided by a narrow branch of the Sea, which is called there
Cincapura.

Jora is not far distant, whose Kings formerly possessed Malacca; but after the
Portugueses came into that World, being invited by the situation of the place,
they built there a Castle upon a little hill, encompassed with a square Wall,
and some houses within it, and taking into the same a quantity of ground as
seemed sufficient. By little and little they began to dwell without the Wall,
and especially beyond the River, that lies to the right hand; those buildings
also that were near the River side, were fenced with a Wall. From hence
proceeded a perpetual fe^d between the Kings of Jora; and the Spaniards, and
therefore at this time did they first make a League with the Hollanders. At
this time four brothers governed Jora, of whom the chief in Authority was named
Jandepatuan, but Sabran far excelled him in ingenuity and industry, being very
intent, both for the defense and increase of his Government, the contrary
whereof it usual in most of the Indian Kings, who rather follow Bacchus and
Venus, loving all things that bring delight at the present, and not minding
anything of future advantage. Now Matelisen was more able in mind than power to
besiege Malacca, for the Castle and Town was kept by Andrea Fartado, a man
famous in War, and having with him almost three thousand men; but the greater
part of them was Indians, because some Portugueses were sent out of the
Garrison with certain Ships to China.

In the Holland Fleet, were eleven ships, and fourteen hundred men. Wherefore
for augmenting his Forces, he desired aid of the Kings of Jora, making a
League, That they should enjoy the Country, and the Hollanders the Town, but
the Prey to be divided equally between them. Hereupon they began to shoot,
first from the Ships, then from certain little Islands which lay near. Then on
the shore to the right hand they pitched their Camp, and suddenly a suburb
beyond the River, that might have been defended, was quitted, and a bridge being
cut down, the whole defense lay within the Castle, and the places near
adjoining to the Castle. Thus the Hollanders with safety made another bridge
over the River, and so invaded the backside of the Town, and a Monastery
defended with a Mount, and in a short time pierced on the other side, even to
the Sea. Therefore Matelisen appoints Forts in convenient and fit places, and
beats down with the shot of his Great Guns, a Bulwark that Fartado a little
before had added to the Castle, and when the ground that was full of Water,
would not suffer the Pioneers to work, making little wooden Towers, and filling
them with earth and small loppings of Trees (and by chance there were many
Orchards near there abouts) he removed nearer to the Castle carrying into that
rude and barbarous World, the Political Stratagems of the Netherlandish War.
And strange it is to tell, and hard to be believed, that in all that Siege
there was no use made of any of the Jorensians, or others whom the Neighbor
Kings had sent thither: The first number promised to send, they performed not,
and then in those that came, obedience and constancy was no less wanting, than
knowledge in the use of Arms; for they were not only unfit to stand against
violent eruptions or sallyes, but at every shot of a Gun, were ready to fly
from their appointed stations; so that then it was evident by clear
experiments, That the Portugueses had rather made a prey of these Nations, than
obtained a Victory.

But the Hollander being pressed with the whole burden of the War, partly by
accidental misfortunes, and partly by weariness and nocturnal showers, were
much diminished and weakened. There was no hope that the besieged being more in
number, could be taken by them who were fewer, it remained therefore only to
starve them out; but now the Siege having continued four Months was broken up
by the coming of a Fleet from Goa, which was commanded by Alphouse de Castro,
the Kings Praetor in the Indies; this Fleet consisted of fourteen Galeons, four
Galleyes, and sixteen smaller ships, which carried of Portugueses, and other
Europeans, to the number of three thousand seven hundred men, and well nigh as
many Barbarian servants. These were commanded, as afterward was known by some
Prisoners and Letters, to invade all the places where the Hollanders were wont
to come with Merchandise, particularly, Achem, Jora, Faham, Patan, Bantam, and
Amboyna. As they came near Achem, they commanded the King of the City, to pay
the Charges of their Fleet, Deliver up the Hollanders, and suffer a Castle to
be builded, as if already they had gotten the Victory. But he being well
furnished with Arms and Fortifications, wherewith he had strengthened the
shore, by the directions, of the Hollander, contemned all these threans and
cracks; yet the Spaniards broke into one of them, but were repulsed with so
great slaughter, that they durst attempt no further. And now the Seige of
Malacca coming to their knowledge, they hasten thither, that they might, if
possible, surprise the empty Ships, and take the Enemy as he lay scattered on
the shore; but Matelisen being forewarned thereof by his Scouts and Spies,
prevented them; and although he were but a raw Soldier, yet he performed the
duty of an excellent Captain: for first, he shipped all his Carriages and Guns,
then the Jorensian Soldiers, and last of all, as any Hollander was more
distant, so he was commanded before the others (that lay nearer) to enter the
Fort, that was erected on the shore. Now had part of them gotten into the
ships, and other part was yet on land, when the Enemy made a strong Sally out
of Malacca, but they were soon beaten back, and so afterward the rest with
more care got on board.

As soon as ever the ships saw each other, they began a Fight with their Great
Guns at a distance; the Portugueses avoiding the Fight, because the Wind
carried them toward Sumatra, which was from the Enemy. As soon as day light
appeared the next morning, and the Wind began to blow from Sumatra, Matelisen
foreseeing the Enemy would press upon him, commanded to weigh Anchor, but one
of the ships which was named Nassaw, when it could not stir the Anchor, and
delayed to cut their Cables, was set upon by two Spanish Vessels, and burned;
but the danger was like to have reached the Authors thereof, if the Galleys had
not come in and assisted them, which kind of help the Hollanders wanted,
therefore being drawn with ropes fastened to the Galleyes that were rowed, they
escaped the fire, that was now ready to seize them: The Holland ships also
attempted to succor their fired Vessels, which were called the Middleburg and
the Orange, but the wind presently slacking, hindered their course, and
forthwith Alvares Carvale, Henry Norone, and Duertes Guerra, Portugal Captains
with three ships set upon them; into which being entangled one among another,
the Maurice, another Holland ship, cast fire, which utterly consumed Duertes
and Carvale, with their ships, and together with them perished the Middleburg.
But Matelisen himself with the Admiral, assailed Norom, fighting with the
Orange, and so terrified it with shot, that at length the torn Vessel in sign
of yielding, took down the Banner: yet for all this, he durst not go among the
Portugueses, preparing to receive him, fearing lest any Seaman, the Fight being
not yet over, should turn both their hands and minds to Booty, and neglect the
Battle. Therefore supposing the ship his own, and commanding the shot to cease,
he drew it after him with a rope, but Norone, the Cable breaking of it self,
escaping to his companions, deceived his too careful and unhappy Prudence. But
here the Spaniard being weary, the Fight began to cease, and the Hollanders
took great care that they might not by the swiftness of the Tide, be separated
and driven below the Enemy. The Victory was equal, each side having lost two
ships, whereof the Portugueses indeed were the bigger, but the Hollanders loss
was the greater, their Fleet being the least. But the loss of men was not
equal; for the Hollanders wanted only might, whereas many of the Portugueses
perished, both by fire, shot, and in the Sea; besides a great many that were
slain by the furious Seamen, contrary to their Captains command, as they
endeavored to escape from the fire in a small Boat. The next days passed in
quiet, or at least in the exchange of some few bullets, when the Hollanders
began to want Gunpowder, and which was a greater mischief than that, the
obstinacy of the Seamen had well nigh burst put into a sedition; for because by
the Law of the society, the whole Fleet was not entrusted to all, but every one
had his own ship delivered to his Trust, they whose ships were burned, as if
they therewith had lost their wages, sad and enraged, incited others to refuse
fighting, with fear of the like loss; therefore for appeasing their minds, as
well that their sick men might be refreshed, as their torn ships repaired,
Matelisen withdraws with his Fleet to Jora, and there enters into Council with
the Kings for strengthening of the Town against any Assaults of the
Portugueses. Here while he stayed a Month, a joyful Messenger came to him with
news, That the Enemy had divided his ^eet, part of them being gone as a Convoy
to the weaker ships, and that there remained at Malacca no more then seven
Galleons, and three Galleyes: Wherefore trying the Mariners, sometimes by
Threats, sometimes by Promises, he scarsly prevailed with them, Not to let slip
out of their hands an occasion so advantageous for the good of their Country.
When they came to Malacca, and saw the B^^^ies Fleet lie at Anchor, under the
Protection of the Castle; Matelisen, that he might draw them out into the open
Sea, made use of this Policy; The outermost of the Enemies ships, (being called
the Nicholas) Himself in the Admiral, and with two other ships, enclosed, and
cutting its Anchor Cable with a Rope, drew it along with them into the Main
Sea; and because Gunpowder was short with him, he appointed they should not
make many shots, but what they did make, to make surely, not aiming at the
bottom (because in that calm Sea he could not well drown a ship) but at the
hatches and decks, and where-evr they saw the men stand thickest. Then he
commands the ship to be immediately entered, and that all they met with should
be put to the sword: Nor were the Seamen backward in performing the command,
forgetting his Domestic quarrel, as he grew hot with fighting, insomuch that
they made a gre^^ slaughter. And when Matelisen would have set it on fire,
being now empty, unless by chance some had hidden themselves therein; a certain
Captain desired the custody thereof, but he would not grant it, remembering
N^rones late escape; nor indeed could he, for the rope breaking with which it
was held, the ship returned to its companions. In the interim, the whole
Portugal Fleet, that they might save the Nicholas in so great danger, weighing
their Anchors, came out to Sea. The Hollanders sometimes waited for them one to
one, otherwhiles two to one; however at last, one of the Spanish Vessels was
burned, another carrying Sebastian^ Snares, yielded it self, the rest all torn
and bloody, hovered up and down, when night intercepted the Victory. Famous and
full of Honor was the Hollanders Valor and Fortune that day, many of the
Enemies being slain, and of themselves scarce any, except such as through
greediness of booty, drew upon them ruin by commixing with the burning Ship.

The next morning, one ship, which was very much shattered, appeared, having
only left a few (...) Slaves that towed it, which also was delivered, the rest
returned to the Harbor. Mat^lisen desiring to spoil those likewise, that he
might perfect so famous a Work, was retarded by fear, lest being so near the
shore, he might run a ground, and so do himself a mischief. When this had
remained under Consultation some days; behold he sees the remainder of the
Ships fired by the Portugueses themselves, with pleasure beholding the sad
spectacle of a mad fear. The Prisoners which he had, he sent back to Alphonso
de Castro, the Chieftains appointed the Ransom to be divided among the Seamen,
and the rest upon this Condition, That the few Hollanders detained at Malacca
or elsewhere, should be restored in their stead. And he either esteemed the
Enemies so vile, or his own men so precious, that he exchanged but ten for
almost two hundred. All the ships which he took from the Enemy, were burned,
that they might not be chargeable, or troublesome to him, only preserving the
four and twenty Great Gunnes which he won in the Fight.

Thus as matters here went successfully on, so from the Molucca's contrary
things were related; for after Verhagen h^d left ^idoris to the ancient
Possessor, certain Portugueses falling upon the Philippines (which are a part
of the dominion belonging to the Kingdom of Castile, which the Natives call
Lusonia) desire and obtain aid of Petro Acuna the Governor, but with this
Proviso, That for the future, the Molu^caes should be open to the Castilians,
(concerning which the said people had been long at difference, as we have
elsewhere related): Whereupon it was not rashly believed, That the Cactilians
had rather the Islands should be recovered, then kept in such a necessity of
time. Being come to Tidoris with seven and thirty Vessels great and small, that
it might be possessed with the more ease, the King himself assisted, following
the Hollanders Affairs outwardly with his words, but maligning them in his
heart. Thence they passed to Ternata, there the Forts are taken, and the King
who had been most faithful to the Hollanders, and foreseeing the danger, had
often advised, that they should not leave Tidoris without a Fort, now suffering
for another fault, first fled, then giving credit to the Spaniard, Articled
for his life, and was commanded to hope for the rest; but his Kingdoms were
disposed to such as were of old emulous to him, by the consent of the Spaniard,
and himself kept in custody, and carried into the Philippines.

Matelis^n, when he heard that Ternata was taken, fearing the like evil at
Amboyna, and having by chance go^^n a small Ship of the Enemies, he furnished
it with Arms, and therewithal sends some that he had in the Fleet, that were
men skillful in the Art of Fortification. Himself went to a small Island called
Buton, seeking the rest of the Portugal Fleet, which as before we related,
going from Malacca, then lay there.

But the Portugueses upon sight of the Enemy, being afraid to fight, fastened
the ships together, and all to the shore, bringing all the Guns to one side,
and choosing moreover a Creek of the Sea, where they might force the Enemy to
Fight against Wind and Tide; and hereto they added all along, great Piles of
Wood and Sand. Matelisen seeing no possibility of approach, endeavored with
some Fireships, to se^ the Fleet on fire; but they, partly by Boats,
endeavored to divert the mischief intended toward them, and the Wind also
helped in blowing them back; but the season of the year did not suffer the
Hollanders any longer to stay, being commanded rather to surcease from War,
then Merchandise, appointing those that should carry them to the Molucca^s, the
Winds beginning to grow boisterous. Part of them went to Queda, the King of
which place, to gain the favor of the Conqueror, imprisoned all the
Portugueses living among them: On the other side, the Hollanders gave him all
the Indians and Enemies he had in his power. And Other Kingdoms also coming
in and submitting, manifestly declared, That the Barbarians Faith would be
shaken by the event of one Battle: So that some had Treated to buy their Peace
of the Spaniards, by delivering up all the Hollanders Factors; but anon after
some Merchants ships belonging to Portugal, became their prey. Making have from
thence to Amboyna, where the People are great Lovers of the Hollanders, he
built a Castle with great expedition and diligence; and Matelisen, though he
believed there were two principal bonds, whereby Foreign Nations are united
one to another, to wit, Marriage, and ^eligion, yet had with him no Ministers
to reach sacred matters, the society among the Hollanders, herein, not
sufficiently imitating the Spaniards Prudence, who have the Jesuits as
principal Instruments in the ordering Spiritual Affairs in their Kingdoms; yet
the Hollanders obtaining a garrison there, intermarried with the Native Women,
whereby Families being produced, it might the more easily become the beginning
of a Colony.

The Shallowes would not suffer them to Land at Tidoris, neither indeed would
it have been of any benefit, or value to have been invaded, which of necessity,
must be left naked to the Enemy, by reason of its poverty: therefore they
thought it more convenient, to Land in the North Corner of Ternata, where is a
Village called Malaja, and great store of Provisions, and to fortify it with a
Fort and Bulwarks: the Spaniards having strongly Fortified a Town on the South
side, wherein he kept 400 Soldiers: And the matters proceeded with success;
and when the greatness of the Work was grown such as they might hope to defend
it, Matelisen departing, appointed 45 men to the keeping of the place, giving
them four Ships, that might carry them up and down the adjacent Sea; and thus a
League was made with the Rulers of Ternata, as had formerly been done with them
of Barida: this being added, by reason of the imminent danger that they should
at the present receive assistance; and that the Hollanders should not make a
Peace or Truce with the Spaniards, but such wherein they should be included.

Then he Commanded some of the People of the Isle of Macian (formerly subject
to Ternata, but now Governed by Tidoris) hastening to Rebellion, that against
the coming of the next Fleet, they should consider of wise Counsel, and lay
aside rash and immature thoughts. Thence himself, with three Ships, and one
small Bark went to China, long waiting for an uninterrupted Commerce; but after
he had been to no purpose held in hand a great while, at last he perceived the
Portugueses coming from Machao, with six great Ships, and diverse less to assayl
him; It seemed to him, a rash thing, to hazard his Fame and Forces in the sight
of an unknown Nation with such unequal Forces: besides, his Ships were foul and
heavy with dirt, as is usual in long Voyages, and therefore, being frustrated
of his great hopes, returning the same way he came, he understood that the
Spaniard was valiantly repulsed in Ternata, from his assault of the new
Fortifications: But that the King of Jora, upon approach of the Enemies Forces
from Malacca, voluntarily fired the Town, and fled into the Deserts and places
unpassable: however, he sent Recruits to Ternata, for by chance, a fresh Ship
was arrived from Holland: And the King of Jora being admonished by Letters of
his fault, that he had not followed the Fortifying of the Town, although often
called upon to that purpose, at last, this comfort was added, that they were
coming that would revenge his injuries.

At Java, Paul Cardenus met him with seven Ships, for he had lost one that
struck upon a shelf at the Siege of Mosambike, from which he was forced to
depart by the sickness of his men, yet he took one of the Enemies Carracks, and
spoiled two there, and others upon the Coast of Bengala: With Matelison, there
came Ambassadors from the King of Siam, who brought Gifts to the Prince; other
Letters also were at the same time brought from diverse Kings. He brought back
with him two Ships, and three others followed, all laden with Spices.

At this same time, when the Indian Company was assisted not only with money as
home, but with foreign Treasure, even from the Enemy himself, a Noble Merchant
being accused for the same, and thrown into Prison, whereupon, many others were
necessitated to flight.

As of old, France greatly flourished under a Potent King, so now it did the
like under a Prince that was the Umpire of Peace in the World, whose Queen at
this time, brought him a third Son: from this Kingdom, one Mounsieur de Mount,
as is elsewhere mentioned, had planted a Colony in the North part of America,
near the River Canada, but without any benefit from thence besides Bever Skins,
(and the Hollanders also had a share therein) but the Company being weary of
the charge, it quickly fell to nothing: nevertheless, collecting others, Ships
were again sent to repossess those deserted places, who planted at Port-Royall
and Quebeco, knowing ^e Air in the Island of Santa Cruce, was unwholesome.

Into England, news was brought from Virginia, that nothing hindered their
Landing, or planting, and that there was sufficient of all things for humane
sustenance, but the nine which they had searched, were of no value.

The faction of Tyrone troubled Ireland, making irruptions upon some strong
Holds near the Sea, while Tyrone himself lived at Rome with the Pope, but no
Supplies coming to them, the same Rebels were easily Conquered, and driven into
the fastnesses of the Woods and Mountains.

Spain, after the Sea was opened to it, and beginning to perceive the
Commodities of Peace, yet sending of thirteen to the Indies, did not omit,
besides Merchandise, to put Soldiers therein, as knowing, that if a League
were made, yet whatever was taken before, would be esteemed lawful prize, and
the King himself sweetning the hardships he had put upon his Creditors, renewed
his Repute: Besides, by a rare Example, he caused his Subject to swear
Allegiance to his Son, being yet an Infant of three years old, as Heir of his
Kingdoms.

Barbary, being always unquiet, while their Soothsayers, at pleasure, draw the
Peoples minds changable by Superstition, now this way, now that way, and then
disturbed by Abdala and his Uncle Zidan, the youngest Son of their sometime
King Hamet, by his lawful Wife, as he reported, of whom He possessing Fez in
his Fathers name, yet soon lost Morocco, a most Noble City, Mahomet the Nephew
of Hamet, being by the Citizens called to the Kingdom, who received the same:
Here by the uncertain Law of Africa, and for the more easy Retreat of
Warriers, a formidable strength of Pirates planted themselves, disturbing the
Sea near the Streights. The Rumor whereof came to the Hollanders, at what time
Spinola was at the Hague; Therefore the States, hearing the said Pirates had
taken one Holland Ship, lest they should seem by dissimulation, to encourage a
public evil, showed themselves ready with an Armed Fleet, severely to revenge
themselves, if Spinola would promise they should not be molested by the
Spaniards, but he protested he had no power to do any such thing.

Among these Pirates, were many English, to whom happened an accident worthy of
memory, which was, That some English under the show of Merchants, entering a
Ship of Zeland, on a sudden got the Mariners all under Decks, by chance, one
Turk was therein, which was of the number of Prisoners, who being taken at
Scluys; and having his liberty given him, notwithstanding ever after lived in
Zeland: He, daring to attempt any thing, being not of a servile nature, killed
two Englishmen, as they were upon the Watch in the night, and overcharged with
drink, then loosing the Mariners, hoysting their Sails, they returned into
their Country, and delivered up the surviving Thieves to a just punishment.

In Germany, a Diet was called at Ratisbom, where nothing was done, though much
deliberated upon: But the Emperor, who of late had begun to show his care for
the Affairs of Holland, was now himself deprived of his Dominions: for Matthias
choosing rather to have, then to expect Authority, and despising Rodolfus his
sloth, found not a few in Hungary and Austria, who were troubled at the present
state of Affairs, and having procured the Agreement of both those Nations, and
causing the Germans to be hated, who under the pretense of Caesar's Person,
ruled all, Collecting an Army, he leads it to Prague, where was his Brothers
Palace and Court; But the Bohemians standing up for Rodolfus, first a Treaty,
and soon after a Peace was made, so as Matthias should for the present enjoy
all the Christian part of Hungary, together with the Principalities of Austria
and Moravia, and Bohemia for the future, if Rodolfus dyed without any Issue
male: But Matthias had scarce gotten the possession of his desires, but his
Conditions were changed: Of affable becoming severe, and denying to the
Austrian Protestants, the use of their Religion, whereupon their minds were
turned from him, and their Arms against him: Nor did the Bohemians for the like
causes, less disturb the Emperor.

The Eighteenth and last Book of the History of the Dutch AFFAIRS.
1609.
AT the beginning of the new year, the Zelanders being hardly brought by threats
to give their consents, that their minds incensed with wrangling, might again
grow into one, and all fear of protracting business be taken away, the
Provinces promise among themselves: that they would make no agreement with the
Enemy, unless the Liberty granted to them in those words, that the Deputies
approved, were in deed and reality confirmed, and nothing contrary thereto
should be admitted, whether sacred or profane. And if the Enemy should
endeavor to do otherwise, they would wait eight days, and then absolutely
break off the Treaty, and return to Arms, with all the strength they could
possible make.

And now on the one hand, the Ambassadors of the Kings, and on the other, they
that were sent from the King of Spain and Albertus, and were lately returned
home, labored to lessen the controverted points: but when that way seemed too
slow, and it was found difficult to explicate business between absent people,
it was concluded there was a necessity of a further Treaty; and to that
purpose, Antwerp was appointed as the fittest place, because many of the
Hollanders were displeased with the Enemies residence among them, and they who
before came as it were to desire peace, now looked upon their coming to them,
as if they had come to sue: And for speeding on the Treaty, this way was
invented, that as soon as Spinola, and they that had been with him at the
Hague, were come to Antwerp, the Ambassadors of the Kings should go thither,
and carry with them a draught containing the principal Heads of the League, to
which the States, at the Request of the said Ambassadors, a few things only
being altered, had consented: And when the Spaniards had subscribed to the
same, then at last, the States Deputies should be sent to Antwerp for
perfecting the rest, and the States themselves would be resident at Berghen op
Zoom, that if any difficulty arose, they might be near at hand to be advised
with thereupon.

The Spaniards being showed the said draught, and desired to Sign it, when they
said, that was a little two imperious, because they were not the demands of
Enemies, but of Friends, who were admitted Arbitors, and thereupon, at least
demanded time of deliberation; they brought to pass, that upon the undertaking
of the Ambassadors of the Kings, the Cessation of Arms should be continued
until the end of February, they promising in the mean time to return their
Answer.

When they began to read over, and discuss the several Heads, they found
nothing innovated in the words, asserting their liberty, only the Spaniards not
enduring that the Ambassadors should call the States by the Title of High and
Mighty, consented at last; they should be written Illustrious: The States
desired, that those Tributes, which the Country Situate in the middle between
both Parties, had paid during the War, for redemption of their Lands from the
spoil of the Soldiers, should be continued by the Truce;

But that was rejected, as Hostile and unjust; for most part of Holland was
enclosed with Sluices and Rivers and paid no Tribute to the Enemy at any time;
whereas they had great and wide Incursions into Brabant and Flanders. The
Spaniards desired to take off all Customs which had been, by occasion of the
War, laid upon all ships passing the Scheldt, and other Rivers; saying also,
That those were the Relics of War, and not only grievous to them, but to the
French and English also. But they could not ob^ain, that any thing thereof
should be altered; the Ambassadors well knowing, that Zeland abominated nothing
more: Yet some hope was given, That after the League, the Matter might be
brought to a better pass, by Friendly Treaties of the Merchants among
themselves; for the Spaniards had boasted, That it was in their Power, to make
their Customs prove prejudicial to them that exacted the same.

Concerning the Indies, there was a long and sharp Dispute, the States
averring, there ought to be particular mention made thereof: But Richardot
said, That King Philip's Interest would not suffer it to be done, for many
Causes, which belonged not to the States to know; otherwise, by this Example,
other Nations would require the same Liberty of Navigation, which neither the
French nor English use, as granted to them, but at their own peril.

Therefore, that the Truce might be made without any Exception, it was passed
over; only, He would have Commerce restrained within those places that King
Philip possessed, either in Italy or Spain; denying, that any further
Indulgence could be granted; and however he would not command the same, yet
that would not hinder, but that the Hollanders might Traffic there; but it
was not convenient, so to be declared by a public League, for it would be
enough, if it were settled by private Agreements.

The Ambassadors answered, That therein were many things, to which the States
would never be persuaded; for it was an Hostile Act, to keep one out of the
Limits of his Dominion, and therefore the Hollanders had rather, if they must
want the fruits of Peace, contend for the Possession of that World by Arms.
Besides, there would be little safety in private Agreements, that should not be
published to all Peoples Knowledge.

But as to what was spoken of Spain and Italy, without doubt those Limitations
were too narrow, since the Spaniard has excluded none from the Islands, lying
within the Streights of Gibraltar, or the Fortunate Islands* or the whole Coast
of Barbary. The Spaniards Replied, That during the War, the Hollanders never
sailed to those remote places possessed by Philip, and now when they have by
the Treaty of Peace acquitted the same, more ought not to be asked by a Truce,
than either had been won by Arms, or could be hoped for by Peace: King Philip
would not allow the Indian Trade should be left to a War, and their case is far
different from those of France and Britain; for, from thence, there went out
only a few Ships, and those by stealth; but the Hollanders go thither with
great Fleets. As to the rest, they seemed to grant the same, that instead of
Spain and Italy, all Europe should be named; and if private Covenants would not
be satisfactory, they desired the public League should be made, so as that the
Word Indies should not be therein. After the form of this Article had been
often amended, and what was approved by the one side, was disliked by the
other; and that the Archdukes had been consulted with first by Verreik^, and
afterward by Richardot; at length, it was agreed in these words,

That the Subjects of King Philip, the Archdukes, and the States, during the
Truce, should maintain Amity, forgetting and forgiving the Injuries given or
received in the War: That it be lawful for them to pass backward and forward,
and freely to Trade by Land, Sea, and Rivers, which the King thinks fit to
limit within Europe, and such other places, as have heretofore, by his
permission, been open to his Friends, and those at Peace with him; but without
those Bounds, it shall not be lawful to negotiate and trade, in any the
Countries, Towns, and Ports, by him possessed, without private leave first had
and obtained: But neither King Philip, his Ministers, or Subjects, shall hinder
them then from Trading there with any other Kings or People willing to deal
with them; nor shall the Hollanders, or any that admit the Hollanders to
Commerce, be molested in his Name.

To which words, the Ambassadors of the Kings would have these added, viz. When
in time it shall be necessary, that they who are conversant beyond those Bounds
with Ships and Forces, understand that there is a League made, from thence
forward a Truce shall begin there for one Year; and if a Messenger arrive there
before, both Parties to forbear Hostility; and, if after the Year, any Hostile
Acts be done, the damage shall be made good.

The Spaniards hearkened to this with great Reluctance, as well because by
manifest Tokens the Indies were expressed, no less than if they had bin named;
as for that they desired Things taken and seized in that part of the World, if
they could be found, should be restored, but slaughters and devastations by
fire could not be restored: They being more prone to Cruelty, but the Hollander
esteeming Booty at a higher value than Blood: However, at last they yielded,
but their Countenances and Words manifesting they had received an Injury.

The Ambassadors having thus far brought the Business to perfection, after they
had received the Directions of the Kings their Masters, by swift and speedy
Messengers, being required by the States to come to Berghen, they declare to
them all they had done: Beseeching them, That they would be content with those
Agreements exceeding all their hopes, and that they should not too solicitously
scan the Words, for the Kings were pleased therewith: And that nothing might be
wanting to their Security, voluntarily promised, That if the Spaniard by force
disturbed the Indian Commerce, they would take Revenge thereof, as if the Truce
had been violated. Whereupon the States, after a little Consultation among
themselves, send their Deputies to Antwerp, the same which had been nominated
before for making Peace; only Nicholas Berk^ was substituted in the place of
Cornelius Renessen that had been for Vtrecht. To these it was given in charge
that they perfect the Remainder; and where they could, should explain and make
clear any thing that seemed obscure. The Spaniards would be asked, that the
Truce should continue for 12 years; And that a long Dispute might not arise, in
discoursing particulars concerning Bounds, it was agreed to be sufficient, That
each should retain the Countries and Towns they possessed at present, and that
the Country about should be reckoned with the Town: As to Commerce, besides
those Things already remembered, it was agreed, That neither should lay greater
Impositions on the other, than their Friends or Citizens bore when they paid
least: And that the Crime of Difference in Religion, might not oppress
Travelers or Merchants passing up and down, the same Things were granted to
the Hollanders, which Velasco had promised the English by private Agreement.
That they shall not retain the ships of strangers for public service, nor
decide the Right of Seizure, otherwise than according to the prescript Rule of
Law. Many Things were spoken of concerning private Affairs, and more fit to be
settled by a Peace, than a Truce. And all Prisoners on both sides to be set at
Liberty, Gratis. That the space of 42 years should not by Prescription
endammage those that followed diverse Parties, nor any Sentences given against
such as were absent, and made no Defense; That there should be no Restitution
of moveable Goods received Profits, or bestowed Honors; That all things should
immediately return to the ancient Lords of the Soil, or to those Societies,
which are devoted to Religion in the Archdukes Jurisdictions, but without any
Power to alienate the same: But for what had bin sold from the Exchequer,
instead thereof, during the Truce, a Yearly Revenue should be paid; and for
what had been bestowed in public Works, the value should be given; That it
should be lawful to redeem any Farms seized for Debt, within a year; yet so, as
a just account should be had to necessary Charges; but the like Privileges was
taken from Houses situate in Towns, so as they should absolutely remain to the
Purchasers: For Lakes, Marshes, and overflowed Grounds, drained by private men
at their own Charge, nothing was done, unless any Rent was raised out of the
Land; That the Exchequer, and not the ancient Professor, should account for
the Rents formerly set upon the Land, for those years which they held the same
Farms: And because it consisted with the Honor of the Commonwealth nominally
to include the House of Nassau, which had so well deserved of Liberty; and
therefore it was concluded, That they should not receive their own, but
besides, should not be liable to any Debt which his Father had contracted since
the Duke of Alva 's time; That the making of Testaments should be commanded to
the Citizens and People under both Dominions, and no Writings or Deeds should
be of any force, which had dis-inherited the next of Kin, out of Hatred to
Sides or Parties: That, to the Cities, whose Jurisdiction, by the League should
return to private persons, yet the States should appoint Magistrates in such as
were in their Dominion, and the Archdukes the like in their Territories: And
with no less Prudence was it provided, That this Truce should be beneficial to
those, who having gone out of the Netherlands for fear of the War, had sought
Foreign Habitations.

Most of these Heads were written by Olden-Barneveldt, as he feared any thing
dangerous, or foresaw any thing advantageous to his Country; so tempering his
words, with wonderful carefulness.

And as Supports of Security, these Defenses were raised: That no Ships of War
should come from one another to the Ports, Havens, or Coasts of the other,
unless by permission, or forced by Tempest; That it should not be lawful to
build any new Forts: And that common Assistance should be promised to drive
away and punish Thieves both by Sea and Land; That private Trespasses should be
vindicated upon the Authors thereof themselves, or else where they lived; yet,
under that pretense, it should not be lawful to break the Truce: That this
League should be confirmed by King Philip, and the Archdukes, in the Name of
themselves, and their Heirs; and the States likewise for themselves to ratify
the same: The States and Archdukes, within five days, and Philip the Third
within a Month: And that each should promise to the other, that they would not
do, or suffer to be done, any thing to the contrary, directly or indirectly;
and whoever should dare to do the contrary, to be punished with all severity.
And these were the public Acts.

In private, the Spaniards by connivence of the French, obtained what they so
earnestly desired, to wit. That, that part of Brabant subject to the States,
and which hitherto had used the Latin Rites, should still enjoy the same
without any alteration. But the States Deputies received from the Ambassadors
of the Kings, a Testimonial in Writing, That the Adversaries had often, during
the Treaty, protested, that the Indies were comprehended under the General Head
concerning Commerce; And that the States, at Request of the said Ambassadors,
promising thus much, had granted, that they should not be named. Besides, that
was the Mind of the States, that all things used by the Spaniards in the Indies
against them, the same they do toward the Spaniards; And if any Hollanders
there should be opposed, or assailed, it should not be a breach of the Truce to
defend them; That the Jurisdictions of Breda and Berghen, should be contained
within the Bounds, and whatever was about, or belonged to the Grave.

On the other side, at the Request of the French Ambassador, the States
Deputies did testify, That the Heirs of the Prince of Spinoy, who had formerly
taken the part of the States, were to be reckoned among those that were to have
their Goods restored; And if the Prince of Ligny delayed to make Restitution,
that the States should adjudge the possession of Wassenaer, belonging to the
Princes of Ligny in Holland, to the Princes of Spinoy.

And this was given in Favor of the Duke of Roan, at that time very powerful
in France, as having the chief Command of the Treasury and Exchequer; And his
Daughter mas married into the House of Spinoy.

The Ninth Day of April the League was made, whereby those Arms, famous through
Europe, and now carried into another World, were laid aside by a Truce, in hope
of a future Peace. And immediately it was approved by the Archdukes, and States
Letters, and publicly proclaimed at Antwerp, and in all those Parts, to the
high content, and with the exceeding Joy of all the Common People. But it was
not so well resented among the Hollanders; who, though People of their own
Nature, loving Peace, yet having been disordered by the prosperity and misery
of forty years, yet could not suddenly return to their first Nature. But
Foreiners, when the Report thereof came to their Ears, they wondered, that such
a Confession of Liberty, and share in the Indies, could be extorted from so
puissant a King, being a Thing so far without Example, that it was even beyond
Credit. From hence reckoning the value of strength and Counsels; And certainly,
from this time, many Kings, Princes, and Nations, began (...) respect the
Society and Alliance of Holland.

FINIS.
The TABLE.
A
ADrian, Pope; when, and his Description, 9 Aurange: William Prince of Aurange,
his Extract and Character; Marriages: being stobbed, and Death. ^12, 40, 143,
144, 145, 150. Alva: Duke of Alva, his Character, and Favor with the Emperor
Charles, and King Philip, 21 Aurange: Prince refuses to take Command of the
Soldiers, Philip would leave at his Departure; and the like does Count Egmond.
22 He, together with Egmond and Horn, write to King Philip, persuading to
remove Granvel. 27, 28 He, with several other Lords, makes Parties; and why, 32
Arms commanded to be taken; and why? 35 Anabaptists not feared in the
Netherlands; and why, 36 Antwerp submits to the Prince of Aurange, where he
forbids Sermon. 39 Aurange: Prince desires to lay down all Offices, but not
permitted (...) and why? 4^ He refuses the New Oath; so does Hochstraten; and
why? He retires to Germany, 42, 44, 45. Alva's Counsel to King Philip, and the
success thereof, 44 He is sent thither with an Army, as Governor, ib. Arrives
in the Low-Countri^s, where none oppos^ him, 45, 46. Aurange: Prince cited to
appear and proscribed, and his eldest Son seized and carried into Spain. 49,
122. He is desired to take up Arms, but refuses; and why? 50 Aremberg Count
slain in Frizeland, ibid. Aurange Prince sets forth a Narrative, to what
purpose, 5, 122. Aurange Prince takes Arms, 51. Raises an Army in Germany, and
comes into the Netherlands, and is, worsted by Alva without fighting. 53, 54.
Whereupon he marches thence into France, ib. Alva Presented with a Consecrated
Sword. 55 He erects a Statue in his own Honor. 55 Aurange Prince raises new
Forces, and who assisted him therein, and who refused. 58, 59 Alva sends to
search the English Ports. 58 Aurange Prince sends Letters to the Netherlands,
and gets a strength at Sea, to which he gives Commission. 60 He is chosen
Governor of Holland by the League. 63 Aurange Prince Disbands his Army, and
goes into Holland. 64 Amsterdam sticks to the Spaniards. 68, 93 Aurange Prince
settles the Commonwealth. 69 Al^mar in Holland, besieged, beats off the
Spaniards. 73 Alva recalled from the Government of the Low Countries. 74
Returns into Spain, and is, together with his Son, thrown into Prison. 74
Antwerp, a mutiny begun there, by whom, when, and for what. 75 Aldegond very
intimate with the Prince of Aurange; leaves Public Employment after the
Princes death, and turns Preacher, and so dies. 79, 163, 610, 611 Alo^t seized
by the mutineer Spaniards. 82 Antwerp sacked by the Spanish Soldiery. 83
Admits the Prince of Aurange and the Soldiers of the Union, and the effect of
the Treaty. 84 Aurange Prince chosen Governor of Brabant, wherewith many of
the Great ones are displeased. 88 Amsterdam besieged by the Nassavians, comes
to Articles. 93 Aurange Prince renews the League of Union at Utrecht. 107. The
Names of the Provinces then United. ibid. And the Heads of the League. 107, 108
The same League confirmed by Oath, and the number of the people taken. 10^
Articles of Agreement and Composition from King Philip, the Heads thereof, and
Opinions thereon. 111, 112, 113 Antonio Don King of Portugal, driven out by
Philip. 114, 115 Aurange Prince beloved by the Commons. 126, 127 Wounded at
Antwerp, and the Peoples sorrow for it. 127 Alo^t taken by Francis Valois. 127
Aurange Prince leaves Antwerp, and goes to live in Zeland, and why 136 Alo^t
betrayed and sold to the Spaniards. 141 Antwerp besieged, builds Forts to
secure shipping. 143, 160, 161 People there desire aid of their Allies, to no
purpose. 149 Is relieved with Provision. 160 Yet quickly after surrendered to
Parma. 162 Aldegund blam^d for the surrender thereof. 163 Altapen slain by
Count Hohenlo, and where, and how. 180 Arnheim won by Parma, and how. 237
Aquisgrave attempted by the Spaniards, but redeems it self with mony^ yet
afterward seized. 237.238 Antonio Don restored by the English and Hollanders.
238.^39 Arragon, Description of the Country, and how the people were insleved
by the Spaniards. 280.281 Ambushes laid, and by whom, and for what purpose, but
in vain. 325. Areschot, a Nobleman, his Speech in the Council at Bruxels, and
how approved. 357.358.359 He retires to Venice, and why. 367 Antonio Don King
of Portugal, deceased. 393 Albertus Archduke of Austria, sent Governor into
the Netherland^. 420 He arrives there, and brings with him the Prince of
Aurange. 421 He is not disliked by the Hollanders. 422 Arde a French Town won
by him. 426 Albertus highly applauded by all, sends to the Emperor, and for
what. 444 He writes to King Philip concerning Peace. 445 Albertus is grievously
troubled with the loss at Turnholt, as well as want of money. 484 485 Amiens a
French City, surprised by a stratagem for Albertus, and effect produced
thereby. 485.486.487 Besieged by the King of France. 487.503 And delivered to
him. 504 Alvarez Agilarius, Governor of Dunkirk, taken Prisoner by Sir Edward
Norris Governor of Os^end. 504 Andrew of Austria, Cardinal, chosen Deputy
Regent of the Low Countries by Albertus. 567 Albertus writes Letters to the
United States, and to what purpose; to do others to Prince Maurice, but to no
effect, and why. 568 569 Antwerp grievously punished by sedition of the
Soldiers, as also diverse other places. 571, 572 Albertus lays down his
Cardinals Dignity. 573 Departs into Germany, and so to Spain. 574 Receives news
of King Philips death at Prague. 575 Meets in Italy, Margaret, going to be
married to the young King Philip. 578 Aquisgrave a German City, proscribed, and
why. 583 It is pardoned, and upon what terms. 58^ Alpen Garrisoned by Mendosa,
together with other places. 604.605 Andrew of Austria Cardinal, his Envoyes
defense of the Spanish cruelty, in an Assembly of the German^. 617.618.619.620
Andrew. Fort rased by the Spaniards, and why. 633.65^ Albertus returns to the
Netherlands. 650 Where he finds Cardinal Andrew and Mendosa at difference, and
for what, whereupon the Cardinal is sent away. 650 He finds all things else in
disorder, and why. 651 Andrew Fort besieged by Prince Maurice, and surrendered
to him for 125000. Florens. 660 Albertus Fort besieged by Prince Maurice. 667
Archdukes gather together their Army. 668 March toward Newport. 669 Comes in
sight of Prince Maurices Army. 672 Draws his men into Battalia, and the form
thereof. 673 Archdukes send Deputies to the United States, and for what; who
are met by others, and the effect of their colloquy. 689.690.765.881 Aquila Don
John, sent from Spain to aid the Irish Rebels, but soon forced to return.
711.712 Achem, King thereof stirred up by the Portugueses against the
Hollanders, but he becomes a friend. 730.731 Arabella Lady, set up to claim the
English Crown, and by whom, with the event thereof. 746 Albertus puts to death
some Prisoners, which is requited by Prince Maurice. 756.757 Antwerp surrounded
by Prince Maurice, but no purpose. 789.790.791 Albertus recruits his Army with
new levye^. 795 796 Aquisgrave oppressed, and how, and by whom. 816.817 Aurange
Prince Philip, resto^ed to his Principality, and by what means. 857 America, a
Description of some part thereof. 873 Archdukes Letters to the States for
confirmation of their Liberty. 879 Aurange Prince comes into Holland; and for
what Reasons. 948.949 Antwerp appointed the place of Treaty. 968
B.
BIshops: New Bishops, when first set up in the Netherlands, and by whom, and
in what places. 25.26 They are found fault with. 26 Brederode Henry, and who
else with him were leaders of the Faction. 33 He is driven out of the Country.
55 Berghen op Zome, the Marquess thereof dies in Spain. 50 Brill taken by four
and twenty ships. 61 Bossu, the Spanish Governor of Hollanders out of the
Island of Vorne. 61 He spoils Roterdam. 61 ^omm^l-Island comes into the Union.
69 Bostu taken with his whole Fleet. 73 Bommenede taken by Requesens. 79
Brabant, the people there affect the Prince of Aurange, so do the Flandrians.
81 Bruxels destined to plunder by the mutinous Spaniards. 82 Bossu, General of
the Netherlanders Army. 98 His Camp at Rim^en assaulted by Don John, who was
repulsed. 99 Bruges, a great sedition and tumult at Bruges, but quickly
appeased, and how; the like also in other places. 109.110 Breda delivered to
Parma, and by whom. 116 Biron sent with an Army from France to help the
Hollanders. 133 Brabant, people there throw down the banks, and let out the
Scheldt, and why. 141 Bruges delivered to the Spaniard. 141.142 Bruxels
delivered to Parma. 162 Bonne taken by Colonel Schenck by surprise. 183
Berghe^op Zo^ besieged by Parma, and why. 217 The Description thereof. 218 The
Townsmens valor in defense of the place. 219 Treachery against it discovered,
by whom, and how prevented. 220 The Siege broken up, and the Town given by the
States, to Prince Maurice. 221 Bonne besieged by Parma, and delivered to him
upon honorable conditions. 21.122.223 Bommel attempted by Charles Mansfeldt,
but in vain. 229 Berck besieged by Parma's command. 232 Blybcke Castle taken by
the Spaniard. 233 Berck relieved by Schenck. 234 But at last won by the
Spaniard. 236.237 Breda taken by stratagem from the Spaniard, and how.
244.245.246. Besieged again by Parma, but in vain. 250.251 Bourtang, a great
Moor, a Fort raised therein, and for what purpose. 315.316 Brandenburgh
Elector, seeks Alliance with the United States, so do several others. 376
Balagny in vain seeks to strengthen his Tyranny, and why. 394.395 Burgundy, by
whom possessed of old, and by whom at this day. 398.399 Bodleigh Thomas sent by
Queen Elizabeth to the Hollanders, and for what. 400, 401 Baolot Claudius, a
Netherlandish Colonel, his valor and Policy. 429.430.431 Berck, the
Description of the Town, besieged by Prince Maurice, and delivered to him.
506*507, 508 Demanded of the States by the Bishop of Colen, and their answer to
him. 508.509.602.603 Bre^fort, besieged by Prince Maurice. 514.515.516 Taken,
together with the Castle. 517.518 Burghley Lord dies, and his Speech to Q.
Elizabeth at his death. 560 Berck besieged by Mendosa. 601 Infected with the
Plague. 603.604 Burick taken by Mendosa. 604 Berck summoned by Alfonso Avales.
605 A sad accident happens there, and what. 605.606 The Town surrendered to the
Spaniard. 606.607 Bucquoy Count, taken Prisoner, and by whom. 622.623 Bommel
Isle, the Description thereof. 626.627 Entered by the Spaniards. 627 The
Inhabitants encouraged by Prince Maurice. 628 Breautee, the fight between him
and Grobbendone. 657.658 He is taken Prisoner, and basely killed. 657.658
Barlot Claudius killed, his Character. 687 Berck besieged by Prince Maurice.
697 Won by him. 699 Biron Duke accused of Treason, Imprisoned, and Beheaded.
734.735 Bucquoy Count passes the Rhine, and why. 796 Erects a Fort at K^sers
Weert. 796.797 Berck reinforced by Prince Maurice. 797 Berghenop Zosm
attempted in vain. 805.806.807.808 Brunswick, troubles there, and for what, and
how, and by whom composed. 825.826 Bre^fort attempted by Terral, and surprised
for the Spaniard, but regained by Henry of Nassaw for the Hollander. 831.832
B^rck besieged by Spinola. 839.840.841 Delivered to him, and why. 842 Britain,
troubles there, for what, and how composed. 863 Bruyke Count, killed by the
Spaniards. 868 Barbary, troubles there, and for what. 965
C.
Charles, Emperor, consults of the alteration of the State in the Netherlands,
and how he was deterred. 9.10 Church, Ceremonies of the Latin Church and the
Latin Tongue, when and why generally received. 14 Charles, Emperor, condemns
Luther. 18 Cruelty rather the cause of Rebellion, than Religion, and why. 20
Confederates, their desires to the Lady Regent, and her answer. 33.34 Calvin,
where, and by whom followed. 36.37 Confederate Lords meet at Dendremund, and
why, and for what. 39.40 Confederacy broken at the present, and how, and by
what means. 41 Charles, eldest Son of King Philip, put into ward, and there
dies. 50 Casimir sent for, and comes into the Netherlands with strong recruits
of men. 92.94.100 He pacifies the Flandrians, and persuades them to receive
Soldiers. 101 He departs to England. 102 Charles, Son to Count Egmond, goes
over to the King. 109 Courtray in Flanders, won by the Duke of Parma. 116
Cambr^y a City, its situation, besieged by the Spaniards. 123.124 Charles
Cimace, Areschots Son, his dissimulation and treachery to his Country.
138.139.141.142 Complaints made to the Earl of Leicester, for what, by whom,
but to little purpose: 173.174 Commoni to have a share in Government, when,
how, and why. 174 175 Creviceur a Castle, why so named. 180 Cavendish sails
into America, and falls upon the Molucca Isles. 181 Covorden, the Description
thereof. 291.292 Besieged by Prince Maurice. 291. ad. 298 Delivered to him. 298
Capelle a French Town forced to surrender. 323 Castle John, his Execution, and
for what. 342 Cambray besieged by the Spaniard. 347.393.394 Cleves and Juliers,
Dutchies claimed by the Spaniards and others. 375.444 Castellet taken by the
Spaniards. 387 Cambray delivered to the Spaniard. 395.396 Cornwall a County in
England, invaded by the Spaniards. 402 Calais besieged by Albertus, and why.
423.424 Attempted to be relieved by the Count St. Paul, but in vain. 425 Is
surrendered, together with the Castle. 425 416 Cadiz Voyage, and the Issue
thereof. 446. ad 453 A Description of the City of Cadiz. 448 449 The City
taken. 451 Corn for hidden by Edict to be carried into Spain, and why. 469
Clement Pope, at Ferrara by Proxies, marries King Philip to Margaret, and
Albertus to Isabella. 580 Cleves and Juliers about to raise an Army, cannot
agree on a General. 585 The Cities thereof fortified, and why. 598.599 They
desire to make a defensive League, and with whom, and why. 600 Send thanks to
Prince Mamrice, but complain of the Spaniards 600, 601 Culenburg Count,
Florence Palante, his death. 610 Culcar a Town of Cleves taken by the Spaniard,
together with many others. 615 Creve^cur Fort besieged and taken by the
Spaniards. 629 Regained by Prince Maurice. 658 Clort a Captain, takes 300 of
the Enemies near Wachtendow, surprise^h Straten, and takes Cracow Castle.
694.695 Coetorden re-enforced by Prince Maurice. 805 Cratow Castle taken by
Bucquoy. 814 Cloves, a rich commodity, and from whence brought. 850.851.852
Cessation of Arms for eight Months agreed on between the Hollanders and
Spaniards. 880 Continued for a longer time. 896 Cessation of Arms lengthened.
901.902 Commissioners on both sides meet, the manner thereof, and who they
were. 915.916.917 Cessation of Arms prolonged. 925 The same again continued.
927 Commissioners for the Archdukes commanded out of Holland by Decree, and the
Treaty broke off. 938 They take leave of the States, and their speech at that
time, with the States answer thereto. 938 Calvin, his Opinions. 951
D.
DUtch, the Form of their Government. 10.11 Difference between France and
Spain, upon what grounds, and by whom begun. 59 Dordect, the Form of a
Commonwealth there begun, and by whom. 63 Discords increase among the
Netherlandish Lords. 90.91 Dunkerk besieged by Parma, and taken, which for the
future made the Sea dangerous, and why. 53 Damme surrendered to the Spaniard.
142 Dewsburgh won by the Spaniard. 163 Drake Francis wastes the toasts of Spain
with a Fleet. 181 Denmark, the King lays an Imbargo on all Dutch Vessels, and
why. 184 Discipline, Military more strict and better with the States, than the
Spaniards. 197 Drake Francis made Vice Admiral. 209 Dutch ships seized in
Scotland, and why. 224 Deventer besieged by Prince Maurice, assaulted, and
surrendered. 265.266.267 Delfeziel won by Prince Maurice. 270 Assaulted by
Verdugo, but with great loss. 326 Dorpius Arnold, called the Rich, is envyed,
called to question, imprisoned, pardoned, and again employed, and how. 356.357
Dolens, in viewing whereof, Lamot is killed. 389 Drion, a Town in Burgundy won
by the French King. 399 Drake Francis sails into America, and why; before his
return he dies. 405.405 Dunkerk Pirates, thence take several Holland ships. 419
Some of the Pirates apprehended and executed. 420 Denmark, Ambassador from
thence, and to what purpose, with the States answer thereto. 493.494 Danny
Peter, his Treason against Prince Maurice, and Execution for the same. 569.570
Doetichem taken by Mendosa. 614 Dorst, a Town in the Bishopric of Colen taken
by the Spaniard. 611 Douse Peter, Admiral of the Dutch Fleet. 640 He goes to
Guine, the description of the place. 644, 645, 646 A Pestilence afflicts the
Hollanders there, of which Douse himself dies. 646, 647, 648 Dunkirk Pirates
taken and executed. 649 Dort. Hollanders first build a Galley there, which
quickly after were increased. 691, 692 Dunkirk Pirates, their insolency and
punishment. 695 Dorp, Frederick succeeds General Vere, in the Government of
Ostend. 717 Dunkirk Pirates put to death, and why. 815 Denmark, Ambassadors
thence arrive in Holland, and for what intent. 903 Dubois Warner killed, and by
whom. 909
E.
EG^ond. Lam^rall Count Egmond, his extract and Character: his Valor, fear of
the Spaniard, apprehension by Al^, and death. 12, 13.40 45 47 48 His difference
with Granvel, and for what. 24 His going into Spain, behavior there,
Entertainment an^ ^turn. 29 England throws off the Pope, so does Denmark and
Sweden. 31 Edict set out by the King of Spain, and the effect thereof. 55, 56
Escovedo, Secretary to Don John of Austria killed. 103 England: the Character
of the English, and how they were concerned with Holland. 151 The difference of
nature between them and the Hollanders. 166, 167 Edict to prohibit the
transportation of Corn, 169 The same Ed^ct revived and amended. 179 English
insensible of their danger from the Spanish Fleet. As also the Hollanders. 207
English Fleet, how disposed to resist the Spaniard, (...) secure the Kingdom.
208, 209 They fight with the Enemy at distance, and why. 210 The whole Fleet
met, and the greatness thereof. 212 They leave the pursuit, suffer a storm, and
return home their Eulogy. 215 Emperor of Germany sends an Embassy for Peace to
the Hollanders but is refused, and why. 280 English annoy the Spaniards, and
where. 283 Ernestus Duke of Austria, sent Governor to, and arrives in the
Netherlands. 320 His Character and reception among the Netherlanders. 321 His
first Musters impeded, and how, and by whom. 324 Which makes him contemptible.
325 Elizabeth Queen, offended with the States, and why. 346. 464 Ernestus calls
a Council at Bruxels, and for what. 357 His dissimulation with the
Netherlanders. 360 Ernestus dies: his Character. 366 Emperor sends Letters to
the States, and their answer to the same. 374. 493 Embden, a Relation of the
troubles of Embden, and the Original, causes, and compo^^ion thereof. 377, 378,
ad 383 English and French ready to quarrel, and for what. 400. 464 Echternach,
a Town in Lutzenburg, taken by the Hollanders. 427 Emperor sends to the States,
and their answer. 446. 653 English and Hollanders wast the Seacoasts of Spain,
with a great Fleet. 446 Essex, Earl, General of the Landforces in the Cadiz
Voyage, his Character. 446, 447.551.652, 653 Elizabeth, Queen, demands
satisfaction of the States, with their answer and Petition. 458, 459, 460 Her
Answer to the Polish Ambassador. 498, 499 Azores. Islands fallen upon by a
great Fleet of English and Hollanders. 499. 500 The Fleet dispersed by
Tempests, returns home. 500, 501 Emilia, Sister to Prince Maurices offends him
by an unequal Marriage, and the event thereof. 523, 524 English, difference
between them and the Germans, the beginning thereof, and for what, and how
settled. 535, 536, 537, 538 Elizabeth Queen, very angry with the Hollanders, and
why, yet afterward appeased, and by what means. 559. 653 Emmeric taken by
Prince Maurice, from Mendosa, and quitted. 610 Again surprised and Garrisoned
by the Spaniards. 622 Essex Earl, harasses Ireland succesfully. 652 He is
committed to custody, and for what. 653 Emperor, Ambassadors from him to the
States, concerning what, with the States Answer. 663.664. Essex Earl, brought
to trial, and privately beheaded. 710, 711 Elizabeth Queen, her Death and
Character. 737, 738, 739, 740 Emperor sends to the United States, complaining
of their intrusion upon his Authority, with their answer ther^to. 748, 749
English and French quarrel in Gertruydenberg. 753 England and Scotland named
Britain. 779 Emperor and others, send Legates to the United States, concerning
a Treaty, and their answer thereto. 786, 787 English and Hollanders difference
between them, and for what. 794, 795 English first come into the Indies, and
under whose Conduct. 852, 858 Europe, a description of many passages there
transacted in the several, parts thereof. 858, 859 Erkelen, taken by Henry of
Nassau. 863 English and Hollanders jointly send out Ships a^ the Indies. 869
England King thereof, desired to assist to the making peace between Holland and
Spain, so also are diverse others. 892 Emperor, Letters from him to the States,
and the purport thereof* with their Answer to the same. 904, 905 Letters from
the same to King Philip, and the Archdukes with their Answer, wherein is set
forth the Emperors pretense to be invalid. 905, 906, 907, 908 Embden, troubles
there, between whom, and how composed. 910, 911 Europe, a short Relation of
some European transactions. 912, 913, 914 England, a League concluded betwixt
it and Holland. 926 Ambassadors move the States to a Truce, and the reason why.
932 The same disputed in Books. 932, 933, 944, 945 Ambassadors of the Kings
draw a League for a Truce, the form thereof. 940
F.
FAction in the Netherlands, after Philips departure about the Regency, and
between whom. 21. 24. 92, 93. 96. 100 French Forces intercepted in their march
by the Spaniards. 64 Frizeland, the Towns thereof, left to the fury of the
Spaniards. 65 France. Henry King of France, privately ayds the Hollanders. 80.
151 Frizeland rebels against the Spaniard, and imprison their Governor. 85
Francis of Valois sued to, and chosen Governor of the Netherland^. 91. 94, 95.
121. 123, 124, 125 He is recommended by Margaret of Valois. 92 Frizeland,
Reneberg Governor thereof, to whom, Campen and Deventer were soon after
yielded. 94 Francis of Valois comes to Bingen, which he wins by storm and
siege. 101 Offended with Casimires success at Gaunt, he departs to England.
102. 124 Frizeland. Renneberg revolts to the Spaniard, and delivers Groningen
to them. 117 Francis of Valois, brings aid to the States, for the relief of
Cambray. 123 Treats of Marriage with the English Queen. 124 The Articles upon
which he undertook the Government. 125 Expects succor from his Brother the
French King, but in vain, and why. 129 Whereupon he falls upon dangerous
Counsels and Design: what they were, how effected, and how frustrated. 129,
130, 131 He treats with the Hollanders, departs into France, and dies. 134, 135
French hated by the Hollanders, and why. 136 Frizeland. William of Nassau made
Governor there. 146 The Form of Government there. 146, 147, 377, 378 France.
French King chosen Defender of the Netherlands, and why. 151, 152 Factions,
diverse in Holland, and for what, and among whom. 187, 188 French King assisted
by the English and Hollander. 241 French and Low Country troubles compared. 242
Falcosteyne Count slain. 263 Frizons desire aid of Prince Maurice, who
thereupon makes an expedition into Frizeland. 268, 269 French King wounded. 283
Famarsh, General of the Ordinance to the States, killed. 293 Fontayne sent by
Philip, to govern the Netherlands his Character. 298, 299. 366 He is the
Author of a cruel sentence, and what it was, and the effects thereof. 303,
304, 305, 306 He is President of the Senate. 366 His care and diligence. 385,
386 Ferte, a Town in France besieged, is relieved and ungarrisoned. 386 Fayer
besieged by the French King. 400. 433 At last is won by Famine. 427 Franecre an
University in Frizeland, when begun 465 French invade Artois, and overthrow
Varembonius, taking prisoner Count Montecuculi. 468 Frizeland wasted by
Frederic Count Heremberg. 511 French King sends an Ambassador to England, and
for what, with the Queens Answer thereto. 527, 528 Frizeland, a Resation of new
troubles arising there, the cause thereof, and settlement of the same. 580,
581, 582 Falcosteyne, Count Viricus, treacherously murdered, and by whom. 607,
608 Forces: new raised in several places, and by whom. 629, 630, 752 Fortunate
Islands, their description, and the assault thereof by the Dutch. 641, 642, ad
644 Quitted again by them. 648 Frizeland, new troubles there, and for what, and
how composed. 662.735, 736, 746, 747 Flanders, War transmitted thither, and
why. 664 Another expedition thither. 696, 697 Henry of Nassau, Governor
thereof. 774 French and Spaniard, difference between them, and for what. 780,
781 Frizeland terrified at Spinola's approach. 804, 805 France: Ambassadors
come thence, to the Hollanders, who they were, and their instructions. 890, 891
French and Hollanders make a League, and what. 914, 915 French Colony in
America, comes to nothing, and why. 964
G.
GRanvell. Anthony Pere^et Granvell, his Extract, Character, Honor and
Greatness in the Court of the Emperor, Charles, and Philip. 21 His diligence
and Industry in managing the Government, and for what. 23 He is Commanded to
depart the Netherlands, and go into Burgandy, from whence he went to Rome. 28
Gheuse: the first Original of that name. 34 Germans, aid the Prince of
Aurange. 53 Guise, the Guisian faction prevalent in France, and the effect
thereof. 64 Geneva Discipline received in Holland, Tenants thereof. 71, 72
Geeretruydenberg taken by the Hollanders. 73 Gaunt: a Peace concluded there,
between whom, and the heads thereof. 84 This Peace confirmed at Bruxels. 85 A
great Sedition in Gaunt. 97, 98 Appeased by the Prince of Aurange. 104 It
consents to the League of Union. 110 Groningen besieged for the States by
Entes, but Relieved by Schencke. 118 Gaunt: People there deny passage to Birons
Army, and why. 135 The Town delivered to Parma, upon te^rms, and what they
were. 148, 149 Grave besieged by Parma, relieved by Hohenlo, yet cowardly
surrendered to him. 170 For which the Governor afterward put to death. 171
Geeretruydenberg, sold and delivered to the Spaniard, and the, pretenses for
the same, and by whom. 224, 225, 226, 227, 228 Guise Duke slain. 240 Groenigen
straightened by Count William of Nassau, Governor of Frizeland. 243 Germans
threaten revenge for the wasting of their Borders. 255, 344, 345 Parma's
Answer, and the States Answer to the same. 256, 257, 258 Groening beleaguered
by Prince Maurice. 269 The Citizens waver in their affection. 270 Send Letters
to Count Mansfeldt, and an Embassy to the Emperor. 284, 285, Geeretruydenberg
besieged by Prince Maurice, with a description of the place. 306, 307, ad 314 A
description of the Princes Camp before the Town. 308, 309, 310 The Town
delivered to him. 314 Groningers send to Ernestus for aid. 326 The description
of the City of Groening and Territory, 328, ad 332 The Siege thereof. 328, 332,
333, ad 337 The surrender thereof to the States, and they receiving a Garrison
from Prince Maurice, as also Count William of Nassau for their Governor. 337
Groll besieged by Prince Maurice. 390.513 Relieved, and the Siege raised by
Mondragonio. 391 Guiana, discovered by Sir Walter Rawleigh. 405 Germans seiz:
Heredtalls from the Archduke, and why. 469 Gr^viwaert attempted by the
Spaniards, but in vain. 487, 488 Groening, difference between the Citizens and
Boors, and about what, and how settled. 489, 490 Groll delivered to the Prince.
514 Germany, a description thereof, both ancient and modern. 587, 58^, ad
592.5^9 Expedition thence intended, and whither, but hindered, and by whom.
621, 622 Gravewaert, beset by Mendosa, but in vain. 624 Strengthened by Prince
Maurice, 625 Germans raise a great Army, and for what. 633, 634 They besiege
^ercke, reduce Rees, yet at last, come to nothing, and why. 634, 635, 636, 63^
Grobdendouc, The Fight between him and Breautee. 657, 658 Groningen grows
mutinous, but reduced to order by Count William* and a Castle built over them.
661, 662 Grave besieged by Prince Maurice. 720, 721 Endeavored to be relieved
by Mendosa, but in vain, whereupon i^ was surrendered. 722 It is beat to the
Hochstrateners, and upon what Terms. 759 Geletre attempted by Prince Maurice.
813 Gunpowder-Treason, the description and discovery thereof, ow re^^ by whom.
819, 820, 821 Groll besieged by Spinola, and taken. 838, 839 Besieged a new by
Prince Maurice. 844 The Siege raised by Spinola. 845 Groeningen, the Castle
there demolished. 867, 868 Germans, their desires. 915 Giron, Don Ferdinando,
sent Ambassador into Britain, and for what. 930 Germany, great troubles there;
and when^^ arising, and how composed. 966, 967.
H.
HOrn, Mommorency Count Horn, his extract and Character, valor, fear of the
Spaniard, apprehension by Alva, and lamentable death. 13.47.48 He retreats
home. 4^ Hollanders rebel against Alva, in Utrecht, Flushing, and other places.
62 Holland and Zeland continue in Arms. 66 The Description of both those
Countries. 66.67.68 Harlem besieged and taken by Alva. 73 Henalt, the Towns
there receive Francis of Valois as their Governor. 101 Holland, the
Commonwealth there faulty in its constitution, and wherein, and why. 114
Hobenlo Count, his men overthrown by Renneburg. 118 Hollanders by advice,
resolve to throw off King Philip, and the reasons for the same. 119.120 Which
they afterward effect. 122 Hog, a base fellow so called, troubles Holland. 136
He is punished for the same. 137 Heremberg William revolts to the Spanyard. 138
Hollanders, their valor and courage admirable, and wherein. 147 Their sad
condition after the Prince of Aurange's death, 150 Hohenlo Count withstands the
Earl of Leicester, and why, and for what. 170 Holland enriched by the war,
Brabant and Flanders undone. 180 Howard Earl of Notting ham, Admiral of
England. 209 H^w Castle yielded to Parma by Sidenberg. 230 Henry the third,
King of France, slain, and by whom. 240 Henry of Bourbon succeeded, but with
great trouble. 240 Hulst delivered to Prince Maurice. 274 Hollanders their
ships wracked by a storm. 320 Henry King of France, reconciled to the Church of
Rome, and why, and the event thereof. 322.323.324 Hartius ^^bo, and Jerome
Comannus come from Bruxels to the Hague, and for what. 337.338.339 Henry King
of France stabbed, and by whom. 342 Hollanders and English join their Fleets
after some contests. 346 They send aid to the French King. 346.347 Henry King
of France, sets out an Edict against King Philip, and why. 348 Hollanders
troops return out of France. 349.385 They suffer much by inundations. 355.524
Hoye a Town of Liege, surprised by the States. 361.362 Besieged and retaken by
the Bishop of Liege. 363.361 Henry King of France invades Burgundy. 36^ Hohenlo
Count Philip, solemnly married, and to whom. 374 375 Hanes, ^a^ on, and the
relation thereof. 387.388 Henry Count Heremberg taken Prisoner. 396 Henry King
of France accuses his Allies, and for what, with their excuses and answers.
399.4^0 Henry the (...) of England, first King of Ireland. 400 Hollanders, a
brief relation of some Sea-Voyages, whereby the United States Wealth was much
increased. 405.406. ad. 420 Henry besieged by Albertus, a description of the
Town. 428.429. ad. 443 The valor and constancy of the besieged. 43^.43^ The
Town delivered upon Articles to him. 443 Whereat the Hollanders and Zelanders
displeased, as also with Count (...) and why. 443 Henry King of France sends
Ambassadors to Queen Eliz. and who, and for what. 457.4^^ Hollanders relation
of a third Sea-Voyage made by them to the North to their great prof^ 471.472.
ad. 4^^ H^^^ Matthias slain, and by whom. 488 H^^a Anna buried alive at
Bruxells, and for what. 4^^ Hollanders resolve to clear Over-Iss^l of the
Enemy, and their (...) thereby. 50^ Henry Frederick Prince Maurices ^rother,
first comes into the War. 505 506. Hollanders, their thoughts of the Peace
between France and Spain, and offers to hinder the same. 52^ They forbid
Traffic with Spain, and why. 531 Are very unsuccessful, and wherein. 534
Increase their Wealth much by Traffiquing at Sea, and into what parts they use
to go. 538.539 They are troubled with Pirates, against which they provide
remedy, and what. 541.542 They send Ambassadors to France and England; for
what, and who they were. 545 The Holland Ambassadors speech to Queen Elizabeth
against a Pacification with Spain, together with the Queens Answer thereto.
546.547.548.549.550.551.552.553 Henry King of France Divorced from his wife,
falls in love with one Estraea, and the trouble ensuing thereon. 553.554.693
Holland Ambassadors Speech to him, and his answer to the same. 554.555.556
Hollanders Treat with Queen Elizabeth about the payment or the money lent by
her to them, and the sum agreed, and how to be re-paid, and a League concluded.
560.561.562 H^lle, a Town in Henalt famous for Miracles. 573 Heremb^rg Count,
wastes the Country by the Eems, and why. 597 Hollanders desire to fight with
the Spaniards. 630 Their Seamen taken and imprisoned in Spain, and why. 638
They forbid all Traffic with Spain, and why. 639.640 Set forth a great Fleet
to Sea, and for what. 640 It is divided, and part sent home. 644 They scour the
Sea of Pirates. 691 Henry King of France, married to Ma^y Medices. 693
Hochstraten surprised by some seditious Spaniards, where they settle a new form
of Discipline Military. 723 Hochstrateners desire aid of the Hollanders, which
is granted, and upon what terms, and this made Albertus prescribe them.
724.725.752 Hollanders Wealth much increased by the Trade of the Indies. 728
They make a League with the people of Banda, and the heads thereof. 729.730
Several other Leagues with other Indians. 731.732.733 849 Their desires to King
James, and his grants thereupon. 743.744 Hochstrateners, their strict
Discipline. 752 They are besieged by Count Heremb^rg, and relieved by Prince
Maurice. 753 They Forage the Country, and take many places. 766.767 Are
reconciled to the Archdukes, and upon what terms. 772 Hauteen William Admiral
of Zeland, me^ts the Spaniards at Sea, and overcomes them. 793.794 Made Admiral
of a Fleet of Hollanders to intercept the American Fleet, and the success
thereof. 829:830 Hochstraten seized by some seditious Spaniards that desire aid
of the Hollanders, which is granted, and upon what terms. 843.844 Hautcea sent
out with a Fleet to intercept the Spanish ships coming out of America, and the
success thereof. 846 Hohenlo Philip his death and character. 856 Hollanders
averse to Peace. 865 Hague, Herman Wittenhorsten comes thither from the
Archdukes concerning Peace. 866 Hollanders averse to Peace, and why. 876 Obtain
a famous Victory at Sea under the command of Jacob Hemskerk at the straights of
Gibralter. 881.882.883 ad. 888 A description of Hercules Pillars. 883.884
Hemskerk Jacob, Dutch Admiral, his speech to the Captains of his Fleet. 884.885
He is killed, and his speech at his death. 886 Holland Fleet retires to Tituan
to repair their ships, where they are received with joy. 889 Hollanders recall
their Fleet from Spain, and why. 892.896.897 Send Deputies to the King of
Britain, and for what, and his answer to them. 894.895 ^^gue, the place
appointed for the Treaty. 900 Hollanders take a great booty from the Spaniards,
and how. 908.909
I.
INquisition, the Spanish Inquisition, the Original cause, and severity
thereof, one cause of the Dutch troubles. 17.18.31 Command sent from Spain to
put the same anew in execution. 30 Received in the Netherlands, and by whom. 55
John, Don John of Austria sent Governor into the Netherlands, his Character. 86
He is received by the Netherlanders. 86 Accused by them to the King. 87
Overthrows the Dutch Army at Gemblin. 91 Offers the Confederates Articles of
Peace. 91 Imbis, a great Incendiary at Gaunt, his character and death. 97.142
John, Don John persuaded to Peace, and by whom, but in vain. 99 His Army is
recruited, he breaks off the Treaty, and pitcheth his Army near Namur. 100 His
death and character. 102 103 Imb^s, moves a new sedition in Gaunt. 104.138
Ipre, a Town, joins with the United Provinces. 110 Issel, a City, submits to
Parma. 111 Ipre besieged by Parma. 140 It is surrendered to him. 142 Issel, the
derivation of the name. 329 Jesuits hated in France, and why banished. 342 The
original, description, and character of that order. 342.343.344 Ireland, Rebels
there assisted by the Spaniards, with a short description of the Country.
402.403 First invaded by the English under Richard Earl of Pembroke. 402
Beginning of a Rebellion there, and by whom. 403.404 Indies, Holland ships
first return thence, with a description of the Country, by them made. 502.503
Isabella Clara Eugenia, betrothed to Albertus, and why. 529 She writes to
Albertus to take possession of the Netherlands, which he does privately.
566.567 Iselburg forceably taken by Mendosa. 611 Isabella sets an Edict out
against the Hollanders, and to what purpose. 638.639 Isabella Fort besieged by
Prince Maurice. 687 Indian Company, first rise thereof in Holland, and the form
of ordering the same. 733 734 James King of Scotland, Successor to Queen
Elizabeth in the Throne of England, and Proclaimed King. 740.741 An Embassy
sent to him by the United States, and the Ambassadors Speech to him, with his
Answer. 741.742.743 Ambassadors come to him from the King of Spain, and the
Archdukes. 743 Indian Company send ships to Sea, and whither. 764.816 848.
James King, other Ambassadors sent to him from the King of Spain and the
Archdukes. 777 Jesuits banished out of Britain, and why, but restored in
France. 780 Indies, several ships return thence very rich. 815 816 847 A
Description of some part thereof. 848.849. ad. 856 Indian Company confirmed by
Edict of the States. 856 Indies West, a new Company for those parts raised in
Holland, the Form and Government thereof. 870.871 872 Several Opinions thereof.
873 874.875 James King, sends Ambassadors to the Hague, who they were, and what
they did. 895 Indies ships come home thence rich, and others sent thither. 910
Janinus goes into France, and for what. 929 His Speech in the Council of the
States. 941 942.943
K.
KNights of the Golden Fleece, the Original thereof, and causes of their
Institution. 5^6 Drawn into Parties, and for what, and when, and by whom. 24
King, the Presence of the King necessary in the Netherlands to keep the Peace,
as the Emperor Charles was sensible. 42.43 Knodsenburg Fort built, and by whom.
253 Knodsenburg besieged by the Duke of Parma. 270 Relieved by Prince Maurice,
and the Duke of Parma's men worsted in sight. 272.273
L.
LOw Countries, the ancient situation, and limits, the original language
Dukes, Earls, and how they attained and hereditary Succession. 3.4 The ancient
form of its Government until they fell to the Burgan^^ans, and after that, to
the house of Austria. 5.^ Liberty, chiefly, and first solicited for at Philips
departure. 22 League between Philip the second of Spain, and Henry the third of
France, and the effect thereof. 30 Diverse Lords of the Netherlands against the
Inquisition, and by whom drawn up, and when. 33 Lutherans formidable in the
Netherlands, and why. 36 Law utterly laid aside, and an Arbitrary Power set up,
and by whom. 56.57 Lumey, Admiral of the Prince of Aurange's Fleet, his
character. 60.61 Luyden besieged, beats off the Enemy. 77.78 Lamot Philip,
reconciled to the King by the surrender of Gravelin, draws in many others. 105
Lyra won treacherously by Parma. 127 L^chem, siege thereof raised, and why. 128
Lorrain, Family of Lorraign claims the Crown of France, which much troubles the
King. 152, 153 League with England, the heads thereof. 164 Leicester Earl sent
General into Holland, his character. 165 Much honored at first by all, and
why. 166, 167.176 He grows ambitious, and raises Factions. 167.168.175.176 He
takes ill the meetings of the States, and why. 174 And returns to England. 17^
He comes back to Ostend for the relief of Sluys, but marches thence and does
nothing. 180.181 He renews the old factions in Holland. 181 Endeavors to seize
the Government, but is prevented. 182 He returns to England, is forced to
abjure his Authority, and dies. 183 ^eban, the place of meeting the Spanish
Fleet. 207 Besieged by the English and Hollanders. 239 Liege Bishopric is
difference between is and the Hollanders, and for what. 259.260 Lope^ Lodewick,
his Treason against Queen Elizabeth, and by whom (...). 341.342 Lutzenburg
wasted by the French. 360, 361 L^ere taken by Heraugier, and lost again
presently. 397, 398 Leyden in Holland and University, when begun, and (...)
Learned Men bred there. 464.465.466.467 Lingen Besieged by Prince Maurice. 520,
521 And delivered, together with the Castle. ^^2 Lisbone beset by the Earl of
Cumberland with a Fleet; and the success thereof. 541 Lovestreyn a City, that
first threw off slavery. 626 Lingen Besieged by Spinola, and yielded. 801, 802,
803 Lochem Besieged by Spinola, and taken. 836 Retaken by Count Ernest of
Nassau. 844 Lipsius Justus his Death and Character. 857 Luther his Opinions.
951
M.
MOntiny, John, Count Horn's Brother, and the Marquess of Berghen sent into
Spain; and to what purpose: With the King's Answer. 34, 35 Margaret Lady Regent
forced to give way to the Times, and agree to the Counsel of the Confederate
Lords. 38, 39 She raises more Soldiers; and why. 41 Maximilian the Emperor's
Advice to King Philip; and how resented by him. 43 Margaret, Lady Regent leaves
the Netherlands, and her Government, 46 Moderation: No moderation to be hoped
from Spain. 49, 50 Montiny executed in Spain. 49 Maximilian Emperor sends into
Spain his Brother Charles; and to what purpose. 52 Medina coeli: The Duke
thereof sent to succeed Alva in the Government of the Netherlands; but he
refused the same. 63 Montz in Henalt besieged by Alva; Relief sent thither by
the French, Prince of Aurange, and others. 64 Montz surrendered. 65 Middleburg
in Zeland sticks to the Spaniards. 68 Marquius called to account, and accused
by the Prince of Aurange, 69 Middleburg won by the Zelanders after a long
Siege. 74, 75 Mutiny: The Spaniards frequently mutiny; and why. 76, 77
Maestrickt sacked by the Spanish Soldiery. 83 Mechlin submits to Parma. 111
Mochlin taken by storm from the Spaniards. 116 (...), Archduke of Austria,
honorably sent away from his Government of the Netherlands. 112 Maurice, Prin^
^on of William Prince of Aurange, succeeds his Father in the Public Care of
Holland. 145 His Inheritance. ibid. (...) Governor of Holland and Zeland. 146
(...) delivered to Parma. 162 Maurice Prince wins Axel; and how. 171 He takes
the chief Command of War at the States Desires. 179 His Merits and Praises. 198
Medina Sidonia Duke, Admiral of the Spanish Armado. 208 Moncada Hugh with a
great Ship driven aground in France; but at last taken and pillaged by the
English. 213 Mansfieldt Charles attaquing Voorn Island; departs thence for fear
of Hohenlo. 231 Mansfeldt Count Peter made Deputy-Regent of the Netherlands.
254 Mansfeldt Octavio killed. 271 Maurice Prince returns victorious into
Holland. 278, 279 He is wounded. 290 Mansfeldt, Count Peter Governor of the
Netherlands. He comes with an Army to relieve Gertruydenburg, but in vain. 312
Maurice Prince marches against Groeningen. 328 Murderers hired by the
Spaniards to kill him. 340 341 Mansfeldt Charles departs the Netherlands, and
dies. 367 Mondrugonio infests the Hollanders Country. 391 Overthrows some
Holland Troops. 391 392 Withdraws to Winter Quarters, and dies; his Character.
392, 393 Moers, a Town in Cleves, besieged by Prince Maurice, and taken. 510*
511 Maurice Prince highly applauded; and for what. 522 (...) dices Alexander,
the Pope's Legate, Mediator of Peace between France and Spain. 526 Mucer^
Balthazar his bold Attempt, and the success thereof. 539, 540 Mendosa Francisco
General of the Spanish Army. 573 Margaret, King Philip's Consort, who she was,
and how allied. 579 Mendosa raises a great Army in Germany; and for what.
585.586 Maurice Prince marches to Arnheym; and why. 593 594 Pitcheth his Camp
by Mendosa. 595 Moers a Town complains of the Spaniard; and the reason thereof.
597, 598 Maurice Prince endeavors to overflow the Country, but is hindered by
Mendosa; and how. 611, 612 He pitcheth his Camp at Doesberg, and why; with a
Description of the same. 613, 614 Brings his Army and Provision to Arnheym, and
so returns to the Hague. 610 Mendosa his Insolence toward the Germans. 614, 615
Maurice Prince in great perplexity; and why. 624 He pitcheth his Camp in the
Isle of Geldre. 625 Mendosa comes to the Isle of Bommel, where he loses many
men by Skirmishes, and otherwise, he retires to K^ssem. 631 Maurice Prince
quartereth his men in Vorn Island. 634 Raises a Fort in Bommel Island, which
is assaulted by Mendosa, but to no purpose. 631, 632 Mendosa put his Army into
Winter Quarters, and so does Prince Maurice. 637 Maurice Prince with a great
Army goes into Flanders, which filled the Country with fear. 666, 667 The
Prince and his Army terrified, at the sudden approach of the Enemy. 669, 670
He draws up his Army into Battalia, and the manner thereof. 671, 672 Mauritian
Commanders Speech to the Soldiers, and the Prince's in particular. 675, 676,
677 Moers won by Prince Maurice. 699 Montiregio a Colonel of the Spaniards
slain. 702 Mendosa set at liberty; and upon what Terms, having been taken
prisoner at Newport Fight. 717, 718 Maurice Prince with a great Army sits down
at Centron, a Village in Liege. 718, 719 Mendosa goes into Spain; his
entertainment there. 725 Mendosa, Andrew Hurtad^, employed to beat the
Hollanders out of the Indies. 728 Mansfeldt, Count Peter, his Death and
Character. 782 Maurice Prince comes to relieve Lingen, but in vain. 803 He
pitcheth his Camp (...) Wosel, and falls upon Spinola's Army, but without
success. 809, 810, 811, 812 Sends his Army into Winter Quarters. 814
Marscilles, a French City, almost betrayed to the Spaniard; and how, and by
whom. 817, 818 Maurice Prince recollects his Army, and re-inforceth Diventer,
Zutphen, and Doesburge. 835 He fortifies all the Country between the Rhine and
Wael, and Issel. 836 Muscovy, Troubles there; whence arising, how and by what
means composed. 860 Maurice Prince persuaded to hearken to Peace; and by whom.
^77 (...) persuades against Peace; so do several others; and who, and why. 899,
935, 936, 937 Melancton Philip; his Opinion. 951 Ministers of Holland meet in
an Assembly, to examine the Books of Armitius and Gomanes. 953 ^lison, a
Captain of Holland, returns from the East Indies with Honor and Wealth. 954,
95^ A Description of several places there; and of the Hollanders Transactions
therein. 954, 955, 956, ^ 961 Molucca's Islands: The Hollanders worsted there;
and how. 961, 961 Several Leagues made by the Hollanders in those Parts. 962,
963, 964
N.
NEtherlanders: They fear the Change of their Government; and why. 6, 7
Netherlands: Margaret made Regent of them; and why. 22 The Government thereof
nominally in Margaret, but really in Granvel. 23 Exempt from Foreign Bishops;
and when. 25 The Lords thereof, after Granvel's Banishment, take notice of all
things, and take all into their own power. 28 Nassau: Lewis of Nassau, a prime
Leader of Faction. 33 Netherlands never subject to Germany. 3^ Nassau: Lewis of
Nassau breaks into Frizeland, 50 N^olph of Nassau slain there. 51
Netherlanders: in Bruxels shut up their Shops, and stand on their Guard. 58
Narda: A Town in Holland taken, and the Walis pulled down. 65 Nassau: Lewis of
Nassau killed, with some others. 75 Netherlanders receive Aid from diverse
Princes. 91 Nassau: Jobs of Nassau, governs Gueldros. 94 Netherlands: Many
Seditions happen there (...) both Sides. 110 Nienout won by La^ove for the
Hollanders, and other places in Flanders 116 Netherlanders troubled at Francis
de Valeis; and why. 126, 131, 132, 133 Treat with him for the Town in him
power. 133 Newport gained by Parma, and several other Towns in Flanders. 136
Nassau William, Governor of Frizeland, composes the Differences there. 14^
Nimineghen won by the Spaniards. 163 Nu^sie surprised by Ni^narius, but
presently re-taken by Parma. 171, 172 Netherlands, Their Borders and
Neighbors. 189 N^rius killed; and how; his Character. 235 Nimineghen besieged
by Prince Maurice, but left on a sudden. 252, 253 Besieged a new by Prince
Maurice. 275, 277 The Original and Description of the City. 276 It is delivered
to the Prince. 278 Nayon, a Town in France, taken by the Spaniards. 30^ Nu^sie
revolts from the Spaniards; so do other places. 319, 320 Namur and Lisle refuse
Spanish Garrisons. 325 Nassau: Philip of Nassau slain. 392 Netherlanders
Letters to King Philip, concerning his Daughters Marriage with Albertus. 529,
530 Netherlands turned over to Albertus and Isabella, the causes and A^cles
thereof declared by King Philip. 562, 563, 564 Several Opinions concerning his
(...) 564, 565 Netherlanders set (...) to their obedience. 567, 568 Their
desires to the Archdukes. 651, 652 Newport a Town in Flanders, besieged by
Prince Maurice. 667 Nassau, Count Ernests worsted (...) fight by Albertus, at
Leffingen Bridge. 670, 671 Newport Battle, the beginning and end thereof, and
Victory gotten by Prince Maurice. 678, 679, ad 680 The number of the slain, and
names of the prisoners. 685, 686 Netherland States summoned to meet at
Bruxells, and the Archdukes Speech to them. 688 Notte Colonel, succeeds Dorpe
in the Government of Ostend. 760 Nassau John, his death and Character. 856, 857
Naya Francis, who, he is employed by the Archdukes, about making peace with
the Hollanders. 878 His desires to the States, and their Answer. 889, 890
Netherlands under the Archdukes, their bounds. 892 Naya appointed to rende at
Delf, and why. 893 He has a private meeting with Cornplius Asten, Secretary to
the States, and the effect thereof. 983, 984 Nassau. Adolphus slain, and how.
949.
O.
OAth imposed by the Regent, on the Commander, and why, and who took the same.
4^ Ocean, breaks over its bounds with a great destruction. 5^ (...), Issell,
Doway, and other places submit to the Duke of Parma upon Condition, and the
heads of the same. 105, 106 O^denard besieged, stormed, and taken by Parma. 127
Oath imposed by the Confederate States, when, why, and on whom. 1^ (...)
Michael, his Ship burned, and ^ow becomes a booty to the English. 2^1 ^arson
Garrisoned by the Prince. 291 Delivered to the Spaniard. 316, 323 ^al, an Irish
Title, abjured, by whom, and why. 403 Ostend, the Siege thereof threatened, but
no more blocked up by Albertus. 50^ ^sen (...) by Prince Maurice. 519 Ostend
taken also by the same, and dismantled. 519 (...) and Mulsem fortified, and
why, and by whom. Orseo besieged. 592, 593 (...) blocked up with Form by the
Spaniards. 6^ Besieged by Albertus, with a large descripti^ of the Town, and
the whole Siege, from the beginning to the end, with the Surrender thereof,
upon honour^ Conditions, and the names of the several Governments during the
time. 698, 699, 700, 701, ad 705.708, ad 710.713. ad 717.760. ad 762.774. ad
777 Olde^zpole besieged by Spinola, and yielded. 800, 801 (...) French Colonel
killed. 812 (...) Burn^velt persuades to peace. 877 In suspected, and lays
down his Offices in the Commonwealth, had ^on desire, takes them up again.
944, 945
P.
POpe, when he attained his height of Power, and how, and by what degrees. 14
Philip, the second King of Spain, departs out of the Netherlands. 21.23 (...)
to consent to the States Request, for removal of the Soldier. 22 (...) great
affection to the Netherlanders, but quite contrary. 29 Send his Wife Elizabeth
with the Duke of Alva, to a Conference at ^ajon, with the French King and his
Mother. 30 Displeased with several of the great Men, and why. 32 Disappointed
of rising. Forces, and how. 36 Popes Authority denied, and by whom. 38 Public
Commotions first begin in the Low Countries, and why, and by whom. 37 Philip
talks of going into the Netherland. 43 H^s churlish answer, to the Emperors
Message by his Brother to him. 52, 53 His name used in all Cases by the Union.
70, 75 Peace: Treaty of Peace at Breda, between whom, and the refuse thereof.
76, 77 Philip, discharges his Creditors without payment. 82 Approves the Peace
made at Gaunt. 85 Desired to make peace with the Hollanders, and by whom, and
why. 90 Parma, the Duke of Parma succeeds Don John in the Government of the
Netherlands: his Character. 103, 104 He besieges Maestricht, and takes it.
104, 110, 111 Peace, Treaty at Colen, and the result thereof. 104, 105.110
Portugal, Kingdom claimed by King Philip, and Conquered by Alva to his use.
114, 115 Parma: Duke receives Recruits from the King. 1^8, 170 He pitcheth his
Camp between Gaunt and Bruges. 141 Takes Dendremu^d and V^lvorde. 148
Plicentia, a Castle in Italy, delivered to Parma by the Spaniard, and why 161
Parma made a Knight of the Golden Fleece. 162 He wins diverse Towns and Forts to
the Spaniard. 172 Peace: Treaty of peace between England and Spain, and the
heads thereof. 184.186, 187 Provinces under the Spanish obedience, which, and
how many; and which under the United States. 188.193 Pope sets out Bulls
against Q. Elizabeth, and exposes it to Conquest. 205 Parma's Council, and the
Marquess of Santa Cruz, rejected. 206 Parma collects above 30000 men, with
other Provisions to help the Spanish Fleet. 207. He is kept close in Dunkirk.
209. Wants Seamen, and why. 210 Piementel Didaco, with his Ship taken in
Zeland. 214 Parma, blamed, envied, and hated by the Spaniards, and why. 231,
232. He falls sick, and goes to the Spaw. 232 Philip of Spains pretense to the
Kingdom of France. 240 Parma receives gracious Letters from Spain, 253. He
takes a new Journey into France, 254. Frees Paris from a Siege. 260 The many
troubles attending his return. 261. Discontented at his loss before
Knolsenburg. He goes to the Spaw waters. 273. He marches into France with an
Army. 282. Returns thence into the Netherlands, having first received a wound.
283. While he intends another Journey into France, he dies. 298 The causes of
his death, and his Character. 299.300 Philip King: his Declaration against the
French King. 348 Peace, desired by all, and a Treaty to that purpose, between
whom, and what Commissioners. 368. Their Speech to Prince Maurice, and his
Answer. 369, 370, 371 The Treaty broken off, and why, with several opinions
thereon. 371, 372, 373 Philip King of Spain, in great distress for money, and
why. 454 He discharges all his Creditors without payments and the ^ssue
thereof. 455.456 Peace conclude^ between England and France, and the heads
thereof as also the like with the Hollanders. 461, 462 463 Poland, the
ungrateful Speech of the Polish Ambassador, and upon what occasion: with the
States Answer thereto. 492, 493 Peace, Reasons why the Hollanders refused
peace. 494, 495, 496 Padilia, sent from Spain with a Fleet to invade Britain,
being broken by Tempests, and returning is removed from his Command. 501, 502
Philip King of Spain, incline to peace, and why. 515 Peace, treated off between
France and Spain, at St. Quintins, by whom, and upon what terms, 526, 527. The
Treaty goes forward, to which are sent English and Holland Ambassadors. 544,
545.553. Various opinions concerning it in the English Court, and what, and
among whom. 551, 552. Treaty removed to Verbin, where a Peace is concluded, and
the heads thereof. 557, 558 Philip King, his death, and the manner thereof.
575, 576. His Character. 576, 577. His Son Philip, named the 3d, succeeds him.
578 Priest, the noble Speech of a Priest to Mendosa. 611 Peace, Treaty between
Q. Elizabeth and Albertus, and upon what terms, with the event thereof. 662,
663 Portugal Fleet K. fought with, and worsted by the Hollanders. 728, 729
Peace: Treaty between K. James, King of Spain, and the Archdukes, and the
effect thereof. 777, 778, 779. Several opinions concerning a peace between the
Spaniard and Hollanders. 783, 784, 785 Poland, troubles there, and whence
arising, and how concluded, and upon what terms. 858, 859 Portugueses, their
Petition to King Philip. 863, 864 Philip King, inclinable to peace, and why.
864 865 Peace, Treaty desired by King Philip, but put off by the Hollanders.
866, 867. Treaty first begun, and how, and upon what. 917, 918, 919. The first
branch agreed conditionally, others positively. 918, 919, 920. The point of
Commerce debated, both by the Commissioners, and by Books. 919, 920, 921, 922,
923. The chief remaining heads to be treated on both sides. 924, 925, 926.
Whereupon the Commissioners proceed with much dissension. 926 927 928. Treaty
lengthened for 6. weeks. 929. A Truce resolved on, and why. 933 934. Great
differences concerning the same. 935.944, 945. The Ambassadors of the Kings,
interpose for reconciling the same. 945 946, 947, 948. Provinces all agree, and
upon what terms. 967 Peace, Treaty renewed at Antwerp, the heads thereof. 968.
The points formerly differed on, agreed, and how. 969. The heads of the League
concluded. 970, 971. The Commissioners on both sides meet at Antwerp, (...)
conclude. 972, 973, 974. The League absolutely concluded, and publicly
proclaimed, both by the Archdukes and States. 975, 976
Q.
QUeen of England refuses to aid the Hollanders, for take the Sovereignty over
them. 79, 163, 16^ 177. She inclines toward them, and moves the King of Spain
to peace. 90. She sends them a supply of Soldiers. 94.151.164. She sends to
them to condole the Prince of Aurange his death; so does the French King. 150
She declares her self for the Hollanders. 164. Is troubled at the Irish
Rebellions, and many other things, and what they were. 181 She hearkens to a
Treaty with the Spaniard, against the will of the Dutch. 185, 186. She fills
the Thames Banks with Soldiers, to resist the Spaniards: She is praised for
her Valor. 208 Almost deceived by Rumors. 209
R.
Religion, Christian Religion, when Ceremonies were (...) thereto, and why,
Instructors thereof first sent from Rome. (...) Reformation, when begun, and
the Authors of several Sects among the Reformed People. 15, 16. Edicts
concerning Religion, which first set in the Netherlands, and by whom, and the
punishments appointed thereby. 18, 19, 20, 21 Roman Ceremonies thrown out of
the Churches, and Romanists debat^ of employment. 71 Revenues of all sorts, and
Tributes brought into a common Treasury. 72.89 Requesens, Lewis succeeds Alva
in the Government of the Netherlands, his Character. 74. His death: whereby the
Government revolves to the Senate. 8^ Rodolfus, Emperor of Germany. 88. His
brother Matthias Archduke of Austria, chosen Governor by the Netherlanders, in
opposition to Don John, yet the Prince of Aurange manageth all. 88.89
Reformers, their Petition to the Archduke Matthias and Prince of Aurange, and
their answer to the same. 95 96 Ren^berg overthrown by the Naslavians, dies.
118 Ringaltius, a Renegado Employed by the Earl of Leicester, which was very
ill resented. 168.173. His miserable end. 173 Richardot sent into Spain by
Parma, and why. 232 Roan besieged by the French King. 282. The siege raised.
283 Ronce Christian, Spanish Campmaster-General, slain, his character. 435.436
R^es and Emmeric Garrisoned by Mendosa, and why. 610.611 Recklinhuysen taken by
the Spaniards. 611 Religion, differences thereabout in England at the coming
in of King Jam^s, and how composed. 744 745.746 Re^s Francis set forth a new
book, and the effect thereof. 787 Ro^^qo^t fortified by Spinola. 797 Richardot
leaves his private instructions behind him in the Inn, and the Heads thereof.
938.939 Religion, a difference therein between Arminius and Go^narus, and their
several Tenets, with the sau^ors of the same. 949 950.951.952 Allowed to be
argued by the States, and before whom, and where. 953 All the Acts of the
Dispute silenced, and why. 952
S.
Spaniards, the difference between them and the Dutch, with a Description of
both. 7.8 Spanish Soldier, removed out of the Netherlands, and why. 23
Seditious people owned, and a^ned by the Confederate Nobles. 38 Spaniards begin
to look at revenge, and against whom, and why. 43 They are worsted in
Friezeland, and by whom. 77. They harass Holland, take Outwater and Coblentz,
but are worsted at Utrecht. 78 Spanish Fleet scattered by disease, and the
Captain thereof dyed. 78.79 Schounen Island taken by the Spaniards. 79
Spaniards go out of Holland conducted by Roda. 83 Are put out of the
Netherlands, but quickly return. 86.87 Senate chosen by the Hollanders, and for
what purpose, and by whose advice. 119 St^enwick won by Verdugo, and how. 128
Soldiers, their number on both sides, and how disposed, their pay equal on
both sides. 128.129.197 Steland Governor of Waese for the Hollanders, his
treachery to them and revolt to the Spaniard. 140.141 Schewck Colonel, comes to
the Earl of Leicester, and fortifies the Isle of Gravewaert. 171. Defend Be^ck
against Parma valiantly. 172 Sydney Philip slain, where, when, and by whom. 172
Stanley William made Governor of Deventer by Leicester. 172 States take
Cognizance of all things, and why. 173.174 So^oy seeks the Government of
Friezeland for himself, which he held before under the Prince of Aurange. 176
Senate, care of the Commonwealth left by the Earl of Leicester to the Senate,
but with reserves of power to himself, which they complain of. 178 Scots, the
Queen of Scots put to death, and why. 178 Stanley William betrays Deventer to
the Spaniard. 178 Goes into Spain, where he is neglected. 179 Sluys besieged
and battered by Parma, and at last won by him. 180.181 States by Edict answer
Leicester. recr^minations. 182 Spanish Fleet prepared against England, to be
manned by Parma. 183 Spanish Provinces in the Netherlands, how governed. 195
Spanish Fleet, the description thereof. 205, 206 Spaniards therein, their great
confidence. 207. Their oversight, and wherein, and how excusable. 209. They
send to Parma, but to no purpose. 212. They are affrighted at the approach of
the English Fireships; but rally at Gravel^. 213 The Losses suffered by the
Spanish Fleet, how great, 215.216 Spaniards sent to Surprise Thol, overc^me and
slain by Count Solmes, 218.219 Scheack Colonel fights with Verdugo, kills his
men, and has a great booty in Money. 234. He sets upon Nimmeghen, but is
beaten off with great Loss, and drowned in the R^ver there; his Character. 234
S^^ia, Coasts thereof foraged by the English and Hollanders. 238 Strenberge won
by Prince Maurice. 255 Spaniards mutiny. 283.284.318 319.320 Steeawle, the
description of the Town. 285. Besieged by Prince Maurice, and the manner
thereof. 286. ad 291. The Valor of the Townsmen. 287.288. Delivered to Prince
Maurice. 291 Spaniards mutiny together with others, and why. 350.355.524.571
The Sedition ^omented by the Hollanders. 351 The Seditious ma^e a League with
the Hollander. 352 353 354 They are sent to by Count Ernestus for
reconciliation. 354 355 Spanish Counselors their Character. 361 Senate,
governs the Netherlands by Phillips Order. 366 Solmes Count solemn ^ married,
and to whom. 374.375 Spanish Forces very numerous. 386. Solmes Count Ernestus
slain. 392 Samagitians, who; and their description. 414.415 Spanish Fleet under
Martin Padilla sets out, and under what pretense. 470 Spanish Fleet sets sail
from Calais, laden with Men, which are landed, only one Ship taken by the
Hollanders. 543 Spanish Army greatly increases, which proves very burdensome
to all; and why. 596 Sevenar, a Town in Cleves, Garrisoned by Prince Maurice,
and why. 612 Spanish Army in great want, and dare not fight Pr. Maurice.
612.613. Goes to Winter in Germany, but leaves behind their sick and wounded
without relief. 609. How they behaved themselves there. 611. etc. Spanish Fleet
flies from the Dutch. 641 Spinola Frederick ayds the Spaniard at Sea. 649
Spanish Commanders Speech to the Soldiers. 674.765 Shertogenbosh besieged by
Prince Maurice. 706.707 The Siege raised, and why. 708 Spinola Ambrose, joins
his Forces to Mendosa's. 719 Spinola Frederick his Galleys burned and spoiled
by the English and Hollanders. 726.727. Beaten again by the Zelanders and
killed 751 Spinola Ambrose comes to the Siege of Ostend, 752.760.761
Shertogenbosh again besieged by Prince Maurice. 754. to 757 And attempted to be
relieved by the Arch Dukes. 758.759 Spinola Ambrose General before Ostend. 760.
He is envied, but minds it not, proceeding with care in the Siege. 761.762
Scluys besieged by Prince Maurice. 767.768. Several Forts about the Town won by
him. 769. The Enemy attempts the Relief of it. 770. ad 773. The Town
Surrendered. 774 Soldiers raised in England, etc. and by whom, and for what.
787.788 Spinola Ambrose made a Knight of the Gol^e^ Fleece. 788.789 He first
causes Soldiers to be brought out of Spain into Flanders by Sea. 792.793. His
Counsel to the King of Spain. 795 He amuzes the Hollanders by dividing his
Army. 7^ He renews and settles Discipline, 799, 800. Dismisseth his Army. 814.
He is generally applaud^, and why. 8^2 Sedan claimed by the Viscount Turcia,
for which he is called to account, and departs into Germany, 823. 824 It is
delivered to the French King as a Pledge. 824 825 Spanish Levies hindered both in
Britain and Italy; and how. 826, 827 Supremac, Oath devised by King James, and
to what purpose 827.828 Scluyes attempted and almost surprised by Terrall, who
is beaten off with great loss. 832.833.834 Spinola marches into Frizeland with
a great Army, but is retarded by ill weather. 835. He attempteth upon Sw^ll,
but in vain. 837 His Soldiers mutiny, and why. 842.843 Spanish Ships afflicted
with Storms and Tempests; and the Hollanders no less. 847.848. Soldiers
dismissed both by the Archdukes, and States; and why. 909 Spanish
Commissioners hindered by the Frost from coming to the Hague. 914. Spanish
Commissioners arrive at the Hague. 915 Are met by Prince Maurice on the way.
916 Spinola discontented at the breaking off the Treaty. 938.939 Spaniards
agree the States shall be called Illustrious. 968
T.
TOleration of Religion, where allowable, and where not; and by whom, and for
what reasons. 16.31 Trent Council, the Decrees thereof published, and the
success of the same. 30 Temples violated, where and by whom. 38 Taxes; the
several sorts of Taxes, and by whom and when set, and upon what; as also the
extent and continuance thereof; and differences about the same.
56.72.456.542.543.629.690.763.764 Turk falls into Africa, where the Spaniard
had possessions, 82 To^ay besieged and delivered by the Spaniard. 124 Toledo
Francisco flies from his Ship, which is taken in Zealand. 214 Thanks are given
publicly to God by the Queen for her Victory against the Spaniards. 217 Truce;
some for a Truce with the Hollanders, and some against it, and why. 373.374
Tescline, a German Colonel killed. 431 Turnhoult, the defeat given there by
Prince Maurice his men to the Archdukes, with a description of the fight.
478.479. ad 484. Two^e Earl, taken Prisoner, and the Irish Rebellion ended, 562
Ternate, King thereof, makes peace with the Hollanders, 731.732 Trivulci a
Spanish Colonel killed. 812 Ter^all a Spanish Commander worsted by the
Hollander, 830 Transylvania, Troubles there, whence arising, and how; and by
what means composed. 860.861 Tol^do Don Pedro sent Ambassador into France by
King Philip, and to what intent. 929.930
V.
VIglius finds fault with the Magistrates compliance with the People. 38. His
Counsel to the Regent. 41 Valenciennes besieged and taken; by, and for whom.
42.111. Union: Names of the Cities of the Union, and others added to them. 69,
70. Verdugo a Spaniard worsts Norris in a Fight. 118 Venleo betrayed to Parma;
and by whom. 171 Union: The Government of the United Provinces. 189. to 195.
Their Revenue. 195. They are exceeded by the Spaniards Provinces there in
Wealth. 196. The number of their Army. ibid. Their manner of (...) the same.
196, 197. Character of the People in the ^nited Provinces. 198, 199, 200
V^ldes, a great Spanish Commander with his Army, taken by S^ Francis Drake.
211. Vere Francis fights with Varembonius, and worsts him with a great
slaughter; then relieves Perck. 236 (...): The United States complain of the
Germans; and for what. 260 They resolve to invade the Spanish Quarters. 262
Vere Sir Francis takes Zutphen S^once by stratagem. 262, 263 Verdugo, with his
Army, assaults Prince Maurice's Camp before Covonden, but is worsted. 296, 297.
He retreats to Ol^enzeel. 327 Union: United States invited to the K. of
Scotland's eldest Sons Baptizing, among other Princes. 345. Divisions among the
United States; and for what: and the ill Successes attending the same. 384,
385. Verdugo dies: his Character. 386. V^llas; a great Commander killed. 38^.
Union: United States send to the P^. of Aurange; and why: and his Answer to
them. 422. Send Ambassadors to the King of Denmark; and for what: with the
King's Agreement thereupon. 467, 468 Venlo^ attempted in vain by Prince
Maurice. 488 Vel^co Lewis, his great boasting. 597 Union: United States excuse
themselves to the Emperor and Germans; and why. 620, 621. Make Peace with the
K. of Sweden. 655 Vere General, Governor o^ Ostend. 698. He arrives there; and
his Care, Valor, and Vigilance; he is wounded. 702, 703, 704. Makes a Truce
with the Enemy; and why. 709, 710 Vandernoort Oliver sails into America; and so
round about the World. 712. United States their Declaration. 719 720. S. Vit, a
Town in Lutzenburg, taken by Lewis of Nassau, and the whole Country wasted. 726
United States accused by Albertus, as Fonenters of War. 765, 766 Venetians
forbid giving of Lands to Monasteries, without License of the Senate, which
causes a great difference between them and the Pope, not long after
reconciled. 827, 828, 829 Verhagen Stephen returns from the Indies, with a rich
Fleet of Hollanders. 847, 848 Venetian Troubles composed by the French King.
862.912 Verginia, a part of America, claimed by the English, who settle there;
and the success of the Plantation. 869, 870 965 United States refuse to treat,
unless their Liberty be confirmed. 879 They receive Letters to that purpose
from the Arch-Duke's, but not satisfactory. 879. They advise with the
Provinces, the Form of their Letters. 880. They send Verdusio to Antwerp; and
for what. 881. He requires a solemn Instrument, for confirmation of their
Liberty, which is granted. ibid. The Bounds of the United Provinces. 892
^erreike Lewis, Secretary to the Arch Dukes, brings to the States the King of
Spain's Confirmation of their Liberty; but it is disliked, and why. 895, 896:
United Provinces: Many Disputes there concerning Peace; and what, and by whom.
896. They draw up New Instruments, for confirming their Liberty, which are sent
into Spain. 896 Verreike returns with the same, together with Nay^, from Spain,
only with some little alterations; which is again found fault with: and why.
897, 898. But at length accepted; and how. 899 United States, give an Account
of the whole, to the several Provinces, 899, 900, 901. Their Debate thereon,
and Result. 901 United States their Proposal to the Archdukes. 902, 903
W.
WAR: The causes and beginnings of the Dutch War, 2, 3, 8 9, 11, 21, 22, 63
Walloons; Who, and where inhabiting, together with their Character. 41. War: In
France first breaks out; and upon what occasions. 46. War Proclaimed against
Don John. 89 War, in Colen first breaks out, and for what, and between whom,
137 Continuation of the War at Colen. 171 Wachten^one besieged by Parma, and
gained. 223 ^eert taken by Prince Maurice his horse, but again deserted, 396
War in Burgundy hotly prosecuted. 399 ^rmondt John, Admiral of the Dutch in
the Cadiz Voyage. 447 Whale, taken at Bercheyd in Holland, and several Opinions
concerning the same. 532.533.765. Wesell a Town, sends a Petition and G^^es to
Mendosa, and his answer thereto. 609.610 Is forced to submit to the Spaniard,
but soon after revolts. 616.617 ^achtendone Surprised and taken by Lewis of
Nassaw. 656.657 War between the K. of France and the Duke of Savoy, and for
what. 692 Wachtendone Surprised and lost again by the Spaniard, 749.750 Woude,
a Castle, taken by Prince Maurice. 791 Wachtendone besieged by Count Bucqu^y,
808.809. delivered to him. 813 Wittenhorst and Gevard Messengers of the
Archdukes, admitted into the Assembly of the States to Treat of Peace. 877.878
Winwoods, King James his Ambassadors Speech in the Assembly of the States for a
Truce, 944
Y.
YOrk Rowland, partaker with I^bis. 171. Made Governor of Welaw by the Earl of
Leicester, 172. He betrays the same to the Spaniard. 178. And is poisoned, 179
Z.
(...) many Victories at Sea against the Spaniards. 83 (...) and Zuinglians,
who and what, and in what part followed, and allowed. 36.37. Zutphen taken for
the Spaniard by Alva, 65.137. Zyriczee taken by Requesens. 79 Z(...) b^sieged
and taken by Prince Maurice, 263.264.265 (...)* difference between Holland and
Zeland, and about what. 49^^ (...)y in Walcheren the Rendezvous for Prince
Maurice his Army, 66^ ^^landers taken a Portugal Carrack, 730.731. Zas
be^sieged by Prince Maurice. 791.792.966. A noble Action of a ship of Zeland.
846 Zelanders averse to a Peace or Truce, and why, 945
ERRATA.
FOr M^rim, Page 3. Line 9. read Morini. p. 9. l. 26. r. when. p. 11. l. 26. r.
is it? p. 18. l. 13. r. with such innocence. p. 19. l. 27. r. as. Ibid, they
might p. 24. l. 7, 8. r. hated above. p. 32. l. 13. dele also. p. 34. l. ^.
Gheuses. p. 38. l. 6. dele Is. p. 40. l. 12. r. would permit him to lay. p. 45.
l. 22. r. woman, things set. p. 51. l. 23. r. was no longer due. Ibid. l. 32,
33. r. was confirmed. p. 52. l. 18. r. equal. p. 58. l. 24. r. Dane. p. 59. l.
ult. r. Coliny. Ibid. l. 19. r. inveighed against him. p. 66. l. 19. r. others
placed here. Ibid. l. 32. r. into. p. 67. l. 7. r. in part called, p. 73. l.
21. r. possible. p. ^7. l. ^3. insert Artevill. p. 112. l. ult. r. it was
first. p. 113. l. 10. r. with (...). p. 131. l. 11. r. upon. Ibid. l. 28. r.
mad. p. 133. l. 5. r. one. Ibid. l. 9, ^0. r. restore such. p. 137. l. 8. r.
T^^rius. Ibid. l. 16. r. of. p. 138. l. 4. r. bu^ ^. p. 140. l. 13. r. these.
p. 143. l. 15. r. one, to wit, the City. p. 145. l. ^. r. of. p. 150. l. 25. r.
Parmensian. p. 172. l. 5. r. Bercke. p. 181. l. 33 r. thirty Florens a man. p.
1^5. l. 16. r. treacherous. p. 202. l. 19. dele now. p. 203. l. 4. dele of. p.
209. l. 1. insert Nottingbam. p. 234. l. 3. r. Rees. p. 249. l. 33. r. Pieces.
p. 251. l. 29. r. decision. p. 258. l. 5. r. hate. p. 288. l. 3^ r. not in. p.
294. l. 2. r. Trench. p. 298. l. 1. r. Prince. p. 303. l. 17. r. Public p.
315. l. 13. r. Cuyck: Anon. p. 337. l. 25. r. scornful. p. 360. l. 1. r. had no
been. p. 361. l. 16.17. r. more famous City. Ibid. l. 20. insert the Ibid. l.
30 dele and. p. 362. l. 3. r. shooting. p. 375. l. 9. r. was one. p. 377 l. 7.
r. Frizeland. p. 406. l. 18. r. Magellan. p. 409. l. 10. dele of. p. 413. l.
21. r. interval. p. 418. l. 2. r. then. Ibid. l. 6. r. and so. p. 442. l. 13.
r. them. p. 45 l. 17. r. thoughts. p. 463 l. 20. r. Mero^^e. p. 466. l. 12. r.
Junius. Ibid. l. 22. r. for his noble birth, honors born, and description of
the Siege. p. 546. l. 16. r. appease. p. 540. l. ^3. r. no^ a like. p 55^. l.
1. r of. p. 574. l. 23. r. had procured* Ibid. l. 24. r. by means of his
brother. p. 588. l. 15. dele been. p. 591. l. 2^. r Ju^eland. p. 601. l. 33. r.
Bercke. p. ^^2. l. 23. r. Hoye. p. 619. l. 27. r. his charges might, p. 6^^. l.
1^. r. seven. p. 630. l. ^1. r. in their sleep. p 665. l. 5. insert dens of.
Ibid. r. ^. r. seven. p. 67^. l. 25. r. ^^k. p. 70^. l. 19. r. Uchtenbrook. p.
713. l. 17. r. (...) p. ^43. l. 24. r. without it. (...) p. 8^1 l. (...) Naya's
p. 882. l. 26. r. (...) ^6. (...) A great. p. 912 l. 6. r. in Hungary, the. p
91^. l. 1. r. (...) r. many of her. p. 965. l. 7. r. M^n^s.


