A GUIDE TO JURIES: Setting forth their Antiquity, Power and Duty, From the
Common Law and Statutes. With a TABLE.

By a Person of Quality.

ALSO A LETTER, to the Author, upon the same SUBJECT.

London, Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Bible and Three-Leggs, over against
Grocers-Hall in the Poultrey. 1699.

To all Honest JURYMEN.
Gentlemen,
IN a Word, You are England's Ephori, and Tribuni; The Boundaries of
Prerogative and Privilege, and the living Bulwark of the Laws. Your Honor is
Eclipsed, is unaccountably Learned Dr. Cowel, in word Jury, speaks of Juries
being (in his own words) Associates and Assistants to the Judges of the Court
(anciently) in a kind of Equality; whereas, now adays (says he) they attend
them in great Humility, etc Citing also Lamb. and Cust. of Normandy agreeing
with them.
shrunk: The Office yet is great: Here Is demonstrated the great Privilege you
be, that it may be seen how much all Englishmen ought, in Interest, to Value
and Encourage you. Here Is set forth What and How you may do, and What and How
you may not Do, under what Penalties: Also the History of the Whole. The King
is graciously pleased to Declare, He will Govern by Law; Is It fit you should
know how to Govern your selves according to Law. This is Concise, and a
Breviate, rather than a Book, that, should it meet with a queasie Stomach,
little Purse, or narrow Soul, the same might not stumble at it. If any thing by
this means happen so general, as admit of any Exception, you may expect it in
some other, if not in the same place. It Is chiefly about Criminal Causes, where
the King's Name's used for that of the Plaintiff, because, most Difficult and
Greatest Concern; But is serviceable and sufficient for others too. It may, at
least, serve to Stir up, and to Foil, if not Assist learneder Hands. Adieu.

THE INDEX.
ANtiquity of Juries, Page 1, 2. Assistants Judges be to Juries, 18, 19, 20,
26. Attaint lies for following Judges directions, 27. Age of a person tryable
by Judges or Jury, 27, etc. Attaint lies not, where Witnesses were not sworn,
32. nor in Appeals, 32. is tried by 24 Men. According to the best of one's
knowledge, what, 41, 42. Appeal is dangerous to bring, 45, 46. Affirmatives are
not to be Sworn against, directly, 90. Altering Indictments is common, and how,
97, etc. Alteration may be of any thing, that is Recorded in Court, 102.
Alteration by a petty Jury to make a fault less, 102. Billa vera means what,
etc. 40, 43, 50, 51, 52, 54. Challenge to Jurors, when and how, 6, to Jndges
anciently, 10. Confirmation of Trial by Juries, 58 times, 12. Conclusion of the
Jury against their Premises, void 18. Contempts in a Jury, punishable, 31.
Concealment in Juries, where, and how punished, 32. Charge to Juries, 38, 39.
Circumstances alleged must be consistent, 64, 65, and when must be proved, 64,
etc. Credit of Witnesses cousidered, 76, 77, 79, 80, 86, etc. Confession before
trial, no Evidence, 87. Differences of Opinions often on the same matter, 25.
Directions of Judges ought not always be followed, 26. Discretion in Fining,
etc. how understood, 33. Duty of Judges, 30, 31, 37, 38. Doubtful Cases are for
Defendant, 50, etc. Difference in proof from the Accusation, 76 etc. which is
material, and which immaterial, 77. Evidence is what, 75. it is Credit and
Authority is to be considered, 76, 77, 79, 80, 86, etc. it is extent must be
well considered, 29, 30, cannot be directly against an Affirmative, 90.
Confession before trial is none, 87. is Juries own knowledge, 22, etc. 35, and
saying and Swearing what is Law is none, 26. Embracery is punishable in them,
32. Error of Judgment is not punishable, 64. Estopels bind not Juries, 91.
Examination of Witnesses ought to be by Juries, 91, 92. Fact is determined by
Juries, not Judges, 13, etc. Fine at Discretion is what, 33. Fault must be
considerable, 40, 62, etc. by Compulsion, of necessity, involuntary ignorance,
etc. not punishable, 67. Felony is what, and how 69. Fraudulent sales, and.
void, 99. Hearing both parties, 54, etc. Implied is what, 66, etc. Judges ought
be able and upright, 2. hold their places at King's pleasure, 2, 3. are not
punishable, 4. ought not be concerned where King is party, 12. meddle not with
matter of fact, 13, etc. are but Assistants to Juries, 18, etc. 26. ought not
influence Juries, 20, etc. 24, 26, 30, 31. their duty, 30, 31, 37, 38. say what
shall be given as Evidence, 88. Juries who may be of, 4, 5. anciently Knights
only, 5, chosen by Sheriff or Coronor, 5, as capable as Judges or more 11. they
only determine Fact. 13. and sometimes Law too, 17. sometimes called Judges,
20. ought not be biased, 35, etc. are Judges of the Credit of Testimony, 88.
are bound by their own sense, 24. Indictment what and how, 39. ought not be
found of course, 41, etc. is a trial as well as another, 44. is great damage to
the party, 45. Ignorance in Juries excuses not, 53. Ignoramus means what, etc.
40, 50, 51, 52, 97. Knights were only on Juries anciently, 5. Legales,
signifies what, 4, 5. Liberi is what, 4. Law is but improved and refined
Reason, 27. Law determined by Jury, 17. Mercy is Justice. 49, etc. Material
Circumstances, which, 64. difference, which, 77, etc. Number on a Jury
indefinite anciently, 8. but now is Twelve, p. 9, etc. Of Judges determining
any thing, was anciently Twelve; Of Witnesses ought to be Two, 80, etc.
Negatives cannot be Sworn, 90. Oath of Juries, its Form, 34. how must be
performed, 35, 36. unalterable, but in Parliament, 42. Punishment is none for
Judges, 4. for Juries in Civil Causes is by Attaint, 4. Juries punishable
scarce any wise else, 28. etc. 31. 32. Quare, 53. are punishable for Contempts,
Embracery, etc. 32. and the Grand Jury for wilful Concealments in a Sessions of
Peace, 32. or for discovering their Evidence, etc. 33. are for refusing to be
Sworn on the Jury, 43. or giving a Verdict Twelve, at last not agreed, 33. no
punishment for Error in Judgment, 64. is what for Perjury, 85, 94. none for a
Jury above Twelve, 32. Parliament can hardly take away Juries, 16. Perjury is
what, and how, 25, 26, 38, 39. Presentment is what, and how, 39. Present is the
same as say, 43. Peers exceedingly suffer by Indictments, 46. their future
Judge and Jury are all without Oath; cannot except against, or Challenge any of
their Jury; if the major part of their Jury agree, it is enough, 47. Presumption
of nothing but innocence, etc. 49, 73, 81. Proof of what Circumstances is
requred, 64. etc. it ought be full and plain, 76, 79, 80. ought be very
particular, and full upon a Statute, 76. differing from what one's accused of,
77, 78, 79. what is sufficient, 78, 79. Punishment was what anciently for
Perjury, 94. Judges, 95. Lawyers, 94, 95. Records are Evidence, though Jury
only know of them, 13. Special Verdict how, 14. Sense of the Jury themselves
upon things is to Govern them, 24. of words, that must be taken which of most
innocence, 78. Trial by Juries most safe, etc. 2, etc. is in effect twice, in
Cases of Life, Member, etc. 7. 44. by one's Peers, why, 6, by Ordeal, etc.
when, 51. Trial of one's Age, by Judge or Jury. 27, etc. Verdict of Petit Jury
may lessen, not enlarge a Fault, 102. Verdicts must be positive what the fact
is 13, 14, and special what and how be, 14, 97, etc. Value 1 s. anciently, was
more than 40 s. now, 15. Vera signifies true, 43. Verdict General which and
how, 97. etc. Verdict in Case of Life, or Member must be given in Court, only,
102. Words of form so called must be examined, 34, etc. 59, etc. which be such,
64. Witnesses ought be examined by Jury, 87, 91, and who be capable to be
Witnesses, 86, etc. Judges determine who shall be Sworn, 88, must be two 80,
etc.
A GUIDE TO JURIES.
OF what Date Juries be, is the same to say, as when was England first
Inhabited, altogether uncertain. But that their Antiquity herein England runs
to and beyond the Norman Conquest, among the Danes, the Saxons, and the
Britains, is most certain. Olaus Magnus, Olaus Wormius, Verteganus, Fortesc.
Co. Lit. etc.

The Saxons conquering the Britains, mixed their Customs with the British, so
the Danes those British and Saxon ones with theirs, and the Normans all these
with theirs; every Conqueror making some alteration. Yet this Law was, and
from time to time has been preserved and continued an Inheritance indisputable
and Sacred unto us through all Revolutions, without any Interruption.

None but must acknowledge this of all others, the best and most effectual way
to find out Truth. There is no other Way or Art in the whole World, says
Fortescue, so remote from all Danger of Subornation and Corruption, 75.

Aaron had, it is true, in plain Letters of Gold, Vrim and Thummim wrote on his
Breast, signifying what he either had, or ought have had, lucem in monte, ac in
voluntate rectitudinem, Ability in Parts, and Integrity in Practice. But have
always all other Judges since had such Parts and Practices? Their Interests,
Ambition, Pleasures, other Passions and Frailties influenced them too much,
rather sufficient enough to render them, as the Prophet Isaiah, c. 33. v. 15.
says, Idols with Eyes, Ears and Mouths, viz. Such as would neither hear the
Peoples Complaints, regard the Oppressed, nor pronounce a just Judgment. Judges
have Places and Preferments so extraordinary Honorable and Profitable: And
what is their Tenure? Even during Pleasure, a term for so long as they do
nothing but what and as pleases, etc. and do every thing which and as does
please, etc. And whose Pleasure must it be? Truly every ones too, that any how
has or can make any Interest, etc. Thus a short Syllogism proclaims them little
other than Bondslaves to such Men's pleasures, and menaces the People with the
worst of all Miseries, Law-oppression, Oppression under color of Law; unless
it be conceivable Men's pleasures were to have the Judges give Sentence against
them. Judges also were all Lawyers we know, used just before to take Fees, it is
the more therefore all forget it now. Judges are concerned in so many Causes,
they are subject to be tempted the oftener, and every Temptation is the greater,
because they know, if would yield, their gain might be so often. Judges are so
few, it is plain they may the easier be Corrupted. Judges cannot want Courage,
they think themselves liable to no Action, etc. in any case, do what they will,
but are absolutely dispunishable, Co. 12. 24, 25. Hutton. Whereas a Jury on the
other side, if it err, in many cases it is liable to an Attaint, the greatest
Funishment they know on this side Death. A Jury consists of many Persons. Those
which be Jurymen in one Case, yet may be in few more. They be Men of other
Professions, used never in any Case to take Fees, etc. They are not prejudiced
with fear of losing their Offices, etc.

And to further manifest the difference of Trial by Judges, and of this by
Juries, Jurymen all are, and must be Liberi etc. legales homines: Liberi free
of, and from all manner of Bondage, Obligations, Affections, Relations,
Passions, Interests, and other Prejudices whatsoever, (as indeed it is ill
Fishing in muddy or troubled Waters:) Legales, ones Peers or Equals, Mag. Chapter
c. 29. West. 1. c. 6. Of full 21 Years old, not Outlawed, never Attainted or
Convicted of Treason, Felony, False-Verdict, Perjury, any Conspiracy at
King's-Suit, nor ever Adjudged to the Pillory, Tumbrel. etc. whereby rendered
Infamous; nor any Alien (unless an Allen be Tried, etc.) But such others as be
most nigh, most sufficient, and least suspicious, 28 E. 1. c. 9. F. N. B. 165.
Die. 59. 34 E. 3. c. 4. Regist. 177. 8 E. 3. 30. They were Anciently all
Knights, Glanvil. l. 2. c. 14, 15. Bract. 116. They are, and must be yet
Persons of Honor and Repute, 1 R. 3. c. 4 Brit. 39. Mir. 117, 118. 11 H. 7.
41. Young 116. 11 H. 4. 35. Stanf. 88. And Si l' Enditement ne y ert even fait
de croyable gens and de bone fame, n'est null tenus a cette respondrue. If an
Indictment be found, but not by Credible People, and those of good Repute, no
Body's bound to take notice of it, Mir. 200. They must be such Persons as are
named and returned at the Election of the Sheriff or Coroner. They must be
every one Sworn every several Trial, and that in and by a particular Oath. If
any of the Grand Jury be as aforesaid, any wise amiss, what they do is quashed
and made void on bare motion to the Court. If any of the Petty-Jury happen so,
Party by Challenging of them, as appear to be Sworn, either sets aside the
Panel, viz. all of them, or may any of them, by taking Exception to the Poll,
viz. to them severally, as the Case falls out; and peremptorily, without
showing any Cause, may Challenge and set aside as many as will, under 36, in
case of High Treason or Misprision of High Treason; or under 21, in case of any
Felony. And showing any such Cause as aforesaid, as many as will, in any Case
whatsoever, Co. L. 156. Now they are such Elect and Choice Men, because of the
great Trust reposed in them: And must be Equals, that the Defendant may the
better speak to, and expostulate with, or reflect upon them, if do amiss. And
that they may not be over awed, etc. by's being greater than them; (whereas
Magna stupem, superiora perstringunt. Greater things confound and astonish us,
and things above us dazzle our Eyes.) Nor be careless or perfunctory for his
being much less than them, (Inferiora ut exigua and minima contemnimus. We are
apt to slight things beneath us, as small and contemptible, or inconsiderable.)
And must be of the Neighborhood, that coming from nigh where the Question
arises, the Defendant, in all probability, may have the better knowledge of
them, to except against, or to approve of them; and such may also the more
likely know somewhat themselves of the Party, of the Matter, of the Credit of
the Witnesses, and all Circumstances. Lex intendit vicinus vicini facta sciat.
Co. L. 78. Thus if the Place happen disputable, whence the Jury shall come,
they shall come from whence the matter is like best to be known, 21 E. 4. 8.
Besides, in this way of or by Jury, where Life or Member is concerned, or in
any danger, and in all other Criminal Causes, is required two Trials of the
Party before he can be said Guilty, or any Judgment can be given against him:
and the Party must also be found to be Guilty on both these Trials, else all is
nothing. The Grand Jury must first Examine the matter, and the Petty-Jury after
Examine all again, to prevent and secure against all Surprises of the Party,
and Mistakes or Errors in the Jury. It seems as if very Anciently the number on
a Jury was indefinite, but it was all the Persons present, come as would come,
Brit. N. Bacon, etc. Like as of Old it was here of those we now call the House
of Commons: Council. Brit. 350. Ingulph. etc. And in the Trials at Rome, where
Vox Populi was the Verdict, (except in Case of a Senator, which indeed was
Tried by his Peers, other Senators.) Hence probably it was, that all Courts
were at first to be open, and so accessible. Likewise Deuteronomy. 19. and some other
Texts of the Old Testament, seems as if the Trial amongst the Jews were so: But
in Analogy of late it is reduced to the number of twelve, like as the Prophets
were twelve, to foretell the Truth, the Apostles twelve to preach the Truth;
the Discoverers twelve, sent into Canaan to seek and report the Truth; and the
Stones twelve, that the Heavenly Jerusalem is Built on: And as the Judges were
twelve anciently to Try and Determine matters of Law, and always when there is
any wageing Law, there must be twelve to Swear in it; and also as for matters
of State, there were formerly 12 Counselors of State. And any thing now which
any Jury can be said to do, must have the joint consent of twelve, West. 2. c.
13. Else it is in construction of Law, not the doing of the Jury, but of Private
Persons, and void. Mir. 42. 200. 41. Ass. 11. 6 H. 4. 2. 21 E. 3. 31. 29 E. 3.
43. Finch. 58. The Grand Jury consists of more Persons commonly than twelve,
but as aforesaid twelve agreeing, it is enough, and so many of them must. So
that by the Law of Juries 24 Men in all, first and last, find one Guilty, etc.
before the Judgment can be given, or one can be punished for the Fault one's
accused of. And besides, every Man of the latter Jury, even all the whole
twelve, must all and every of them agree, and be of that one and only Mind;
(much to suspect, unless one be certainly and plainly Guilty. It Is more for all
twelve, than for twenty nine out of thirty to agree) Any of the Grand Jury
giving in a Presentment or Indictment, without eleven more of the same Mind,
and agreeing with him, ought to be Imprisoned, 40. Ass. 10. which also for any
one of the Petty-Jury to do, none will deny but to be worse. A Judge was Hanged
for giving Judgment on the Verdict of eleven Jurymen, Mir. 296. But on the
other side, the Judges are not so many at a Trial scarce ever, the major part
of them agreeing, it is enough; their Trial would be but one, or once only; they
are never sworn at the Trial, nor ever at all, but only once, and that
exceeding generally; they cannot any of them be excepted against, or
Challenged, (though Anciently might, Lamb. Mir. Bract. Flota) be they never so
great strangers, professed Enemies, and otherwise ill qualified; and though the
King be Party, yet chooses them himself against one.

Besides, if Judges had Power of both determining the matter of Fact, and also
the matter of Law, as must, if were no Juries, their Latitude of Erring, etc.
must then be the greater, and their doing wrong or mischief might be the more,
in as much as might wrong one then in both the Fact and Law; and their
Encouragement so to do, would be Improved, since then it must be harder to
detect them, as whether erred in the Fact, or in the Law, or partly in both;
like as it is easier seeking a Bush than a Wood: And as it is said, Occasio facit
furem: Opportunity makes many a Whore. But were Judges presumed Saints, and
never so upright, etc. yet who can imagine but at a Trial, when Witnesses are
all Examined, and Evidence all given, the Jury being so many Persons, and
probably knowing something of the matter before, they may all assisting one
another better observe, remember, and judge upon the whole matter, than any one
or two, etc. others, though called Judges? Certainly one may do more with help
than without. So the Proverb is, Ne Hercules quidem contra duos; oculi plus
oculo vident: Two to one is odds at Football: And, Non omnes sed pauci decipi
aut decipere possunt, The fewer may the more easily deceive, or be deceived
Quandoque bonus dormit at Homerus. Nemo sine Crimine vivit. Humanum est errare.
It Is natural for Man to err. None's without fault, and the surest Foot may slip.

Visc. St. Albans, Aph. 8. says, That Is the best Law, which leaves the least to
the Arbitrariness of a Judge; and Bract. 119. says, Judges represent the King's
Person, they are his Officers, and Act in his stead, (and hence concludes) they
ought not at all be concerned in Causes of Life or Member, etc. (Where the
King's Party) for, says he, the King is thus Judge as it were in his own Cause.

Thus appears what is the Difference of Judges and Juries, and something of the
Reason why the Parliament has all along been so Zealous for Trials by Juries,
as no fewer than 58 several times since the Norman Conquest, has established
and confirmed the Trial by Juries; no one Privilege else nigh so often
remembered in Parliament.

Now, for the Power and Authority of Juries, and how the Wisdom of the Law has
entrusted and enabled them in this Trial. The Law says, in Trials, whether any
Complaints as made, or any matter as alleged be true or not, the Judges ought
not, nor can say, nor have any thing at all to do therewith, but the Jury only.
Ad questionem facti non respondent Iudices. All the whole, or most they can do,
or at least ought, is only after and upon what the Jury, or the Parties
themselves agree first to be true. What the Jury does, is called Verdictum,
Veridictum, the declaring of what is the Truth in the Matter. What the Judges
do, is called Judicium, Juris dictum, the telling only of what is the Law. Thus
it is, that every finding of the Jury as their Verdict, etc. must be positive,
what the Fact and Party's intent, etc. was, and not saying only what their
Evidence is, that it was; for the Judges cannot even so far meddle with, or take
Conusance of the matter of Fact, as but to say, then the Fact, Case, etc. is so
and so, if you agree, your Evidence to be so and so, and accordingly give
Judgment. Co. 9. Downham's c. Co. 10. Oxford c. Benlow. 3 E. 6. Isaac and
Clerks c. Hob. 167. As A. delivers B. Goods, and after demands them again of B.
but he refuses to deliver them again; if A. sues B. for finding these Goods,
and converting them to his own Use; the Judges will tell the Jury, since B.
refuses to re-deliver them, this is Evidence enough to find him Guilty of
converting them to his own Use, etc. and is in Law a Conversion. But if the
Jury gave their Verdict, etc. specially, as that A. delivered B. the Goods, and
after re-demanded them, but B. refused the delivering of them back, without
saying positively B. converted them to his own Use, or not saying generally, we
find for the Plaintiff, which is tantamount, the Judges cannot say and judge B.
Guilty, etc. but must discharge him. So where in a Trial, fraud is pretended by
one Party done, etc. by the other, the Judges will tell the Jury, such and such
parts of the Evidence prove the Fraud, or in construction of Law are Fraud. But
if the Jury give their Verdict specially, that such and such things are true,
(which the Judges said prove the Fraud) and not saying positively there was
Fraud, the Judges cannot say or judge Fraud, nor take the least notice of any
thing as such. In the case of Roger Mortimer in Parliament, Ao. 1 E. 3. it was
adjudged there, 28 E. 3. n. 10. that the matters he was accused of, though were
notorious, and known to them all in Parliament, and all People else, yet they
could not give Judgment upon this, nor any time ought proceed on any knowledge
of their own. One Condemned of Trespass in the Common Pleas, the Judges seeing
him in Court, and knowing him never so well, yet it was adjudged, if he deny
himself to be the same Person, they cannot say he is, and so cause him
apprehended; because they cannot judge of any thing, nor take notice, but only
of what is upon Record before them, 33 H. 6. 55. Thus if A. be Indicted of
stealing five shillings, In Henry the Third's time, 1 s. was as much as 40 now,
and before then, more; yet the Law was then, one must steal above the value of
1 s. to be Gullty of Felony: So that Merciful Juries now value by the Ancient
shilling, and save many, not Guilty of above the value of 40 s. present Money.
the Jury may give a Verdict, that he is Guilty of stealing the five shillings,
but only to the value of ten pence; and the Judges here cannot say, the five
shillings were more worth or less, though never so apparent. King Henry the
fourth asking Judge Gascoyn, what if he saw A. kill B. and the Jury will find
not that A. killed B. but that C. did? He answered, I can only Reprieve C, and
then intercede with your Majesty for his Pardon. Pl. 83. The Infamous Empson
and Dudley, proceeding to judge as Judges, of matters upon Information by
Witnesses, etc. otherwise than by Juries; this was one indelible blot in their
Escutcheon, though had an Act of Parliament, 11 H. 7. c. 3. to warrant them in
so doing: Ander. l. 1. 156. When a Prisoner is Arraigned, he says, he puts
himself on God and his Country (neither of which are the Judges) for his
Trial; which Country is the Jury. So it is manifest, Juries have the sole
Power and Conusance of the matters of Fact, as whether a thing be true or not,
etc. and the Judges have at most only to do with matters of Law.

Jury men have also the determination of Law, but with this difference from
that of Fact, that it is necessary they determine the matter of Fact. But they
may either refuse to meddle with any thing of Law, and leave it to the Judges,
or at their Election, may take upon them knowledge of the Law, and determine
both Fact and Law themselves. Lit.. 368. and so is every days Experience,
whereof see more anon, speaking of general Verdicts, and special Verdicts. Only
if a Jury give a Verdict, setting forth specially or particularly how the
matter was, and then draw an ill Conclusion as to the matter of Law thereupon,
the Judges will judge against, and so make the Judgment of the Jury in the
matter of Law void, Hob. 53. As suppose A. be Indicted of Murdering B. the
10th. of Feb. etc. And the Jury give their Verdict, that A. gave the Wound at
C. the 5th. of Feb. and that B. died at D. the 10th. of Feb. And conclude, that
A. murdered B. at C. or on the 5th. of Feb. Now the Law saying the Murder was
on, and at the place and time, when and where the Party died, the Judges will
judge against the Judgment of the Jury, Co. 4. 42. So Anno 1654. in B. R.
between the Protector and Somner, the Court said, the Jury had concluded
contrary to their premises, finding he killed two Men on the Road, but calling
it Manslaughter, se defendendo, and so the Judges ordered him to be Tried again.

Thus we see, Judges are unessential and needless in a Trial by Jury, further
than to assist it, by answering and informing what the Law is, where
difficulties arise, or at least the Primitive Constitution might be thus. Like
as also yet they be in the House of Lords, or when any Trial is by the Lords,
but Assistants only, when consulted, and no Parties of or at the Trial, etc. Or
as it is, and always has been in Courts Barons, Hundred Courts, Courts of
Ancient Demesne, and County Courts, 6 E. 4. 3. Crompt. 232, 233. and where the
Sheriff is made Judge, though by the King's Writ, etc. Co. 6. 11, 12. The very
form of special Verdicts to this day, looks as if it were so. As in Murder, the
Jury find and give their Verdict (first) how, and in what manner particularly
the Fact was committed, and then say, but whether upon the whole matter
aforesaid, the killing aforesaid of J. S. be Murder, (in construction of Law)
the Jury is ignorant, and therefore ask the Advice of the Court; and (further
saying,) if upon the whole matter aforesaid, it seem to the Judges and Court,
that it is Murder, then the Jury on their Oath, say, the said I. N. is Guilty
in manner and form as by the Indictment against him is supposed. And if upon
the whole matter, etc. it seem, etc. that it is not Murder, then, etc. I. N. is
not Guilty in manner, etc. Co. 9. 64. So all the Judges do is but Advice,
though in matter of Law; and it is the Jury only that judges one Guilty or not
Guilty of Murder, etc. and whether it be Murder, or what one is Guilty of, by
the Advice and Assistance only of the Judges, without their being any wise any
Parties of or in giving such Judgment. And the Reason, and only Reason, why it
ever seems otherwise, may rise hence, that the Judges of Westminster Hall keep
the said inferior Courts to their due Bounds, Methods, and Order. And the
Lords keep the Judges to theirs, when amongst them; but there is no Body does in
Westminster Hall. The like is hinted by the Stat. of Marlb. c. 26. which says,
Murdrum, etc. non adjudicetur coram Iustitiarijs, Murder, etc. shall not be
adjudged in the presence of the Judges: Showing the Judgment always to be in
the presence of, not by the Judges. The Ancient Books call Jurymen Judges, as
Mir. 209. And it is not for nothing, the Law is so tender of them: He that
strikes one of them, it is perpetual Imprisonment, and forfeiture of the
offending Hand, Judge. 174.

It perhaps may be pardonable in Counselors, because for their Fees, and not
pretending Authority: But why Judges, though apt to Indulge, Improve, and
Extend their own Power and Jursdiction, should offer to brow-beat, threaten,
order, impose upon, or wheedle, flatter, tempt, insinuate with, or any wise
lead, persuade, direct, incline or dispose Juries, how to find their Verdict,
unless only directing them so far as Juries require of them, it is hard to say.
People daily Rob, and so have done, on Salisbury-Plain, but it is never the more
Lawful. Thus are Judges Trumpets, and Juries the Echo, let who will blow. Thus
are Juries but an empty Name: Thus is turned topsy-turvy all the whole thing of
Juries. Thus might the Judges draw, and ingross to themselves the whole Power
in the Trial, and be in Effect Judges and Juries too. Thus is the Trial by
Juries a color, a sham, and really no Trial at all by Jury. Were this
allowable by Law, we should never have had any; the having them would thus be
only an unnecessary trouble, etc. whereas, Lex nunquam per plura quod possit
per pauciora. The Law never sets up or requires any thing so vain or fruitless.

But some will say, the Jury can do nothing, but on the Evidence given in
Court, which the Judges hear as well as the Jury, and so may see the Truth, and
know how the Verdict ought to be, as well as the Jury, and consequently they
may Instruct, Assist, etc. the Jury. It Is true, they may be helpful, they may
assist, but however, it is no matter for their being as aforesaid, too
Officious. And besides, as aforesaid, that the Jury is Neighbors of the Fact,
of the Party, of the Witnesses, etc. but the Judges strangers; and the Jury be
more Persons, and the Judges fewer, etc. The Jury also is not bound up to the
Evidence only given in Court, or that the Judges hear, but may go upon their
own private knowledge. Suppose A. sues B. on a Bond forteen pounds, and B.
pleads payment, but at Trial proves nothing: The Judges themselves say to the
Jury, you must find for A. unless know the Money paid your selves: Which shows,
the Jury may find for B. if they know the Money paid, though the Judges knew
nothing of it, 4 H. 7. 29. So Hob. So if one be Arraigned, and no Witness
produced against him, the Court says the like; as was seen this Michaelmas
Term, 81. in B. R. Bradley's Case, and by daily practice. They use their own
knowledge besides, and often against the the Evidence in Court, Cr. El. 616.
Groves and Short's Case. So in Plowd. 410, 411. So a great Case adjudged in B.
R. Hill. 21 C. 1. And another there, 22 C. 1. And so says Stanf. If a Jury know
any thing of themselves, it is as much as by Evidence, 130. So Plowden says, a
Petty-Jury is sometimes bound to give their Verdict, though have no Evidence,
f. 12. Hence in all Cases at Common Law, one Witness is accepted of as
sufficient; and doubtless any Verdict is good, though in such Cases, without
any Evidence given in Court, because the Jury is presumed to know somewhat of
themselves. Whereas in all other Countries in the World, where Juries be not
used, and here when the Trial is without a Jury, there must be at least two, as
hereafter shall be said more at large. Thus in any Attaint brought against a
Jury, more Evidence may be given on that side the Jury passed of or for, or in
behalf of the Jury, than was given before, Die. 53. b. which could not be, if
their own knowledge were not Evidence, as well as that given in Court. Styles
says, 23 C. 1. in B. R. it was adjudged, that the Grand Jury are not bound to
find an Indictment, though have Evidence, since they may know something of
themselves to overbalance it. So is Plowden, A Jury may sometimes go against
their Evidence given in Court, 8. b And one may read, Juries were Anciently
punished for going though according to the Witnesses, if happened false ones,
Mir. 48. The Evidence to a Grand Jury is seldom heard by the Judges, which yet
could not be, if none were Evidence but what given in Court. Likewise, a Jury
knowing of a Record, Statute, etc. may give their Verdict, etc. according to
it, though never given in Evidence. Moor says, a Jury-man delivered his
Companions a certain Paper concerning the Question out of Court, yet the
Verdict was adjudged good, Case 656. Besides, if it happen they have no other
Evidence but what the Judges know as well as they, yet they ought by, and
according to the true purport and meaning of their Oaths, to proceed on it in
their own sense, and as they apprehend or understand it themselves, and no
otherwise, though the Judges differ with them; else how can they discharge
their Conscience? And it often falls out, they may differ. No two Lawyers, nay,
Judges, reading or hearing the very same Case, but presently make different
Inferences, Deductions, Collections, Conclusions and Arguments, yea, the same
Person at different times; like as the Philosophers hold our Senses and
Sentiments as different as Physiognomies. And why should A. impose his Opinion
on B. rather than B. on A? So of Judges and Juries. One cannot see by another's
Eyes. And this is certain, every thing any Jury does, as a Jury, is on Oath,
and they swear to be true by Virtue of the Oath at first administered them;
therefore if any of them happen to join in a Verdict, etc. with the rest,
against his Opinion, or not thoroughly satisfied in their own private judgment,
such a Verdict, etc. though never so true and good in it self, yet makes the
Party or Parties, as aforesaid, not satisfied, certainly forsworn, at least in
foro Conscientiae, as to their Conscience: For Perjury is not only a Lie
confirmed by Oath, but likewise either when any one being deceived, and
believing that to be true which is not, rashly, or unadvisedly swears it to be
true. Or either when any one thinking a thing not true, swears it is true,
though indeed it be true, Flet. 334. Bract. 288, 289, 292. and all the
Casuists. So is seen in Palmer's Reports. One was Indicted and Punished for
swearing a thing so and so, because he did not know it to be true as he swore.
So that upon the whole, one may see a Judge ought not to meddle at all with the
Jury: If he differ not with them, it is needless and troublesome; if he differ,
they are not to mind him; take it which way one will.

But perhaps it will be urged, that this must be understood only as to trying
matter of Fact, and that however, as to matter of Law, the Jury ought always to
be advised and governed by the Judges though not as to matter of Fact: No no
further than a mannerly deference that is payable to the Judges, as more
Learned in the Laws. For if the Judges say, or any Witness swear the Law to be
so and so, no Jury is by Law bound or any wise obliged beyond their own Reason,
etc. at least to believe them in it, 9 H. 6. 38. Finch 58. If an Attaint be
brought against a Jury, it is no Excuse, that the Verdict is according to the
Judges Directions, Cro. El. 309. 18.

Now says a timorous Ignorant Juror, Oh! but whether the Law be thus or not,
the Judges will Punish the Jury if comply not with them. This sure would be
pretty! A Jury, perhaps, forsworn, and liable to an Attaint, if do comply, and
yet punishable if do not: No, no, the Law (which is nothing but improved and
refined Reason) was never so unreasonable to suffer this. A. levied a Fine of
Lands to B. and B. paid A, the purchase-money: But after A. said, he was then
at levying the Fine under Age of One and Twenty Years old, and therefore the
Fine was void. The Law says here, the Judges shall determine by looking on the
Party, whether he were of full Age or not, and the Jury shall not, (the true
Reason being, that if the Party seem of full Age, though he be not, he shall
not avoid the Fine, to prevent cheating, etc. Whereas, if the Jury were to try
it, they must not go according to the seeming, but real true Age, and so if he
want but a Day of One and Twenty Years, he must thus be adjudged under Age, as
much as if he wanted Twenty Years, and B. should be cheated.) This Fine was
after reversed by King's Bench, because A. did appear, and was also proved by
four Witnesses to be under Age: But the Validity of the Fine coming after to be
disputed in Common Pleas, on a Trial by Jury, though the Court here told the
Jury, that notwithstanding some Witnesses prove to you A. was of full Age at
levying the Fine, yet you ought not to heed them, for the Judges have the sole
and only power of determining whether of full Age or not, and the Judges of the
King's Bench have already determined it; nevertheless, the Jury being somewhat
extraordinary, and not so very leadable Men, gave their Verdict contrary to the
Direction of the Court, and as if A. were then of full Age: And an Attaint
being after brought against the Jury, the Jury was acquitted and commended, Die.
201. and 301. And the Jury is the more justifiable in it, since the Judges
first altered the Law, in trying by Witnesses, and not only by Inspection, as
Juries also do, which in Trials by Witnesses are, as aforesaid, the more
competent, etc. Of this Nature is a memorable Case of Bushel, reported by Lord
Chief Justice Vaughan, where Meade and Pen, two Quakers, were Indicted at the
Old Baily for their Meetings; and the Jury, whereof Bushel was the Foreman,
would not find them Guilty: The Court, mighty angry, Fined and Committed the
Jury, alleging for cause, that they (the Jurors) against the Law of the Realm,
against full and manifest Evidence, and against the Direction of the Court in
matter of Law, to them in Court openly given and declared, had acquitted the
said Meade and Pen: But upon long and serious Debate, it was after adjudged,
the Commitment, Fining, etc. was unlawful, and accordingly the Jury were
discharged, etc. Another time also a Jury-man dissenting with all the rest, and
that no less than two days, the Judges asked him what he would do? Says he,
rather starve and dye in Prison than consent; the Court fined and committed
him; But on better Consideration, discharged him without more ado: All the
Court can do, being only to (carry them in Carts, if in the Circuit; along with
them, and) keep them without Meat, Drink, etc. till will agree, 41 Ass. 11.
says Mir. Juror's ought not to be threatened, but to be free, differing in
Opinion, etc. 273. And it was resolved in Parliament, Anno 1677. That the
Presidents and Practices of Fining, etc. Juries, in or for giving their
Verdicts, are Illegal. And Keeling, Chief Justice of B. R. was called to
Question in Parliament for such Practices.

Coke upon Lit. f. 369. says, If any Labor a Jury, Instruct them, or put them
in fear, or the like, it is Punishable, as Maintenance or Embracery, either at
King's Suit, or at Parties; and perhaps, it would puzzle one to show, why a
Judge is not within this Law; for how can he be said to do this as a Judge,
when to do so is no part of his Office? And why should any usage alter the Case
here, any more than in other Cases of breaking the Laws; it is much too, any
Judge should offer such a thing, considering he that judges without a Jury,
certainly judges without Authority: And he that judges with a Jury, but
governed or led by him, judges only by color of a Jury, and by color of
Authority, and thus makes himself forsworn in and by the Oath taken at his
being Created Judge, makes the Jury all forsworn, violates the greatest
Privilege of the Subject, infringes the most often confirmed Law of the
Kingdom, and also does particularly the Party offended the greatest Wrong
imaginable, in as much as by color of Law, and makes all the Jury accessaries
to the whole.

Hence it is improbable any Judge should offer the contrary: But however, a Jury
in any Indictment, Presentment, or Information, ought, and may give their
Verdict, etc. according to their own Conscience, without any fear of Punishment
one way or other.

And in any other Case, as where the King is no Party, but an Attaint happens
to lie, they may be punished no other way. Also no Punishment whatever lies for
or against a Jury, which consists of above Twelve Men, 14. H. 7. 13. Nor does
Attaint ever lie where the Witnesses are not on Oath, or for going against what
any such Witness says; nor in any Appeal of Maim, Murder, or Felony, F. N. B.
107. Nor in other Appeals, as Regist. 122. Attaint. 59, 62. and 22 Ass. 82.
say. Nor does ever any Action lie against any Jury for going against their
Evidence: And where an Attaint is brought, it must be Tried by a Jury of Twenty
four Men.

The only Cases the Judges have any Power over Juries in, are, where in their
Behaviors they become guilty of any such thing as the Judges may justly call
an unlawful Contempt, 4 E. 4. 27. 36 H. 6. 27. Or be guilty of Embracery, 5 E.
3. c. 10. 34 E. 3. c. 8. as receiving Bribes, Promises, etc. before or at the
Trial, etc. Or in Case of Concealment, the Justices of the Peace of every
Shire, etc. may take by their discretion an Enquest, etc. to enquire of the
Concealments of other Enquests taken before them, and before others, of such
Matters and Offenses as are to be inquired and presented before Justices of
Peace, whereof complaint shall be made by Bill or Bills, etc. And if any such
Concealment be found of any Enquest, etc. had or made within one year, etc. The
Justices may Amerce or Fine them at Discretion.

3 H. 7. c. 1. viz. as much as is reasonable for such Offense, as is said in a
like Case by Lord Coke, 10. 140. and in Dalton, p. 541, 23. If any refuse to be
on a Jury, not offering sufficient Excuse, he is Finable, 7 H. 6. 12. So if any
of either Jury give a Verdict, etc. as aforesaid, twelve not agreed. So the
Grand Jury may not discover Evidence given them, Inst. 3. 107. Mich. 15 Ja^. in
B. R. Smith and Hill's Case, 27 Ass. 63. Lamb. 402. Chron. 207, 272. Finch. 20.
So the Petty-Iury, if without License of Court, depart any whither upon any
Occasion whatsoever, after sworn, before Verdict given: Or that while, but
especially after Evidence given, eat or drink: Or out of Court receive any
Evidence from either side, may expect Fine and Imrisonment.

Thus much for what a Jury may do: Now something more how, and what it ought to
do. The Oath it self, but that it is so general, would else be Instruction as
well as Obligation sufficient. The Oath of a Grand Jury-man is, I will
diligently enquire, and true Presentment make, of all such things and matters
as shall be given me in Charge, or shall come to my knowledge concerning this
present Service. The King's Council, my own and my Fellows, I well and will
truly keep secret. I will Present nothing for Malice, Lucre, or Evil Will: Nor
will I leave any thing unpresented for Love, Favor, Affection, Reward, or any
hopes thereof: But in all things that shall concern this present Service, I
will present the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing else but the Truth. So
help me God. The Oath of the Petty-Iury is, I will well and truly-Try, and true
Deliverance make, between our Sovereign Lord the King, and the Prisoner at the
Bar, according to my Evidence. So help me God. That of the Grand-Iury was part
of it Anciently, Quod neminem accusare velint innocentem, To accuse no Person
innocent, Ll. Ethelred. And pour rien ne levray que je verite ne diray. Nothing
shall hinder me from speaking the Truth, Brit. 12. 135. Crompt. 304.

The Scripture teaches one his Duty upon an Oath: It says, One must swear in
Truth, in Justice, and Judgment, Jer. c. 4. Deuteronomy. c. 16. Exodus c. 20. Dan. c.
5. Levit. c. 14. Zech. c. 13. Acts c. 5. and the Proverbs in several places. In
Truth, with one's Eyes, neither in a Telescope or Microscope; not proceeding by
appearance or seemingness of things, not by adding nor diminishing, not by
aggravating or palliating, not by Equivocation or Reservation, not by
Representing or Accepting the matter otherwise than really and truly it is, not
presenting, etc. things, etc. doubtful, or not certainly true, as true; nor
omitting any thing certainly true, but always as the naked Truth is, so and so.
In Judgment* not at a venture, as by casting Dice, etc. not as matter of Form,
not rashly, perfunctorily, or negligently passing or running over things, not
by implicit Faith, or in complemental Obedience, etc. not upon trust or
belief, further than with, and upon good and great Deliberation,
Considerateness, Reasoning, and Satisfaction according to ones own Conscience,
and because one's mature and settled Judgment is so and so. In Justice,
proceeding fairly, impartially, with Integrity, and according to the Merits of
the Cause, without charging one with Murder that is Guilty but of Man slaughter;
and without Malice, Fear, Hope, Pity, Favor, Affection, Passion, Corruption,
or other Prejudice, Byas, Consideration, or private or sinister End or Design:
But all throughout purely, because is so and so more than otherwise. And
consonant to Scripture, as well as generally in all other things, so also in
this are even Morals and Politics. The Wise Men (so called) of Greece, were
called so from their living Prudently, Justly, and Honestly, such also are they
Aristotle calls so, 1 Metaph. etc. The Stoics say, He Is the Wise Man that
sticks to Truth, Neque quicquam fingit, and abhors and banishes every thing
else, not so much as admitting of any Stories, Fictions, etc. whatsoever.
Machiavel says, Judex cujusquam gratiae nec potentiae cedet, neque misericordia
nec invidia nec odio comovebitur sed vere semper and incorrupte ex legibus
judicabit. Judges must not be moved for the Power of any one, nor for any ones
sake, one way or other, nor with Pity or ill Will, but always go according to
Law, truly and without Byas. Justinian speaking of Judges, says, Eorum est
manus puras Deo, Imperatori and Legi praestare. They must be inoffensive to
God, the King, and the Law. Non illum populi fasces, non purpura regum
flectunt, No Acclamations of the People, no Honors of the King, neither of
these move them. Contra rempublicam, nec contra jus jurandum amici causa, vir
bonus non faciet. Against the common good or an Oath, no Man will stir an Inch,
if honest, though it be for a Friend's sake. Judex ponit personam amici cum,
Iudicis induit. Judge Hales is a Friend, as Hales, but none as a Judge. Si
omnia facienda sint quae amici velint non amicitiae tales sed conjurationes
putandae sunt. Cicero. What a Judge does at the Request of his Friend, is
really and truly no Friendship, but is making himself and Friend guilty both of
a Crime. The Areopagites (were Judges that) heard Causes only in the dark, that
they might take Notice what was said, and not who spoke. And what is said of
Judges by these Authors, must by us in like manner be applied to Juries. The
Book whereon Swearing one lays one's hand; is God's Everlasting Truth, and
most Holy Word; so that if one forswears one's self, one virtually in so doing
utterly forsakes God, and his Mercy and Truth. Says a Learned Man, part of the
Oath is, So help me God, viz. I pray God he will never help me, if I shall not
sincerely and faithfully keep this my Oath. Cajetanus says, 2 Qu. 98. Perjury
is of it is Nature a Contempt of God. And as the Proverb says, Malum est ludore
cum Sanctis: It Is however ill jesting with edged Tools.

By the Oath of the Grand-Iury, one's bound to observe as well the Charge which
shall be given by the Court, as the Form of the Oath it self. But this it is
plain must be understood, so far as the Charge is according to Law, and not
contrary or repugnant to the Oath it self, and no further or otherwise.

Anciently the Charge was given in Writing to the Jurors, Brit. 9. Bract. l. 3.
c. 1. Dalton p. That the Jury might easier remember it, their Minds be
refreshed, and perhaps, themselves Edified, etc.

What the Grand Jury does, is by way either of Presentment or Indictment. By
Presentment, when they know of a a Crime or Fault themselves, and give a short
Note of the Parties Name, place of Abode, and Fault, without Form, referring it
to the Court to put into Form. By Indictment, when the Party and Fault are
ready brought them in Parchment, drawn up in Form: And indeed, the most true
difference is only, that the one is in Form, and the other not.

In an Indictment, first they must consider and understand it well and
thoroughly: And if they cannot understand it, ask the Assistance of the Court,
either to give them a Clerk on Oath to English it for them, or otherwise as
need shall require. Then they must consider, if the Fault, as alleged, with
the Circumstances and Aggravations; amount to, and be a real Fault or not, and
also worth complaining of; for De minimis non curat Lex. The Law minds not
every little thing, and this is daily experienced in Indictments and Ac. of
Case. If it be no Fault, or one not worth complaining of, which in Law, as
aforesaid, is all one, they reject the Bill, and meddle no more with it. If
they find it a Fault, and considerable, as aforesaid, then they consider, if
know it true so of themselves; which if they do, or other Evidence satisfy
them it is, they Indorse, or write on the Back side of it, Billa vera, this
Bill is true: But if they do not know it themselves, nor be satisfied by the
Evidence, then instead of Billa vera, they write Ignoramus, We know not: And
afterward thus deliver all the Indictments into Court.

The Clerks of Court, to get Fees, and perhaps, some others for one sinister
end or other, will be apt to say, that the Grand-Iury ought to find an
Indictment, or make a Presentment against any supposed Offense or Offender,
though have but color of Evidence, or a probability of the thing being true,
and that what they do is but matter of Course, a Ceremony; matter of Form,
barely an Accusation, etc. But that this is not so indeed, is apparent, for
what end then is a Grand-Iury? Only for show. The Law would certainly then have
never required one to be at all. We see they are obliged to be Sworn, and they
are as much on their Oath as any other Jury, which then should be the contrary.
The very form of their Oath teaches us better. The Oath is, Diligently enquire,
etc. not negligently, etc. True Presentment make, not probable, etc. Nothing
for lucre, etc. not excepting the Clerks, etc. According to Evidence, not
Presumption: The whole Truth, and nothing else but the Truth, which how can be
at such a rate as the Clerks, etc. speak of?

But then they Object, that these words, According to the best of one's
Knowledge; are added. If they be, it is against Law, Mir. 304. Brit. 12. 135.
And altering an Oath, is imposing a new one, which cannot be without an Act of
Parliament, Inst. 2. 479, 658, 719. But however, May Jurors in such case wink,
etc. that they may not know, etc. These words are best of, etc. and not worst;
they are Knowledge, not Ignorance; they imply the best one can know or find
out: And not only what one already does know, for then what need the word best?
And besides, they relate to the word enquire, as well as any other word, etc.
So the more one considers them, the less one shall find they really alter the
Oath.

Then, say they, all a Grand-Iury does, is but presenting in form, and not in
form as aforesaid, and is only suppositious as it were, and nothing positive or
certain, grounding themselves only on this, that the Form of the Indictment is,
The Jury upon their Oath Present, instead of The Jury upon their Oath say; and
so infer, that if any thing in the Presentment or Indictment be false, yet it is
no Perjury. Alas, to see Men in extremity, what hold they will catch at! Could
Argus himself have seen this Exception? No, unless blind. Present and say are
undoubtedly here, and in such like cases, Synon^mous Terms. To Present on Oath,
is to give the Court to understand on Oath: And to say on Oath, is to tell the
Court on Oath; and an infinite of Indictments be say instead of present, Rast.
263. Kitch. 100. Co. 9. 114. And Fleta goes so far, as calls an Indictment a
Verdict, f. 113. The words also of the Oath be, to truly present, and not say.
And Lord Coke plainly calls the Grand Jurymen all wilfully Forsworn and
Perjured, if wrongfully find an Indictment, Inst. 3. 33.

Then, say they, but Indorsing Billa vera, as aforesaid, implies not that the
Jury takes upon them to know, or say, the Bill, or the Contents, are true; but
vera there signifies probable, or fit for Enquiry. But then, why not another
word used more properly and usually Latin for such a sense than, and instead of
vera? And what is Latin for true, if it be not? And is not true, the common
accepted English word of, and for vera? And is not Billa vera the Answer made
to their Oath, that they shall true Presentment make? This is like the rest.

Then, say they, this is no Trial, but in Order to bring to Trial, and the
Party is at no prejudice if the Bill be found. It Is true, it is no determinative
Trial that finally concludes either Party, because it is but one of two, which
every one accused of a Crime must have as aforesaid. But it is so much a Trial,
as Learned Fleta, f. 113. looks upon it no less one than any other. The form of
their Indictment is the same of that of a Verdict. All things are, or ought to
be alike in the whole Proceedings, and to differ nothing, but the one to be
before the other, and the latter to be final, the other not. The Stat. of 23 H.
8. c. 23. Enacts, One shall be Indicted of High Treason in what County the King
pleases. And the Stat. 1, 2 P. M. c. 10. says, That Trials for Treason, shall
be according to Common Law: This Act repeals the other, though speaks only of
Trials, and the other of Indictments, Anders. (1.) 104, 105. Inst. 3. 27. which
shows an Indictment is a Trial. One of the Grand Jury cannot be afterward on
the other: And why? says the Law, for he has once already found the Party
Guilty, and if should not again, he must Perjure himself, Brit. 12. 25 E. 3. c.
3. 7 E. 4. 4. Stanf. 158. It puts the Defendant to Disgrace, Trouble, Damage,
Danger of Life, etc. It makes him liable to an Out-lawry, to Imprisonment, etc.
and to every thing but very Death, etc. the final Judgment it self. It gains
Credit, and gives Authority to auother Jury to find one Guilty. It produces
this Effect, that if the other Jury find one guilty never so wrongfully, no
Attaint lies against them, nor other Punishment: And what is the Reason? The Law
says, because he is found Guilty not by these other twelve only, but in all, by
Twenty four or more, this latter and the other Jury too, Attaint. 64, 60.
Attaint R. a. 18. v. 8. H. 4. 23. b 14 H. 7. 13. So if one be Indicted, any one
may bring an Appeal, though never so wrongfully, etc. against him, whereas he
that brings one against any one that was never Indicted of the same Offense,
may be liable to great Punishment, if wrongfully brought, Stanf. 172.b Cor^n.
178. 40 E. 3. 42.

Where Peers be indicted for Treason, Felony, or Misprision of either, they not
only suffer in Honor, Liberty, Vexation, Danger, Trouble, Charges, and other
Inconveniences, as aforesaid, another does, but must with a more tender sense,
and in a much greater measure, as they be so much greater Persons, etc. And
they can have no other Trial on Oath, for their future Judges or Jury are none
of them on Oath, Inst. 3. 89. Co. L. 156. They can except against none of their
Jury, though have what cause soever possible, Co. L. 156.b They must be Tried
by such as shall be chosen against them, such, as perhaps, shall not be
Neighbors, but picked any where up and down the whole Kingdom; such a Jury, as
perhaps, shall not be above twelve in all, whereof then if any seven, or any
time the major part agree to find them Guilty, it shall be so, though the other
five, or lesser number, be utterly against it: So that upon the whole, if a
Peer have but seven Peers among all the rest that bear him ill will, or either
any ill wisher, that can make him so many of them his Enemies, he must Dye,
etc. fall back, fall edge. And to help the matter, he shall always be sure of
the ablest Council in the Kingdom, to manage the Cause against him.

Suppose one should ask any Honest Man this Question: Were he not on his Oath,
yet would he find an Indictment of Course, etc. to expose one, and put him to
such Inconveniences, as aforesaid? Certainly, says he, No. And the Monster that
would, does it wrongfully, because is not certain he does otherwise. And being
on his Oath, as aforesaid, it is not only doing wrong, but tainting himself
Crimson red in Perjury too; sure a Malicious way of doing wrong. It Is doing
wrong also by color of Law and pretended Authority, the greatest Mischief and
Injustice, says the Lord Coke, of all other, Inst. 2. 48. The damage, etc. too
in all these Cases is the greater yet, that the Party can very scarcely, if at
all, expect any Reparation or Amends: Whereas in all other Cases he may easily.
For against the Grand Jury, or any of them, no Action lies, in as much as doing
what they do on their Oaths, the Law will not presume, etc. any Malice, etc. in
them. And though one be Indicted at the Instance, or upon the Endeavors of
some other Person, (all the Jury, as aforesaid, being sworn to Secrecy) can one
easily discover, and prove who this Person is, what he did, and prove it at a
Trial? Which yet one must do fully, if expect any thing but making bad worse.
And might one recover damage, etc. yet it is damage, etc. to be put to the
Trouble and Hazard of the Recovery. Well therefore, says Fleta, f. 52. Valde
necessarium est in omni presumptione in inquisitione de vita and membris;
Juratores diligenter examinare: It Is an exceeding necessary thing, that the
Grand Jury should make diligent Examination, before presume any thing, either
in Case of Life or Member. Just. Dalton's Book, p. 539. says, no less Care or
Concern at all lies on the Grand Jury, than does on the Petty Jury.

The Law, (to see its Nature, how it inclines generally, that one may the
better guess in this matter) it is not with us like those of Draco: It Is as
tender of the Lives, Liberties, and Credits of the People, (none can deny in
all cases else) as a Mother of her Child, and why then not in this also? It
will presume nothing dishonest, etc. in any one, or any time, but it will, and
always does presume all Persons and Things Honest, True, Innocent, etc. till
the contrary be proved, Co. L. 78. b As Ovid says, Sit piger ad poenas princeps
ad praemia velox. So Lamb. Sax. Laws cry often Clemency and Forgiveness as well
as Justice. And Lex Angliae Lex misericordiae est, Says Coke, Inst. 2. 315.
Like the Laws of Scripture, whence it was first derived, which shows Mercy is
not opposite to, but part of Justice, 1 John 1. 9. Psalm. 71. 1, 2. Ier. 18. 7,
8, 9, 10. Ezekiel. 33. 13, 14. The Laws of England, the Laws of Mercy. And says a
Great Man, Justitia semper mitiorem sequitur partem. Justice leans that way
which is the milder. One brings an Appeal, if the Jury be doubtful, the
Defendant shall be acquit, and the Appellour imprisoned, Fleta 52. Mir. 224,
273. So a Jury being doubtful if one were a Villain or not, was therefore free,
Fleta 238. Been tibi praecipiunt (says Cicero) qui vetant quidpiam agere quod
dubites aequum sit vel iniquum; aequitas enim lucet ipsa per se, dubitatio
autem cogitationem significat injuriae. They do well, that forbid, one doing a
thing when dubious, whether right or wrong; for where it is right, the thing is
necessarily as clear as the Sun: But any doubt speaks the thing not to be so.
As if a Physician give one Physic, he must give one that he is sure will do
one good, or no harm, and not what he doubts may do one harm. It Is also plain,
if I doubt, I must not say, I am certain, (as Billa vera) but I know not
certainly, (as Ignoramus) else I tell a Lie. It Is very remarkable too about all
Indictments, the Jury only says, either it is true, or we know not, and never
that it is not true; which shows, if they be doubtful, or not fully satisfied,
the Indictments must be Endorsed not Billa vera, we know it is true, but
Ignoramus, we do no not know it is true. And the Law does not put it upon the
Grand Jury, to say the Bill is not true, if they do not find it, though does
put it upon them to say positively, the Bill is true, if they find it, and so
encourages the finding Indictments Ignoramus. Fortesc. says, It Is better Twenty
ill Men were unjustly saved, than one unjustly Condemned, 62. For Mercy and
Pity is on the one side, but on the other Injustice and Cruelty. Says Bracton,
Tutius est reddere rationem misericordiae quam Iudicij. It Is safer giving an
Account of one's being Merciful, than otherwise. The Saxons in doubtful Cases
only Appealed to God for Discovery, and left all only to him, viz. Where the
Case was doubtful, if Guilty or not, or clear and manifest Proofs wanted, they
had four sorts of Trial, Spec. Sax. l. 1. First, Kamp-fight, or by Battle.
Secondly, Fire-Ordeal, by holding red hot Iron in his Hands, or walking
barefoot over it. Thirdly, Hot water-Ordeal, by putting one's Arms up to the
Elbows, in seething hot water. Or, Fourthly, Cold Water-Ordeal, But a Jury
first past upon them, Rot. Temp. R. S. Io. Lord Hales his Collections.
by casting one into the Water with a Rope under his Arms. Whereof the three
last were used, one or other of them, where the Party was most vehemently
suspected; Versteganus and others. But Pope Stephen the 2d. by his Decree,
utterly abolished them all, and afterward so did the Parliament, 3 H. 3. Memb.
5. Judging it more fit the Party should be acquitted than prosecuted, where the
Case was doubtful. So that one must know beyond all doubt, before say Billa
vera, else say, Ignoramus, which is in English, we doubt, we do not know, we
are not certain if it be true. Paribus, sententijs reus absolvitur, Inst. 4.
64. And says Brit. If a Jury doubt at any time, they must find for the
Defendant, 245, 130, 136, 219, 213. Judge Fribern was Hanged for judging one to
Death, where the Jury were doubtful in their Verdict, Mir. 298. Anciently if a
Jury Indicted an Innocent Man, another might be impanelled to go upon this
Jury, as Offenders, etc. Mir. 101. Aussi sont homicides de volunt, faux Jurours
and ceux que Endictent fauxement: Jurors that falsely Indict any one, be guilty
of wilfully killing Men, Mir. 34, 36. They shall be reputed and adjudged
Infamous, and suffer Corporal Punishment, that find an Indictment against an
Innocent Person, ibid. 251, 252. 254. 256. Or, if an Innocent Person be
adjudged to Death, etc. if they could have helped it, ibid. 256. An Appeal lay
against a Jury in such Cases, ibid. 136. Brit. 14. 137, 237. If they any wise
offend so, Ignorantly, yet this excuses not at all, unless they could not
possibly know better, ibid. 257. And negligence in, or of knowing better, makes
their fault the worse, ibid. And the greatest Oracle of our Laws, Co. L. 115,
391, 45, 94, 113. has it, That whatever was Law, is yet, unless altered by Act
of Parliament, which this never was. Whereas on the other side, if a Grand Jury
do not find the Bill against any one, there can be no harm then to any Body;
but another Indictment may some other time be brought, when there is better
Evidence, or a worse Jury. For though one's Life, etc. shall come but once in
danger, or on Trial, before the Petty-Iury, it may yet a Thousand times before
the Grand-Iury, for they never say the Party is not Guilty, but at most say
Ignoramus, as aforesaid.

Any thing any Jury does, ought be Quoddam Evangelium, like what they laid
their Hands on, taking their Oath. When they write Billa vera on an Indictment,
they undeniably compare the Truth of the Contents therein, to the Truth of the
Gospel, and this upon Oath. Thus one would admire how it comes to pass, that
they of the Grand Jury should often hear but one side: Their Oath, it is
apparent, is against this: It says, Present the whole Truth, not concealing or
omitting any part of it; which implies as well all one side can inform them as
the other. And so appears by less strong Cases far, an Attaint lies against a
Jury (swearing to well and truly Try the issue between the Parties) when every
word of the Verdict may yet be true, only it not being the whole Truth. As if
one having had common appendant time out of Mind, bring an Assize of the
Common, making his Title that he has had common time out of Mind, etc.
(without speaking of the Appendency) and so the Jury find for him: For thus he
should else have Common in gross, when his Right or Title is not to such, but
to Common Appendant, F N B. 107. a. 10 E. 4. 17. 49 H. 6. 17. So one having had
a Rent in Fee, as Forrester of such a Forest, time out of Mind; in an Assize
for it, makes Title, by saying he had a Rent out of that Land, time out of
Mind, etc. (without saying as Forrester, etc.) and the Jury find for him, for
he has not had the Rent by Prescription, as must be understood by the Claim
and Verdict, as aforesaid, ibid. b. Co. 5. 78, 79. So that it is not enough for
a Jury to say the Truth, but the whole Truth, though too no such Word as this
of whole Truth, be mentioned in the Oath. It proceeds, and says, And nothing
else but the Truth, which how can possibly, or any Jury-man be satisfied in,
unless hear both Parties? It says, You shall diligently Enquire, etc. not by
halves, or but hearing one side only. It Is a Maxim, Qui statuit aliquid part
inaudita altera aequum licet statuerit haud aequus fuerit. He that judges or
determines any thing, when but one side only is heard, does unjustly: And the
Judgment, or Deternation, though in self be never so just or right, yet shall
he no wise be accounted a Just Judge, etc. Is it not a common Saying, One Tale
is good, while another is told? One at this rate might be Indicted for a
Cutpurse, when but an Honest Glover; so might Chyrurgions, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Jaylors, Hang-men, Attorneys, etc. for but doing what belongs to their several
and respective Professions, as the matter may be managed, and yet saying
nothing but Truth neither, only not the whole Truth. Is there not in all
Determinations else, the Hearer and Defendant, as well as Complainant? Thus
erred Judah the Son of Jacob, in judging Thamar to be Burnt, upon Report, when
she was unheard, Genesis 38. 24, 25, 26. So was Joseph faisly accused of Lying
with his Mistress, and cast into Prison, Genesis 39. 19, 20. So was Mephibosheth
falsely accused by Ziba, and deprived of all he had, 2 Samuel 16. Which being all
Presidents, and Damned in Scripture, must, or shall any one be so hardy as to
embrace and follow them now? Either one's Guilty or not; if be, let him yet
have fair play for his Life, etc. If not, why should he then be Indicted? So
that, why should he not be heard? Else one's Condemned first, and Heard after;
or indeed Hanged first, and Tried after, or little less. The true intent of the
Law herein seems, as if Men were to be handled not thus, but that the Defendant
should be heard at first, and if he then could give satisfaction, etc. he might
be at no further trouble, etc. And if he could not, that he should have such
trouble, etc, and having Notice thus, might prepare himself the better, and so
not be surprised at the final and concluding Trial, or have any color of
Pretense that he was surpised, or any wise unprepared at this final Trial.
This method being most Honorable for the King and the Law, and also most safe
for the People. And the Reason why it was ever otherwise, seems barely a Result
of some Artifice of the Clerks, to get themselves Money, imposing on the
Juries; or from this, that Presentiments being made without the Party heard,
therefore the Jury thought they might find an Indictment likewise. Whereas,
they ought always to distinguish; for a Presentment is on their own knowledge,
when they know all the whole matter, even what the Defendant can say for
himself; but an Indictment is found upon Witnesses, which tell their Tale to a
hairs breadth, etc. as makes the most for the side they are produced of. And at
length after some few Presidents, it has now grown into Practice: Dato uno
absurdo mill sequuntur: All can be pretended why it should be so now, is but
Practice and President. And when it is against Justice, against Truth, against
any ones Judgment, sure one ought rather to Correct than Approve of, or follow
such Practice or President. At least wise a Grand Jury ought hear both Parties,
if present, or easily, or conveniently to be heard.

It would likewise amaze one, to see how the Clerks, for their Gain, or others
for other Ends, have often prevailed with Jurors to find a Bill true, etc. when
in all the Circumstances of Aggravation, or most of them, false, if not in the
Fact it self; and those Circumstances too altering the very Fact, as alleged
about as much as white Feathers would a black Crow.

Considering how true Presentiments, Indictments, and Verdicts ought to be, and
that the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth must, or may be in them: That
the Jury undertake the Bill is altogether true, not only as to the Substance,
etc. or in general, but even in every particular, all the Circumstances,
Aggravations, and every individual word, (for if it be not true in the least
word, it is not true, but false, and Perjury.) Stanf. says well, f. 96. b De
fair bon Enditement est requisite a conustre and d' aprendre que sera dit
Treason. ou Felony ou non: To perform the Duty of one on the Grand Jury, it is
necessary to learn and know what is called Treason, what Felony, etc. and what
not: Hence also one learns, one must not in an Indictment, etc. call, or suffer
called Felony, Treason; Manslaughter, Murder; nor one Crime by the Name of
another: Or mention, or suffer mentioned, words spoke, or things done, other or
after another manner than really or truly were said or done; and therefore the
Judges give the Grand Jury to this day their Charge so distinguishing,
particular, and directive of all, and all manner of the several Crimes, their
Natures, and how to call them, etc.

When the Clerks draw an Indictment, Information, etc. they will not only allege
and insert in it the very Fact, etc. one is accused of, but craftily, and full
of Art, stuff and load it, into the Bargain, with several fictitious and
fleight Allegations of their own, to swell up, and aggravate the matter; as
Circumstances of Malice, or Design, etc. in the Party, when did the Fact, spoke
the words, etc. So that sometimes from a Mouse, a Mountain; from nothing, or
what is inconsiderable, it will in such a Dress show and strut like a Giant, a
Monster, etc. And all this, forsooth, they will call matter of Form, and then
endeavor to persuade a Jury, if they find the chief matter, or that part which
they will call the matter of Substance, true, they must of course find all the
rest, which they please to call matter of Form, true also. This usual way of
wording Indictments is so notorious, dangerous, hurtful and grievous, that it
several times, and in all Ages, has been complained of by all Persons
whatsoever, except the Clerks and Prosecutors themselves, whilst Clerks and
Prosecutors. It has been a Complaint in and of Parliament, by King, Lords, and
Commons; See 4 H. 4. c. 2. 37 H. 8. c. 8. This is that whereof may be said, as
was in Courtin Hertsey's Case, Aliquid creare ex nihilo malum, Diabolicum est.
It Is the part of the Devil himself to make a small fault be, or seem a great
one. But no Complaint, no Argument will, or can prevail with a Covetous Clerk,
getting Fees, or a Malicious Prosecutor, troubling whom he has Envy or Malice
against, to desist their Advantage. And as the true Circumstances of any Crime
do always, or mostly aggravate or alleviate it, and all those suggested thus by
the Clerk, if the Bill, etc. be found by the Jury, (though pretended only
matter of Form) become thus as true, and the Judges must adjudge a Punishment
accordingly, as if all were really true: Thus is a Trap set to catch the Jury
and Defendant; the Jury to Perjure themselves, and wrong the Defendant, and the
Defendant to be adjudged of a Crime, when perhaps guilty of none, or at least
of a worse Crime than truly he is. A Jury therefore, ought first consider, as
aforesaid, if the matter of Substance, or chief matter, be Criminal at all; and
if be, then if considerable: And if be not Criminal, or considerably Criminal
in it self; then if the Circumstances, as alleged, make it so; and if not,
then to reject it. If it be considerably Criminal, with or without the
Circumstances, then consider if you know it of your selves, or by Evidence be
satisfied it is true, both it self and the Circumstances: If the matter it self
be not true you reject the Bill; (for where is no Body, is certainly no Shadow:)
If the matter be true, but the difficulty be about the Circumstances, then
consider if they be material; if not, you find the Bill; if be, then consider
if they be consistent, or the matter will bear them; if not, then reject the
Bill, etc. or at least strike them out of the Bill, etc. If be, then consider
if they be true on your own knowledge, or by the Evidence given you; if be,
then find the Bill, etc. if not, they must be struck out, or the Bill returned
Ignoramus, etc. As for Example, The matter must be Criminal and Considerable:
This partly appears before; but further, Suppose the Apprentice of A. get a
Woman with Child, and secretly run away upon it, and A. procure a Warrant to
Apprehend him for it: But B. a Stranger knowing of the Warrant, Lodges,
Comforts, and Assists the Apprentice in unknown places, that the Warrant cannot
be served; the Stranger is not punishable, 15 Jac. B. R. Vaughan's c. If a
Commission be granted to two, and one of them execute it alone, without the
other, and accordingly Fine People, etc. yet no Indictment lies, for it was an
Error of Judgment, 27 Ass. 23. If one say to a Justice of Peace, Executing his
Office at his House, etc. and not on the Bench, certain scandalous words,
touching his Office of Justice, yet he may not be Indicted for it, Hides c.
Trin. 11. C. 1. B. R. And so was Sir -- Sackfield's c. these being all
inconsiderable Faults. And as to whether the Circumstances, or other matter
than the Principal, be material or not: Those words or parts be only words of
Form, and but those only which are necessarily employed, as that if the
Principal, or the rest, be true, these must be so too, and cannot possibly be
otherwise, and thus become needless to be proved, being before proved, as and
by the necessary consequence of the other Proof; so he that proves a Shadow,
proves also a Body, since there must be a Body to cause it; and those words be
material which may cause a different Judgment or Punishment, or that aggravate
the Fault, make it greater, of another Nature, or any wise alter it, and
therefore are not to be presumed, but must be proved. The Jury must observe
also whether consistent, as an Indictment of or for Felony, saying, that one
such a Day Feloniously cut down such Trees, and carried them away; or with
Force and Arms such a dav cut down such and such Trees, and Feloniously carried
them away; this is inconsistent, for Felony can never be about standing Trees,
Indict. 4. So of growing Apples, of Houses, or any thing fixed to the
Freehold: But all it can amount to, is only Trespass, unless the falling
appear by the Indictment to be one time, and the carrying away, another. So if
a Madman, a Child, etc. which have no Discretion, be said to do things
maliciously, or designing any thing, this is inconsistent, or impossible, in as
much as no Malice or Design can be in such. If necessarily employed, for if be
not, they must be proved, etc. Every Jury must go by Probata, what is proved, as
well as Allegata, what is only alleged. Where one's Accused of knowingly
keeping a Dog wont to worry Sheep, etc. the knowledge must be proved as well as
the rest, Cockrain and Davies c. B. R. 17 C. 1. So the Lord Shaftsbury, when
sued Lord Digby, for maliciously speaking such and such words, he proved the
malice as well as words. If one pleads a Feoffment by Deed, and the other
denies it, it must be proved to be by Deed, Co. L. 281, b So if one be Indicted
of Murder, as that he with Malice, Forethought, killed such a one, the Malice
fore thought must be proved; for in these Cases the killing might be either by
chance, as the Glance of an Arrow, etc. by giving Physic, by a Champion in
Trial by Battle, by a Hangman doing his Office, or by one non Compos mentis,
etc. In which Cases is no Malice, and and therefore the Indictment not to be
found: So the Words might be spoke in Jest, or a Thousand other ways, and not
maliciously. So one might keep such a Dog, and not know he was such, and the
Fault would then be none at all in him. The Law also may several times be broke
in the Letter, yet without any Fault, if the Intent of the Law be not broke: As
when things are done to avoid a greater Inconveniency, or by Compulsion, or for
Necessity, or by involuntary Ignorance, etc. And in these and such like Cases,
the Party ought not be Indicted, though the matter be true in it self. The
Romans had a Law, He should dye that climbs over the Wall in the Night; yet one
doing so to discover their Enemies, was by the Senate adjudged Innocent, and
Rewarded. So it is Lawful with us, to pull down another's House when a Fire
happens, or in Time of War, to prevent a greater Mischief. So one being to
appear to a Writ, but hindered by Floods, Sickness, etc. does not, he is
Excused. One forces and uses one's hand to kill a third Person, he is only
Guilty: So an Infant, or one non sanae memoriae, kills another, it is excusable.
So that where any Fact or Words in an Indictment might be as well under any of
these Circumstances, as what other the Clerk or Prosecutor is pleased to
allege, these alleged must be proved, for it is plain, are not necessarily
employed. And yet if a Man should do any wise thus, the Clerks will draw up the
Indictment or Information, as if none of these Circumstances were in the Case,
but that it was Maliciously, in contempt of the Laws, etc. So it seems hard a
Man should be Hanged for stealing under a Necessity, where the taking is upon
absolute Necessity indeed, and it is not the Parties Fault, but Misfortune, he
fell into such Necessity: And especially if the Party whom the taking is from,
have not the like necessity for the same thing, or the Person that takes, be
very Serviceable or Profitable to the Kingdom or Common Good, etc. yet he must
be, though the thing so taken be not of the Value of 13 d. if the Jury agree he
did it Feloniously; whereas one Guilty of Perjury, though does one a Hundred
thousand times more harm, shall only suffer an inconsiderable Rebuke. And why
should a Jury in this Case find it done Feloniously, this was done under Force
and Necessity, to preserve a Man's Life, etc. instead of an House, etc. and
what is said Felonious, must be, Felleo animo, with an ill affected Mind, with a
Mind not barely to do the thing, but an itching also to do Mischief; (only this
itching indeed shall be presumed, unless Cause appear to the contrary.) As if
one takes a thing out of another's Possession, claiming it with some color as
his own, etc. this is adjudged no Felony: Why? for not done with any Felonious
Intent, as appears by his claiming, etc. So the like Stealing, as aforesaid,
was not for Mischief sake at all, but for Necessity, etc. Thus David, against
the Law, took and eat that Bread which was provided for the Table of God only,
Exodus c. 29. 1 Kings 21. Our Savior and his Apostles plucked off, and eat the
Ears of another's Corn, Mat. 12. And he, because he had need of an Ass, took
that was none of his, but another; and had Lazarus, ready to perish, taken
Dives's Crumbs against his Will, etc. yet it seems he had no more sinned than
he mis-behaves himself, that does what the Lord bids, and the Steward forbids,
under the Rules aforesaid. A Jury therefore, not observing the Rules aforesaid,
gives a Verdict not only against the present and immediate Defendant, but also
in him even against David, Christ, etc. represented thus in his Case. In the
Civil Law, (that of the Admiralty particularly) if a distressed Ship takes
water by force of another where is Plenty, it is no Theft; because of the
necessity, so adjudged several times. If an Indictment mention one Seditiously,
and designing to disturb the Government, and to withdraw from the King the Love
of his Subjects, and said of him such and such Words, here the Words might,
perhaps, be spoken within the Privilege of Discourse in Parliament, or in a
Jocular Way, or Ironically, when one means the contrary; or by way of
Supposition, in Argument, or when one meant a contrary thing, or no harm at
all; and this perhaps too explained at the same time in other words
accordingly, or the Words in the Indictment be but part of the Sentence, etc.
or transposed, or some how else altered. So if a Complaint be, that one falsely
and maliciously, and withal designing to break his Credit, and ruin his Trade,
called such a one a Bankrupt, here, perhaps, he was a Bankrupt then, or no
Tradesman at all; therefore in these and such Cases, the Circumstances alleged
being not employed necessarily, though the Fact or words were spoke, they must
be proved. But to instance some Cases adjudged by the Judges themselves: If A.
bring an Appeal against B. and B. is after acquitted; now, should B. Indict A.
for maliciously, etc. bringing the Appeal, the Indictment ought not be found,
if B. were Indicted before of the same Fault, he was after Appealed against
for, because his being before Indicted proves there was at least colorable
Reason why the Appeal was brought, and not Malice only, Coron. 178. 40 E. 3.
42. A Chvrurgion was Indicted, for that he by Negligence in Curing one's Hand,
maimed it; the Negligence must be proved, 48 E. 3. 6. 11 H. 6. 18. So in
Actions for Words, which holds the same Law as in Indictments, etc. A. sues B.
for falsely and maliciously calling him, being an Heir, a Bastard; Action will
not lie, if B. pretend himself Heir, for then it was not maliciously, but only
as it were in order to get or claim the Land, etc. And it is Lawful thus to
slander another, justifying one's own Title, Co. 4. 10. So Molton sues Clapham,
for that a Suit depending between them, upon reading certain Affidavits in
Court, Clapham openly then and there, falsely and maliciously said, there is not
a Word true in the Affidavits, and that he would prove it by 40 Witnesses; here
the Words, though were agreed false, yet being not spoke maliciously, but out
of other design, as in his Defense, etc. as aforesaid, Action does not lie, B.
R. 14 C. 1. Rot. 459. So a Councellor calling one a Thief at a Trial, the like;
for it is not malicious, etc. if material for the Cause he manages, Montagues c.
So where A. says to his Friend B. that C. has the French Pox, therefore
advising him not to keep him Company; for spoke as Advice to a Friend, and not
maliciously, James and Rudley's c. 40, 41, El. in B. And thus is further seen
the Cause or Occasion of speaking words, or doing any thing, must be considered
as well as the Words or Fact: And says Coke, This is a General Rule, Co. 4. 14.
Also it is another Rule, All Offenses in Fact or Word, ought in construction to
be made the least of possible. Verba accipienda sunt in mitiori sensu. Words
shall be taken spoke in that sense which is most innocent, etc. See of this
several Examples, Co. 4. 17. Hob. 473. C. 4. 19. Co. 4. 13. for the Law will
presume Innocence further than downright proved, as aforesaid, to the
contrary. And if Juries should not be cautious, as aforesaid, one might be
Indicted, etc. for saying The King is a fit Man to Govern, or for any thing in
the World. Suppose A. be Indicted for maliciously, and with a design to
withdraw the King's Subjects from their due Allegiance, etc. saying, The King
is a fit Man to Govern, and A. should be found Guilty of it, because he said
these words; A. would be in a sad case, the Judges must give Judgment, as if
the Words were spoke Ironically, or in a contrary Sense than they were, for so
the Circumstances alleged import, though be found of course. If a Jury find an
Indictment, etc. with the Word felonice in it, they find one Guilty of Felony,
be the Fact what it will, and so as a Felon the Defendant must suffer: So also
if the word proditorie, for High Treason; and why may not they as justifiably
find these words of course, as other not necessarily employed? Where an
Indictment, etc. is grounded upon a Statute, then every little Word must be
proved that is also in the Statute, though seeming employed, or little more than
immaterial; this all agree. For want of these, and such like Observations, one
Tho. Burdett, Esquire was Condemned, Hanged and Beheaded at Tyburn, in Edward the
Fourth's Time, when the matter proved was only, that he being absent, the King
hunted in his Park, and killed a white Buck, which Mr. Burdett fancied above
the rest of his Deer, and that Mr. Burdett hearing of this, wished the Bucks
Horns in his Belly that Advised the King so to do, Speed's Hist. 700. Much like
was it also with one Walter Walker, who was Beheaded in Smithfield, Anno 1476.
when all proved against him, was only, that he (Living at the Sign of the Crown
in Cheapside, London) said to his Child, to pacify him when he cried, Peace,
peace, Child, thou shall be Heir of the Crown. But who can open some Jury-mens
Eyes, to see how like an Ox led to the Slaughter they be imposed upon, and
cheated, to cheat others of their Lives, Fortunes, and all that is dear to them;
though by their Example too of Acting thus, they make Presidents, and give
countenance to after Juries to be like themselves, and consequently expose and
render themselves, they know not how soon, in the same predicament, and to be
punished as the Criminal was they punished. Or by the Evidence given you.
Evidence is only such a Testimony that makes somewhat relating to the issue or
matter in Question clear, manifest and plain to the Jury; hence says Coke Lit.
283. Probationes debent esse evidentes and perspicuae. And thus is it, all the
Witnesses or Testimony in the World of things impossible, repugnant,
inconsistent, etc. can be no more than bare Testimony, and cannot any wise
amount to, or be called Evidence. Herein the Jury must consider the Credit and
Authority of the Evidence, and the matter or extent of what is Evidenced.
First, If the matter proved amount to such plain and full Proof as is required.
An Indictment laid against three Persons, may not be found against all three,
when the Evidence is only against one or two of them; nor if laid against one
Person for three Faults, may it be found against that one for all the three
matters, when but one or two of them are proved; nor when the Evidence is but
to part of a Matter or Fault, may the Indictment be found for the whole; but,
as aforesaid, all found must be proved. Indictments, etc. as aforesaid, brought
upon, or referred to any Statute, the words of the Statute mentioned in such
Indictment, etc. must be proved very strictly, even to a tittle; the Proof must
hit the Bird in the Eye. As one Indicted on the Statute for Maliciously
disturbing a Minister at Divine Service, every one of these Words must be
proved; so for wilfully and corruptly forswearing one's self; so for one's gain
keeping a Gaming-House. But in other Cases, as at Common Law, if the proof and
words in the Indictment, etc. differ either in the matter, or the form, or
manner, inconsiderably, or so as the difference be not somewhat considerable or
material, as aforesaid; such is indeed no difference in Law, nor by the Jury to
be taken as any. In the matter, as in a Complaint for these words, B. is a
maintainer of Thieves, and a strong Thief himself; here the word strong
signifying little or nothing, need not be proved spoken, Die. 21. 75. But if the
Allegation and Proof materially differ, otherwise; as for these words, If B.
might have his will, he would kill all the true Subjects in England, and the
King too. Now, the Proof being that the Defendant said, I think in my
Conscience, that if B. etc. the best Opinions in this Case are, that this is
not sufficient Proof; for the Words alleged are more positive and absolute,
and move Credit more in one's Ears than those proved, and so are not in effect
the same, but materially differ. So of these Words, B. procured eight or ten
Witnesses of his Neighbors, to Perjure themselves; the Proof being only that
the Defendant said, B. had caused eight or ten, etc. This is no Proof, for one
may be a Cause, and yet not a Procurer, there being remote Causes, Causa sine
qua non, as well as others so nigh, as that of procuring. Such a Cause as this
B. might be, though only Plaintiff or Defendant in a Suit, for had there been
no Suit, there could be no Perjury. And the most favorable and innocent Sense
of Words is to be taken, and no other. As for the manner, An Indictment being
for Murder by Poison; if the Proof be, it was not by Poison, but a Weapon,
Burning or Drowning, etc. this will not do; for the manner proved, is of
another Nature proved than alleged; but if the difference were only thus, that
the Poison alleged were of one sort, and that proved of another, this being
immaterial, (both agreeing it was by Poison) the Proof may serve. So Murder
alleged to have been committed by a Dagger, the proof being it was by a Sword
or Bill, may serve; but proof by Poisoning will not do. If an Assault and
Battery be alleged to have been at A. the proof being it was not at A. but B.
may serve, provided the Offense be neither greater or lesser, whether committed
at A. or B. But if the place alleged aggravate the Fault, it is otherwise; or
if both places be not in the same County. So of the like difference in time
alleged and proved. Now, as to the Credit and Authority of what is Witnessed:
It Is no proof or Evidence to a Jury, which is against their own knowledge, nor
any other but that only, which confirms them in what did know, or acquaints
them with what did not know. The only Reason, said my Lord High Steward, at
Lord Cornwallis's Trial, why a Prisoner is allowed no Council in matter of
Fact, or in any thing but matter in Law, when Life or Member is concerned, is
only this, The Evidence whereby he shall be Condemned, ought to be so plain and
evident, that all the Council in the World may be presumed able to say nothing
against it, or in his Defense. Nothing ought so much as raise a suspicion, says
Horn, but what comes from grave and good People, those which be Credible, and
heed what they say, Mir. 200. And not from others, as ill-tongued, ill
disposed, etc. People, Bract. Brit. Stanf. The great Lord Coke says, of old
time (as yet, says he, indeed it ought to be) Any Indictment was not to be
found but on Credible Witnesses, and plain and direct Proof; and never upon
Probabilities or Inferences, etc. Inst. 2. 384. The Famous Montagne, p. 1040.
says, a tuer les gens il faut un clarte bien lumineuse and net. And the Lord
Coke, Inst. 3. 25. It Is most necessary, as many hold, there should be two good
Witnesses produced to the Grand Jury to prove every Indictment: And the Proof,
says he, ought to be more clear than Light. Every Jury must always remember,
they may presume nothing but Innocence; and Innocence etc. they ought, until
the contrary proved. Of Presumption and Argumentative Verdicts, etc. finding
one Guilty, there be several very sad Examples. One the Lord Coke tells of, is,
There being two Brothers, one dies, leaving an Estate, and an only Child, the
other Educates it, and one Night correcting it, it cried, Good Uncle do not
kill me, and next morning it was gone no Body knew whither. This Brother is
Accused of its Death, upon Evidence of the matter aforesaid, that he beat it,
it was Young, about Nine years old, it cried as aforesaid, it was never heard
of since, and that the Uncle enjoys an Estate by this. The Jury find him
Guilty, and he was Hanged, but about a year after it returned safe and well,
Inst. 3. 232. The Scripture enjoins the use always of two Witnesses at least,
when yet the Punishment then and there was so much less than now with us, for
the Crimes to be punished, Deuteronomy. 17. 6. 16. 19. 15. Mat. 18. 16. Jo. 18. 27. 2
Cor. 13. 1. Heb. 10. 28. Vox unius nullius vox. One is none, l. 8. C. de
testibus. Quaedam sunt causae quae plures quam duos exigunt testes, nulla tamen
quae unius testimonio terminetur, says the Civil Law. In some Cases there must
be more than two Witnesses, but never fewer, c. Licit. 23. in sin. extr. de
test. By the Ancient Laws of England, no Indictment was to be received against
a Presbyter, without three, or at least two Witnesses; against a Cardinal
Deacon without twenty six, or at least twenty four; against a Cardinal
Presbyter but with sixty four, or at least forty four; nor against a Cardidal
Bishop without seventy two Witnesses. Lamb. 178. The general Rule is, In one
duum vel trium stet omne verbum si modo sint omni exceptione majores. Two or
three Witnesses be enough, if liable to no Exception: Any one Person may invent
or contrive any Story for Malice or Envy, or other End, to take away another's
Life, etc. And who can disprove or detect him? But it is not so easy for two to
do it; yet two may possibly also agree and contrive an Evidence together, and
so form it, and frame Circumstances, all agreed of beforehand between them,
that being false, it may yet seem very plausible; The Children of this World be
wiser than the Children of Light. Jezebel had two Witnesses against Naboth; and
two Witnesses were against Chaste Susanna, to prove her Avoutry, yet both ^ad
false Evidence against them. Sussanna was acquitted, only because the Witnesses
differed what Tree it was unde. In all Trials whatsoever in England, either at
Civil Law, or Common Law, where is no Jury, there all will confess must be two
Witnesses at least, Co. L. 6. b And always that Witnesses are to be joined to
the Jury, they must be two at least, ibid. And in any Law any where must be
always two Witnesses at least, and no place can be pretended of otherwise,
except only England. And that it should be so here, even when there is a Jury
too, see 48 Ass* 5. Barrec 241. Enquest. 42. Bract. l. 5. 400. 48 E. 3. 30. And
so is expressly Mir. c. 3. etc. Fortesc. 73. Co. L. 6. b Inst. 3. 26. And so it
was agreed in B. C. Trin. 9. El. And the only Reason why it should be
otherwise, is as aforesaid, that the Jury be presumed to know themselves, to
the Value of one Witness more. But if it so fall out, that really they know
nothing themselves; then, should they find one Guilty upon a single Testimony,
they make that Law, which other wise could not be Law, and find one Guilty the
Law would have acquitted; and thus a Trial by a Jury would be less safe and
more destructive than any other in all the whole World again. The Jury thus
make one Witness as good as a thousand; for had a thousand Witnessed, the Jury
could have done no more. This would occasion great Mischiefs, Perjuries, and
other Inconveniences. A. then being sufficiently Malicious or Interested, and
so designing B's. Death, an Italian would Poison, Spaniard Stab, Frenchman
Pistol him; but being an Englishman, and expecting such a Credulous, Officious
Jury, as aforesaid, to help him, will sure choose to swear him to Death; for A.
has his Malice better answered. B. thus not only loses his Life, but also his
Credit, Estate, and what not? Besides attainting his Blood, and utterly
disgracing all his Relations; and at last, how shall A. be discovered in it? He
is infinitely more safe this way than any other. Or, suppose one comes out of
the Moon, and by chance should discover him, he knows he is safe of his Life,
he shall not dye by our Law: If any body happen too that will be at the
Trouble, Charges, Hazard, and Danger, to Prosecute him never so severely. But
by the Statute he shall forfeit 40 l. or at his Election stand a while on the
Pillory, and half a year be in Prison; this is all. Likewise a cunning Rogue,
suppose, Robs one, etc. no Witness by; if one offer to prosecute him, let him
Prosecute first, and he Hangs one thus into the Bargain, and saves himself
honorably. Or were there one or two Witnesses by, but he first Prosecutes, and
Swears against all; it will go hard with them all.

It Is said of the Egyptians, they had no punishment for lying, and so had no
measure in it; But thus our Law tempts, as well as scarce at all punishes
Perjury. A Jury, though have two or more Witnesses, ought also consider and
examine their Circumstances. Amongst the Turks only such may be Witnesses as
are Freemen, can say their Prayers, have some knowledge in Law, be known of
civil life and conversation, etc. Boschiner Academ. 19. By the Laws of Scotland
(for the most part always like ours) none shall be Witness under 14 Years old;
furious people, officer of the same Court, Women, Adultrous Persons, Thieves,
Poor, whipped for any Offense, Infamous, Convict and Ransomed from Justice,
Kinsfolks, Companions or Parties of the same Crime, Clergy against Laity; nor
any ones Tenant, Bailiff, Servant, or any other of his Robe, Council, Retinue,
etc. nor any known Adversary, nor any Person Excommunicate, or Imprisoned for,
or accused of a Crime. St. 2. Rob. 1. By our Laws none ought to be a Witness
that is Indicted of Treason or Felony, and not acquitted, Persons excommunicate,
outlawed, or otherwise defemed, nor Judges in any case where they shall be
concerned as Judges, Brit. 39. Mir. 117. 108. Bract. 118, 119, 133, 141.
Persons outlawed or otherwise infamous, 11 H. 7. 41. Young 116. Stanf. 88. 11
H. 4. 35. Inst. 3. 36. And certainly they cannot that be infamous, as attained
of a false Verdict, of any Conspiracy at King's suit, of Perjury, of a
Praemunire, of Forgery on the Stat. 5 El. c. 14. of Felony, or have by Judgment
lost their Ears, or stood on the Pillory, or be Infidels, or Non sanae
memoriae, of insufficient discretion, considerably interested in the matter,
Cromp^ 127. b Co. L. 6. b A Husband or Wife cannot be Witness for, or against
one another, Co. L. 6. b nor against any other in the same cause, Stanf. 26. b
Except in* crimiminal cases, where he or she is the Party offended, and swears
only for the King, and no other Evidence can be expected. The Confession of a
Criminal gotten by Fright, or any Artifice used upon him, or made before comes
to his Trial, is no Evidence against him. The Common Law was so strong in this
point, that 'till 2, 3, P. and M. c. 10. no Justice of Peace could examine a
Criminal; in short, Conditio, sexus, aetas, discretio, fama,
Et fortuna, fides in testibus ipse requires.
Ask his Estate, Fame and Religion,
Quality, Sex, Age and Discretion.


But the Judges use to Determine who shall be sworn, and what shall be produced
as Evidence to the Jury, and the Jury what Credit or Authority the same's
worthy of, Co. L. 6. b One that is burnt in the Hand for Felony, is by some held
to be a Witness in Law; for, the Crime say they, is purged, so if pardoned by
the King. And some hold many of those aforesaid are in Law good Witnesses, as
Poor Men; but the Jury may consider such may easier be biased or corrupted, he
has not so much to lose or forfeit for a Crime, he lies under several
Necessities and Temptations a Rich Man does not, etc. In Solomon's (Proverbs)
c. 30. praying against Poverty, the Reason's alleged, lest being poor, one
should steal, and take the Name of the Lord in vain. And it is for something the
Poet says, Quantum quisque sua nummorum servat in arca,
Tantum habet and Fidei --
Juvenal.

As for Servants, etc. they are under the same Circumstances commonly of Poor
Men, and worse, for more apt to do any thing in Obedience, or Favor, or else
out of Malice, etc. against or for their Lord, etc. Before the Conquest the
Oath of a Thane (one of like degree then, as a Yeoman is now) was in Law
Equivalent to the Oath of six Villains, Pagans, etc. (Servants that were bound)
Lamb. 56. 200. as for Persons any wise Infamous, such will not value or stand
upon their Credit, or but the less, since have little or none to lose, and over
shoes over boots. As for criminal Persons, It Is a Maxim, Justitia non potest
cum scelerato Commorcium habere. He that has been once wicked, or in one thing,
may be suspected again, or in another thing, hence where a Desendant is
supposed in Law guilty but of a Contempt, Trespass, Deceit or Injury; He shall
not wage his Law, for the Law will not believe him, though would believe
another against whom is an Action of Debt, Detinue or Account, Co. L. 295. As
for one under 14 Years old, such are, as our Law says, not arrived at
Discretion, such may Mistake, be Influenced, etc. and so of all the rest. But
it were not amiss, if Juries heard all Persons, weighing their Testimony as
ought. A Jury should mislike any Witness also, that in's Evidence varies,
delivers himself in any passion, speaks at random, or not cautiously, or seems
to side with or against either Party, or to argue, or to offer proving
Negatives. None can swear a Negative, nor may be admitted to give Testimony
directly against an Affirmative, 48 E. 3. 30. 12 H. 6. 6. Assize 408. 12 H. 4.
9* 50. E. 3. 16. 43 E. 3. 32. Fleta li^ 6. c. FNB. 136. h. 97. c. A Jury may
take Notice of particular Statutes, Patents, Judgments, and other Records given
in Evidence, and may go against Estopels, Conclusions, etc. so it be according
to the very truth; for they must speak the Truth in all cases, Co. 4. 53. It Is
much the Jury does not always examine Witnesses themselves. If he that examines
them be corrupted, or any wise ill affect, he may easily mislead the whole
course of Evidence, he may countenance which side he will pleasedly, hearing
the one side on one sort, but the other not without brow-beating and
uneasiness; he may frighten, discountenance, divert, puzzle, distract, or
otherwise abuse a Witness; he may flatter, wheedle, prompt, ask leading
Questions, direct, etc. and thus darken and perplex the Truth.

How does a Jury discharge its Conscience thus? The Jury is the only Judges
also of what is said, and how the Verdict shall be given, and they whose
Consciences are to be satisfied, and certainly know best what they want to
know, etc. unless walk by implicit Faith, and therefore be the most proper to
ask the Questions.

All that is aforesaid should also the rather be as proposed, considering how
the Law is now altered as to Accusers, Judges, Witnesses, Counselors,
Solicitors, etc. Anciently, Omnis qui crimen objicit scribat se probaturum. Et
non oportet quenquam Judicari vel Damnari priusquam legitimos Accusatores
habeat presents, Ll. Guil. 1. c. 5. All Persons that Indicted any other, were
to be sufficient, responsible, etc. Co. 5. 120. Accusers gave Security to
answer Damages if the Accusation proved false, Mir. 19, 120, 124, 147, 195.
Glanv. 75. longum carceris inducunt inclusionem cum redemptione, falsae
appellationes and hujusmodi abettatores, Fleta 142. Fines were set on
Appellours, 11 R. 2. Fines 2. 15 E. 3. Fines 49. 107. If A. brought an Appeal
in any Case, and was either barred, nonsuited, or his Writ abated, he was
fined and imprisoned immediately, without Defendants trouble, 8 H. 4. 17. 20.
Brit. 245. 32. Ass. 9. 42. E. 3. 26. Appellee acquit, the Appellour was by the
same Judgment, without more Trouble, imprisoned a Year and Day, and was to
repair the Damages of Credit, Trouble, Charges, etc. of Appellee, besides,
undergo a grievous Ransom or Fine to the King; and so was it of Abettors or
Encouragers of the Prosecution, Fleta 53. It was Death to appeal innocent
Persons of any Mortal Crime, 'till H. 1. brought it to Corporal Punishment, and
satisfying the Party grieved his Damages, Mir. 250, 251. So the Lawyers were
punished for assisting the Accuser, and a year and a day's Imprisonment
inflicted on a Sergeant, Lawyer, Attorney, or Clerk, to use Deceit or Collusion
in a Court, or consent to it, either in Favor of the Court, or any Person
else, Fleta 87. Counselors were to be suspended Practice, if tendered false
Delays, false Witnesses knowingly, used Deceits, Fictions, or Untruths to the
Court: And were to swear not to maintain or defend any Wrong or Falsity, Mir.
121, 122. And it is by a kind construction they be not yet liable in several
Cases to be punished as Barrettors, Maintainers, etc. An Assize did lie against
Counselors, Attorneys, etc. by whose ill practice or means any one lost but a
Freehold Inland, Mir. 154. 209. Brit. 315. So Witnesses have formerly been
punished severely. In the Scripture, the Story of Susanna, the Witnesses are
put to Death. By Moses's Law it was Eye for Eye, and Tooth for Tooth, Life for
Life, etc. against false Witnesses, Deuteronomy. 19, 21. By the Law, Cornel^a amongst
the Romans, a Witness that occasioned another's Death by false Testimony, lost
his Head, if one of the greater Quality, else he was Hanged on the Cross, or
given to wild Beasts, Simler. Before the Conquest, that of Moses was mostly; so
with us, only sometimes it was Banishment, etc. Ll. Ed. c. 3. Ethelst. c. 10.
25. Edm. c. 6. 35, etc. Edw. and Gru. c. 11. Aussi sont homicides devolunt
juges and tesmonis que fausses. Mir. 34, 36. False Judges, and false Witnesses
are guilty of wilfully killing Men. After it came to cutting out of Tongues*
Mir. c. 4. Ll. Canut. c. 15. As for Judges, they were accounted Disseissours,
if wronged any one in his Title, Brit. 137. Mir. 154. 209. Brit. 315. In
Scotland, Judex qui ter male judicasse convictus fuerit perdit Officium and fit
infamis, Stat. Rob. 1. c. 28. A Judge convicted of having thrice ill judged,
loses his Office, and is adjudged infamous. Says Glanvil, Tenetur Curia
Judicium suum tueri per duellum and maxim per illum qui Judicium reddidit. Et
quidem si Curia de falso Judicio convicta fuerit, Dominus Curiae in
misericordia* Regis manet and perpetuo Curiam amittit; prae^rea tota Curia in
misericordia Regis renanet, Glanv. 66. Altresi qui faus jugement fuit pert sa
Were si il ne pret prover sor saintz que melz ne post juger, Lamb. 162, 64.
Also whosoever gives a false Judgment, shall forfeit his Were, (what is Life is
worth) unless can prove on Oath he could judge no better. Judges, if Condemned
one to Death against their Knowledge, or by Ignorance of, or in what they ought
not, as Judges, be Ignorant of, they be Murderers, etc. and to dye as such,
Mir. 256. v. Bract. 412, King Alfred's Law was, That false Judges, because
dishonor God, whose Vicars they be, (the Scripture calls them Gods) and the
King, which raises them to such an Honorable Seat, as the Chair of God; they
shall (first) make satisfaction to the Party grieved, forfeit what else they
have, and suffer further Punishment at King's Will and Pleasure. And if they
falsely put to Death any, then to dye themselves, and always at least to suffer
like for like, Mir. 265. 301. Appeal of one's Death lay against a Judge, for
judging one falsely or wrongfully to Death, Mir. 136, 258, 298. Presentiments
were made against Chancellours, Judges, etc. for breaking their Oath, Mir. 144.
There were 44 Judges hanged in one Year for wrongful Judgments, Mir. 296. etc.
And says the same Book, it is an abuse, that all things are not so now, 296.
What became of Tresilian and Belknap, of later years? But now the Law seems
clear otherwise, we have little or no Punishment against Chancellours, Judges,
Counselors, Attorneys, Clerks, Witnesses, etc. yet were Juries then so
cautious, as aforesaid, with and against them, where now therefore how many
times more Jealous and Cautious have they Reason, and should they be.

The Law considering the great Burden; that lies upon the Consciences of
Jurymen, has favored them with this Liberty. They may, as aforesaid, take
upon them the knowledge of what the Law is in the matter, or upon the truth of
the Fact, as well as the knowledge of the Fact, and so give in a Verdict
generally, that the Defendant is Guilty or not. Or they may give in only the
matter of Fact, particularly how they find it to be, and then leave it to the
Judges to determine. Or, they may acquaint the Judges, how the matter of Fact
stands, and then ask the Judges their Opinion, as to the matter of Law, and
then determine the whole matter themselves. The Grand Jury strikes out of the
Indictment what they be not certain is true; or may any wise alter it to what
they be certain is true: Or, if any thing be in it they be doubtful of, they
may superscribe it Ignoramus, at their Election in all these Cases. Thus if a
Jury find the Words not spoke, or the Fact not done, with, and according to the
Aggravations and Circumstances in an Indictment, etc. mentioned: They ought
either not find the Indictment, (for one not being Guilty as the Indictment
mentions, is consequently not Guilty of that Indictment, but rather seems, if
guilty at all, guilty of some other matter than which he stands Indicted of,
and so of some other Indictment only; and then let the Prosecutor, if so fond
of troubling his Neighbors, bring such other) Or strike out what they have not
sufficient Evidence of, as do often in Indictments of Murder, (which say the
Defendant of his malice forethought Feloniously Killed and Murdered such a
one) strike out the words of his malice forethought and murdered, having no
Evidence of the Malice, but sufficient of the rest, and then endorse it Billa
vera, and so find the Bill Manslaughter, instead of Murder. So was it of an
Indictment against Ld. Chandois and Count Arundel his second in a Duel. In like
manner, when the Evidence proves a Fact done only by mischance, defending one's
self, in time and place of War, when Defendant was non Compos mentis, an
Officer doing his Office, etc. the Grand Jury alter the Indictment accordingly.
So of the Petit Jury, only it does not alter the Indictment, etc. but instead
of altering Murder to Manslaughter, etc. as aforesaid, in the Indictment, they
only say, Guilty of Manslaughter, and not of Murder; or guilty of
Chance-medley, Se Defendendo, etc. Or they may tell the Court particularly and
plainly how they find the truth in, and of the whole matter to be so far as
concerns the Fact, or what was done or said. As in Cases of Words, what were
spoke, where, to what intent, etc, and so leave it to the Court to judge on it
according to Law, and to tell what the Law is thereupon, and so be discharged
themselves, which is called giving a special Verdict. Suppose A. bring an
Action of Debt on a Bond against B. as Heir of C. and B. pleads he has nothing
from C. to pay any thing with; and A. replies, that he has, etc. and so the
Issue is joined (or what the Jury be to Try, is) whether B. has any thing, as
aforesaid, or not. A. proves that B. had before the Action, brought something
so, but aliened by Fraud and ill Practice, to deceive A. of his Debt. Now, they
finding the matter or case to be thus indeed, and the Law being (for there is a
Statute, 13 El.) that such aliening shall be void, and consequent, the Heir
chargeable nevertheless: They may, if will, as aforesaid, either take upon them
to know the Law, and in this, or any Case, say generally, they find for A. Or
not take Notice of the Law, but only of the Matter, and so tell the Court how,
and what they find the matter to be; and thus leave it to the Court to judge in
Law, whether ought to be found for, and this is their most safe way. To this
end was the Stat. of West. 2. c. 3. that if a Jury doubt on the Evidence what
the Law is, and therefore what to do, they might leave it to the Judges to
determine. But, says Coke, this Statute is only in affirmance of the Common
Law, Inst. 2. 425. 13 E. 1. 39. See a special Verdict in Case of Murder, Co. 4.
44. Co. 9. 63. One in an Information, N. B. Entr. 375, 378. Co. 1. 22. One in
Attaint, Die. 173. So in a Case about Murder, the Jury tell the Court; they find
the Killing itself to be true, but not the Killing Feloniously, as mentioned in
the Indictment, and so ask the Opinion of the Court if it be Murder, Go. 9. 69.
So the Jury found the Parties Indicted for Riotously tearing the Petition,
Guilty of tearing the Petition, but not of the Riot, etc. It Is true, it is
doubted in Moor, c. 1002. whether in a Writ of Right a Jury may give a special
Verdict. But as there is no Reason, that if the Cause be indifferently plain,
as to the Law, the Jury themselves should not put an end to it, giving a
General Verdict, as Guilty or not Guilty, etc. without so much further Charge,
loss of Time, increase of Trouble, as otherwise must needs follow; yet on the
other hand, there is as little why if there be difficulty in Law upon the case
that they being mostly unlearned in Law should be bound to find generally
Guilty or not, etc. and so find and say on a sudden what is the very Law, as
well as Fact, when some such Cases have several years puzzled all the Judges to
resolve. And it is against all Reason, that the Election of giving a special
Verdict, or general Verdict, should be in the Judges too; for the Jury best
knowing themselves, their own Capacities and Strength, do therefore best know
when meet with difficulties to them in Law, and so when to give the one or
other: And accordingly are (...) best Opinions that the Jury may choose* (...)
the Action, etc. real, personal, or mixed, Civil, Criminal, Public, or Private;
and be the Issue general or special, or in any Case whatsoever: And that the
Judges must accept of, and cannot refuse such Verdict, 13 E. 1. 30. Fitz. I. of
P. 114. Co. 9. 14. Inst. 2. 425. Inst. 4. Co. L. 227, 228.

Either Jury may at any time alter their Opinion or Verdict, etc. before
Recorded in Court, Fitz. I. of P. 114. Co. L. 227.

All said any where above of Grand Iuries, may be applied to the other Juries;
and no Body will offer to deny, but other Juries ought to be as strict,
circumspect, and careful, etc. as aforesaid, though would pretend otherwise of
Grand Juries.

A Petit Jury may abridge a fault a Grand Jury finds one Guilty of, but cannot
enlarge it: As one indicted of Murder, may by the Petit Jury, be found Guilty
of Manslaughter, Chance-medley, etc. instead thereof; but one being Indicted
of Manslaughter, cannot by the Petit Jury be found guilty of Murder, or any
greater Crime than Manslaughter.

A Petit Jury cannot give any Verdict against any one, where Life or Member is
in question or danger, but only in the Court, whilst also it is sitting, etc.
though in other cases may.

A Letter to the Author.
SIR,
HAving by your Friend received your Treatise concerning Juries, with desire
that I should show it to one, whose course of Study is so well known to be
Conversant with Ancient Records and Books, as his Judgment is worthily
Esteemed, I did, after I had read it over, perform that Trust, by showing it to
that Learned Gentleman, whose Opinion your Friend told me was desired; and
further by that Gentleman, it was Communicated to another Worthy Person of the
same Course of Study; and both of them having read it over, I from them return
it to you, with Assurance, that they, as well as I, have had much Satisfaction
and Delight, by seeing so useful Subject Matter so Learnedly Treated of, in a
time, when the Publishing it seems not only Seasonable, but Necessary.

I wish we might have the Happiness to know you, but being assured by your
Friend, that you have taken a Resolution as yet, to Conceal your Name, we must
for the present, think it enough to believe that Treatise is composed by a
Worthy, as we find it could be done by no other than a Learned Man.

And I must, in returning your Manuscript, present you some Matters and Cases
which occurred to our Thoughts in Reading it; which being agreeable with yours
on that Subject, yet some of those Cases and Instances, I am about to mention,
not being so particularly Expressed in your Book, though two or three Passages
which are in yours, [as concerning all the Twelve of a Jury of Trial to consent
in Verdict; and in Grand Juries, Twelve at the least to Consent in making
Presentiments, or Indictments; and the Matters of Empson and Dudley.] I shall
herein repeat, because they will relate to the other Paragraphs here intended,
what may seem not mentioned in yours, are offered to you to consider, whether
you will insert them in some proper Places among the Leaves, and Parts of your
Book, and reject the rest that I shall Write in these Papers, unless you please
to receive them all together as they will be sent to you, by way of Letter*
which yet must want the Ceremonial Form of Address, whilst you forbear to let
me know, to whom to direct my Respects.

What I am about to present to you, relating to this Matter, are:

Let any Sober Citizen consider, how Legal, Just, and Reasonable, he would
think it, if being of clear Reputation, Credit, and Innocence, he should be
indicted for some Base, yet Capital Crime, upon the Oath of a strange or bad
Fellow's Evidence, who should be altogether unknown to the Grand Jury, or
vehemently suspected to be a Rascal, notwithstanding which they should (by the
Judges Directions) find the Bill, and thereupon the Citizen should be publicly
arrested by Officers, haled from his House or Shop, committed to Prison, his
Goods inventoried, and Guards set upon his House to prevent pretended
Imbezlements, and his Credit and Reputation utterly ruined without Remedy. And
after all this, that it should be said, the Grand Jury did well to find the
Bill, from whence all these sad and woeful Consequences followed, upon such late
applauded Notions, that the Grand Jury are not to be Judges of the Credibility
of the Evidence; or that tho Citizen is not in danger of his Life, till his
Trial by another Jury.

Again; How much would such Principles have been abhorred, and declaimed
against, if a Woman, notorious for being a Common Whore, should have indicted
the late Archbishop of Canterbury for a Rape, and the Grand Jury should have
found the Bill, whereupon the Archbishop was to be committed to Prison,
suspended from Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, his Goods and Chattels all over
England inventoried by the Sheriffs? Would the Plea have excused the Grand
Jury, in the Opinion of any Unbyassed and Impartial Man, that though they
believed in their Conscience, that the lewd Woman swore false, yet, they being
to find according to her positive Evidence, they, as so many Parish-Clarks were
but to say Amen to her Oath of the Fact; and so find Billa vera against that
Eminent Prelate?

It may be also considered, whether the Statute 13 Car. 2. cap. 1. which
requires that Persons shall be Indicted and Accused by the Testimony and
Depositions of Two Lawful and Credible Witnesses upon Oath, can be interpreted
to make the Testimony of Two Witnesses not Credible, sufficient Evidence? If
the Witnesses are to be Credible, as the Statute plainly declares they ought to
be, then it may be further asked, Who are to be Judges thereof? If the Judges;
Then they take upon them to determine Matter of Fact, and so becoms Judges both
of Law and Fact: And what need then is there of Grand Juries? But that the
Credibility of the Lives, as well as the Circumstances of the Evidence of the
Witnesses is entirely lest to the Grand Jury, is plain from this; That if one
of the Judges be produced as a Witness, he must in that respect, for that time,
leave his place as a Judge, and be sworn, and appear before the Grand Jury, as
any other ordinary Witness.

Besides, If the Entire Judgment of the Evidence had not by the Law been left
to the Jury, then they would be finable if they should refuse to find according
to the direct Swearing of the Witnesses, (whether true or false, probable or
improbable to them,) and if they should not implicitly follow the Pleasure and
Direction of the Judges.

But that the Jury is not finable, is adjudged in the Case you remember of
Bushel, in the Lord Vaughan's Reports, by solemn and seasonable Resolution of
the Judges.

And should not the Grand Jury be Judges of the credibility of the Evidence
before them, the Affidavits of Two Persons, who should swear Treasonable Words
against any Man, would be sufficient to bring him immediately upon the Jury of
Life and Death, and then the Trouble of a Grand Jury would seem only a piece of
needless Formality, which our wise Ancestors never thought so slightly of
before; and certainly the Use of them would never have been continued, nor
would Men of so Great Worth, as they generally are, or should be, serve
therein; where Sheriffs make a Conscience of their Duty to return such.

It may not seem Impertinent here, to mention a Memorial, or Credible Report,
of what happened in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, concerning a Jury at a Trial,
whereof the Substance is; That a Murder being committed, a Man, who was
suspected for the Fact, was Arraigned before the Lord Chief Justice Anderson,
at the Assizes; the Evidence was so strong, that the Judge directed the Jury to
find the Prisoner Guilty; and they going together to consult of their Verdict,
Eleven were for finding him Guilty, but the Twelfth Man was against it: This
begat great Dispute, and the Judge expecting a present Verdict, sent for them,
to know the Reason why they staid so long, he being ready to rise; the Jury
told him, they were all agreed but one, whereupon the Judge ask him, why he
did not agree with his Fellows, to find the Prisoner guilty, seeing there was
so plain and full Evidence? To this the twelfth Man gave no Answer, (where by
the way may be noted, that none of the Jury are bound to declare their Reason
for their Opinion.) So the Jury was sent out again; but no Persuasions could
prevail with the twelfth Man to agree with the rest: Therefore the Jury were to
be shut up all Night without Meat or Drink, and in the Morning great were the
Complaints from the Eleven, of the Indisposition of their Health; so that the
Judges in Commiseration sent for them, and they agreeing with the Twelfth Man,
the Prisoner was found Not guilty, and so acquitted. After the Jury had given
in their Verdict, the Chief Justice desired to speak with the twelfth Man, and
that he should come to his Lodgings after the Court should rise: When he came,
his Lordship taking him aside, told him, that the Country looked on him as an
Honest Man, but in what he had done, he much doubted there was something
extraordinary, and desired him to tell him what it was: The Juror, with a
disturbed Mind, told him, that if it might not turn to his Prejudice, he would
discover the whole Business: To which the Chief Justice replied, that it should
not, and gave him his Hand upon it; whereupon the Juror with tears told him,
that he was the Person that had unfortunately killed the Man, and that the
Prisoner was not guilty of it; and that this Juror had not sought to serve in
the Jury; and confessed, that after he was sworn, upon his Lordships
Directions, and the Juries Importunities, he had once resolved to comply, and
find the Prisoner guilty; but when he considered, that was to add Perjury, and
another Murder unto Murder, he resolved to be starved to Death, rather than to
agree thereunto. When the Chief Justice had heard him out, you have, says he,
done a very ill thing; but seeing you have not added one crying sin to another,
Pray God for Pardon, and I will get you the Queens Pardon.

Sir, You having mentioned in your Book, I might omit to say any thing, that
Juries of Trial every one of the twelve must agree, or no Verdict can be given,
and no way should be introduced to go to the Vote, and Poll amongst themselves
for the major part. But I could not forbear mentioning it again, because
special Notice should be taken thereof.

And also of what you have very well observed, that Grand Juries ought not to
find any Bill, or make any Present men or Indictment, unless twelve of their
number agree to the Presentment or Indictment. The Rule of Law being very clear
(...) as may appear by the Statute that direct Enquiry to be by the Oath of
twelve Men: And all the said Statutes prove, and some of them expressly declare,
that Enquiry by the Oath of twelve Men has always been the laudable Custom and
Usage of this Realm: Therefore though Grand Juries consist of a greater Number,
and may put matters that come before them to the Vote and Poll, yet the major
part of them ought to be twelve at the least, to agree to any Bill of
Presentment or Indictment; for there cannot lawfully be any Presentment or
Indictment, unless twelve of them consent thereunto, which I could not forbear
the more expressly to repeat; It being fit and necessary for all Gentlemen, and
others who serve in Grand Juries to know, to prevent Mistakes of what is so
plainly the Law, in all Cases of Presentment and Indictment by Grand Iuries.

That Juries are Judges not only of Fact, but of Law, by your Treatise may more
fully be seen, and may clearly appear by their Power to give Special Verdicts
as well in Capital as Common Matters, as in Case of ^^dictment of Burglary,
they may find only the Felony, and acquit of the Burglary, and many such like
Cases, as where Indictment for stealing Goods therein mentioned, of the Value
of Ten Pounds, they may find the same to be but Ten Pence, and so to be but
Petit Larceny.

And I hope it will not seem tedious to show that Juries, as well of Inquiry as
Trial, have sometimes been Judges also in Matters of the Church and Religion,
even in time of Popery.

As in Cases of Praemunire, such anciently was the Care and Watchfulness, which
our Law provided against the Danger and Incroaching Jurisdiction of the Popes
and Church of Rome, which have always had Designs against England, our Laws and
theirs being incompatible.

Therefore from the time of King Edward the Third, and the Reigns of the
succeeding Kings, there have been Laws made, That if any of the Kings Subjects
obtain Provision or Promotion to Benefices, or if any Appeal from the Kings
Courts of Justice to the Court of. Rome, etc. they shall be Imprisoned during
Life, and forfeit their Lands and Goods, and be out of the Kings Protection.
And we know, that the way of Inquiry and Trial in these Cases has always been
by Juries.

There are some other Matters comprised within the Construction of the Statute
of Praemunire, as the drawing Matters any where else to another Examination
than in the King's Courts of Law. And many other Offenses made to be under the
like Punishment, and called Praemunire by other Statutes, which we need not
here mention; my Intention being only hereby to show, that Juries have been
anciently Judges of Ecclesiastical Matters, even in time of Popery.

And for their having been Judges of Religion also, we may see after King Henry
the Eighth had cast off the Pope's usurped Supremacy, and by the Power of a
Parliament restored the Crown and Laws of England in Church Matters, to their
ancient Rights and Usage, but had not then cast off the Popish Religion; He,
with the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in Parliament, in the
Thirty first Year of his Reign, even at the Instigation of the Clergy. (as is
recited in the Record of that Statute, and in Rastal's Printed Book of Statutes
at large, 31 H. 8. c. 14.) Enacted that the Statute (commonly called) of six
Articles; whereby,

1. The Real Presence in the Sacrament was to be believed.

2. That the Communion in both kinds was not necessary.

3. That Priests ought not to Marry.

4. That Vows of Single Life are to be kept.

5. That Private Masses were agreeable to God's Word.

6. That Auricular Confession was necessary, and that if any one should
Publish, Declare, Say, Affirm, Argue or Hold any Opinion against the said
Articles, he should suffer Pains of Death, without Benefit of Clergy, and
forfeit all his Estate, Real and Personal, and Commissions were to be directed
to the Bishops of the Diocese, their Chancellors, Commissaries, and other
Persons, as the King should appoint, to Inquire by the Oaths of Twelve Men
concerning these Matters.

Of which Statute, the Learned Dr. Burnet in his History of Reformation, Folio
266. has observed, That there was but one Comfort which the poor Reformers
could pick out of the whole Act, That they were not left to the Mercy of the
Clergy in their Ecclesiastical Courts, but were to be Tried by a Jury, where
they might expect more Candid and Gentle Dealing.

But though these Matters were thereby to be brought before a Jury, yet so
great were the Arts and Industry of the Bishops, and those who were then most
Zealous to uphold Popery, that they endeavored sometimes to bring back these
things to their way of Determining without, and to lay aside Juries, and often
when these Matters were brought before Juries, they did overawe them, and
overstrained this Law, and so dreadful were the Storms, and so grievous the
Persecutions against the then Dissenters, that in the 35th. Year of the same
Kings Reign, to qualify the Severity, (as by the Record thereof, and Rastal's
Book of Printed Statutes at large, 35 H. 8. cap. 5. may be seen) that whereas
by force of the former Statute of 31 H. 8. Certain false Accusations and
Presentiments were brought against the Kings Subjects; and such Accusations and
Presentiments were kept secret from the knowledge of the Accused, till time
espied, and they by Malice Convict, to the great Peril and Danger of the
Subject. It was therefore Enacted, that Presentiments and Indictments on the
said Statute, whereunto any Person shall be called to answer, shall be in open
Court, upon the Oaths of Twelve indifferent persons, according to Equity and
good Conscience, and as other Presentiments have been used to be taken in this
Realm in such (...) Causes, according to the good and laudable Custom and Usage
of the same. And that the Inquiry and Trials upon the said Presentiments and
Indictments, may Justly and Charitably proceed without Corruption or Malice
accordingly.

If any Object against this last recited Act, That the Statute of 31. H. 8. of
the six Articles, was afterward, in the time of King Edward the Sixth,
Repealed, and that this latter Statute of 35 H. 8. is also Repealed, or of none
Effect. It is to be answered, That though the first be repealed, and that the
latter Statute, in what it relates to the former Statute in that respect be
Repealed, or of no Use, yet as to what it does Declare and Affirm to be the
Ancient and long used Course of Law, that Juries should proceed according to
the Laudable Custom and Usage of this Realm, and agreeable to good Conscience
and Equity, and Charity, without Malice or Corruption, and that the Lives of
the Subjects ought not to be drawn into danger by False and Malicious
Accusations, and Secret or Corrupt Practices.

These are such Fundamental Maxims, and Rules of Law, as cannot be repealed,
and no Judges whatsoever may give any Expositions to the contrary, any more
than they can do against Magna Charta, or any other Fundamental Maxims or Rules
of our Laws and Government.

Thus you may see, what was then declared by the greatest Authority on Earth,
the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the Laudable Custom and Usage
of this Realm, has ever been for Grand Juries to make their Presentiments and
Indictments according to good Conscience and Equity, and that they ought to
proceed therein, as well Charitably as Justly.

Since therefore in such Matters as belong to Grand Juries to enquire, or are
brought before them, they have as large Power as a Lord Chancellor has, in
matters within his Cognizance. Well might Antiquity call them Grand Juries, as
Magna Charta is called the Great Charer, from its great and weighty Contents.

Here I would not have it thought a Digression to add, that having seemed
before to speak only of Grand Juries, and Juries of Trial in Criminal Causes,
that the like Rules are to be observed concerning Juries a Trial of Actions
between Party and Party, that the Judge should always leave the matter
impartially and fairly before them, which would much diminish the number of
trivial Actions, as of slander for Words, etc. whereof there may be some doubt,
whether some of them would bear an Action, if the Judge would be pleased at the
Trial not to countenance either Party; where a great Man sometimes will bring
Action against a mean or poor Man, for Words it may be but slightly proved,
though by Witnesses of seeming Gravity, and not give Directions thereupon, to
give excessive Damages by reason of the great Quality of the Plaintiff.

I shall further take leave to Observe, that both Juries of Inquiry, and Juries
of Trial, with their Power and Privileges, are so naturally the Rights of
Englishmen, that even when strong Endeavors were used to say them aside by an
Act of Parliament, which Empson and Dudley (whom, though you mentioned in your
Book, and I must take occasion to repeat with some Observation thereon) had
procured in 11 H. 7. to proceed without Juries; yet when, like wicked
Gardiners; (for Gardiners may be a Simile for Counselors and Ministers of
Justice and Government, and be styled good or bad as they behave themselves)
the aforesaid Empson and Dudley, instead of using the Power they possessed in
their Masters favor, which should have been for preserving, had cut down some
of those Ancient Trees of wholesome Fruit, [the way of Enquiry and Trial by
Juries] and dug deep to bury them by the Act of Parliament they had obtained
to that purpose, and hoped they would never rise again: Yet, there being a
lasting Life in our good old Laws, (though sometimes as little to be discerned,
as when the Life of Trees in Wintertime retires invisibly to their Roots:) The
Act of 11 H. 7. was repealed by an Act of Parliament, 1 H. 8. and the Use of
Juries restored and sprang up again, to the Confusion and Destruction of those
Treacherous Gardiners, of whom the History is Famous enough, to be a warning to
all others to avoid the like mischief.

And how careful Judges have since been, and ought to be to maintain the
Ancient and Rightful Course of Law, and not to go out of it, may be seen in
Anderson's Reports, fol. 156. where Empson's Indictment is recited at large.
That Act of Parliament by which he and Dudley, being as in the 94th. Psalm,
ver. 20. like the seeking to establish Mischief by a Law, and so contrary to
the good Fundamental Law of England, to Enquire and Try by Juries; That though
it was an Act of Parliament they acted by, it proved too weak to save their
Heads; and became Fatal to them who procured, and were chief Instruments in the
Execution of it, and the inferior Instruments, the Informers and Promoters,
were also severely punished, and dyed shortly after, as mentioned by the
History of King Henry the Eighth, Written by the Lord Herbert.

As an Appendix to the Treatise of Juries, might be also recommended to your
Consideration, the late increase of Informations in the Crown-Office of Court
of the Kings Bench in Criminal Cases, not specially and particularly expressed or
directed by any Statute; for thereby the Subject is drawn into hazard of
Liberty and Estate, without Presentment or Indictment of Grand Jury, and
thereby deprived of that great and good out-guard of his Liberty and Property,
the Inquest by Oath of twelve Men, before he should be brought to Trial, which
is worth the Judges Care to rectify, or will he worthy the Consideration of a
Parliament by a Law, more fully to remedy for the future.

By having after named Empson and Dudley's History, mentioned the Mischief,
which if not carefully prevented, would grow by the Increase of the last
mentioned Informations in the King's Bench, I do not in either of these Cases,
intend any Reflection on any of the Judges; for as I am a Son of a Judge, who
whilst he lived made it his Care to maintain, as well as use the Rules and due
course of Law, and often, as well in public as private Discourse, would praise
the Excellency of our Laws, and particularly those of Enquiry and Trial by
Juries; I bear such Honorable Respect and Kindness to the present Judges, as
to believe and hope, that whatsoever (may sometimes happen) they always do, and
will for the future, make it their Care to preserve the Law in its due Course,
and to prevent any Mischief or Inconvenience from Entering or Growing in the Use
or Practice of it.

I would here close, but that I could not totally forbear to take some Notice
of the Ways, which are used to punish those Protestants, who do not Conform in
the Outward Manner of Worship and Ceremonies, though they agree with our
English Church in the Main Doctrines thereof, and in all respects behave
themselves Peaceably, whereof I crave leave freely to say my Mind.

That, though I love our Church, and frequently and duly receive the
Sacrament, and I, and all my Family come constantly to Church every Sunday,
(except hindered by Sickness, or other Extraordinary Impediment) and continue
decently there, during all the Time of Divine Service; and I so well love the
Common Prayers thereof, that I use part of them in my Family; and would
persuade all I can to the like Conformity; yet I have that Kindness to all
those Protestants, commonly called Dissenters, who by reason of Tenderness of
Conscience, different Education, or Use of other manner of Worship, and who,
though they differ in Opinion, concerning some lesser Matters, yet hold the
main Doctrine of Christianity, wherein all Protestants agree, notwithstand
their different manner of Worship.

And I could use many Arguments for Gentleness toward them; whereof I shall
here only name the Topics of some of them; which are,

From the common sense of Humanity.

From Principles of Right Reason.

From Christian Charity.

From Divine Command, and the Holy Scriptures.

From its being well pleasing to God, and the Way to have his Blessing.

That the beginning of Persecution of, and among Christians, was from
Antichristian Principles.

That Persecution is chiefly used by the Pope and Church of Rome.

That Union of Protestants is the Common Interest of the Protestant Religion,
both here and abroad.

That Union of Protestants is the best way to preserve and defend us from the
Idolatry, Policy, and Force of Popery.

That the safety of Christendom depends upon it.

That it is the best way to preserve the English Monarchy, so as thereby it
would Balance, and hinder the French King from gaining the Universal Monarchy,
and be a means to preserve the Countries and Dominions of all other Princes of
Europe in Safety.

That it would much increase the Peopling of this Land by quiet dwelling here.

That it would infinitely enrich this Nation by increase of Trade, and Value of
Land.

That Trade being thereby increased, his Majesty's Customs will be also very
much increased.

That Gentleness, Mercy and Kindness, are: honorable Qualities.

That these Qualities are agreeable unto the Gracious Expressions of his
Majesty, to his Protestants Subjects concerning the fame.

That it is suitable to the Kindness he shows to the Persecuted French
Protestants.

That we hope some of his Counselors and our Best Magistrates, are of the like
Honorable Mind, concerning Gentleness to be used to Protestant Dissenters, and
that the Measure of their Goodness, will be esteemed and taken by the Degrees
of their Disposition to such Gentleness.

I could name more Particulars, from whence much might be said on every of them
to this purpose; which Task, though it would be rather pleasant than difficult,
I shall not meddle with, but leave it to some other, who will better perform it
than I can, it being unnecessary here to say more thereof, because it is here
only proper to Observe how some late Acts of Parliament, relating to Church
Matters, leaving the Trust of punishing thereby, to the Discretion of the
Magistrates, without the use of Juries (which is so great a Trust, as was not
usally left to any Judges in former Ages) those who have that Power ought to be
the more careful, discreetly and prudently to use it with Moderation, and not
to abuse so great a Trust by overstraining such Laws hunting after, and taking
all Occasions they can to punish their fellow Subjects with the utmost, or
beyond the Rigor, and contrary to the Intention of those Laws.

And whereas one of the late Acts, allows an Appeal, it may yet seem hard for
an Englishman, to be put to that after-game of a hopeless Trial of his Appeal
by a Jury, when he is deprived of his first legal Guard, a Grand Jury, to whom
by the Laudable and Ancient Usage of England, all Presentiments and Indictments
in Criminal Matters do belong. And it is further to be considered, that the
Person who is brought into this Trouble, may be under great Difficulties,
whether to desire, or how to manage his Appeal, when, perhaps, all his Goods,
by selling whereof he might provide Money to deposite, as the Law requires,
before he can be admitted to Appeal, are taken from him by Distress, and at
last his Appeal shall be tried before the same Justices, that inflicted the
Penalty on him, and also that the Prosecution at the Trial shall be managed by
the Informers, who are to be Sharers of the Profit, they can get by the poor
Man's ruin.

These are some of the Considerations I could not omit to mention, together
with my wish, that the good Reputation of our Ancient Laws, may not be clouded
by any more such New Laws, as herein seem to imitate Ecclesiastical Courts,
where Proceedings are without Juries, which it seems some of our Clergy in
times past, did think to bring to pass, whereof, though I could mention some
Instances, I shall only cite one fully to our purpose, out of the Lord Cokes
2d. part of Institutes, being his Exposition on some Statutes, fol. 599, etc.
where he says, It will conduce much to the understanding of this matter, to
report unto you what Articles Archbishop Bancrost exhibited in the Name of the
Clergy, in Michaelmas Term, 3 Jacobi, to the Lords of the Council, against the
Judges of the Realm, Entitled, Certain Articles of Abuses, which are desired
to be reformed in granting Prohibitions. And the Answers thereunto, upon mature
Deliberation and Consideration, in Easter Term following by all the Judges and
Barons of the Exchequer, with one unanimous consent under their Hands,
Resolutions, which were by them delivered to the Lords of the Council, and for
distinction-sake, because there might be occasion often to cite them, called,
Articuli Cleri, 3 Jacobi.

These Articles, and their Answers being very long, I must refer to be there
read, as being very material to be known, how the Clergy endeavored to get the
multitude of Businesses into their Courts, to be determined without Juries, and
so encroach upon, and alter the Course therein, of our good English Laws and
Government. At the end of those Articles and Answers, the same Author further
says,

That the Clergy claimed to Interpret all Statute-Laws, concerning the Clergy;
but it was resolved by all the Judges of England, That the Interpretation of
Statutes concerning the Clergy, being a parcel of the Laws of the Realm, belong
to the Judges of the Common Law. And says, Magna est veritas and praevalet. To
which, as agreeing to the truth thereof, I may add, Lex Angliae optima est, and
praevalebit.

I would not have any of our present Clergy think I reflect on them, for I
truly and heartily Honor, some of our Bishops and Dignified Clergy, and any
others of them, whose soundness of Doctrine, great Learning, and good and sober
Lives, are, and might be, Examples for all the rest, and for whose sake, I bear
Civil Respect to the rest that are not altogether so praise worthy, as those
Good and most Reverend Men, to whom I bear my chief Respects, but shall say no
more of any of them here, but that I hope, they will leave off severe Punishing
their Fellow Christians, and for bear one another, Col. 3. 13 And study to be
quiet, and meddle with their own Business, 1 These. 4. 11. And that by a re-view
of these Laws, these things will in due time receive prudent and gentle as well
as sufficient Cure and Remedy in Parliament.

And now, Sir, I hope you will pardon me, for having, perhaps, been too
tedious, seeing your excellent Treatise contains so much on the behalf of
Juries, that all that I can say, may seem needless; and you may think fit to
lay aside what I have written; yet if it only have the effect, to dispose you
to let us know, to whom we owe our Acknowledgments for your so good Book, which
is fit for every Englishman, who may think himself concerned in our Rights, to
read and understand, I shall think it enough to testify that among those you
will infinitely Oblige thereby; I shall desire to be

Dec. 29. 1681. Your Friend and Servant, J. M.

I Shall here add a necessary Post script concerning 3 H. 7. Cap. 1. Wherein
there is a Clause, how in some special Case, a Jury of Enquiry may be fined,
That it only concerns such Matters and Offenses, whereof Indictments may be
brought before Justices of the Peace in their County Sessions; if the matter
plain and fully proved, and they wilfully conceal the same, the said Justices
of the Peace might cause a new Inquest to be returned (but the words, take
Inquest, do not give the Justices power to name, who shall be returned, which
is the Sheriffs Office) and it is to be only and purposely to enquire of such
Concealment; and does not extend to enquire of any other Offenses whatsoever;
and then after such wilful Concealment is found by such Inquest, The same
Justices of the Peace in the County Sessions, might fine the Jury of the former
Inquest. By which may be observed, That the said clause of the said Act of 3 H.
7. does fully and clearly prove, that by the common Law, Juries were not
finable concerning their Presentiments, Indictments and Verdicts. And even that
Clause, since that time, being One hundred, Ninety and four Years, or
thereabouts, has seldom or never been used. Our Books of Reports of Law-Cases
not affording any plain or full Instance of any Proceeding on that Clause of
that Statute. Therefore it may seem, as Littleton says in his Book, Sect. 108.
That in as much as it was never seen or heard, that any Action was brought on
the Statute of Merton (which was made 20 H. 3.) For the matter he treats of in
that Section, no Action could be brought thereon. For if any Action might have
been brought for that matter, it shall be intended, that it would some time or
other have been put in ure. And with this agrees the Ld. Coke, in his Comment
on that place. And also the Judges, in their Arguments on a late case of Action
brought on the Statute, about the Return of Members of Parliament, did cite the
said place of Littleton. By which appears concerning such unusual manner of
final Juries by the Clause of 3 H. 7. how there ought to be great Caution, in
Executing any Acts or Statutes, where they alter the Common Law and Course
thereof; seeing that Act of 3 H. 7. in that particular, and other memorable
things therein, made then such Alterations of the Common Law of this Realm, as
I forbear any further here to mention.

FINIS.

