THE ANTIPATHY between the French and Spaniard Englished By Robert Gentilys

Sold by R Martine at the Venice in old Baly 1641



THE (...) AND THE Spaniard. OR, of the world, displayed in lively (...)
representing the Antipathy of their Humors and different Dispositions. (...)
of the Customs of both those Nations.

By R. G. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for (...) at the Princes Arms in Paul's Churchyard.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful SIR PAUL PINDAR Knight.
YOur well known goodness which makes you admired and praised by every one,
excited long since a desire in me to testify unto the world, and your self,
that though a stranger unto you, yet I was not such a stranger in the city, but
that I had heard and taken notice of your daily pious and charitable works. So
that this my translation being to go forth into the view of the world, I have
made bold to dedicate it unto you for two causes. The first, my desire to make
known unto you that you had an unknown servant, who had long wished for some
opportunity whereby he might manifest the desire he had to tender his service
unto you. The second, to make this poor work more acceptable to the world, by
prefixing your beloved name in the front of it, which is greater in the worlds
esteem, Quam cui possit invidia nocere. Your courteous and noble mind will (I
hope) not disdain the gift, though so small that it meriteth not so great a
Patron: I promising ere long to present you with something which shall be mine
own invention. So wishing you many happy days, forerunners of eternal
happiness, I rest,

Your Worships most devoted servant, Robert Gentilis.

To the Reader.
TO obviate an Objection I thought good to write these few lines unto thee. For
it may be said that the extolling of one is in some sort the vilifying of
another: and the glorious praises given in this book to the French and
Spaniards may seem a disparagement to our Nation. But when I think upon that
Prince, who desirous to have a valiant man brought before him, and one being
presented unto him, who had many scarres about him, (which were questionless
tokens of his bold adventerousnesse) said he had rather have had the man who
gave those wounds. I resolve my self that our Nation is rather commended and
magnified by their praises then otherwise. For if their conquests be so
glorious, what must the English renown be, who never could be said to have
had but the upper hand of either of them, in all attempts or enterprises,
witness Histories and Chronicles of all ages? If the Author have been any
thing hyperbolicall in their praises, impute it to the Spanish phrase and
humor which cannot speak in a low style or strain, and in your own
discretion accept of his meaning, and circumscribe his generalities. As for
example, when he says that these two great Monarchs protect and defend others,
tax him not with so much indiscretion as to imagine he meant all, but only
such petty Princes and Dukes as have their adherencies and dependancies upon
them. And not those who equal in power need not crave aid of any but God,
either to defend, or vindicate them. So submitting my author and my self to
thy courteous censure, I rest

Thine if thou esteem me worthy of thy favor, R. G.

The opposition, and conjunction of the two great lights of the EARTH.
CHAP. I.
That Peace and Union, are Gods Attributes, and the perfection of nature.
THAT supreme God who made the Heavens, chroniclers of his glory, and
greatness; to give us by his visible effects some knowledge, and notice of the
invisible treasure, deposited in the deep treasures of his own omnipotency.
In all his operations, as well internal, or (as the Divines do term them,)
ad intra, which are the generation of the word, and production of the holy
Ghost; as also in the external, as the creation, the providence, the
preservation, and the like, shows us, that his most essential and proper
attribute is Union. Since the real distinction, admitted by sacred Divinity,
between the Divine persons is not sufficient to make the Son not to be the
same with the Father, and both one with the holy Ghost. Nor does that infinite
variety of diverse natures, whereof this artificial frame of the world is
composed besides the universal dependency, which they have from one beginning,
refuse the bond of peace, wherewith they are straightly joined together. For
proof of the first, the efficacy wherewith the same God, did so much give in
charge and urge unto his chosen people the unity of his divine nature, shall
serve me for a concluding reason, he saying unto them a thousand times; Hearken
O Israel! thy God is one, and one is his name. Which words as they are most
true, and unreproovable witnesses of this truth, shall save me a labor of
proving it by natural, and theological reasons.

The second, which is the dependency which all creatures have, from one only
beginning, may be plainly demonstrated by that which historical Moses writ the
beginning of his sacred history, attributing the creation of the world to one
sole cause. Which truth that great Mercurius Trismegistus did also leave
engraven in pure Emerald, being there in followed by the whole troop of
Philosophers, who unanimously confessed one first cause, eternal, independent,
and immortal; needing therein no other Tutor, but only the light of natural
reason. And if any curious man should ask me the proof of the third point, he
may yield himself satisfaction, by considering the straight bonds, and
intrinsecall union, wherewith all natures do link themselves one with
another* until they come unto the first link from whence they were taken. Nor
let any one think this union, and natural concord of the creatures to be a
borrowed perfection; or accidentally belonging unto them: seeing that the
supreme architect, who made all things deliberately, and with wisdom, and
measure; having set every one of them in their own post, and place convenient
for their natures, gave unto them all joined together union, for the center of
their preservation. And that so properly, and intrinsecally, that if the said
union could be broken, the whole frame of the world whose harmony consists in
the reciprocal consonancy of all its parts, would be brought to nothing.

He that shall with particular attention consider the seven rings, or linkes,
whereof the chain of this world is composed, shall easily find out this
marvailous bond of union. Beginning from the first and last, which is God; who
though he be generally united to all creatures, which live in him, subsist by
him, and move through him; yet by a more particular assistance, he is united
unto the Angelical nature, as the perfectest of all creatures. This joyneth it
self with the nature of the heavens, which by reason of its incorruptibility,
is the most perfect next unto the Angelical. To the celestial enterlaceth it
self the elementall, in whose link consists the diameter of the chain; as
that, which according to the order and perfection of nature, is farthest from
the first. The fifth is composed of the last element, which is the earth: and
this is the first link, which begins to turn toward it beginning, and it is
the vegetative nature which intresseth it self with the sensitive, and that
with the rational, which uniting it self immediately with God, shuts up the
chain and circle of this succession. And because the last knot or link of
this chain was to unite it self with God, and betwixt God and the creature
there could be no proportion of equality: therefore the eternal wisdom
created the soul, which being immortal and incorporeall, should have some
resemblance of God, and so uniting it self perfectly with him, the chain of
the fabric of this world should so close up and shut. And in case, that some
curious body, not content with the general union, of the seven rings or
linkes, which have bin set down, should desire more particularly to find out
the point of this truth, he may satisfy himself, with the internal
searching out of each nature and link of the said chain. And beginning from
the first, he shall find in it an infinite abyss of perfections and
attributes, which are Wisdom, Omnipotency, Justice, Goodness, Glory, Mercy,
and innumerable more, which are all with an unspeakeable incomprehensibility
gathered in, and united unto the indivisible latchet of the most simple divine
nature.

Concerning the second link, which is the Angelical nature, he may very well
apprehend, not only by the light of faith, but also by the strength of his
own understanding: the marveilous order, and perfect concord, wherewith those
Angelical spirits are united together; the Cherubins joining themselves to the
Seraphins, the Seraphins to the Archangels, they to the Angels, Thrones,
Powers, Dominions, and the other kinds of the twelve quires of Angels, with
such great uniformity and concord, as may be presumed in that heavenly
commonwealth. Then if we shall cast our eyes, on the contemplation of the third
link, which is the nature of the heavens, we shall plainly see (if Ptolomie
deceive us not) that the primum mobile, is united to the Christalline heaven,
this to the eight sphere, the eighth sphere to Saturn, who joyneth himself
to Jove, Jove to Mars, Mars uniteth himself to Sol, Sol adheres to Venus,
Venus to Mercury, Mercury to Luna, from whose hollow superficies takes it
beginning: the fourth link of the Elementall nature, joining it self unto the
annexed fire, it unto the air, whom the element of water follows, until it
comes to unite it self unto the earth, which is the universal center of al
heavy and ponderous things.

From the earth begins the fifth link, to go upwards again, and this is
the Vegetative Nature; which, like unto the rest, keeps it dependence and
succession united unto all her species and kinds, beginning from the biggest
trees and of greatest fruit, even to the lowest, humblest, and poorest grass
of the field. In this vegetative nature consists the basis and foundation of
the sensitive, which is utterly unable to put in practice the operations of
moving, and feeling without it. This likewise is not different from the first,
and has it kinds and degrees of succession and dependency, the noblest, and
perfectest of them, which is the Lion, uniting himself to the poorest worm of
the earth. This sensitive nature, linkes it self at last with the rational,
which being (by means of the soul) spiritual, exceeds in perfection; the
corporeal, vegetative, and nutritive, remaining at last united with God. So
that the aforesaid union is not only to be found in this whole universal
frame, but also in every one of its parts. It being impossible that there
should be any one not linked and united to the rest, by the analogy of some
attribute, which is indifferently proper to them all.

The little microcosmos of man may be an example of this, her being an epitome
and cipher of the whole fabric of the world, in whom all natures are united,
he being participant of each virtue and perfection; for he has his body of the
heavens, elements and stones; his vegetating or growing, from the plants; his
feeling from beasts, his discourse from Angels, and the image and likeness of
God. And passing to that which is proper unto this nature, we shall find that
all his actions have a dependency one from the other; the understanding being
not able to understand any thing, unless it unite it self to the senses; nor
these produce any sensations or feelings, unless they join themselves, by
means of the species and image, which presents it self unto them, with the
object. And according to the Philosophers doctrines, the object unites it self
to the external sense, the external transmits it to the common, the common
represents it to the fantasy, from whence comes the names of phantasmaes:
With these imaginations does the active intellect join it self, illustrating
them, and with taking away all their materialities, makes them of sensible,
intelligible. The active intellect unites it self with possibility, which
cannot operate, unless the active disposes it to it, by representing the
species unto it, disrobed of all matter and singularity. From thence the
intellect or understanding being disposed produces its first operation, which
is the simple apprehension; and this coupleth it self with the second; which
is affirmation or negation; from whence grows the third, which is discourse.
The discourse goes united with the will, which could not produce any act of
love, or hatred, or election; if discourse had not gone before, it being
impossible to will or refuse that which has not before bin known. So that all
things which are enclosed within this frame of the world, are nothing but
union, accord, and amity; not only through the dependency which every thing
has from one sole beginning; but also through the loving correspondency, which
they hold amongst themselves.

And if any one shall ask me the reason of this marvailous link, and
intrinsecall love wherewith so many, and so different natures are linked
together, I will not answer them with that which is ordinarily said, that God
had so ordained. But I will say, that the supreme artificer, having determined
in the creation of the world, to make a perfect and durable compound; variety
and union were very requisite therein: it being impossible to make any thing
beautiful, which was not composed of varieties, or durable, if it were in and
against it self divided. To this end he appointed all creatures (at the least
the corporeal ones) a natural, and proper mean, which hinders all that
which is contrary to the union, and preservation of this world. And this is
that prima materia, argued upon by all, but (as I believe) known by none. This
materia (which some say, is pura potentia; others an entitative act; others,
that it is neither quid nor quantum, nor quale) is a beginning, in the which
stand united all corporeal or bodily natures. It is not engendered, nor it does
not corrupt; for so the union and pacificall harmony of the world might come to
be lost, whose preservation is grounded upon the incorruptible unity of this
matter. It has bin created, but not from everlasting, as Plato, and others
have affirmed; it being impious to give or attribute the glory of eternity, and
of being, without a beginning, unto a creature, which is due only to God.
Finally, it is sufficient for us to know, without engulfing our selves into any
other metaphysick, that the matter whereof all corporal things are framed, is
of one and the same kind; and by that reason, all your material species or
kinds, are united and coupled together.

And because that the forms of the compounds, which must necessarily be sundry
and diverse to make a perfect and fair compound, should not deviate from that
unity, which God ordaines, and nature pretends: The supreme Artificer
determined that they should all come forth of the entrails of the materia* or
(as the Divines call it) de potentia materie, that so in all their alterations
and changes, they might be tributary unto that beginning, out of whose bowels
and entrails they came: the power of corrupting, engendring, and altering,
resting only in it, as not being subject to go out of the bounds of union and
peace.

By this doctrine, is confuted the opinion of many modern Philosophers; who
judging by the sense, that which is contrary to reason; believe that the forms
of the Elements, have no other end, then to destroy and corrupt. As for
example, the fire, which we see consumes, and devoures all as it finds, living
in perpetual war with the water; as also the earth with the air: For if we
leave that seemingnes, which sense shows us, and examine the truth with
reason, we shall find, that the elements being constitutive parts, whereof all
your mixtes are compounded, it is repugnant, and contrary to them, to have
destruction be their end, their nature being essentially ordained to compound.
Whence is concluded, that the natural end of the Elements, is nothing but
union. And although there ordinarily seems to be a continual enmity between
them, destroying one another, yet we must hold for a certain, that this war
is only made for the preservation of peace and union; since the fire in
seeking to persecute its contrary, does nothing but seek a temperament, to the
rigor of his proper strength; and any thing else which might hinder the union
and conjunction, whereby the compound is preserved.

So that we will conclude this Chapter, saying, that Union is an attribute of
God, the treasure of nature, the natural center of creatures, and chain of the
whole world This unites the mortal with the divine; as the eternal Word with
humane nature. The mortal with incorruptible, as the body with the soul. The
material with the spiritual, as the understanding with the senses. The living
with the insensible, as beasts with the earth. The heaven with their elements,
the elements with man, and man with God. And finally, from God, to God, there
is nothing but peace, concord, union, agreement and love.

CHAP. II.
That enmity and discord are monsters of nature, and the devils own children.
FRom the precedent Chapter, we may by very good consequence infer, that,
which we seek to prove in this: For if union and peace (as we have proved) be
Gods attributes, and the perfection of nature, it is plain, that enmity and
discord (capital enemies of union) must of necessity be contraries to God and
nature, being altogether averse to the noblest perfection that our
understanding can conceive in God, which is unity and simplicity; wherewith his
divine attributes and perfections, are so indivisibly united together, that no
manner of distinction can be admitted between them, either real, formal, or
fundamental, as Divines do term them; unless we should allow of the
distinction of reason, which our understanding licenciously frames conceiving
that to be distinct, which in it self is indivisibly one. Daily experience
shows us, the great repugnancy, and contrariety that is between discord and
nature, either of them showing it by their effects: seeing the proper and
principal end of the one, is to corrupt, diminish, ruin, and undo. Of the
other, to generate, to join, to multiply, and unite all wordly things, with
the most firm bond of peace. Because that knowing by evident induction, that
discord and enmity, are enemies unto God; and the very plagues of nature, we
may, with good reason, conclude them to be, the works of the devil, wrought
by his own hands: so pestilent a fruit doubtless proceeding from such an
accursed tree.

The Apostle did in three words admirably set down the genealogy, and
descent of this fierce monster, saying, that through the devils envy, death
was come into the world. Wherein we must note, (according to the exposition of
some Doctors) that the Apostle in this place, calls dissension, and discord,
by the name of death: And that very properly, seeing that the Doctors meaning
by death, as well the souls, as the bodies death, we shall find death to be
nothing else, but a wretched separation, and unfortunate divorce tending to
ruin, and perdition. And as for the death of the body, none can be so
ignorant, as to deny this truth, beholding with his own eyes, the dissolution
of the streightest, and internallest friendship, as humane understanding can
conceive; and after that, the miserable accidents which ordinarily accompany a
dead carcass. And if this passage be taken for spiritual death; it being an
enmity, and divorce, between God, and the soul, and not an ordinary divorce,
but an infinite one by reason of the infinite distance, that is between God and
a sinner: we still conclude that death, and discord, are one, and the self
same thing; and both daughters to the devil, and envy, as the Apostle says,
the motive which moved the devil, to bring this accursed dissension into the
world, was a cruel, and impatient rage against man: being not able to endure,
that God should grow enamored, of so ugly, base, and wretched a nature, as
humane nature is; and that he should enrich it, with so many extraordinary
favors and privileges, as unite himself hypostatically to it, and make it
the instrument of redemption; denying that favor, to the Angelical nature
which is more noble and perfect, then the humane: and so being desperately
enraged, he contracted matrimony with envy, in which wedlock, death was borne:
so that death, or discord, has the devil for her father, and envy for her
mother: her grandfathers were pride, and contempt, and her first root was
ambition.

This cursed plant was the first Angels plague, and that which made him to
exceed the bounds of his own nature: rashly opening the way unto an unbridled
appetite, and ambitious desire, to climb up unto the heaven of divine
perfection, to place his throne above the stars, and to be like unto the most
high. Making the consideration of himself, and the beauty, and perfections,
wherewith he was enriched, the instruments of so blind a pretense, and proud
absurdity. Judging himself thereby, to be worthy of so great an honor: out of
which consideration grew pride, which augmenting the raging fire of her mother
ambition, caused the Angel to forget the respect and honor due unto his
creator, and to become the heir of contempt. These two fierce monsters of
nature, Pride and contempt, made such a slaughter of that fair creature, that
they left not in him the least sign of perfection and goodness* yea, they did
so deprave and pervert his will, that seeing himself banished out of heaven,
and condemned to a perpetual priva^ion of God, and ^o the terrible habitation
of those darkesome prisons of hell* he enragedly protested to be revenged. And
being unable to execute his vengeance against God* his infinite perfection and
greatness, being not to be reached unto; he purposed to wreake his vengeance
upon man, as the creature in most favor, not being able to endure those
particular favors and prerogatives wherewith he perceived God did intend to
honor him. Out of which consideration sprung envy* the Devils spouse, and
mother of death.

With such weapons does this fierce Leviathan persecute mankind, and with them
he brings to an end all his pretenses: subjecting unto his empire and command,
all the Provinces of the earth. It being most certain, that cities subject to
discord and dissension, cannot be free from the devils bondage, and
consequently subject to ruin. The epithets which the Prophet Nahum gives unto
the city of Niniveh, shall be sufficient, and faithful witnesses for me
herein; when he calls it the city of blood, the city of misery, the city of
death and perdition; attributing the cause of these wretched effects, to
nothing but to the discord and division of her inhabitants. And he does with so
much efficacy, insist upon this point, that he pronounces an infallible curse
upon that city, which shall stand divided and in discord. The same does the
Prophet Hosea, concluding by an enthymeme the ruin which comes through
dissension, saying, Their heart is divided, and therefore they shall perish.
And if this be not sufficient, let us consider that wretched trick he served
our first fathers, in the beginning of the world; where it being a hard task
to beat down such knowledge and wisdom, so perfectly infused, as Adam and
his wives was, he used no other weapons then these, persuading them, that God
had enjoined, upon pain of death, not to taste of the tree of life; only
through an artificial malice, because that none should be so wise as himself:
which he could so well, and with such lively reasons persuade them, that (being
already moved with an ambition and desire of knowledge) they conceived such
enmity and hatred against God, that casting away the respect and obedience
which they knew was due unto him, they did contrary to that which was commanded
them; remaining thereby subject unto death, and their posterity to an abyss of
miseries.

Let him that is curious, observe for the confirmation of this truth, the
sentence which God pronounced against the Serpent; when as being willing to
punish him by way of retaliation, or as they say in Latin poena talionis. He
took for a means of the punishment, the same way as the Serpent had taken, to
make man fall from his original justice and state of innocence; saying unto
the Serpent, I will set enmity between thee and the woman; as if he should
more plainly say, thou have procured through thine accursed persuasions and
lies, to set hatred and enmity between the woman and I, to make her a slave,
and all her posterity subject to thy will and tyranny. And I say unto thee,
that thou shall be chastized with the same punishment, for I will sow such
terrible hatred and deadly antipathy betwixt you, that you shall always live
in continual war and enmity, she endeavoring with all her might to break
thine head, and thou to set snares for her heel.

Finally, by means of enmity and hatred, the devil did catch Cain, never
letting him rest until he took away his brother Abels life. By means of
these two, he stirred up Esau his anger against Jacob, Saul his revenge against
guiltless Duvid. Pharaohs hardness against the children of Israel. And with
dissension, discord and ambition, the devil has brought under his dominion
and obedience, the most noble and fruitful Provinces of the earth; burning up
the fruits of peace, respect, fear, reverence and zeal of the public welfare
toward them, to whom they were subject, by divine and humane laws.

Many times have I considered that excellent and admirable invention which
Samson used to revenge himself upon the Philistines; and I truly find, that
it is the same as the devil uses to be revenged upon man; since, if that I
well remember the story, Samson having sought all the surest ways, to be
revenged of the wrongs he had received, could find none more effectual then
division, verily believing, that thereby he should ruin all his enemies goods
and wealth; and to that end he took a number of Foxes, and binding firebrands
to their tails, he let them run into the Philistines corn fields: The beasts
feeling themselves loose, began to sever and divide themselves in the fields,
with such disorder, that there were not two left together, all taking several
ways, fixing their eyes toward their own homes and terriers. Which division
was the cause that all the corn was burnt up, leaving the land spoiled, and
Samson revenged. With such like industry does the Devil subject unto his
Empire, all the countries of the world; overthrowing the best things he can
find in them, and leaving them utterly unable to help themselves. Seeing that
to turn a quiet and peaceable city into a city of blood and wretchedness,
the first thing he does is to stir up ambition in them whom he finds most
disposed thereunto, and alluring them with their own proper interests, he
kindles the fire of discord and dissension in such sort, that it being
impossible to pacify and unite it: the fear of God, the zeal of public
welfare, the respect and obedience due to the Prince, and the charity toward
ones neighbor, are all beaten down: whence immediately follows, the total
perdition and ruin of the commonwealth.

By all this which we have said, we may surely infer, that since discord and
division produce no other fruit but blood, ruin, perdition and death, they
cannot be positive effects of God, to whom is repugnant to be the author of
evil: Nor yet of nature, whose treasure consists in unity; but merely the
Devils, who seeks nothing but to oppose himself to all goodness and
perfection, which God or nature brings forth in this world. The contrary
effects also, which are found in both, may bear sufficient witness to this
truth, since that all which God and Nature pretend, is nothing but peace and
union: that which the Devil professes, is nothing but wars, and dissension.
Nature loves preservation; the Devil ruin; that to generate, this to destroy.
Nature finally desires to make every thing like unto it self, by means of
peace, love and union: the Devil strives to subject every thing under his
dominion, by means of division, hatred and discord. Therefore such effects
being directed unto such a detestable and perverse end as destruction, we
cannot attribute them to God; to whom, by reason of his infinite goodness and
perfection, is not only repugnant to be author of evil, as the Apostle
says, but also to will it or desire it.

And if any selfe-weening, or peevish man should contrary this, alleging the
words of the Prophet, who said, There is no evil done in the City but God
does it: and likewise the words of the Apostle in the ninth chapter to the
Romans, where he seems to prove, that God is cause of the evil which is done
in the world: he may satisfy himself with the Fathers of the Churches
ordinary exposition of those places; considering that in evil, or sin, there
are two things, whereof the one is the material of it, which is the physical
action, or real execution, to which God does positively concur, it being
impossible for the creature to do any real act without the ordinary
concurrencie of the Creator: Since that all that is in the world, lives and is
preserved through him: and in this sense are to be understood those texts which
prove God to be the cause of evil.

But the formal, and malicious part of sin, as the deformity of it, and
privation of righteousness, depends only from our free and absolute will, and
not positively from God. Because if that were so, God should not only go
against his supreme perfection of being God, but should also be unjust in
punishing man; he not being the true and immediate cause of sin. And so we
must freely confess, that the proper and essential cause of sin, is the
maliciousness of our will, depraved both by it self, and by the Devils
temptations.

And though we find in holy Scripture, that many times God punishes one sin
with another, as Pharaohs insolency with the hardness of his heart; the
Pharisees incredulity with blindness, we cannot for all that say, that God is
the author of evil; because that although those which God punishes with,
considered in themselves, are sins; yet if they be considered as effects of
the divine justice, to which belongs to reward and punish every one according
to their desert, they ought not, nor cannot be so called. And so our conclusion
always remains true, that enmities, wars, discords, divisions, and other
such like accidents, are works of the Devil.

CHAP. III.
That it is monstrous in Nature for one to persecute another that is of his
own likeness.
ANY speculative understanding, will be quite astonished, and full of wonder,
if he consider the abyss of chimeraes, falsehoods, deceits, persecutions, and
garboiles, which pride and ambition do breed in the heart of man, to so
detestable and perverse an end, as the destruction of the particular creatures
of the same kind: A thing so horrible, monstrous and terrible, that it goes
beyond the nature of the fiercest beasts of the earth; amongst which you shall
hardly find any that will abuse and persecute another of the same species or
kind. And therefore he said very well, who left it to us for a Proverb, that
man with man is like unto a Wolf; since that this beasts cruelty in tearing in
pieces a poor Kid, is not greater then the rigor and tyranny of a brutish and
soule-lesse man against another man. Another said, that one man against
another, is a Lion: and a third, who would express the venom of his heart,
said, that one man toward another, is a man declaring unto us that his
fierceness surpasses the fierceness not only of these, but also of all
other beasts, whereof there is not any that abhors from the preservation of
its own species and nature.

And if we do, in truth consider this point, we shall find, that among
creatures there is not any; which has more ground, or reason to humble it
self, and to love the particulers of its kind; nor less reason to grow
proud, and persecute them, then man. Since that pride has always for her
seal some nobleness, prerogative, or excellency, whereupon she builds her
close pretenses, and presumptions. And man is far from all these: his
composition, and first frame being of the lowest, basest, grossest, and vilest
dross of the world, which is the earth; out of the slime, and ordure of which
man was framed. And therefore the monstrousness, and violence of pride, is no
lesser in man, then if one would exalt the element of the earth, above the
heavens.

And if we will show his beginning, state, and end, we shall plainly see this
truth, reduced into a short and compendious definition, which most patient Job
made of him, saying, that the nobility of man consistes in being borne of
woman; to whom the expositers upon this text do attribute variableness,
fragility, imprudency, and all manner of imperfections. In having a short life,
and full of miseries, calamities, and afflictions; there being none of Adams
children, that can glory, of having had the least shadow of pleasure, and
content, which he has not paid for, with a thousand griefs, and bitternesses;
in a most incredible inconstancy, and variability, because he never continues
in the same state, and purpose, but is wholly a disordered, and confused chaos,
which has no determined nor sure end. And finally, it is a brickle, and unsafe
vessel, into which, as the Prophet David says, the treasure of life is
deposited, and which one, and that a very small stone, is able to break, and
reduce to nothing. Because that though his fantastical prides be all of gold,
and silver, and do reach up to the heavens; yet the foot, and basis thereof
being of clay, like Nebuchadnezars statue, some small stone of weakness, or
disaster, hitting against it, they straightwaies come down with their whole
frame, and all their chimeraes; and fall into a poor, and stinking grave: so
that if we consider him from the top, to the toe, we shall find nothing, in
him, but is contrary, and repugnant to pride. Whence follows that man, having
no ground whereupon he may grow proud, he cannot have any, for the persecuting
of others, persecution being the daughter of ambition, and arrogance; but that
the baseness of his composition, should rather invite him to peace, amity, and
love.

And though these forealledged reasons, should not move man, to withdraw
himself from such an execrable, and cruel montrousnesse, as to be the
butcherer of his own kind: yet his equality, and similitude, with all the
rest, might move him to procure peace and amity; the holy Ghost in S^lomons
books, and nature it self, teaching us, that all things do love their like;
which being most true, it shall also be more reprehe^sible in man, to
persecute one another, then in any other creature: seeing that amongst all the
created species, there is not any that has its particulars more like, equal
and proportionable then man, reserving its similitude and quality so well, both
in the beginning, middle and end; that there is not the least tittle of
difference: For as for the beginning, it is well known, that they all came out
of the dust, or slime of the earth, and that they were all borne naked, and
came into the world weeping. The equality of the end may be known by the
universal attribute which all Adams posterity do owe unto their birth. Since
that neitehr Scepter, nor Miter could ever find any Antidote, or spell against
death. And as for the middle, which is from the time of their birth, until
death, we have already said with Job, that man's life is a continual warfare,
full of all manner of afflictions, and calamities, as may be devised or
imagined. And this is universal and common to all, there being none exempt
from crosses.

So that there being in man a perfect, and total similitude with all his
particulars, and all agreeing in one, and the same degree of misery, baseness,
and calamity, there being none in this more noble, or privileged then others;
we conclude that pride, and persecuting of his like in man, is a monster, and
prodigy of nature and a frenzy of the understanding. He being by his baseness
bound to humble himself; and by his equality tied to love those of his own
species. Whence I do infer, that your naturallists do with very good
reason, call the Lion King of the Beasts; and prefer him before other Beasts
for generosity and strength; because God made him advantaged, and showing odds
of the rest, but by what reason can one man esteem himself to be more then
another? What prerogative or excellency did nature grant unto him, which she
denied to other men? which being most certain, we may securely say, that a
man which is proud, and at enmity with another; is worser then the Devil, or
to say better, pride, and ambition, is not so unproper for the Devil as for
man. Because if Lucifer did pretend to set his throne above the stars, to be
like unto the most high, and had other foolish fancies, and rash propositions;
though he had no true nor real ground for it, the creature being incapable of
the creators perfection and nobleness: yet he saw, and knew in himself some
likelihood, and color for his unbridled appetite; knowing himself immortal,
incorporeall, and the most beautiful of all creatures; being as Isaiah says,
not only a bright shining star, but Lucifer unto the morn, and the most
perfect of all other angelical spirits. Moreover the whole army of Devils is
united, and concordant in the persecution of the soul, one not entermedling in
the others office, nor endeavoring to disturb or cross the temptation, that
another shall intend.

Whereby it is proved, that man being the most abject, and wretched creature,
and having nothing but what other men are also partakers of; growing proud, and
persecuting another man, he goes beyond the nature of a brute beast, and is
worser then the Devil himself.

CHAP. IV.
Of the nobleness of man.
THE conclusion of the precedent Chapter, gives us great occasion to treat in
this Chapter of the nobleness of man, and of his excellencies, by reason of a
motive any one may have to wonder at our last proposition, wherein we
concluded, that man is the most abject, imperfect, and wretched creature of the
world: Which being considered at the first sight, seems quite contrary to
that which both Scripture and common Philosophy teaches us, Canonizing man for
the noblest and perfectest creature. And truly if we do with particular
attention consider, that high sublime and lofty degree of nobleness and
perfection which man attained unto by that Hypostaticall union, which the
divine word made in the incarnation, we shall freely confess that it is the
noblest and perfectest of all creatures; since the angelical nature did not
only remain inferior to it, but also subject to adore it in Christ's humanity.
Whence (as some Doctors testify) the first Angel took occasion to rebel
against his Creator, not being able to brook the exaltation of humane nature,
and the extraordinary and exquisite favors, which by revelation he knew God
would communicate unto it.

Neither is that proof which is ordinarily brought by them who think man
inferior to the Angel, of any great force or power; for whereas the vulgar
translation says: Thou have made him little less then the Angels, the Hebrew
has it, Thou have made him little less then Eloim; which according to some
Rabbis interpretation, signifies, that man is little less then God: because
that the word Eloim signifies many times God, and many times Angel. And that
exposition is not much out of purpose, but grounded upon very good reason: for
if we attentively consider that mavelous union which God made with our
nature, we shall find that Gods Epithetes were thereby so appropriated unto
man, that it may truly be said, that man is little lesser then God; which thing
the Angel cannot glory in, he being deprived of so notable a favor.

And although in all creatures there be in some fashion a certain resemblance
of God, yet it is more perfect in man then in any of the rest, since that in
none but man is to be found the Word incarnate. His composition consisting of
Soul, whose three powers are correspondent to the three divine persons; and of
body, which united to the soul, is correspondent to the divine Word, in which
are divinely united Body, and Divinity. And of all this the Angel is
incapable, because he is incorporeall.

The Divines call these perfections, perfections of mere grace, because that
God would out of his will and mercy so favor this nature, though she could
no way deserve it by any virtue or excellency. And in this all confess, that
human nature is more noble then the Angelical, since God did not bestow so
many favors upon the Angel, as he did upon man. But if we consider both
these natures of themselves, without any respect to grace, many, or almost all
will say, that the Angel is more perfect then man. In the deciding of which
question, I cannot resolve my self, but with a distinction: Noting first, that
in man there are two things to be considered, the Soul and the body. Of the
soul some say, that it is of the same substance and nature as the Angels are,
incorporeall and rational as they; but that is not a complete substance (as
Logicians call it) wherein it only differs from Angels.

Others ingulfing themselves into an abyss of Metaphysickes, say, that the
Angel is more perfect then the soul, since he is not subject to the
imperfections and miseries of the soul, and has his will, not indifferent to
good or evil as the soul has, but only frame himself to do that which is
good and just. Which reason I cannot allow of: For considering the Angel
according to his own nature, or in puris naturalibus, as Divines term it, he
is as indifferent to good or evil, as the rational soul; which is evidently
proved by holy Scripture, which says, that Lucifer and all his followers did
sink themselves into hell, and Michael and other good Angels remained in
Paradise. For if the Angel by nature had been impeccable, and could not have
sinned, he could not have damned himself, nor much less save himself, if his
will even from the instance of his creation had been precisely determined to
evil. Besides the Scripture tells us that there be good and bad Angels, and
that the last fell from Heaven for the sin of pride: whereby is concluded,
that the nature of Angels precisely considered, is peccable, and may sin,
being indifferent to good or evil, as well as the soul. Yet the Angel being
now confirmed in grace, loses the indifferency which he had, and his will
remains now governed and subject only to good. And all this may the Divine
find to be likewise in the soul punctually: there being none so foolish as
to imagine that in the blessed there is any indifferency or possibility of
sinning. So that by the foresaid reason it is not concluded that the Angel is
more perfect than the soul.

And if the curious person will give me leave to speak my opinion freely, in
this case I will say (always subjecting my self to the doctrine of the
Fathers, and correction of the Church) that the soul in this world, even with
its indifferency of sinning or not sinning, is more perfect then the Angel,
though he neither does nor can sin. The reason is, because the soul having the
power to sin and not sinning, gains a greater excellency and perfection then
she should otherwise have, if she were good because she could not be bad, as
the Angel is: So that the indifferency which is in the soul, and her being
subject to so many temptations which daily fight against it, argues an
excellency of perfection; whereby making her victory more glorious over her
enemies, her reward shall be so much the greater. For I would feign know what
great commendations is it for a man to be quiet and peaceable, when there is no
boby strives against him? Or what is it for one to be good, when there is no
body to provoke or entice him to be evil? And what perfection shall it be not
to sin, when the will is so tied and subjected as that it cannot sin? None
verily: Whereby I conclude, that the soul even in her own nature is more
noble than the Angels. True it is, that if we will consider in Angels that
which is accessory, and concomitates this their unaptnesse to sin, which is
glory, and the beatificall vision, in this he shall be more perfect than the
soul, and there shall be as much difference between them, as there is
between him that is blessed, and him that is not: whereof I intend not now to
discourse. But if we will consider the counterprises and inconveniences
whereunto the soul is subject whilst it lives within this mortal body, (I mean
the dependency it has upon the senses in all her operations) then
questionless the Angel being incorporeall, and without any dependency, is more
perfect then it. Yet otherwise the soul exceeds all other creatures in
nobleness, amongst which she only participates somewhat of God.

Of this nobleness of man in respect of other creatures, I do not purpose to
discourse, but only by the way; it being a thing which requires much
metaphysick, and speculation; wherefore laying it aside, we will treat of that,
which it has in respect of its own individui, that is one man, in respect of
another: seeking wherein consists the nobleness of man: that is to say, who
amongst men may justly call himself noble, and what requisites he ought to
have, that deserves such a title, and name. I am moved to speak of this by
reason of the conceit every one has of himself, of what quality soever he be,
esteeming himself noble, and well borne. And this evil is grown so common,
that if you ask a Cobbler an accoumpt of his genealogy, and descent, he shall
puff up like a Peacock, answer you, that he is descended by a direct line,
from the Emperor Sigismond, or Alexander the great: and he will speak it with
such confidence, and ostentation, that even he shall be bound to believe him,
that knows it to be false. I will not say, that Nobleness is repugnant to a
mechanical artificer, nor to him that lives by his hand labor; Yea I hold
them to be in a great error who ordinarily style country men and those people
who live by their labors, to be peasants, and base people, banishing them out
of the number, and company of the noble, by reason of their vocation. Since it
is certain that the noblest of all men that ever were, was Adam, and he had no
other quality, nor trade but a labourer: being forced to eat his bread with
the sweat of his brow. The sons of Adam were noble, and they exercised
themselves only in mechanic and base trades: as as to be Smiths, and the
like. Noah was by all men held to be noble, yet his recreations were nothing,
but planting of vineyards, and sowing of fields. Abraham and his children were
noble, seeing that from them came the Jewish nobility, yet had they no other
means to live, but what they got by laboring: Saul, and David, were noble,
and Kings, yet were nothing but sheapeards. Finally, all the ancient nobility
was occupied in bare and mechanical exercises: whereby I conclude, that they
are deceived who judge of nobility by their exercises and trades. Neither does
true nobility consist, in being private, or in favor with Kings: since there
are many who not only are out of favor with Kings, but also are persecuted by
them; yet their nobility, stands still firm, alive, and secure. Neither does
it consist in learning; since that ordinarily the most learned, and wise, if
they have nothing else but learning, are the most vile, and contemned of a
common wealth. Whence I draw this conclusion, that true nobility consists in
every ones generous actions, be he rich, or poor, Citizen, ignorant, or
learned. So that he may lawfully be called noble; who shall be most noted for
some heroical enterprise, either of fidelity, or valor, or any other rare
virtue. And it is reasonable and just that such a ones memory should be
preserved in his posterity, all of his lineage holding the name of Noble.

This is the true nobility which is called discreet and wise men's nobility;
because those that are so, ought to hold or esteem none but such to be noble:
But the vulgars nobility, which this day is practiced in the world, is not
this, but wealth; so that in this our wretched age, he is only esteemed
noble, that is rich. And if the discreet and wise reader will give me leave to
prove the nobleness of wealth by the baseness of the contrary, which is
poverty, he shall clearly see, that the vulgar sort are not much deceived
therein, since there is no mis-hap nor misery can be equalled to a poor man's.
Poverty is the quintessence of contempt, the root of all worldly miseries, and
the grave of virtue. Give me the valiantest and couragiousest man in the
world, if he be poor, a Hare shall not be more timorous or cowardly then he.
If he be honest and mannerly, there is none, but seeing him poor, will
esteem him an hypocrite. And finally, poverty coming to any man's door, the
world knows him not: his kindred denies him, his friends retire from him, his
servants forsake him, and he seems a stranger to all, the world flying from
him, as if he had the plague about him. Poverty is the mother of Infamy: for
finding a man poor, he will be apt to work any deceit or roguery, and
attempt any treachery: his ordinary companions being dishonor, cruelty,
ignorance, contempt, falsehood, infidelity, treachery; which, and the like, a
poor man shall be apt to commit. What difference is there between a poor
man and a withered tree, a bow without a string, a ship without tackling, a
cart without wheels, a bird without wings, or a body without a soul? Surely
not any: Since he remains as unable to do any good thing, as the abovenamed
things. Since therefore these are the effects which poverty produces in man,
with very good reason the vulgar sort affirm, that nobility consists in the
want of nothing. And what does man desire more, then with nobility to enjoy
those privileges which wealth brings with it: For let a man be the most
infamous fellow under the Sun; yea, let him be a hangman, if he be a rich
man, and in prosperity, he shall straightwayes be a Cavalier, Noble, and well
descended from the line of Alexander the Great, and the first of the Baldwins:
Let him never have taken sword in hand, nor seen battle, unless it were
drawn in some picture; and they shall presently say, that he is a valiant
Captain, and that in the Gulf of Lepanto he overcame the Turkish Army, and
took the King of Miramamolin prisoner. Let him not know the first letter of
the A. B. C. and they shall suddenly canonize him for a Mercurius Trismegistus.
Finally, being rich, he shall in the vulgars eye, have all the virtues,
eminences, and nobleness in the world: for all will respect and reverence him,
pulling off their hats to him a mile off. If he comes into the Church, they
will all make way for him, and give him their places. At banquets they place
him at the upper end of the table; when he speaks, they all stand attentive,
and hearken to him, as if a Cicero were speaking.

The rich man's house is frequented by all men, his children are made much of,
his servants are respected, and styled gentlemen; if he be sick, the City is
turned upside down to find out presents to bring him; his gate stands full of
foot-clothes, his hall full of visiters, his tables attended on with music;
and in conclusion, as all manner of miseries accompany the poor man, so all
contents, favors, and privileges belong to the rich, since in this wretched
age money is the absolute Lord over all our actions. This commands, governes,
and keeps in subjection all the world, and all things, as Solomon says, obey
it. It attaines to all things, makes all things easy. Money is the object,
motive, and end of all man's cares and desires; toward it are bent all his
endeavors and employments, and every thing is governed by it. This makes the
bitter sweet, the impossible easy, the little great, the false true, and
finally of nothing it makes all things; and by reason of its great power and
worth, all the world loves it, seeks it, and adores it, tormenting and even
martyrizing themselves for to obtain it. What moves the Soldier to march up
to the knees in water in the winter time, laden with iron, nigh dead with
hunger and thirst, broken and bruised all in pieces, with death daily before
his eyes, but only money? what makes the Labourer to break his arms, yea his
whole body, tearing up the earth with his labors, but only money? What makes
the mechanical artificer pass continually the winter nights in working, but
only money? Who makes the Merchant venture his life upon two inches of planck,
and suffer so many storms and tempests, but only money? Who makes the Lawyer
lose his sight in studying Bartolus and Baldus, the Physician Hippocrates and
Galen, but only money? Who makes the Counselor confound his brains to
defend his causes per fas and nefas, but only money? In conclusion, money is
the end toward which man directs all his actions and endeavors. The
Physicians Recipe, the Apothecaries misce, the Lawyers Bartolus, the Scriveners
Pen, the Notaries etc. the Logicians Ergo, the Grammarians Nominatives, the
Astrologians Heaven, the Philosophers infinitum, the Metaphyficians unum verum
and bonum, the Shoomakers Nawle, the Tailors Needle, the Plowmans Plough, the
Noblemans Gentility; and finally, life and death it self lies in the hands of
money: since reward is able to condemn a just man to death, and to give life
to one that is condemned to dye. Whence finally I conclude, that the vulgar
sort speaks not much out of purpose, when it attributes all the nobleness of
the world unto money, since in the world infinite wonders are wrought by it.

CHAP. V.
Of the Nobleness and Worth of the French and Spanish Nations.
IT were fitting and reasonable to leave this chapter unto fame, as a lawful
Chronicler of this heroical enterprise, it being only reserved for her to end
that which my pen could not in an age begin. For if true nobleness consists
in the generosity of actions, as we have said in the precedent Chapter, the
actions of these two Nations are so many, so excellent, and so heroical, that
it would be impossible almost in an age to rehearse the least part of them. I
will not now stand to set down the beginning and descent of these two most
noble Nations, it being notorious unto all, and ordinary for them who have
written of this matter. I will only insist a little upon the contemplation of
the rare and perfect virtues which God infused into them: of which he may come
to have knowledge and notice, who will attentively consider the mavelous
order which God held in the six days of his Creation, in which time he had
beautified the large field of this world with so many varieties of nature; and
that they might make show of the perfection which he had granted them, he
made the fourth day two fair and bright lights, to which he gave certain
vicars and substitutes, giving them full license to assist the day and night,
dividing, ordering, and appointing times and seasons, and producing those
mavelous effects which daily experience presents unto us in the theater of
this visible world. The greatness and perfection of these two Lights might
sufficiently be proved by the only knowledge of the senses: since he must be
altogether blind, that opening his sight toward heaven, does not know, that
the Sun and Moon are authors of all the rejoycings and gladnesses of this
world* and of all the varieties, changes, and alterations that are seen in the
four elements: and that their absence causes many troubles and sorrows
amongst men, which the horror of the night, and nightly impressions may
testify by the suns absence, together with an infinite company of other
effects, which for brevity sake, I do omit. Notwithstanding the strongest
means I have to prove the excellent perfection of these two lights, is to see
that the Prophets, and the whole Scripture, when they would make us conceive
the greatness of the Creator, they know not to whom better to compare him,
then to these, calling him Sun, and Moon, and Astrology teaches us, that
all the stars, and luminous bodies receive their light, and splendour from
them, and that from them proceed all the alterations, and motions, of all that
has, or has not life.

These and infinite other greatnesses, shall the contemplative man find in
these two great lights which God placed in the celestial globe, so noble,
fair, and bright, that an acute understanding can not sufficiently praise
them, but only by admiring them. For if those do enlighten all visible and
material things; these do enrich, and govern the reason, and the actions of
the will, which are so much above the sensitive, as the being free, and
voluntary exceeds the natural, and depending. These have for their ends
generation, corruption, variation, and change; these to eternize, to conserve,
and also to attain to the infinite, since they do produce marveilous effects,
as virtue, counsel, understanding, learning, and doctrine, which eternize the
soul with God. Those have their seat and place, in an incorruptible, yet
material substance; and these hold dominion over humane nature, for whose
service the first were created; and because that the middle, or means, cannot
be more perfect then the end for which they are ordained, the heavenly lights
with all their influences, and virtues, being only created for man, it is
certain they must be less perfect then man.

Yet we will compare the nobleness of these two earthly lights, which are the
Spanish, and French nations, with the two heavenly ones, there being more
amongst creatures which may better represent their rare perfection, seeing that
the one has such proportion, and correspondency with the other, that it seemed
the divine architect took from these the original* which had ab aeterno bin
framed in his divine mind, to produce in time their pourtracture, and place it
in the first, and fourth sphere. These are they which in rigor of justice
deserve the name of two great lights; that which now virtue, learning, and
advice, do publish the truth: so that the Evangelick faith holding her seat
between these two most firm, and inexpugnable columns, that is between a
Catholic, and a most Christian, she stands firm, and secure, out of danger of
being stained by any cloud of infidelity, or persecution. They do command the
day, and the night, since there is no nation from one pole to the other, which
does not obey them, spreading their names into all, both barbarous, and
catholic provinces, as the fear of the Lions voice amongst the other beasts
of the wood.

CHAP. VI.
Of the nobleness, and valor of the French.
LET Christendom publish the strength of the valiant French arm, and let
faithful Europe exalt her famous acts, let not England altogether contemn her
valor, and let Germany celebrate her fearlesse assaults, let Italy solemnize
her valiant endeavors, and let perfidious Turkey divulge without passion, her
heroikall enterprises and actions, wherewith she does daily eternize her
immortal valor: let the same fame also speak (if it does not through passion
grow dumb) and tell that which my tongue and rough pen cannot: let the
powerful Ottoman aright confess this truth, which holds it self
unconquerable by having one company of French Soldiers. And let not great
Persia dissemble the qualities and valor of this great Nation, since it
studies nor labors for thing more then to imitate their manners and warlicke
hardiness.

The memory of Roman antiquity is now forgotten, her proud command, her so
renowned acts, through the singular prowesses and rare generosity of the
unconquerable French nation. Fame which was once so appassionate of the
excellent enterprises of Alexander, and Caesar, remains now tributario unto
the heroical and immortal actions of great Henry the fourth, father of his
country, pillar of Christendom, scourge of the Infidels, and shade of the
whole world. And from such a foundation and premises, let them begin and
continue unto this hour, to sing and praise the rare prudence and extreme
wisdom of great Lewis, worthy son of such a father. Let the seven Planets,
and all other stars of biggest greatness, which in this French firmament
receive their brightness, and light from this Sun, speak, and communicate
unto the world his peregrine valor, that every one may admire it. Let that
almost infinite number of Princes, which like bright stars adorn this sky,
discover the magnanimity of his bright influences, that the wise may conjecture
the beauty of the whole, by the beauty of the parts. Let the Earth eternize thy
renown, since the Heavens, as an elect vessel of perfection, do bestow
singular favors upon thee, beautifying thee with all those conditions and
requisites which belong to a just and lawful King. And if one (as the Scripture
says) would have excused himself from being King, saying that he was no
Physician, neither was there bread in his house: that cannot be spoken of
thee, who art abundance it self, and furnishest other nations with bread,
wealth, nobility, infinite valor, virtue, knowledge, mercy and piety. And to
this plenty is added thy being a Physician, whereby thou do arrive to the non
plus ultra of thy greatness; remaining upon earth the mirror of Christians,
the scourge of Infidels, the fire of thine enemies, the death of the envious,
the haven of the passionate, the comfort of thy subjects, the protector of thy
orphans, the justice of thy wronged.

None can tax thee, unless it be some one, who bursts with envy, or rages with
passion. When did ever the poor, wretched, or needy come to thy door, to ask
for succor; but that thou did with a free and liberal hand, remedy their
necessities? when did the afflicted, ever lay open his griefs, and sorrows,
unto thee; but that he found thee always disposed like a pitiful mother to
yield her a remedy? when ever did oppression, wrong, or subordination dwell
within thy breast? was there ever any affect found in thee, toward thy
children other then clemency, liberality, generosity, and virtue? can there be
ought found in thee to obscure the least atome of the perfect splendors? No
surely, thou art the quintessence of greatness, and valor, thou art the
Infinitum in actu of worth. Finally, thou art the content and harmony of this
our hemisphere.

The last attribute belonging to these lamps of heaven, which is to cause
changes, alter the times, and produce diverse effects, belongs also to this
nation, may easily be proved, without spending many words, by the quotidian
experiences, and marveilous effects, which her glorious enterprises do work
amongst all nations; since that every time as France takes arms in hand, other
nations presently, confused, and changed, and with a deadly heart beating
double their garrisons, fortify their walls, renew their munitions, give
orders, and prepare themselves with such care for defense, as if they looked
for a new deluge in the world. The fierce roaring of the Lion in the night,
does not more affright the other beasts of the wood, then the sound of the
French trumpet, or drum, affrighteth other kingdoms: what lightning broke
out of a cloud, comes down whirling more furiously through the air, then the
fearlesse, and warlike French does in setting upon an enemies camp? what
Kingdom, Nation, or Province, is upon the earth, that having France on his
part, has not Mars in his arms, a Lion in his breast, an Eagle in his hands,
a crown on his head, and an assured victory on his side? are the treaties,
complots, expeditions, and undertakings of other nations, powerful and strong
enough, if French valor does not aid, and confirm them? No surely, since we
see that as the sun beams do dissolve the Chaos, and obscurity of the
clouds; even so the French strength, and industry, once beginning to show it
self, breaks, splittes, and annihilates, the plots, and stratagems of all
other nations: so that they do if this will, they have if this gives, they get
if this suffer, they conquer if this helps, they lose if this go from them and
finally, if this persecutes, they are destroyed.

I could say much more, though it would all be too little, if fear of being
tedious, did not stay my tongue, and the discretion which a writer ought to
suppose in the reader did not secure me, as also the infinite disproportion,
which is betwixt the gross energie of my tongue, and the supreme valor of
this nation. So all that which I have said, and all that which Rethoricke could
set down, if she did undertake the task, would be but a beginning of an
infinite, an atome of an immensity, a point of a line, an instant of eternity,
a shadow which passes, and like a nothing in respect of the whole. And since
the subject of my Book will not suffer me to conceal any thing of this noble
nation, I shall be forced to imitate the industry of that famous painter, who
being commanded to draw out a Giant in a little space, finding that it was
impossible to draw him out whole, he resolved to draw only one of his little
nails, so as by that proportionably might be known the deformity and
greatness of the Giant. Let those therefore which read this Chapter know, that
if I have said any thing that seems too much to any one, that all this is but
the least part of the whole, which might be spoken in praise of this Nation.

CHAP. VII.
Of the nobleness and valor of the Spanish Nation.
THe complaints of my mother Spain begin now to buzze in mine ears, as
offended by my having bent all my forces in praising of France; imagining that
being drawn by some private interest, passion, or subornation, I have with
silence passed over all her greatnesses. I already see the Lords of Spain
angry with me, canonizing me in their assemblies and congregations, for the
most ungrateful, faithless, and forgetful man of the world, persuading
themselves that against the natural law of my Country I have taken Caesar his
due from him. On the other side, me thinks I meet the French quite puffed up,
imagining that which I have spoken to be proprium quarto modo (as your
Logicians term it) belonging only to them and not to others. I also know that
some malicious Sophister, enflamed with passion, stands waiting with great
impatience to see whether I will express my self, and tell which of the two
Nations is the Sun, and which is the Moon, which shall have the title of the
greater, and which of the lesser Light.

But my intention being not to kindle the fire of enmity between these two
Nations, but rather to quench that which is, and only to treat of the
excellency and nobleness of each of them, without offending either of them: I
say (shunning comparisons, which are odious) that between these two most noble
Nations there is neither greater nor lesser, great nor little, since they are
both great Lights, fair, and resplendant. And that therefore all that I have
spoken of the French Nation, must also be understood of the Spanish, without
diminishing any the least perfection as may be thought of.

And to show the great proportion which these two nations have with the two
Lights of heaven, upon which I have grounded my discourse, it shall suffice
that the holy Scripture says, that God created two great Lights, without
seeking out any other particulars, or Metaphysicall distinctions. Yet to
satisfy the malcontent, and those which are too curious, who will not be
content till they know which of these two Nations is the Sun, and which the
Moon; which governes by day, and which by night, I shall be forced to show a
point of Philosophy, by which your delicate and appassionate understanding
shall be satisfied, and shall confess that there is neither greater nor lesser
between these two noble Nations, being both great, and of exceeding worth and
dignity.

Your Scholars know that the whole Homogeneon, or alike, is of such nature and
property, that the integrant parts of it have the same faculty, name, and being
which the whole has. As for example, water which stands in many vessels, be
they great or small, still all or each of the parts retains the same name and
virtue of water, there being no attribute that can be imagined which does not
equally befit all the parts. In the same manner we shall see that the light
being a homogeneall and like quality, all the parts of it, though placed in
several subjects, have the same nature, name, and virtue. And therefore it
would be a great absurdity to imagine the light of the Sun to be different,
or of any other quality then the light of the Moon, since God made them both
the fourth day, shining with the same light which he had created the first
day. Which may admirably be proved by those words of the Psalm, which say, Per
diem Sol non uret te, neque Luna per noctem, giving us to understand, that the
virtue of heating is in the same manner common to both, as well as the shining,
the having its influences, and the lighting. And in that sense must those words
of Moses be understood, Fecit Deus duo luminaria magna. There are
notwithstanding three things to be considered in each one of these lights, the
influence, the manner, and the light. The two first are different enough, the
Moon ending her course in eight and twenty days and odd hours, and the
Sun in a year, and therefore there must needs be some difference in them,
and therefore holy Scripture calls the one the greater light, and the other
the lesser; but as concerning the light, they are both great, and shining. The
same Philosophy may be found in our two earthly lights, I mean in the French
and Spanish Nations, to whom God did impart worth, perfection, and nobleness,
with such liberality, that he left them great, and wholly perfect, nobleness
and virtue being as proper to either of them, as the light is to the Sun and
the Moon. The truth is, that in some particulars there may be some difference,
and may likewise by turns be called one greater then the other, no otherwise
then the Philosophers affirm the heavens to be more perfect then man, by reason
of his incorruptibility, but as being a living creature, not only man, but
even the least worm of the earth is more perfect. In the same manner some
things may be found in the French Nation which may cause it to be called the
greater, and so likewise the Spanish may have others which may give it the same
name and title. Yet these differences being accidental, do not undo the
greatness of the other, agreeing both in the essential perfection, of being
both most noble and advantaged. And therefore all that which has been spoken
of France, and much more which might have been spoken, may without diminishing
of the least tittle be also spoken of Spain.

And if that the enmity and natural antipathy, rooted in the hearts of these
two Nations, for so many ages, shall dazzle the eyes of some passionate, and
will not suffer him to know the reason, I will satisfy him with experience, the
true mother to give satisfaction and faithful witness of truth, by setting
down some little parcel of that most pure and unspeakable brightness which
this great light communicates to all the world, to bring forth in it those
virtues and mavelous effects which are in it. Of whose unlimited strength,
the Eagles and the Lion, which great Philip carries in all his devices, shall
be witnesses, giving us thereby to understand, that his command, worth and
strength, flies through all parts of the world, there being no part within its
spacious map, wherein his light, fear, signiorie and nobleness is not known.

A thousand times have I had in remembrance those words of David, who says: In
omnem terram exivit sonus little, and in fines orbis terrae verba little, which
though they be construed by the Doctors, for the Apostles, and preaching of
the Gospel, yet I may be suffered to apply them to the singular virtue of
this noble Nation, they seeming to be spoken only to this purpose; for if we
attentively hearken to the cries which are heard in all the parts of the world,
there is nothing heard but Viva Spain and Viva Philip. If you ask Europe who is
her father, shepherd, refuge, tower and strength, and who keeps in awe a many
of young Lions, Wolves, Tigers, and Foxes that would bite him, it will surely
be answered, that it is none but this courageous Lion. If we come into
Affricke, we shall hear nothing but a terrible and timorous rumor of war,
accompanied with a squadron of confused and untuned voices, which in despite
of them, call for mercy, and cry, Viva Spain. If we turn our hearing toward
fruitful Asia, we shall hear it do nothing but lament the continual
slaughter which the Spanish policy and valor makes there. And if we ask
news of this great nation in America, it will answer with loud voices, that
she is indebted unto it for the light of the Gospel, and Christian religion,
and for taking of it out of the Devils hands: and finally, for making of it a
new world. And if curiosity do draw us to inform our selves of what is spoken
upon the brinish and wide seas, questionless we shall hear, that Spain
enriches her Islands, defends her gulfes, and makes the passage easy to all
nations. Finally, the claws, strength and valor of this great Lion, reach to
the ends of the world, since that America obeyes is, Afric fears it, Asia
desires it, and Europe honors it.

And as we have said above, that it is proper to the heavenly lights, to order
times, divide seasons, and enrich the world with diverse effects, to whom can
this better be attributed, then to this valiant Nation, whose nobleness,
wisdom and quickness of wit is such, that it specifies each speculative
understanding? Since that all nations, even her greatest enemies, confess,
that Spain is a harbor of virtue, a treasure of understanding, a sea of
discretion, a garden of nobleness, an abyss of sciences, and a wonder of the
world. And fear of not ending my discourse, I should once engulfe my self into
the heroical attempts, and noted actions by the Spaniards, did not hinder me,
it would appear that those of Mars would be abased by theirs; and all those
which have been written of from the creation of the world to this day, compared
with theirs, would be but as a shadow of the body, and a draught of the
original, there being no fidelity, obedience, respect, generosity, wisdom
and prudence in the world, which compared with the brightness and splendour of
this light, be not darkened, ecclipsed, and do not vanish away.

And if any one judging me to be suspect through being passionate and
partial, shall disallow of these my reasons, let him take the depositions of
her very enemies, as eyewitnesses, and he shall see, that there never lodged
fear or pusillanimity in the heart of a Spaniard; nor was there ever any
Spaniard, that did not valiantly spend his life in service of his king, and
defense of his country, which the continual heart-beatings, and mortal
slaughters wherewith they affright the Moors, can well witness, whose
frontiers do water their fields with the blood of their inhabitants, in stead
of water, spilt by the unconquered army of Spain. Who tames the unlimited
desires, and unsatiable thirst of the Ottoman Wolf, but the strength of this
majesticke Lion? Who humbles and abateth his proud ambition, beating down his
designs, discomfiting his armies, casting his thoughts to the earth, and
causing him, like a frighted Wolf pursued by Dogs, to beat a retreat, but
the supreme valor of this Spanish Monarch?

I finally conclude the praises of this great Light, with that Maxim of
Aristotle, as true as proper to this Nation, which says, that in every kind,
there is a thing which is the rule and direction of all the rest, and which
contains in it self all the perfection which severally the rest have in
themselves. As for example, amongst the Beings of God, amongst substances the
Angels; amongst souls, the rational; amongst the heavens, the Imperial;
amongst the Planets, the Sun; amongst the Elements the fire; amongst living
creatures, Man; amongst men, Christ: Amongst bruit beasts, the Lion; amongst
fishes, the Sturgeon; amongst birds, the Eagle; amongst metalls, Gold; amongst
precious stones, the Carbuncle; amongst colors, Azure; and amongst Nations,
the Spanish, which is the model and major of all the rest, and that which has
in it self all the prerogatives and eminences, and is the nobleness of all
the nations of the world.

CHAP. VIII.
That the French, and Spanish Nation, being the beginning of the other Nations,
naturally ought to be opposite.
IT being concluded in the precedent Chapter, that the French, and Spanish
nations, are the beginning, and spring of all the other; It must through
necessary consequence follow, that they ought to be opposite, and contrary; as
likewise the two great lights of heaven are, upon which the discourse of this
my book is grounded: The end of the contrariety which is in the heavenly ones
being none other, then the variety, whereby the spacious garden of the world
shows fair, and enamelled with diverse colors, with infinite variety of
natures, and kinds, yet with such order, and art, that all united together
seem nothing but individuum of one only thing. And so it was requisite that
their influence, and motion should be various, and diverse; it being certain
that there can be no difference in the effects, if the causes be not different;
which punctually belongs to these two nations, which as the beginning, and
model of the rest, must have some contrariety, in their ceremonies, humors,
fashions, of clothing, conversations and the like, that other nations which
look on these in a glass, might be various, and so humane nature, by reason
of the said variety, should be beautified, and delightful.

And though this truth be clear to any one that shall look on it; yet I will
confirm it by Aristotle's authority, who says, that beginnings ought to be
different, saying when he defines them, that contraries or beginnings, are
they, which are not made by any, neither any of them is composed of the other,
but of them all things are made; which definition squares excellent well with
these two nations: since we cannot say, that they are composed of any other;
that is that they have taken any perfection, virtue or nobleness, from them
which were before them; seeing it is plain that since the creation of the
world, there never was any nation flourishing in learning, wit, subtilty,
policy, or other laudable exercises, more then these two. And so it seems
that God did with particular providence make them in this world, bestowing on
them immediately with his own hand, those perfections which they have. Neither
can it be said, that the one is composed of the other, since that neither
France takes anything from Spain, nor any way seeks to imitate it, nor Spain
likewise from France: yet other nations are composed of them, receiving all the
good they have, from these two beginnings, and fruitful springs, so that it
agreeing so well, with these two nations to be beginnings, they ought also to
be of their nature, that is to be contrary.

I hold it certain, that this variety and opposition of nature, which is in
these two nations, was by divine providence. For if all were of one mind, and
one humor, either all would stay at home, and would have no desire to see the
world, or all would be wandering, and forget their homes, and families, against
the law of nature, and preservation of humane kind: and the effects of the
world not have that beauty which is in them, if they were all alike. And
therefore this being the pretended, and in the creation of the universe, God
made these two beginnings, and nations so contrary, and shared all favors, and
graces, amongst them so equally, that the one cannot prevail against the
other, like two contraries of equal virtue; that cannot overcome one the other.

Neither let any one deceive himself so far as to think that the
contrariety which is in these two nations as originalls, be any imperfection,
but that it is in them the greatest excellenlency that may be, seeing that if
we consider it well, they have no other end, then peace, and preservation, it
being a thing infallible that since they cannot overcome, nor conquer one
another, by reason of the equality, strength, and valor, they will preserve
not only themselves, but these nations also which depend on them. It being
most certain that a Province favored, and protected, by Spain, shall not be
destroyed by France: nor likewise by Spain, any nation favored by the French.
And therefore we shall find that this contrariety is ordained for the peace,
and preservation of the world: and if God had not made these two original,
these two nations contrary, and communicated unto them their valor, with full
equality, I verily believe that a great part of the world would be left: for if
God had not tempred the fury, and violence of the French, with far degrees
less of Spanish patience, and solidity, they would questionless be sovereigns
of the world. And contrariewise if Spanish patience were not mixed, with a
slow, and phlegmatic deliberation, there is no doubt but they would bring all
the kingdoms of the earth in subjection. And that therefore God, who with an
equal balance, measure and wisdom made all things, sweetly disposing of
them, ordained that the world should be preserved in peace by means of this
contrariety, dividing the goods so equally between these two Nations, that
that which the one wanted, the other abounded in, that so like two perfect
originals they might give peace and preservation unto other Nations.

This Philosophy will not seem harsh to them who shall consider in the four
Elements the contrariety and order wherewith they mix themselves, to produce
and preserve those things which are composed of them; for he shall in them
find their qualities tempered and divided with such art, that the one has
that which the other wants. God gave the Element of fire heat (as the
Philosophers call it) in summo, and dryness inremisso. For if it were
extreme, as the heat, it would with its power and activity destroy all the
other. And therefore to withstand that disorder, he left the fire with a
remissness. If the earth had coldness in extreme, as it has dryness, it
would by reason of its clamminesse and hardness be intractable, and altogether
incapable of compounding any mixed. He left the water with a remiss humidity,
giving the same to the air in summo. So that with this distribution of
qualities, God made them originals of peace and preservation. The same art did
he use in these two Nations: for he gave the French the extreme of valor,
force, and gentilenesse, yet accompanied with the remiss of variability and
inconstancy.

He placed in the Spaniard courage, stability, and constancy in a supreme
degree, but tempered with a remiss deliberation. I would lay open the point
more diffusedly, if I did not fear thereby to animate, by telling of the
truth, the two nations one against the other, who will not confess that they
have any thing in a remiss degree, but all perfection in summo. And so we are
to believe that it was by heaven ordained that gifts should be so entermingled
between these two Nations, that neither France nor Spain should have all the
power in either of themselves, but equally divided between them, that knowing
themselves to be no stronger one then the other, they should always live in
peace, and should not attempt any thing whereby they might get broken heads.
The truth of this admirable piece of work was rarely set down unto us in two
words by the wise man, who considering the fabric and ordering of the world,
and the wonderful means which God ordained to preserve it, said that he had
set one against one. Which was questionless done, because no one should
overtop the other, going beyond his bounds and confines. And so considering
well the whole frame of the world, we shall find that there is no one kind or
nature in it, but has its contrary. God having set against a hell, heaven;
against a Lucifer, Michael; against vice, virtue; against an Adam, Christ;
against an Eve, a Mary; against the fire, water; and finally, against the
Spanish the French nation, from which two, as from beginnings, yet contraries,
should issue such plentiful streams of valor, generosity, and nobleness, as
should beautify and make fruitful all mankind; since that if any light of
faith has spread it self amongst infidels, it has been through the
diligence and labor of these two most noble Lights.

CHAP. IX.
How the Devil envying the nobleness and perfection of these two Nations,
turned the natural contrariety into a mortal antipathy.
OUr Lord God created these two noble Nations in the aforesaid degree of
perfection, that they might communicate and distribute that light and beauty
which he had granted to them. But the old Serpent, mortal enemy unto peace,
knowing the mavelous good and notable profit which these two Nations might
have brought to the world, ^f they had agreed and lived together in peace,
fearing lest they should with their great learning and holiness, cause the
true faith and Christian religion to spring up in all Heathen countries, and
by that means get them from under his subjection, whom by means of idolatry
and bestiality wherewith he deceived them, he yet kept: he gathered strength
out of their weakness, and sought to hinder this fruit, making use of the
powerfullest arms he had, which were enmity and hatred: which he rooted so
deeply in these two Nations, that he converted his art into a nature, leaving
them enmity and persecuting of one another as hereditarie, there being no sign
or token left of amity, peace and union betwixt them; so that the smoke and
dust, as Saint John says in the Revelation, that cursed star fell from
heaven, has raised, is gotten up to the fourth sphere, and darkened the Sun.
This is the cloud of enmity and mortal hatred, which the Devil sowed between
the Spanish and the French, which obscured the Sun and light of these two
nations. Since, if had not been this cursed seed of enmity, whence grows the
distrust of one another? They had, being both united together, conquered most
Kingdoms and Monarchies of the world, dissipating the darkness of infidelity
in many provinces and kingdoms which want the light of the Gospel, and had
offered an acceptable sacrifice to God, of an infinite number of souls, which
they would have drawn out of the way of perdition, and brought them into the
way of salvation and eternal life.

It is therefore lamentable to see, that this accursed Leviathan should find
so much aptness in such wise nations, to swallow his mortal poison, and bring
them from their first perfection, that he could be contented to set them at
variance, and in hatred; but he has also with his powerful diligence
converted them (at least in outward show) into himself: seeing that although a
Frenchman be the same with the Spaniard, in that which is of the essence, that
is rationalitie; yet has the Devil so disguised this nature in such sort, and
has so maliciously defiled, and changed her accidents, humors and conditions,
that now a Frenchman in a Spaniards eye seems to be no man; and a Spaniard a
Devil in the Frenchmans eye.

And if the Devil would have been contented with setting enmity and discord
only in the humor, clothing, commerce, and other particular ceremonies of
these two nations, it were no great matter, for it might easily have been
remedied; but he was so cunning in sowing this mortal dissension, that with
his deadly punctures and poison, he converted that into nature, which before
were but accidents, making it pass by succession, from the fathers to the
sons, and from these to the grandchildren, like original sin. So that as
the Chicken flies from, and is afraid of the Kite, although he does not know
him: or as the gentle Lamb scarcely come out of the mothers belly, seeing the
Wolf a great way off, retires fearful and timorous, flying him as a mortal
enemy, having never seen him before, nor received any hurt by him, nor any
having showed him any enmity and antipathy. In like manner the hatred of the
French to the Spaniards, and the Spaniards to the French, is grown so
natural, that even in children hanging on their mothers breasts, there seems
to grow a natural instinct to know a Spaniard a mile off, crying out as loud
at the sight of him, as if he did see some strange vision or apparition.

From this natural antipathy comes that to either nation, the customs,
clothing, and manner of living of the one, seems evill-favoured, improper,
and altogether abominable to the other, though the things of themselves be
good, joining them with the three ordinary fruits of hatred, which are,
unbelief, detraction and contempt. For if one tell a Frenchman of any victory,
any strong hold, or city which the Spaniard has taken, or any other famous
and heroical enterprises, which this nation ordinarily perform, none shall
make him believe it, no not if an Angel should come down from heaven to
verify it. And if he be either by common report, or other credible relations
forced to believe that the thing is true, he will say, they yielded without
resistance, or that all in the hold were asleep, that the watches and centries
betrayed it, or that there were but thirty of the enemies soldiers, and the
Spaniards were three thousand: or finally, that there were many Frenchmen in
the Spanish army, by whose advice and industry the battle was given, and the
victory obtained. Howsoever, he will never confess, that the victory was
truly gotten, but by some accident, or mischance.

So again, if the Spaniard hear any such like news of the French, he will
say that some river broke her banks, and drowned the enemies camp, or that
thirty pieces of ordnance brake and killed half their army, or that the
plague, or some other contagious disease, was amongst them: so that he will not
confess that the victory was obtained by any strength, valor, or industry,
but by mere misfortune.

All the world knows that Spain is more barren then France, by reason of the
great droughts, and small store of rain, that falls there: wherefore some
years there comes corn, and other victuals out of Languedock, and Provence
into Catalonia, and France, come your hollands, cloth, linen, cambrick, and a
thousand other commodities which Spain has not: yet you shall not find a
Spainard who will confess, that France is a better land, or more abundant, and
rich. The same weakness we also find in the French, seeing that the greatest
Prince of that nation, that day as he will make show of his greatness, he
adornes and beautifies himself with things which come out of Spain: if he
have any brave horse, it is Spanish, if he have perfumes about him they are
Spanish, if he be clothed in fine cloth it is Spanish, if he drink good wine
it is Spanish, and will scorn at play to carry any money about him but Spanish
pistolets; and yet though all this be true, they will not believe, but that
Spain is a wretched country, and Spaniards a cunning, malicious, and no way
curious nation. And when they are convinced by experience, they will say, that
all is good in Spain which cannot speak.

All Spaniards hold the French liberty, mirth, and affability, to be base,
contemptible, dishonorable, and of small esteem, and almost madness, and yet
is a wonderful perfection, wherein they excel all other nations; for by that
means any one be he never so poor, may come to speak to the King, and
relate his grievances to him when he will, without any let. The French gives
like judgment of the Spaniard, calling his gravity, and continency, pride, and
madness; yet it stands with reason, that every one should know what he is,
and not give occasion to suffer too much liberty, to breed (...) and disrespect.

The Spaniards account your French liberality in great feasts, and banquets, to
be an unreasonable gluttony; it being very true as I my self have seen, that
they are very abundant, and delicate in their food, especially your Nobility;
their ends in these excesses being no other then to keep their houses,
servants, and families, satisfied, content, and merry; which are things
properly belonging to generosity. The French believe that to abstain from
these excesses, and the rule and order which the Spaniards keep, proceeds from
baseness, and avarice, only to avoid expense: and yet it is manifest that
this is no virtue, like unto sobriety, and parsimony, as well for the
commendation it particularly has in holy Scripture, as also for the spiritual
and bodily benefits, which proceed from it.

If you ask a Spaniard what he thinks of the French habit, and fancy, he will
not only hold them to be ill favored, but will be scandalized at a thing
which causes mirth, and attracts the minds. For to see a troop of French
upon a festival day clothed in such variety of colors with a thousand kinds
of feathers, jewels, embroderies, fringes, ornaments, and gold laces with so
many hundred of jewels, diamonds, pearls, rubies, emeralds, and topaces, that
one would think the Indies were landed in France; is even as one should see a
garden enamelled, and enterlaced most artificially with diverse flowers, or a
fair field full of dazies, lillies, and violets, whose fair show, wakens the
senses, keeps the mind in suspense, and enamoures the very soul: Yet the
Spaniard will say, that it is the greatest folly in the world. I do not wonder
at it, because that in Spain your civil habit is so much used, and wearing of
colors so abhorred, that they force the hangman to wear colors, for a mark
of his shame, and infamy. And if we have a French man's judgment concerning
your Spanish habit, and manner of clothing, he will say that to go always in
black is a sign of despair, the mark of a widow, or a decayed person, yet
black is one of the most honorable colors, and argues modesty, reputation,
authority, and understanding.

Let a French man truly consider the effect of the look, modesty and courtesy
of a Spaniard, his deliberatenesse in his speech, his reservednesse, his
affectuous conceits in his discourses, his gravity in his gate, his patience
in his business, his measuring of his words, his attentive harkening to his
reasons who speaks to him, and he shall truly find that all is but civility
and courtesy; yet he will say that Spaniards would seem to be wise but are
not. And if a Spaniard looks upon the actions of a Frenchman, his never
standing still, his unquietness and impatience, his flinging away, though he
knows that under such actions there is a great deal of wit, capacity,
subtilty, and wisdom, yet he will say, that Frenchmen neither seem nor are
wise.

If a Gentleman go to a friends house to visit him, he will scarce be in, but
with a great deal of mirth he asks for breakfast, if it be in the morning,
or according to the time of the day, wherein he shows his liberty and
friendship, seeing that to eat in one dish, and drink in one cup is a sign
of fidelity and friendship. Now this would be abominable and disgraceful to
the Spaniard, who would rather starve for hunger and thirst, then ask for it
in a friends house. Yea there are some so shame-faced, that will sit a whole
meal without drink, only because they will not ask for it: as it happened
to certain country people, who being invited to a Bishops house, after they
had eaten went to drink at a river, because they were not so bold as to ask
for drink at the table. If we ask a Spaniard what he thinks of the manner
and fashion which the French use in saluting of Ladies, kissing their facess,
coming near them and touching them with that freeness as is used in France,
he will lose his patience, and he will by no means be persuaded that such
ceremonies can have any civility or courtesy in them: it being a maxim among
them, that who parleyes will yield the hand, who yields the hand will yield the
face, and who yields the face will yield the rest. And yet it is most certain
true, that such actions are void of malice, and ancient customs, practiced
even in the Apostles times. As also when they salute them afar off, going
backwards, raking their feet upon the ground, with such like honest, wise, and
just ceremonies, wherein there cannot be the least occasion of any rash
judgment: yet I do not wonder at this ordinary contrariety, seeing the Devil
has so taken away all manner of liking between the two Nations, with envy
and hatred, that he makes that seem evil and detestable unto them, which
indeed is commendable and honest.

CHAP. X.
Of some things which befell the Author in France, touching the enmity of the
two Nations.
I Know that every one will believe the antipathy which I am describing,
without urging me to prove it by any of those many particulars which happened
unto me. Yet I will a little digress from the theory, and (as by the way)
delight the Reader with some passages, which when I remember I cannot forbear
laughing, and afterward to fall into a strange admiration, in seeing how much
the name and sight of a Spaniard has been, and is abhorred in France.

I went out of Spain, drawn by that curiosity to which the desire and
appetite of knowing inclines unquiet minds. And being told that in France I
might satisfy my desires, I was not slow in taking my journey that ways, it
being near unto Spain, and there being also ordinary commerce between them.
I undertook my journey with as much ease as my poverty could afford me, which
was not so great, but that I did ride on horseback, and had some money, though
not much, which I also was forced to lay out to make me a suit of cloths. I
believed that as soon as I should come into France, without any other art or
ostentation, that only seeing of me in Spanish habit, would make all the world
affect me, and strive who should first have me home to his house. I thought
that a spanne of ruffing which I wore stiff starched, would serve me for bill
of Exchange; believing that having them on, none durst deny to lend me money,
if I desired to borrow of him.

Then I assured my self that I should be esteemed of, respected and in a
manner feared, by reason of six palms of rapier which hanged by my side, raking
with the chape upon the ground. At last I arrived into France, clothed in
Spanish habit, as may be presumed of one that went into France with a pretense
of finding favor, only because he was a Spaniard. I traveled all the way
from Bordeaux to Paris, without any accident worth the writing, unless it were
some base words they gave me when I paid my reckonings at Innes; which because
they were of no great importance, and spoken by people which could not offend
me, I bore with patience. I came into Paris with that desire which the city
deserves all men should have, which come to see it. I began to walk the
streets with a Spanish gravity, state and garb: yet I was feign to leave it,
and hasten my pace, forsaking my wonted gravity: for I had not scarce gone
twenty paces, when I heard a noise behind me of children that called to me,
Senor Senor de la Burrica pany Ravanicos: Sir, Sir, out of your budget bread
and radishes, with a thousand other injurious words, and such untuned voices,
that I was by necessity forced to go into the first house that I found open,
leaving the door and court as full of little children and men, as if it had
been the Council chamber gate. By misfortune there were three little boys
playing in the entry, who seeing me in a habit which they were not accustomed
to, did entertain me with such outcries, fears and shreekes, that with their
noise many began to look out at the windows: then came a groom, who thinking*
I had done those children* some injury, struck me such a blow on the head with
a Curry-comb he had in his hand, that he had almost astonished me. I thought to
excuse my self in those troubles, with some humble reasons; but it was a kind
of preaching to a desert. And so after I had made my complaint to 30. or 40.
that were come into the entry, they resolved to put me into the street, and
turn me over to my first tormentors, who waited at the door for me, whose
number being by the one half increased, they began to follow me up another
street, with such a noise and tumult, that from all sides came an infinite of
people to see the cause of this extraordinary tumult, thinking I was some
fellow that was whipped up and down the streets. I was so troubled, and besides
my self, that I had not the wit to ask where I was; and though I could have
done it, yet that accursed company of Humble-bees did not give me time to do
it: so that all as I could do, was to hasten my pace, endeavoring to find
some gate of the City, taking it for my last remedy, to go out of it. But my
evil fortune not yet satisfied, (to my greater confusion) caused me to see a
Church which stood open, and a Priest saying Mass in it, and many hearing of
him; I went in, thanking God a thousand times for the favor he had done me, in
delivering me out of the hands of so many Caldeans. I was scarce gone up the
second step, but there began such a laughter amongst the poor lame people that
stood begging at the Church door, that they which were within the Church very
attentive at mass, turning their backs to the Altar, began to gaze upon me,
and second the others laughter, whereat I remained so astonished and confused,
that I stood a great while still in the midst of the Church, turning my self
no way; and I had stood so a great while longer, if one of them as stood next
to me had not come to me and bid me make clean my cloak.

So I went into a corner of the Church, where looking upon my self from head
to foot, I found a hares scut and a piece of a sheep gut pinned upon my
cloak, and the rest of it embroidered with spittles and other filth, which
together with my habit, had been the cause of the tumult in the street, and
laughter in the Church; the sudden murmr of them which heard mass was so
loud, that the Priest looked about three or four times, to see the motive of
this news, and because I perceived he knew that I was the cause of that
whispering and noise, every time he turned himself about to the people and
cast his eyes upon me, me thought he reproved me as a disquieter and disturber
of that spiritual rest. Which did so trouble me and make me so ashamed, that I
repented a thousand times that I was come into the Church. Once amongst the
rest, when the Priest turned toward the people, he looked upon me, and whether
it was true, or but only my imagination, I thought that in stead of saying
Dominus vobiscum, he had said to me, Why do not thou get thee hence? with
which impression I suddenly went out of the Church so enraged, astonished, and
troubled, that not looking what was before me, nor regarding where I set my
feet, as I came out of the door I hitting my head against a Friars nose, who
stood in the middle of it, begging with a box in his hand, and gave him such a
knock, that he fell on his hands and head to the ground, and the box tumbled
down the steps, at the bottom whereof stood ten or twelve foot-boies holding
their masters horses, who enraged against me for the knock I hit the Friar,
began to make a tumult, and hold up their rough cudgels against me: and surely
they would have evil entreated me, if my laying hands on my patient sword, and
the sacrednes of the place where they stood had not stayed them. Yet using
their tongues for instruments of revenge, they followed me down the street with
such injurious words and speeches, as were able to have scandalized the
desperatest fellow in the world: And they did not leave me, till crossing of a
street, I shut my self up in a Cooks house, where I staid all night, yielding
infinite thanks to God for being gotten out of so great a fear and confusion.

The day following I resolved to take another way, thinking that of the last
day to have been unlucky. And so with hope of better fortune I took heart, and
came out of the house with the same gravity and stateliness as I used before:
yet still looking every way, to see if I met with any of mine enemies. Truly
that day was lucky, for none followed me in the streets, only the Shoomakers,
Cobblers, and Tailors in every street as I went by, would leave their work, and
standing upon their door sills, would hiss, scoff, and laugh at me till I
was gotten out of their sight. Whereof I made small account, it seeming but a
pastime to that was past.

This manner of contempt and scorn lasted all the while I went in Spanish
habit, which was almost two months, during which time my very soul was
tormented with diverse affronts, fictions, and jests, whereto I could by no
means find any remedy: so that the remainder of that time, I was forced to
go in the evenings after Sun setting, like a night-Bat, or a man that hid
himself for debt, it being impossible by day to go in the street an hundred
paces, without having twice as many boys about me. Once that I presumed to go
over a market place, the sight of me was such a novelty, and seemed so strange
to certain women which sold radishes, salads, and eggs, that coming near
one who was weighing of a Cheese of ten pounds, she so wondered, and was so
affrighted at the sight of me, that the scales fell out of her hands, and both
scales and cheese fell upon a basket of eggs which stood under them, out of
which immediately began to run a stream of whites, and from her mouth issued
more excommunicate curses then does come from an Exorcist to one possessed of
the devil: the eggs were another woman's who stood by her, and perceiving her
ware upon the ground, without scolding with the other, took hold of three or
four of her cheeses, which stood there upon a little table, so that the one
striving to take them away from her, and the other to keep them, they strugled
so long that both they, the table, cheeses, and basket, and all came to the
ground, and falling with their heels upwards, discovered etc.

I stood by looking on, and laughing with the rest, who stood by looking upon
the skirmish, which lasted above a quarter of an hour, struggling, and
scratching upon the ground, with the skirts of their coats over their heads,
so that those that came at last could not perceive what it was, seeing nothing
but their buttocks and their feet. The battle ended with some little blood,
bruises and loss of much hair on both sides; and having wiped their faces
which were all bedawbed, with butter, eggs, dirt, and blood: seeing me there,
and remembering that I was the first cause of the skirmish, they both with one
accord took up the broken eggs which lay on the ground, and ran toward me
with their hair about their ears* and barefoote throughing them at me: after
them arose all the rest, and believing I had been the cause of all that
mischief, they began to shower upon me so many stones, onions, pears, whole
cabidges, and pieces of poor John, that they made me look blacker, and more
disfigured then they; and I remember I could make no more use of the cloak nor
the hat, seeing a whole army of women upon me, so enraged as they were, I
sought to escape from them running as nimble as a Dear, forgetting that
gravity, and stateliness which I professed.

By good fortune in this my trouble I met with a gentleman, who questionless
had been in Spain, and moved with compassion, took me into a friends house,
which by chance was at the end of that street, for me unfortunate, and
commanded certain grooms to make clean my cloak, and clothes. I came out
again, timorous, and angry; fearing to commit some infamous action, as really
I had done if I had drawn my sword against ten or fifteen women, who warred
against me with nothing but onions and cabidges; and I had scarce gone a
hundred paces, but a far off I espied a troop of people who very silently
stood harkening to a long and set discourse which a blind man had with a dog
tied to his girdle in a chain. The dog hearkened to him attentively, that he
truly seemed to have judgment and capacity to apprehend all that was said
unto him. So having made him dance to the sound of a cymball which he carried
at his back, he began to ask him certain questions, and amongst the rest, he
said unto him what will thou do for the King of France? Then the dog began
to dance and skip, and make such show of rejoicing, that if it had been a man
as indeed it was a beast, he that had seen him would have judged him to be mad
or frantic, seeing how he danced and stirred about. This question being past,
the blind man asked him again, what he would do for the King of Spain?
Lord! who could relate the foolish noise which that beast made with barking?
truly the hair upon the ridge of his back began to bristle, he grinned with
his teeth, turned his eyes awrie, pricked up his ears, and began to gape so
wide that he seemed to have a legion of devils within him. I could look on no
longer, I was so enraged and even smothered with anger, to see that the hatred
and disdain against the Spanish nation, should be a means for blind men to get
their livings in France. Whereupon I resolved to cloth my self after the
French fashion, and conform my self to the use of the country, persuading my
self that I might thereby prevent a thousand inconveniences.

I went away from that company, thinking that my habit gathered more people
together then the blind man and his dog: and so taking my way homewards, I
found at the end of a narrow and unfrequented street, a woman sitting upon her
door sille, and giving her child pappe, who being froward, and untoward, would
by no persuasions eat his pappe. The poor mother vexed with the childs
obstinacy, seeing all the fair means she could use, could not make it take
that which she would give it, made use of the present occasion, and when I was
near her she said to it, see the Spaniard that comes to carry away little
boys that will not eat the pap: in truth that little creature was so affrited
when it saw me, that full of fear with a panting heart he held up his little
hands, as a sign to his mother to give him all the pap at once: This thing
made me laugh so heartily that for two hours after, I did nothing but laugh
and wonder at it.

But if I should particularize unto you, the broiles, the decepts, and
cousenings, which the inkeepers used toward me, I should never have done. I
never came into an Inn but I came out of it, with a quarrel, was cousoned,
and yet forced to ask all those that were present forgiveness: The quart
descu in my hands, or rather in their hands was worth ten sols: a relon of ten
sols was converted into a half quart d'escu, and this into a royal, and that
of five royalls into five sols: and if I chanced to reply any thing, they would
turn toward me like Lions, chiding me, and saying, that if I did not know what
value coins were of, I should learn, and not contest with honest people that
feared God, and carried a good conscience: and they would tell me I had no skill
in Arithmeticke, and especially in subtraction. Many times I should buy some
wares which I knew would not waste at the air nor the fire, yet within a
quarter of an hour in a pound I should find four ounces wanting. With these
and the like deceipts I passed my first days, till knowledge and practice of
the country showed me what means I should use to free me from these evils.

CHAP. XI.
The contrariety and antipathy of the soul and body of the Spaniards and the
French.
I Have thought a thousand times to ask the midwife in what manner the French
came out of their mothers bellies, for seeing the contrariety that is between
them and the Spaniards, me thinks it is impossible for them ^o be borne in
the same manner, seeing one can hardly presume, that having the middle and the
end, the body and the soul, yea and their very death contrary, they should
have their natural beginning, which is their birth, alike. This contrariety is
so great and so remarkable, that to define a Frenchman, one cannot do it more
properly, then to say he is a Spaniard the contrary way. For there the Spaniard
makes an end where the Frenchman begins, as I shall show in the following
chapters. As for the soul I must confess that they are all created in
tempore, and that they are all of the same species, and that God does with one
action create and infuse them into the organicall body. And if faith did not
teach me, I should never believe, that French and Spanish souls were of the
same nature. Yet I find, that if we consider the soul of it self, and
without any reference to the body of either Nation, the soul it self is
neither French nor Spanish: And this specificall unity which Divinity admits
between them, is not against that which I say; for considering the soul within
the body, it is no more indifferent, but determined to be either Spanish or
French.

Wherefore I say, that the soul determined into a French body, has her powers
quite contrary to a Spanish one. First the French understanding has its
apprehension very quick, and with a great deal of ease will go through any
difficulty that can be proposed unto it: yet it goes no further, nor enters
into deeper discourses, which depend upon the same difficulty: But with the
same speediness as he did apprehend it, with the same it goes away and is
forgotten. Contrariwise, the Spaniards understanding is slow in apprehending
the difficulty, but having once understood it, he will hold it fast, drawing a
thousand consequences out of it, and sifting every point of it.

The Spaniard his understanding is altogether speculative, since that in all
his actions, his end is no other but the contemplation of things, without
afterward directing or settling of it upon any servile or mechanical work.
Wherefore you shall find few natural Spaniards of any mechanic trade, as
Shoemaker, Tailor, Cobbler, Joyner, Inne-keeper, or the like. For which I call
the French to witness, who go into Spain, and come back again offended,
because they find no Alehouses nor Innes as they have in France, so that
sometimes they may travel three days and not come at an Inn, whereby they
are constrained to carry meat with them in their bags, and wine in their
bottles. The French understanding is altogether practical, being it is not
content with the only knowledge of things, but learnes them for to make use of
them therein, where he may reap some profit by it, and so is not idle, but to
avoid idleness employes it self in any manner of exercise; and thence grows
the variety of trades in that Nation. The greatest part of your French wits
addict themselves to the study of the Law and Canons, and very few study
Positive or School Divinity. Amongst the Spaniards few study the Law, and
almost all Divinity.

The French understanding, though it receive and hold things concerning Faith
and Religion for infallible, yet it cannot stay and fix it self on them, but
will see, consider, and also judge whether that which faith says is as he
means, and finding some difficulty, he runs his boat a ground, believing
himself only, and denying that which others hold. The Spaniard his
understanding is fearful, and humble in that which concerns faith, and
determination of the Church. So that as soon as any Article of faith is
propounded unto him, he presently sets bounds to all his knowledge, wisdom,
and discourse, and not only strives not to know whether that be so or no,
which the faith sets down, but uses all the means he can to avoid
speculation thereon, fearing to fall into some error through the frailty of
his understanding. Whence grows the punctual obedience which the Spaniards
yield to the Church of Rome, and the difference and dissension that is
thereupon amongst the French.

The French man will resolve upon businesses of greatest importance, when he is
in most company, being not disturbed by any tumult, noise, or outcrie: so that
I have noted in this nation, that your Princes, Lords, and other persons of
quality, will dispatch their commissions, and other weighty businesses sitting
at table, the eating being no disturbance to the audience which they give to a
thousand people: and sometimes they will sit at meals and have one of each
side of them, who at the same time will talk to them, and they will answer
them all as punctually, as if they were shut up privately in a chamber, without
any disturbance and had nothing to do, but to hearken to them, which speak to
them. All this is contrary to the Spanish understanding, who if he have any
business of consequence, retires himself into some solitary place, and is such
an enemy of company and tumult, that if a fly comes buzzing by his ear, when
he is in the depth of his business it is enough to hinder his resolution.

In the second power of the soul which is the memory, there is contradiction,
and antipathy, since the French man's is altogether concerning the present: I
mean, that all his actions have none other end, but that which they then have
and possess, remembering neither that which is past, nor that which may happen:
and so for a content and pleasure in hand, they forget all past adversities,
and make no count of any thing which may come, though they know assuredly, that
that very occasion once past, it shall surely happen to them. The Spaniards are
quite contrary, who weigh all their actions with the scale of what is past, and
what is to come; not plunging themselves, in the content, and enjoyment of the
present, without thinking, weighing, or esteeming all inconveniences which may
ensue: and therefore reducing this point to two words, I say: that the French
man's memory is about the present, if one may bear present things in memory:
and the Spaniards is of that which is past, and is to come: the French will
easily remember, or forget a thing, being quickly angry for any present wrong
done to them, and easily forget and pardon it: Your Spaniards must be much
urged before they will remember an offense, but once had in mind, they will
hardly forget it. I could make a whole book and a large volume, of the
contrarieties, and antipathies which are in their wills, if I might speak all
that which truly I might, without distasting of neither nation: I will
therefore be content, without touching the virtues or vices, which might be
found in either, God only being perfect, and without fault, to say that there
is no nation in the world so patient, and suffering, as the Spanish nation is;
so that it will never quarrel nor contend, unless it be upon a more then
urgent occasion, which must prick him on to it. The French contrariwise, if you
do them but a hairs breadth of offense or injury, he presently makes a
breach, and will never rest till they be revenged by fighting.

The Spaniards are true, firm, and constant in their loves; so that many times
they go beyond the bounds of affection, adoring that which they love, and with
so much fidelity, that they would be afraid to annoy it so much as with a
thought, and they inviolably preserve this faith; no chance whatsoever, being
able to remove them from what they profess, yea they are so affected to their
will, that many times they lose their judgment, which never happens to the
French who are so mutable in their wills, and purposes, and so voluble that
having set their affection upon one, they will settle it upon a hundred more,
if so many should come to them. And if any there be, as there are many, that
have not this defect: yet their affections are to changeable, that the least
anger in the world, will change their fire of love into a colder snow, then
that which is in winter upon the Pyrenean mountains.

A French man that is in his Mistrisses favor, will do what he can to let his
friends and all the world know his being in favor, and his being acceptable
unto her: a thing much abhorred by the Spaniard, who if he be in any such
predicament, with all care and diligence, will seek to hide his content from
his friends, and all the world, and even from himself, if it were possible.
Finally, in this particular they have two contrary motions; The French man
seeks to have that seen, which lies hidden. The Spaniard seeks nothing more,
then to hide that which is outward and in light.

The Spaniards delight extremely, in outward appearance, and honor, caring more
to satisfy the world, then for their own interests; so that they care not for
suffering want or misery, so that it be not known: and there are some who being
in places that they must go abroad, handsome in clothes, want will bring them
to that extremity, that they will fast two days to have a handsome cloak, and
a starched ruff, to go abroad in, and they will carry themselves so lustily,
well disposed, and haughty, that you would think they had kept a very good
house. Contrariewise the French have no other end in their actions, but their
proper interest, and pleasure, so that if he may but fare well in his diet, he
cares not what the world can say: and if necessity sorce him to it, he will
sell his cloak, his sword, yea his very shirt, and drawers; and after he has
consumed them, he will go forth naked if need be into the street, to give his
friends satisfaction; holding it no disgrace to say that he has sold them to
buy food. If a Spaniard be so near driven that he must sell his clothes, to
buy food; he will first sell his shirt* seeing that with his doublet, and
ruff, he covers the want of it; and if his need increases he will sell his
doublet, covering his body with his cloak, after his doublet goes his sword,
after that his ruff; and the last thing of all is his cloak. But the French
man when he is in want, does quite contrary, beginning where the Spaniard ends,
and the first thing he sells is his cloak, next his doublet, then his
britches, and last of all his shirt: in want there is none more valiant and
fearlesse then the Spaniard; nor is there any are more timorous then the
French, if he want victuals. A Spaniard will live three days upon a piece of
bread, and will not be dismayed, or show loss of courage, but if the French
man wants his pottage but one day he thinks himself lost and undone.

A Spaniards generositie is notable when he begs an alms; seeing he will
never confess he does it for necessity, but by some accident or disaster;
that he was forced to save his life and his honor, to cloth himself in a
poor habit, and beg in the streets; and the words he uses when he begs shall
be these or the like: Please you, Sir, to do some courtesy for a poor
cavallier, who is come out of his Country for such a mischance; that he has
been forced to cloth himself in this habit as you see: And when you know who
it is that begs (as long it shall not be before you do know) you will think
your self happy that you pleasured a man of my condition and quality; and if
by chance he that hears him, and hearkens to his complete speeches, ask him
who he is, and what mischance he has had; having first made him swear that
he will not discover him, he will answer that he is nephew to an Earl or Duke,
or brother to the Admiral of Castile, and that a great Princess falling in
love with him, he conveyed her out of her fathers house in man's apparel, which
being discovered by her parents, he was forced to absent himself and live in
that fashion unknown, till his friends had made peace; and he will say that he
has fifteen or twenty thousand crowns a year, and eight or ten Baronies:
Finally, the Spaniard then shows his generosity most, when he sees himself
most crossed. But if a Frenchman comes to that pass, that he has not a penny,
nor any thing to sell for food, good Lord who can rehearse his inventions! his
stratagems, his wry mouths, and shruggings, to make his misery known, and to
draw men to bestow an alms upon him? He will shrink up his shoulders, cross
his hands, fall on his knees, beat his breast, weep, and with a doleful
humble voice full of anguish, will desire you to give him a farthing, to buy
him bread, seeing he has eaten nothing in three days; he will say he has
nothing in this world that he can depend upon, nor any that can afford him any
comfort, that he is altogether wretched, forsaken of his kindred, parents and
friends: finally, he shows so much lowliness, and faints so, that he should
be harder then any stone, that hearing a relation so full of compassion and
misery, should not bestow something upon him.

The contrariety of body which is between the French and the Spaniards is so
manifest, that it would be time lost that were spent in discoursing long upon
it; it being manifestly seen, that the most part of Spaniards are little, and
your French tall. Your Spaniards are brown, your French fair: your Spaniards
brave black hair, your French red or flaxen: your French wear long hair,
your Spaniards short: your French have spare legs, your Spaniards fleshy,
seeing a Spaniards calfe of his leg will be as big as a Frenchmans thigh:
your French let their beard grow, your Spaniards cut it, leaving nothing but
the mustachoes and a little tuffe in the middle: your French are choleric,
your Spaniards flegmaticke: your Spaniards are slow, your French quick: your
French are light, your Spaniards solid: your French are merry, your Spaniards
melancholy: your French are bold, your Spaniards shamefaced: your French are
precipitious, your Spaniards wary: your French liberal, your Spaniards
sparing. From these may be considered infinite things which shall always be
found wholly contrary.

CHAP. XII.
Of the contrariety that is between the French and the Spaniards in their
clothing.
IF one consider a Spaniards habit, you shall find it quite contrary to the
French; the Spaniard from the waste upward being broad and thick, and the
French man contrariwise, from the middle upwards is slender, his doublet being
very close and strait. Amongst a thousand Spaniards you shall find none but
wears a cassack, and amongst a thousand French, you shall not find one that
will wear it: there is not a French man but will in summer wear his doublet
open before and behind, holding it a stately thing to show their shirt: The
Spaniard although there should fall lances of fire, will never unbutton
himself, holding it disgraceful to show ones shirt: A Spainards hat is high
in the crown, and narrow in the brimmes; the French quite contrary: The neck
and collar of a Spaniard is close before; the French man's open: That which the
Spaniard wears upon his arms, the French man wears it upon his thighs,
wearing long sleeves, and short breeches* and the French man wears very long
breeches, and his doublet sleeves very close: The Spaniard wears garters, and
the French man wears none at all: The French fancy wears two great roses
which cover almost all his shoo: The Spanish pomp is to wear such a small
latchet that you can scarce perceive it: your French wear high hollowed and
pointed heels, your Spaniard wears them low, broad, and flat: The Spaniard
wears his stockings drawn up smooth, that you can scarce take hold of them
with a pair of pincers, the French man lets them fall loose, desiring to have
four plaites just above his heel: The Spaniards wear a long cloak and let
it hang down; the French wear it short, and so tuckt up, that you can scarce
see any thing of it but the cape: A French man cannot hold his arms under his
cloak as he walks the streets, the Spaniards never hold them out: your French
wear a little sword and with small hilts, and hanging before them: your
Spaniards wear their rapiers with large hilts, and wear it upon their side:
your French man wears his dagger on the middle of his girdle: your Spaniard
hangs it on the one side: your French man when he goes to fight in duel,
will put of his doublet, and his shirt too: the Spaniard wears his shirt, his
doublet, his coat, and his jacke of maile: the French man begins to button his
doublet from the neck down toward the waste: the Spaniard begins at the
waste and ends at the neck: the Spaniard when he makes himself ready puts on
his doublet first; the French man last: the French man in cold weather puts on
a wastecoate in the night, and puts it off in the day, because he will not seem
thick wasted: The Spaniard wears it the day, and pull it off at night.

CHAP. XIII.
The contrarieties in eating and drinking.
THE Spaniards ordinary rule is to eat twice a day, a^ at dinner and at
supper: The French man four times eating besides those two meals a^
breakefast, and afternoones nunching: The Spaniard brings in fruit at the
beginning of meals, your French at the latter end: your Spaniards have every
one their several dishes to eat pottage in: your French eat all in one
platter: The meat which is set on a Spaniards table is cut in small pieces:
The French man's is whole: your French will put all their fingers in the dish to
take out a sop, your Spaniard will very carefully take it up with two fingers,
if he have no forke: the Spaniard reserves what good meat remains at dinner,
for supper: the French man never brings meat to the table again: the French
man eats his boiled meat first; the Spaniard his ^ost meat: the Spaniard
eats ^allads only at the supper, and at the beginning of it: your French man
at every meal, and at the ^atter end: the French man after meals walks and
goes: the Spaniard rests and sleeps: when the Spaniard drinks he fills water out
first, and then wine; the French the wine first, and then the water: the French
man always talks while he is eating; if the Spaniard speaks a word it is a
wonder: the French man calls aloud for his drink, the Spaniard beckens, and
says nothing: the Spaniard eats much bread, and little meat, the French much
meat and little bread: the Spaniard eats very leasurely; the French man very
fast.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of their Antipathy in going.
IT is a strange thing to see a company of French men walking in the street;
for they will all, if there were a hundred, walk side by side, taking up the
whole breadth of the street, and they go as close as grapes in a cluster,
stumbling, falling, and rising, yet never forsaking their rank; neither
advancing forwards, nor tarrying behind, though they meet with other company,
and be justled by them; or though they justle, and be ready to overthrow one
another: The Spaniards do quite contrary; for if they be above three in
company, they will go together but only two and two, so that when they are
many, they make as it were a procession: when the French walk always in their
turnings they keep their places: the Spaniards change at every turn, those
going into the middle which were on the sides: the French ordinarily walk as
fast, as if they had Sergeants at their heels: the Spaniards walk with such
leisure and gravity, that they that see them, think they have lately been
sick, or have yet some quartane ague: your French use to walk about the city
booted and spurd, the Spaniards cannot endure it; and if they do chance to
walk in boots, they will not wear spurs: your French when they are a
horseback, ride always a full trot: the Spaniards ride leasurely: The French
men's footboyes run after their Masters when they ride: the Spaniards go
before: your Spaniards on horseback wear their cloakes and swords, and their
man's sword too: amongst the French, the Page carries his Masters sword and
cloak: if a French man walks pensive, he lets his cloak hang upon one
shoulder, and holds his hand upon the pommell of his sword, the Spaniard casts
out his legs, and turns up his mustachioes: when your French go together in
the street they leap, laugh, and make a noise, that you may hear them a mile
off: the Spaniards walk upright, stiff, and grave, say nothing, nor make any
uncivil or unmodest action: the French man when he meets a friend, salutes him
with his whole body, bending down his head, kissing his hands, and making
legs, and stand half an hour in such action: the Spaniard holds his body and
his head, as stiff as a stake, and only with the pulling off his hat, requites
the prolixe courtesies, and reiterated ceremonies of the French: a French man
though noble will make no difficulty, to pull an apple out of his pocket, or
buy it in the street, and eat it before all the world: a thing so abhorred by
the Spaniard that he would not do it for the world, fearing to offend them
that look upon him: when the French man sees some body a far off and would
becken to him, he lifts up his hand toward his shoulders: the Spaniard casts
his hand down, holding it toward his feet.

CHAP. XV.
Of the contrariety in speaking.
HE that would discourle of all the particulers, which might be spoken of in
this point, must of necessity make a great volume of it, wherefore to shun
prolixity to which I am an enemy, I will only touch the property of these two
languages, and also of the third which is the Italian: Some curious wits feign
that these three languages had their original with the beginning of the world,
and that they were all three used between God, the serpent, and man: They say
that when God commanded Adam he should not eat of the tree of knowledge, he
spoke to him in Spanish, showing thereby that the property of that language was
gravity, imperiousnes, command, and nobleness: after God had given him this
command they say the serpent, the better to induce him to sin, and to disobey
Gods command, spoke to him in Italian, to show us that amongst all languages
there is none so persuasive, sweet, and affected, as the Italian: after our
first parents had sinned God called them, and asking them the cause of their
disobedience, they answered him in French, there being no language to free and
excuse themselves like unto it.

As for the rest it is seen by experience that the French ordinarily do speak
much, and aloud, the Spaniards a little, and softly. If one ask a Spaniard why
he came out of Spain, he will answer that the King sent for him, because he
should go treat about some business of great importance. And if you ask a
Frenchman the same question, he will say he went a pilgrimage to St. Jacques in
Galicia, or to visit the holy Crucifixe of Burges, and that his fellow dying in
an Hospital, he staid behind looking for some company to go home into his
Country with him. Finally, you shall get nothing out of a Spaniard that is out
of Spain, but greatness, nobility, and authority; and from a Frenchman when he
is in Spain, you shall hear nothing but abasing of himself.

Your Spaniards have a noted property, different from all other Nations, which
is, that being out of their Country, they love one another, honor, and
respect one another extremely, though at home they have been mortal enemies.
And if any one questions him concerning his fellow, asking him who, and what he
is, though you question him about the poorest fellow in the world, and the
son of a cobbler, he will answer with great admiration, and say, Is it
possible Sir that you do not know that cavallier, and that you have not heard
of him (though perhaps he has never a shoe on his feet) I dare lay a wager,
that there is scarce in the City or Kingdom a child of five years old but
does know him, at least if he be of any fashion. You shall understand Sir,
that he is son to the Maggiorasco of Castile, and of the greatest families of
Spain; and there are many that say, he is second cousin to King Don
Sebastian: yet he goes disguised, and in the habit you see, by reason of some
mischance; and I beseech you, Sir, not to discover him: for if the King should
know of it, he would take it very ill, that he did not go directly to alight
at Court: and he would not for all the world be known. If a Frenchman, or any
of another Nation, meets with another Countryman out of France, presently
they become mortal enemies, speaking the worst they can one of another; and if
any one desires to know, and be informed what his companion is, he will with
all manner of contempt, say: Sir, that is a Frenchman, a poor Carpenters
son, whose fathers goods were all taken away for debt, and had not above
eight or ten crowns left, with which he bought that suit at the Brokers, which
makes him seem to be some fine fellow; but before four days comes to an
end, he will sell it, and then you shall see him go a begging: and so will
speak the worst he can of him.

All the industry in the world cannot make a Frenchman keep a secret, but that
he must needs reveal it: And all the drugges in the Indies shall not get a
secret from a Spaniard. Finally, all the Spaniards actions are contrary to the
French, and there is no concordancie nor resemblance in any of them.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the fruits of the said Antipathy.
THe aforenamed, and many other contrarieties, which manifest the hatred and
mortal enmity between these two Nations, were sown by that accursed Satan,
the enemy of mankind, planting this accursed root between them, that so the
head being infected, all the members might also be out of order, and
overthrown, with such extravagancie of Religions, Customs, and Laws, as we
now see over all the world: since that we may freely say, that the liberty
which barbarous nations have to multiply their beastly Customs, Statutes and
Edicts, proceeds from nothing else, but from the enmity and disagreement of
these two: and that the greatness of many Princes, who at this time have great
dominion and command in diverse parts of the world, grows from the small
confidence these have in one another, each doubting to lose their own, whilst
they engage themselves in the conquest of others.

Who makes any question but if they would with one accord have communicated
that wonderful talent, of knowledge, virtue, and learning which God has
bestowed upon them, but that they might have gotten out of the devils hands an
infinite number of souls, which for want of teaching, lie now buried, in the
darkness and chaos of ignorance and error? And we see that by reason of our
sins, and to the great affronting of the valor and greatness of these two
nations, a barbarous and tirant King governes all the East: Christendom also
in part yielding him obedience, hommage, and tribute, and all the world
honors, and holds him for a great Lord, to the great disparagement of the
honor due to the Catholic faith, her chief, and defenders: yet it has no
other ground nor cause, but this accursed hatred, and pernicious enmity: For
the strength and valor of these two nations lying buried in themselves,
necessarily their enemies must increase, and so innumerable heresies, errors,
sects, and unbeleefes spread themselves abroad in the world, by which the body
of the Church is daily persecuted and evil entreated: wherefore the devil
being cunning and well experienced, made use of the invention and strategeme of
the good shepeard, when a troop of wolves fall upon his sheep, which is to
set his dogs, and mastifs upon them, that whilst they two fight, his flock
may pass securely and untouched: A cunning and marveilous invention of the
devil to come to his accursed ends: He saw plainly, that if he left the
strength and mouths of these two valiant Lions unmuzelled, they would have
swallowed up all infidelity and barbarism, filling it with all manner of
holiness and virtue, so that there would have nothing redounded unto him but
shame and confusion: wherefore fearing to lose the command he had over the
infidels, he caused hatred and discord to come between these two nations, and
so diverted them, that they might not disturb the increase and prosperity of
his vassals, and truly when I consider this point, I am astonished with
wonder, being not able to imagine or think, what veil or cataract, so blinds
these Nations, as that they cannot see these evils; and that they will suffer
their enemies to grow great, and exalt themselves before their faces; to the
blemish of that reputation they hold in the world; it being thought that they
are the two greatest Monarchies of it.

And if the zeal of their own honor did not move them to open their eyes, and
to take it ill, that they being styled the one most Christian, and the other
most Catholic; a barbarous infidel and tirant, should usurp and command the
holy Sepulcher, and that he should entitle himself grand Signior: and the
continual cries of poor Grecia, Bulgarie, Sclavonia, and Armenia, and many
other poor Christian Provinces, which only implore the favor, and protection
of those two Nations or either of them, for to bring them out of the wretched
slavery and servitude wherein they live: yet might they be moved to compassion;
by reason that it is one of the easiest and securest enterprises that is in the
world; as it is well known to them who have been in those parts.

This is the snare wherewith the devil keeps tied the strength of these two
Nations, and the veil which he hangs before their eyes: there being at this
time an infinite number of valiant soldiers buried in sloth, who study
nothing, but how to undo and break the Spanish power, and policy: who if they
were employed against the infidells would perform more heroical exploits then
Homer writes of Hector and Ulysses. With such persuasions and deceits does this
cursed enemy bewitch a great number of Cavalliers and Gentlemen that live
contented with their mean fortunes, who if they would employ their valors and
warlike courages in Turkey, would not make plain Cavalliers, but mighty
Monarchs. In the same manner are in France many Illustrious Princes, and
magnanimous Lords, which following the ordinary course of the Court, and
service of their King, live at home, who if they did put to execution the
inclination of their noble minds in Afric or in Asia, would conquer more
Provinces then Ferdinand Cortese did in America. Wherefore I know not by what
diabolical witchcraft such noble understandings are blinded, that they do not
perceive that by this hatred and enmity, both Nations lose many Crowns and
Kingdoms which they might have subject to their dominions. And that their
union should not only not suffer themselves to hurt one another, but neither
of them to be hurt by other Nations, but be assured also, that such a concord
and amity could have no other end nor issue, but the service of God, the
exaltation of his Church, the peace of the world, the banishing of infidelity,
and the increase of the common good. Things which this pestiferous venom of
enmity, troubles, and hinders, there redounding from it nothing but
multiplicity of heresies in Europe, institution of sects and religions in the
East, the observance of beastly and salvage customs and statutes in those
parts of Libia and Ethiopia, the exaltation of Mahomets law in Afric and
Asia, the Turks swelling pride in Constantinople, the little respect and
discourtesie of the King of Fesse and Marocco, the poor Christians miseries
which live among the infidels, the captivity of the holy Sepulcher, the
martyrdoms and torments of an infinite number of slaves in heathen lands, the
multitude of Lordships and States, which know no Kings nor Lords, the
persecution of the Catholic Church, the perturbations and commotions of
commonwealths, the small security of neighbors, the contempt of those who are
far off, and the boldness of vassalls. All these things happen by reason of
the hatred and enmity of these two nations, which certainly if they were as
well united in conformity of wills, as they are in confederation by way of
marriage, scarce the world were able to resist the force of such an union. In
witness whereof I will allege a reason which an old and wise Moore told me
upon a Friday in Constantinople, who after he had long questioned with me
concerning the manner of living of the Kings of Europe, and particularly of
these two kingdoms, which they confess to be the chief and the most
powerful of Christendom, he told me that every time they came into their
Moscheas to say their prayers, they prayed to God that the hatred of these two
Nations might last for ever, that the one being continually suspicious and
mistrustfull of the other, they might not remember them, nor think upon taking
arms against them.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the cause of the enmity and antipathy of the Spaniards and the French.
I Have endeavored diverse times to find out by speulation the fundamental
cause of the disdain and hatred between these two Nations: Because that
though it is true, that the Devil has been the principal author of this
antipathy and discord, to hinder the fruit which might grow through their
union, yet we must presume, that he found in them some ground and root to
increase such a cursed dissension, and pernicious poison.

Some do attribute this contrariety to the difference of the stars, and
their influences, as their universal cause, and say, that the situation of the
heavens, and constellation of Spain, being far different from that which the
French have, consequently the temperament and humors of both must be very
different. They confirm this with Hippocrates doctrine in his book de Aere,
Aquis and Locis, which says, that the diverse constitutions of the stars, is
cause of the variety of temperaments, complexions and humors of man. And
verily he that considers the humors of these two Nations in order with the
constellation and change of time, shall find some likelihood in this reason;
seeing that in Spain, if hot weather once begins, it continues in the same
vigor three or four months, there being in all that time no notable change;
and of the same compass is the Spanish humor: seeing that setting upon a
purpose, he keeps himself firm in it, without any change or alteration at
all. It is otherwise in France: for there, be it Winter or Summer, the cold
nor the heat, nor the fair weather, never lasts three days together; but the
variableness of this constellation is such, that a man can never perceive what
time of the year it is. The inhabitants of Paris know this to be true,
because that in one day there you shall have the weather change eight or ten
times, the morning or day break being very fair, and two hours after there
falling a deluge of rain: after the which, the Sun will appear more bright
and resplendent then in the month of June: and he shall scarce have spread his
beams, but you shall hear a noise of thunder, lightning and wind, as though
the world were sinking: and therefore there being a dependencie from the
influence and constellation, the French, as subjected to an inconstant clymate,
must needs be voluble and inconstant in their determinations. And therefore he
that will assign for the reason of this Antipathy and hatred, the diversity of
climates, will say, that the Devil grounded his malice upon nature, making use
of the differences of the stars.

This reason, though in appearance it bears some show of truth, yet it does not
resolve our question: seeing that though the stars have dominion over
natural things, yet they do not extend their force to acts of absolute command
of the will, which are hatred and love, and therefore we must confess, that
those who bring this reason, that the stars incline things subject unto them,
(yet natural ones) and by reason of the league, which it has with their
wills, this influence may somewhat touch them, moving them in some manner, but
yet it cannot force them.

And since this matter gives me occasion of speaking of a difficulty, which is
commonly handled by curious and learned men, I will not pass it over with
silence, without speaking that which my small talent will afford me. All the
world almost marvailes at some things which the Astrologers foretell, which
depend on man's will, over which no constellation, influence, or celestial
virtue, has power to move it or force it; but contrariwise the will and
discourse command and govern the stars with their influences. Whence came
that common Proverb, Sapiens dominabitur astris: and yet we see that many
times they prognosticate the truth, and so punctually, as if the stars did
directly enforce man's will (...) whence holding such predictions to be
miraculous, they call the Astrologians Magicians, no^ believing that such
things may be known by natural reasons, thinking it impossible, that the
command of the stars should go beyond material things, under the which are
not comprehended the powers and actions of our soul.

Surely they which find great difficulty in this, do it not without great
ground: but if they shall consider the order which our understanding and the
will ^old in producing of their acti^ns, they shall find, that it may ^e done
only by the perfect spe^ulation of the stars; without ^oing beyond the bounds
of na^re. Since all will yield to me, ^^at the stars have their influ^nces in
sublunary things; and ^^at they have great power over ^aturall things, they
being governed by them: and that being true, the consequence follows, that the
celestial virtue and influence, shall have command over that which is natural
in man, as might be the body with the senses, to which our soul is so linked,
and so depends upon them, that it can produce no act without them, representing
unto them the matter, which is the intelligible species; it necessarily
follows, that by reason of this union and straight bond of amity which they
reciprocally hold, the soul must somewhat participate of the dominion which
directly falls upon the senses. And although by this means they do not force,
but only incline, ye^ our will, after sin, remained so contrary to the law
of Reason and so annexed to the sensitive appetite, that it seldom withstands
or contradicts it, reproving those things which it propounds unto it; which
senses being governed by the influence and power of the stars, as subject and
depending on them, the will must needs follow that which the appetite propounds
unto it. And therefore the Astrologers judging the actions of the will by the
influence which governes the sensitive appetite, many times prognosticate the
truth, though absolutely it depend on the will of man.

From this doctrine, though true, it follows not, that the influence of the
stars only, and the diversity of the clymates are the fundamental causes of
the hatred and antipathy of these two nations: being there are many other
nations in the world, far more different in climates, and constellations,
which have not so much hatred and contrariety amongst themselves, as these two:
we must therefore find out some other reason, more powerful, then this of the
stars.

I remember I have read in the histories of France, that King Lewis the
eleventh, came to meet the King of Castile upon the confines of France, to
confer with him about some business of importance. This King though
magnanimous and generous, had notwithstanding his particular humor, as other
men have, and so he ordinarily wore a leaden medall in his hat, his clothes,
and other French men's who were his followers were ordinary, and of mean
stuff; so that he was but meanly clothed without any stateliness or pomp:
the Spaniards did cloth themselves the best they could, using all the pomp
they could, believing that the King of France would have come withal the
greatness and variety as they expected from so great a King: and seeing him
otherwise, they began to despise him, and strangely to scoff the French men;
where they conceived such hatred against the Spaniards, that they could never
since forget this disgrace and affront: and if we will say that the devil at
this meeting grounded the enmity, and antipathy which now a days reigns, we
shall not say amiss, seeing a far lesser ground then this will serve his
turn.

To all that is said before may be added a great motive which these two Nations
have had to contemn and abhor one another; which is that in times past,
there came not out of France into Spain any people of sort and note, but only
poor beggarly and needy people of the frontiers, as Guascons, Biernois, and
others, who went as they do to this day in white round caps like a trencher
upon their heads, bare legged, with wooden shoos which they call esclops upon
their feet; these with a base kind of avarice will put themselves to any base
office, as keeping of cowes, and hogs, to sweep chimneies or the like, and
though in their eating they be sober enough, for with an onion, or a head of
garlic, and a piece of bread they will pass the whole day, yet in their
drinking they are unreasonable, and all their gains goes in wine, which being
strong and heady, presen^ly makes them drunk, so that for the most part of the
day they go reeling and falling about the streets, to the great scandal of the
Spaniards, amongst whom there is no greater infamy or dishonor then to be
drunk: wherefore the Spaniards who saw no other French men but these, and
thought that all the rest had been like them, did abhor them, and conceive much
enmity against them, and contempt of them; the same occasion had the French,
for very few or no Spaniards of fashion going into France, and they seeing none
but poor and wretched people who went to be touched for the Kings evil,
verily believed that all other Spaniards had been of the same kind; and so
from that baseness they took occasion to hold the Spaniards in little
esteem; and besides this contempt to increase this mortal enmity; each of
these foresaid reasons in my mind, are sufficient occasions and motives of the
hatred and disdain we find between these two Nations, especially the devil
mixing his care and industry with it: But if I should speak mine opinion, I
think there cannot be a more powerful reason given for this antipathy, then
the natural contrariety of these two Nations humors: and so it being so hard a
thing to force nature with reason, I do not wonder, if the will in which
consists hatred or love, keeps company with nature, and follows her steps,
obeying her contrarieties and repugnances; and we must imagine, that to move
the will so much the more to the contrariety of humors, the devil did help
forward all the forenamed accidents; so that the constellation, the diversity
of humors, the contempt of both nations, and the devil joining together,
there could nothing be hoped for, but a mortal hatred, and the antipathy which
now we see; the remedy of which lies in God only; seeing I do not believe
that on earth there is any antidote for such a pestilent poison.

CHAP. XVIII.
That the conjunction, and confederacy of these two crowns, is a thing which
proceeds from heaven.
AMongst the great and infallable truths which the Apostle St. Paul writ, to
lift us up toward the knowledge of God, me thinks that is a marveilous one
when he says, Invisibilia Dei per ea quae facta sunt intellectu conspiciuntur,
which is as much to say, that in all and every creature; shines the infinite
power of the divine wisdom; and that they are all like so many tongues, to
declare unto us, what the almighty power of their author is; wherefore that
must be a gross and material understanding, which by the contemplation of
things created, could not reach to the knowledge of the perfection and
nobleness of of him that made them.

The same was the royal Prophet his intent when he said, Coeli enarrant
gloriam Dei and opera manuum eju^ annuntiat firmamentum: whereby is known the
imperfection and misery of our understanding, subject only to the knowledge of
the materialities of this world, and unable to reach at the knowledge of things
which are beyond natures bounds; since that in these (as Aristotle says) he is
as the owl or the night-bat is with the sun beams, when it shines most
clear and bright: and the same Psalmist knew this truth, when he with such
great fervency craved of God; Revela oculos meos and considerabo mirabilia de
lege tua: holding it for a certain, that it was impossible to arrive to the
knowledge of such high mysteries, with the imperfection of nature only;
wherefore the supreme architect finding that there could be no equality nor
proportion found between his greatnesses, and our humane understanding, they
being infinite, and this material and limited: he ordained that man should
come to the knowledge of his infinite power, by means of the visible effects
of this world.

Whence we shall see by this reason that God at all times did communicate
himself to men by material, and visible means, as in the guiding of the people
of Israel, by day with a pillar of cloud, and by night with a pillar of fire,
making mount Sinai to shake when he gave the Law, affrighting them with thunder
and lightning, sending fire from heaven, the deluge and the like, by which he
did accommodate himself to the imperfection of our understanding. For if God
should not use material things, and easy to be understood, perhaps the
understanding of man, would either attribute such effects to some other cause,
or would not know from whence they proceeded. For it is certain, that when God
decreed to destroy the world with the flood, he could as well have annihilated
and destroyed it without filling of it full of water, or doing any other
manifest and visible action; but it would not have seemed so great a wonder to
men, if they were all fallen dead without any manifest cause, as the rivers
overflowing of their banks, and the opening of the cataracts and windows of
heaven was.

And though God could have destroyed those accursed cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah, without any apparent sign, with making them fall simply, without any
other visible effect; yet he would have their ruin be by means of a material
cause, which should manifest the great power of him who sent to do such an
execution, as that was, to make fire (as the sacred text speaks) and
brimstome to come down from heaven, a sign that he could make even the
grossest understanding know what the power of divine justice was: for if God
had used some insensible means, the cause would not have been known, nor his
great might and power. So also when he gave the Israelites their freedom,
taking them out of Egypt, he could in the night have opened the gates of the
city, and made them come out, or by day have blinded all the people of Egypt,
that they might not have seen them, or find some other means to free them
out of bondage; but if he had done so, he had not caused that fear which
material means did, and the visible tokens which he showed, in turning the
waters into blood, filling the land with Locusts and Frogs, and Flies, with
other marvailous wonders and effects; by means of which, all that barbarous
people, and even Pharaoh himself confessed the omnipotency of the God of the
Hebrews, and besought Moses, and his brother Aaron to pray for them, that
those plagues might be taken away from them, and that they would obey him. And
if God had used some other sign as had not been so plain and manifest as
this, and that which he used at the red Sea, peradventure the Egyptians would
not have attributed the deliverance of their slaves to the power of God: nor
the people of Israel, who was rough and of a hard belief, would have believed
that he by his omnipotence only could have wrought any such effect.

In the law of Grace God used the same means to make himself known, seeing
that all the miracles which he wrought (as the Evangelists set them down)
were done by sensible and material signs; from which every gross and rough
understanding might gather the greatness and the supreme power of the Creator.
For who could be so gross, but seeing sight restored to a blind man with
only laying a little dirt upon his eyes, might not know that the dirt of it
self had no such virtue; and that therefore he who applied that medicine, had
a command above nature? And who will but say, seeing a Lazarus, who had lain in
the grave four days, raised only by saying, Lazarus come forth, that he had
power over death? And that the satisfying five thousand people with five loaves
and two fishes, only by blessing of them, does not infer supreme worth and
power? And that seeing the healing of one, the restoring of sight to another,
turning water into wine, banishing death by natural means, do not presuppose
that this is a supernatural power and virtue? And if that Christ had done
these wonders without visible and material means, only by his absolute
power, peradventure his infinite power had not been known: and therefore let
us conclude with Saint Paul, that by means of visible and material things,
we come to the knowledge of the invisible things of God, as his Infiniteness,
his Immensity, his Goodness and Omnipotency. And if in all nature there be
any visible thing which shows us this divine power, it is the miraculous
conjunction of these two Nations, so prodigious a one, that any gross
understanding may plainly perceive, that it is an immediate work of Gods
omnipotency, which only could undo that which the Devil with so much
diligence and art had done: since we cannot imagine that any secondary causes
could have so much worth, industry and power, as in an instant to unite two
natures so infinitely distant one from the other, and make them come from an
extreme hatred and enmity, to the other extreme of union. And seeing that if
the discord and contrariety of these two Nations, had been a new or
superficial accident, the only consideration of good understandings, and the
perspicuity of wise and prudent persons, might have been sufficient to remedy
it, but being nature and antipathy, which like original sin goes by succession
from the Fathers to the children, and so to the grandchildren; and especially
being fostered and maintained by the Devils malice, we must infallibly believe,
that it is the work of heaven, and that this union was only reserved to God,
for to prevent an abyss of evils and miseries, which by the said enmity were
threatened. And so God, to whose goodness it belongs to dispose sweetly of
things, having created and preserved the world by means of the union and peace
of his creatures, seeing that the discord of these two Nations was sufficient
almost to ruin it, stayed through his omnipotency, the fury of this raging
evil, and through his goodness and mercy, provided such a perfect and
salutiferous remedy as this divine union is, that so the world might not only
be freed from its imminent ruin, and the calamities which threatened it by
reason of this enmity, but might also be enriched with those precious fruits
which from this union may be expected.

And as the end which God pretended in this confederacy, is no other but this:
so it is plainly known that the Devil with all his followers, has not had
power to hinder the execution of it, though he raised a thousand inventions,
pretenses, and fears, both amongst the common people, and also the most Noble,
egging them on with the fire of enmity and hatred, to oppose themselves with
all the power as might be, against Gods decree, the Commonwealths repose, and
the good of the whole world: and though the Devil went loose, and puffed up,
holding the victory certain with his forces, against that small aid which was
promised; yet his care and labor being against the will of God, and the
universal peace, I wonder not that God did send a woman to break his head,
through the wisdom of so good a physician, whilst he laid wait and snares for
her heel.

And though there were no other reason to prove that this confederacy came
from heaven, this would of it self be a sufficient proof, that we see it was
gloriously effected, against all humane endeavors, and propounded difficulties,
and against such great oppositions, as I will now leave to the wise man's
contemplation, and the pens of others, who peradventure will write of this
matter. Wherefore I conclude, saying, that this conjunction being made at that
time, when this antipathy was most rooted between these two Nations, we must
needs confess, that it was done by divine power, since neither hatred, nor
disdain, nor the diversity of climates and humors, nor the variety of
customs, nor mistrust, nor the Devils endeavors were able to hinder it.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Gods marvailous invention to unite these two Nations.
IT will not be hard to persuade an understanding man, that this so important
and so glorious confederacy comes from heaven, and was ordained for the
general good of mankind; the effects, circumstances and means of effecting
it, having been such, and so mysterious, that they prove it to be true: and
that which now stupifies man's understanding, is the marvailous and divine
invention which God used in uniting those two Nations, so different amongst
themselves, a means so ^ngenious and sovereign, that it not be hoped nor
looked for from any other place th^n from that inaccessible and majesticall
Consistory of the holy Trinity: seeing that in it God has showed three
effects of his immense Godhead, which are, Omnipotency in uniting from an
infinite distance. Mercy in preventing an abyss of mischiefs, which
threatened the world: and Wisdom in establishing an union and indissoluble
marriage. Whereupon we are to consider, that God was not contented (by finding
out of such a way and means) to remedy the present evil, but like a good
Physician he left an antidote and medicine to preserve these two Nations from
any infirmity or danger as might ensue.

This healthful medicine which God sent into the world is matrimony the most
effectual and strong means that could be found in nature, the wills being
thereby so straightly knit together, that they being two that are united, come
to be one flesh, and so conformable and united, that it causes one to forget
father and mother and brethren, to forsake his country, his own interest, and
even himself; for married folks many times deprive themselves of their own
liberties, to subject themselves to the content and desire of one another;
wherefore marriage bringing forth such effects, we may say that God by means
of it uniting these two actions, found an extreme and exquisite remedy, for an
extreme and exquisite disease, there being joined to it by succession an
eternal and perfect union, out of danger of ever being lost, by reason of the
stability promised in those things which come from heaven; where I dare say
there could not have been found an inventio^ more to the purpose, or more
secure then this was; seeing there is nothing in the world that can mortify
the fire of enmity and discord more then the matrimonial knot, which once
contracted between two enemies, when they think the grievances and distastes
which are past, they quite forget them again, having not the heart or mind to
persecute or offend so much as in thought, those that are of their own blood,
or have any dependency of it.

The Romans (as histories report) made use of such remedies, when they saw
themselves most persecuted by the Sabines, amongst whom there was so much
enmity, hatred, and persecution, that they did destroy and ruin one another,
burning their corn, spoiling their vines, and killing one another wheresoever
they met; whereby other nations which were not subject to them grew the
stronger, and increased through their two enmities, and discords: so that at
the last they perceiving the damages and wrongs they did themselves by
persecuting one another, and the triumphs and glory which other nations got,
grounding their happiness and greatness upon their discord, they agreed to
use for a remedy the same means which God had used with these two nations;
which was, that the Romans determined to give their daughters in marriage to
the Sabines sons, and the Sabines held it for an excellent good remedy to
give their daughters unto the Romans sons, that so by this mixture the evil
might be remedied, and the nations remain in peace and concord: and it is
certain that though the Romans remembered the wrongs, and injuries, they had
received at the Sabines hands, and that through this remembrance there might
some appetite and desire of revenge be stirred up: yet when they saw that if
they executed their rage and fury, they must do it upon their own bloods,
having their daughters amongst the Sabines, they stayed themselves from doing
them any hurt: which consideration served also for a bridle to the Sabines,
knowing that they could not use their swords against the Romans without
spilling of their own blood; and so by means of marriage and confederacy they
forgot all passed enmity, and remained intimate and hearty friends: such and
many other good things ought we assuredly to hope for; through the means and
confederacy which God has ordained between these two nations; for they being
linked together with so firm and effectual a knot, as matrimony, we may be
sure that Spain having matched her daughter with the son of France they will
quite forget all enmities, rancors, and hatreds, as hitherto have troubled
their peace and quiet, to their great wrong, and dimunition of the renown
which they might have gotten if they had agreed; and will unite themselves,
with such indissoluble and firm amity, that there shall not be seen any sign
or shadow of what is past; and their wills will be so well ordered and disposed,
that neither of them will have any more intent to attempt war, persecution,
breach of faith, or any other manner of deceit against the other, each of them
binding their hands to their girdles for fear of doing hurt, and harming their
own blood: moreover none can imagine but that by this confederacy the
antipathy and enmity which was, will be quite extinguished, and ended; seeing
that marriage in all respects both of law and reason, ought to be more
powerful and effectual in subjects that are so noble, generous, prudent,
Christian, and fearing God, as these two nations are, then amongst barbarous,
heathen, and idolatrous people, as the Sabines and the Romans were; whereby all
those who are well affected to these two nations, may assuredly promise
themselves and hope for so perfect and complete a peace, and agreement, as the
like has not been seen in the world, with all the fruits and properties that
from it (as proceeding from heaven) may or ought lawfully to be hoped for. In
so happy a confederacy I contemplate the supreme and extraordinary love that
God has showed to these two nations, giving unto them the same means and
manner for peace and union, as he himself took, when he was most at enmity
with the world: not only Divines but others also know the continual war and
enmity which was between God and man before the incarnation of the word; they
employing themselves in nothing else but in offending him, with all the sins
and wickedness as they could, neither fear, nor shame, nor any thing else
being able to refrain their disordered appetites; and these sins were so
great, that there could not be five righteous men found in Sodom, no nor one to
stay the vengeance of heaven; but man's nature was so corrupted and depraved,
that God seeing their wickednesses and sins, said in Genesis, poenitet me
fecisse hominem: not that he repented, for he being exceeding perfect, was
incapable of grief, repenting, change, or imperfection, but it was as if he
had said: I see humane nature so disobedient, ungrateful, and bent to evil,
that were I capable of repenting I should repent that I had created it: so that
at that time men did so obstinately contemn Gods commandments, that they
offended him without any care, and on the other side God was extreme severe
and rigorous in punishing of faults; which the names that were then given him
in holy Scripture may witness, calling him the God of armies, the God of
vengeance, the strong, rigorous and severe God: which titles were accompanied
with the fury of his power, as it was seen in the general Deluge of the world,
in the fire which descended from heaven to punish Sodom, in the number of the
Jews which he caused Moses to kill when they worshipped the Calfe, in the
four hundred years that he kept his people in slavery in Egypt, in the number
of the Egyptians which he drowned in the red Sea: and infinite other examples
which the Scriptures teach us; so that God does nothing but punish, and men
nothing but offend. So that seeing he had created mankind to save it, and his
divine goodness being more inclined to mercy, and love, then to justice and
cruelty, he took pity and compassion upon humane nature, and determined to
make a peace, by means of the most glorious and admirable marriage as could be
conceived; which was to marry his Son, the Divine Word, unto our Daughter,
humane Nature, and to unite himself with it so intrinsecally and perfectly,
that he never left it, nor will ever leave it (as great Anselmus says) by
which consederacie and hypostaticall union our nature was so extolled and
favored, that it surpassed the spiritual degree of Angels, from whose
greatness, (as we have said) the first Angel took an occasion to rebel
against his Creator. By means of this divine and supreme league, Gods justice
and divine wrath was converted into mercy and compassion: Mercy and Truth (as
David says) meeting, and Peace and Justice giving each other sweet kisses: Yet
there remained in man an Obligation of never offending God, but always to
serve him; taking as a motive thereunto, Gods extraordinary mercy and
clemency showed to Man, in espousing himself to humane nature our daughter:
so that in offending him, besides the disloyalty and ungratefulness we show,
we do also offend our own blood and nature; And by this selfsame union was
God moved to use sinners mercifully, staying the rigor and punishment, by
reason of the matrimony which his Son contracted with our Nature, holding it
for a certain, that this great Advocate which we have in heaven with the
Father, which is Christ, does obtain forgiveness for our sins: and in
consideration of his merits, the everlasting Father bestows those favors and
mercies upon us which we feel every day.

Hence it is, that holy King* David, when he implored the Divine favor, was
always wont to say, Protector noster, aspice Deus, respice in faciem Christi
tui. As if he had plainly said, God of my soul! my stay, my protector, and
only refuge, look on me with the eyes of thy divine mercy; but do not look
immediately upon me: for thou shall see nothing but sins, iniquities,
disobediences, and wickednesses, which will provoke thee to wrath and anger;
but cast thine eyes upon thy Son: for seeing him wedded to my nature,
questionless thou will be moved to mercy and compassion. Finally, with this
miraculous league, God remedied the enmity which was between man and him, and
left man fortified with eternal peace and amity. All this may in some sort be
seen by the heavenly conjunction which God has made between these two
Nations, which he has of his infinite mercy protected; it being certain and
sure, that they being united by divine means and invention, they shall live in
perpetual peace, and continual concord, triumphing over their enemies, and
leaving unto posterity memorable enterprises, and actions of Nobleness and
Generositie.

FINIS.

